@@@@@


doc= 40918


Moores, Sir John (1896-1993), businessman and philanthropist, was born on 25 January 1896 at the Church Inn, Eccles, Lancashire, the first son and second among the eight children of John William Moores (1871-1919) and his wife, Louisa, 'nee' Fethney (1873-1959), a millworker. On the birth certificate his father's occupation is registered as 'licensed victualler', but John William had been trained as a bricklayer, and before long he was back in the building trade again. He was a hard worker, but his health was poor and he had started to drink too much. The family had difficulty making ends meet. Young John Moores's ambition was born: he wanted to look after his mother and to make the family fortune. 
Louisa, a highly intelligent woman, had recognized her son's potential early. He left his higher elementary school at thirteen to become a Post Office messenger boy, but the front room at home, otherwise sacrosanct, was opened up for him every evening so that he could work there in peace: he was doing a correspondence course for the civil service. He also went to night school to learn telegraphy, which finally led to a job as trainee telegraphist with the Commercial Cable Company. In 1916 he volunteered for the navy and was posted to a shore station in Aberdeen as a telegraphist. He was demobilized in 1919. His father had died earlier that same year, and John was now head of the family. 
Moores returned to the Commercial Cable Company again, first in Liverpool, then to a posting in Ireland. The Waterville cable station was an isolated base in co. Kerry, where the cable came out of the Atlantic. There was a nine-hole golf course nearby, but no library or sports shop for miles, and very soon Moores had embarked on his first business venture. In his spare time he formed the Waterville Supply Company, to import bulk-purchased books; before long it also became Dunlop's 'sole agent in Waterville for the supply of golf requisites'. John had discovered that there was a good profit to be made on golf balls, and he wanted some to practise with himself; sport of all kinds always interested him. Eighteen months later he was moved back to Liverpool. 
Now Moores had another plan. He had heard of a football pool being run by a man in Birmingham, and he persuaded two friends to join him in starting a football pool of their own. They risked the sack if found out, as the Commercial Cable Company's rules did not permit outside employment: they used the name Littlewood (the birth name of one of the trio) to disguise their identities from their employer. 
A few months earlier Moores had married: major steps in his career often coincided with important happenings in his private life. Ruby Knowles (1894-1965), a waitress, was the daughter of the family where he was in digs. Her father, William Albert Knowles, was a clerk in a shipping firm, but the family came of fairly prosperous farming stock and had once owned a sizeable acreage near Chester. Ruby's qualities were warmth and kindliness and, even more importantly, strength of character. It would be needed in the risky times that lay ahead. The couple were married on 19 September 1923. 
Littlewoods Pools -- a system of betting on the outcome of football matches -- was to be run on the French 'pari-mutuel' system, in which 10 per cent of the total stake is subtracted for management costs. The three young men had to lay out their own money to rent an office, engage a typist, and pay for the coupons to be printed. Of those first 4000 coupons distributed in 1924, only thirty-five were returned. They had 10,000 coupons printed for a big match in Hull. Only one came back. By Christmas each of them had put $200 of his own money into the kitty, and the two friends had had enough. John had not, and Ruby backed him, saying: 'I'd sooner be the wife of a man who has gone broke than a man who is haunted by regret' ('The Independent'). He took on overtime for the Commercial Cable Company, working on Sundays; he also paid back each former partner his $200, stopped renting the office, dismissed the typist, and called on the family. From now on coupons were marked by his brothers and sisters, who came over to his house every weekend, while Ruby cooked meals for them. She was still doing this the following season, as well as looking after a small baby; their first child, a daughter, had been born at the beginning of June. And the enterprise was still losing money. John decided to drop the 'pari-mutuel' system. Instead he deducted expenses, plus a commission, before paying out, and the business began to take off. He rented an office again, took on staff, and devised a security system to prevent cheating. In 1928 -- the year in which his second child, a son, was born -- he acquired his own printing firm to produce the pools coupons. By the 1990s it had diversified and become one of the largest printers in the north of England. 
The world slump from 1929 to 1934 caused mass unemployment everywhere, but Littlewoods continued to engage more staff and acquire more buildings. And as their incomes increased the family began to enjoy life: they took up golf, shooting, and fishing, and started to travel abroad. The seeds of Moores's two lifelong interests, languages and painting, were sown now, although he did not have time to indulge them fully for many years. What he did do was to make sure that his workforce, in many ways his extended family, was also benefiting. Canteens were installed, with good food at subsidized prices; there was a medical welfare department, a contributory pension scheme, a social club for activities such as ballroom dancing and snooker matches, and a staff sports ground. 
Moores was now a millionaire, at thirty-six. But he had to prove to himself that his success had not just been a matter of luck: he would start a new and entirely different business, from scratch. And on 23 January 1932, three months before the birth of his second son, Littlewoods Mail Order Stores was incorporated. 
The idea may have come from the little mail-order firm Moores had started years earlier in Ireland, and he knew that the enormous mailing list which pools had built up would be very helpful; but it was also inspired by the hardship and poverty prevalent everywhere in the bleak depression years at the beginning of the 1930s. And he could remember only too well the difficulties with which his mother had to cope when feeding, clothing, and bringing up a large family on a small income. There had for some time been institutions in existence, such as the Co-operative Society, and the tallyman of the north, which enabled the poorer members of society to buy things they needed. Moores's originality lay in applying a mix of these schemes to a large-scale business enterprise. 
As usual all the family were involved. They researched and planned catalogues and helped to choose the merchandise, and Moores visited the United States to get information from big American mail-order firms such as Sears Roebuck. At the end of the first year the turnover was $100,000. A year later, in 1934, it had risen to $400,000; and by early 1936 mail order was grossing $4 million a year. Moores had made his second million. 
It was not enough to satisfy him. Moores wanted to do more for Liverpool, the city to which he had given his abiding loyalty. For seven years, from 1933 to 1940, he served as a Conservative city councillor. He also stood twice for parliament, on each occasion fighting a safe Labour seat, and so failing to get in. But he still had another major business success ahead, the Littlewoods chain stores. 
Moores's timing was impeccable: the economy had begun to pick up in the second half of the 1930s, and the firm already had buying experience and supplier contacts. On 4 July 1937 his fourth and last child, a daughter, was born. And on 6 July the first store was opened in Blackpool. Three years later, in 1939, there were twenty-five stores in operation, and further sites had been acquired. Then war was declared. 
Moores had seen it coming. After the Munich conference in September he had already started to consider air-raid precautions, and had organized an ambulance division at his own expense. Less than forty-eight hours after the outbreak of war the new pools building, complete with all office equipment, was handed over to the government censorship department, and a great many of the Littlewoods vehicles were donated for use as ambulances. But Moores wanted the whole organization converted to war work. 
The first contract was for parachutes. A Littlewoods warehouse was transformed into a factory; groups of pools girls were instructed by experts in the techniques of cutting, sewing, rigging, and assembly. The first parachute was produced on 11 December 1939, only a month after work had started on the building conversion. One month after that the first 20,000 parachutes were delivered to the Air Ministry. 
It seems extraordinary that a paperwork-based firm such as Littlewoods could switch to mass production, often of a very technical nature, in the way that it did. But the records show that its sixteen factory conversions, employing 14,000 workers, produced among other things 12 million shells, 5 million parachutes, 50,000 dinghies, 20,000 barrage balloons, and more than 40,000 pontoons and storm boats. It could be put down to Moores's leadership, to the research he had done into time study on his visits to the United States, to his organizing ability. But his own explanation was simpler: 'The ordinary man or woman can do anything if they want to badly enough' (private information). He always regarded himself as an ordinary man. 
When victory was finally won it brought little respite on the work front. Moores's businesses had to adapt to a new and changing world. The pools building which had been handed over in 1939 was not returned for nearly ten years. There was an acute paper shortage, so pools coupons could not be produced. The mail-order business had difficulty finding enough manufacturers, let alone enough paper for catalogues. The stores took the longest to recover. Building restrictions were not relaxed until October 1945, and not lifted completely for a further nine years. All the sites which had been acquired before the war lay undeveloped, and some were even compulsorily purchased by the government, having been first valued as 'derelict' land. 
In spite of the difficulties, by buying up old properties and shops Moores had managed to get six new stores going by the end of 1947. But the non-stop work involved took its toll. He was fifty, and was driving himself hard. There was panic throughout the organization when, at the beginning of that year, he became seriously ill with meningitis. 
Moores had recovered in time for his eldest daughter's wedding in April, but the specialists were far from satisfied with his condition and prescribed a good rest and some sunshine. Moores and his wife went to Bermuda. During the holiday he came across an enormous disused hotel on the island's best ocean beach, and before long he had decided to buy it himself and build it up into a profitable concern. (As a follow-on, Littlewoods also became involved in the hotel business for a time, acquiring two in Harrogate and a loch and fishing lodge in Scotland. The family had to pay to take holidays there, but groups of long-serving employees who needed a break were sent free of charge.) Moores's initial action had not been entirely due to business acumen; he had an ulterior motive. Should anything happen to him, the Bermuda hotel could be sold and the proceeds used to pay off his death duties on Littlewoods. His concern was to keep the business intact for his descendants, and his recent illness had made him only too aware of his own mortality. A great many of his shares were put in trust for his offspring at this point. 
The 1950s saw a resurgence in all three core businesses. New catalogue titles were created in mail order; more stores were opened (there were now more than sixty in the chain). Moores had produced a formula which could withstand almost any economic conditions: the cash flow from the pools was continuous; in good times the stores thrived; if there was a recession, then mail order got the benefit. Two of the divisions were always able to support the third when necessary. 
Moores's charitable works increased at an equal rate. In 1956 he became chairman of the Liverpool Motorists' Outing for Handicapped Children. In 1957 the John Moores Liverpool Art Exhibition was founded, a biennial competition with a top prize of $20,000. Moores had taken up painting himself, and wanted to do what he could to assist young and aspiring artists. Those the competition helped to launch included David Hockney, Peter Blake, and R. B. Kitaj. 
After his mother's death from cancer in 1959, the pace of Moores's activities grew even more hectic. In 1960 he became chairman of Everton Football Club, attending nearly every match: he even left for one in the middle of his younger daughter's wedding reception. In 1963 he funded a school of business management studies at Liverpool University. He became involved in the funding and building of boys' clubs and youth clubs. And his charities went on growing. 
What few people knew, even within the family, was that Ruby, like John's mother, had suffered from cancer herself. She had had a mastectomy two years before Louisa's death, going into hospital under an assumed name, and timing it carefully so that two weeks later she could attend a family party without anyone realizing. She never liked a fuss. Now the cancer was recurring. Moores resigned his chairmanship of Everton to be with her as much as possible, but she died in 1965, seven weeks before her seventy-first birthday. At first Moores seemed almost stunned; they had been married for nearly forty-two years. Then he forced himself back to work again. 
A few weeks later Moores had a bad fall. His hip gave him considerable pain for the next year or two, which restricted his fishing and shooting activities. But nothing could make him restrict his workload. In 1966 he had an IBM computer installed. In 1967 Littlewoods took over Sherman's Pools. New stores were being built and bought every year: there were eighty-four by the end of the 1960s, and three years later the number had grown to more than 100. Then Moores decided on a hip replacement operation. Artificial hip joints were still a recent development, but the operation was a great success. He was not allowed to ski again, or to water ski (a sport which he had taken up at the age of sixty-nine), but otherwise he was back to normal. 
In 1970 Moores was made a freeman of the city of Liverpool, the honour, probably, which gave him the greatest pleasure of all. A year later he was appointed CBE. In 1980 he received a knighthood and chose as the motto for his coat of arms 'Opportunity made, not found'. 
On doctor's orders Moores was beginning to take more holidays. He was enjoying his great hobby, painting. But, even after resigning the chairmanship and handing over to his younger son in 1977, he still went in to his office every day and continued his flying visits to stores all over the country. Three years later he was back at the helm: handing over was something he always found difficult to do. When he did finally resign the chairmanship, he was elected president for life, remaining involved until 1986. In that year he had two operations, one after another, first on his Achilles tendon, and then for an enlarged prostate. He was never quite the same again. 
Sir John Moores died on 25 September 1993 at his modest four-bedroomed home, Fairways, Shireburn Road, Formby, Liverpool, at the age of ninety-seven, and was cremated on 1 October at Southport crematorium, Scarisbrick; his ashes were interred in Dove Glade on 11 May 1994. He was reputedly one of the wealthiest men in Britain, and left an estate valued at over $10 million. Moores was the archetype of the self-made man, in the paternalist, Victorian manner: his business acumen was matched by a concern for his workforce, and, while his family was at the centre of his world, he had a practical interest in the welfare of other young people. Liverpool Polytechnic was renamed Liverpool John Moores University in 1992, a testimony to his success, his philanthropy, and his devotion to the city of Liverpool. 


@@@@@


doc= 40920


Gould, Rupert Thomas (1890-1948), horologist and broadcaster, was born on 16 November 1890 at St Edward's Road, Southsea, Hampshire, the second son of William Monk Gould (died 1923), composer and musician, and Agnes Hilton (died 1937), daughter of Thomas Skinner, medical doctor of Edinburgh. After a period at Eastman's Royal Naval Academy he was sent as a fifteen-year-old cadet to Britannia Royal Naval College at Dartmouth in 1906, with the intention of providing him with a career in the Royal Navy. The boy's intelligence was quickly apparent and he was top of his class almost throughout his schooling. He seems to have had an almost photographic memory, enabling him to amass considerable learning as a young man; he was especially interested in mechanical things, discovering a fascination for clocks and watches at a very early age. From May 1907 he began service as a midshipman and in the following seven years, during which time he underwent specialist training as a navigation officer, he served, among others, under captains Beatty and Jellicoe in the Mediterranean and home fleets and on the Yangtze (Yangzi) in China. 
Although he looked the part -- he was strikingly handsome, blond, blue-eyed, and 6 feet 4 inches tall -- Gould's nature was actually quite unsuitable for a naval officer. His knowledge caused him to be rather pedantic; although he was generally kindly in demeanour, he was not a team player nor a good leader of men. He was, however, a talented artist, especially in pen and ink, was socially and intellectually assured, and had a ready wit, especially when he had a large audience. In spite of great self-confidence, he was unfortunately prone to violent nervous disorders, usually provoked by the stress of national crises. Thus, at the outbreak of the First World War, Gould suffered a severe mental breakdown and was invalided out of active service. During convalescence in Yorkshire in 1915 he met his future wife, Muriel Hilda (1894-1980), daughter of Thomas and Emily Estall; they were married on 9 June 1917. A son, Cecil, was born in 1918, followed by a daughter, Jocelyne, in 1920. In 1916 Gould had been found a job as one of the assistants to the hydrographer at the Admiralty, receiving promotion to lieutenant-commander in 1919. 
In that year Gould decided to devote his spare time to writing a history of the marine chronometer, an essential navigational instrument for which he had developed a fascination during his training. This led him, in 1920, to discover the great marine timekeepers by John Harrison (1693-1776), decaying in the cellars of the Royal Observatory at Greenwich, and he vowed one day to restore them to their former glory. In the same year Gould was introduced by his friend the author Ralph Straus to the dining club the Sette of Odd Volumes (founded by the antiquary Bernard Quaritch in 1878) and over the next two decades the printed menus for the Sette often featured Gould's fine caricatures of members. The menus always included a distinguished selection of fine wines, and regular dinners with the Sette, which Gould evidently enjoyed to the full, combined with the stress of late nights writing his book, soon began to tell on the Goulds' marriage. 
The year 1923 saw the publication of 'The Marine Chronometer', a book so thoroughly researched and well written that it still had no equal seventy-five years later. By this time Gould had sought, and received, permission to restore the Harrison timekeepers and this next Herculean task, to be done in his 'spare time', had already begun at his home in Epsom. Three years later, by which time his wife was finally losing patience with his obsession, Gould's overwork, combined with news of the general strike, precipitated a second nervous breakdown. On his discharge from hospital Gould found, to his dismay, that she had left him. After a vain attempt by Gould's mother (who had recently moved to nearby Ashtead) to reunite them, Muriel petitioned for judicial separation on grounds of cruelty (they were never divorced). She cited as particularly distressing his excessive drinking, certain sexual predilections, and a series of fits associated with his breakdowns, during which she stated that he terrified her. The case, which was heard in 1927 at the High Court in the full glare of the national press, was won by Muriel and Gould lost everything: the custody of the children, his home and, because of the adverse publicity, his job at the Admiralty. He had no option but to go and live with his mother in Ashtead, at Downside, a large house in Woodfield Lane. 
Once Gould had recovered from the stress of separation, the following ten years proved to be the most settled and prolific of his life. At Downside, in a specially converted loft workshop, he completed the restoration of all the Harrison timekeepers, during which time he also wrote many articles for the horological and maritime press and compiled extensive notes for a history of the typewriter, an instrument he amassed a very large collection of at Downside. His major publications at this time, however, consisted of a series of books about unsolved scientific mysteries; 'Oddities' (1928) and 'Enigmas' (1929) were followed by 'The Case for the Sea Serpent' (1930). Gould was one of the first people to investigate the Loch Ness monster mystery systematically, and published his work 'The Loch Ness Monster and Others' in 1934. He had always been interested in the history and the rules of tennis (he was an active player himself, though by all accounts not very sporting), and on many occasions in the 1930s he was engaged to umpire at Wimbledon, often on the centre court. 
In 1934 Gould was asked by the programmers for BBC radio to speak every week on 'Children's Hour' under the name Stargazer, giving a fifteen-minute chat on any subject which he felt might interest the young 'listeners in'. His broadcasts, live and (until wartime) without any script, continued, off and on, for over ten years and included at least one early television broadcast from Alexandra Palace. In 1935, as well as writing a fine small biography of Captain Cook, Gould completed his restoration of all the Harrison timekeepers and gave a historic presentation on John Harrison and his timekeepers to the Society for Nautical Research at the Drapers' Hall in London in that year. 
Two years later his mother died, and Gould was obliged to sell up and leave Downside, the estate passing directly to his children, with a small income only to Gould. It is probably for this reason that he was remembered by many of his contemporaries as being decidedly mean with money. 
In 1937 Gould had tried hard to gain a curatorial position at the newly opened National Maritime Museum at Greenwich, where the Harrison timekeepers were on display, but the scandal of 1927 was not forgotten and he was refused any employment. Until 1939 he lived at the Red House, a residential hotel in Leatherhead, but the looming international crisis pushed him into his last and worst mental breakdown. One of the few things he had inherited was his mother's car, and on the day war broke out in September that year he packed what effects he still had and drove aimlessly west -- away from Europe and war -- arriving at Shaftesbury before finally collapsing. During a stay in a nursing home there he fell in love with Grace Ingrams, one of the nurses, and moved in with her and her mother in Wiltshire for the duration. During the war, after convalescence, Gould was employed again by the BBC to broadcast as the Stargazer, and, in October 1942, he was invited to join The Brains Trust. He was remembered for being the most frequent sparring partner of another 'Brains Trust' panellist, the well-known philosopher Professor Cyril Joad. Gould was noted for his ability to answer even the most esoteric factual questions with his characteristic eloquence and pungent wit. When the panel was once asked, tongue in cheek, 'What is the difference between 'fresh air' and 'a draught'?' it was Gould who immediately replied: 'it's fresh air when you open the railway carriage window yourself and a draught when somebody else does!' 
Since the late 1930s Gould had become very overweight and in 1944, probably owing to the vigorous tennis matches he still played, and perhaps also to his lifelong habit of pipe smoking, he suffered a severe heart attack, compounded by the appearance of Parkinson's disease. In 1945 Grace Ingrams and Gould separated. After a hopeless attempt to reunite with his wife which lasted just two weeks, Gould, now an increasingly sick man, went to live with friends at Harbledown near Canterbury. Ironically, at this late stage the National Maritime Museum decided, in 1945, that it would employ Gould as a curator after all, only to find that, within just seven days of having started, he had to resign owing to ill health. Realizing that this truly great horologist was not long for this world, in 1947 Gould's colleagues in the British Horological Institute awarded him their gold medal, the highest honour the institute can bestow. He described it as the crowning moment of his career. He died on 5 October 1948 at the Kent and Canterbury Hospital, Canterbury, of a combination of Parkinsonism and paroxysmal tachycardia. Only his son and a handful of others were at his funeral in Ashtead parish church when he was buried on 11 October, alongside his mother. 
Gould's part in the restoration of Harrison's chronometers was dramatized to good effect in Dava Sobel's bestselling book 'Longitude' (1996) and in its subsequent television adaptation (1999), where he was played by Jeremy Irons. 


@@@@@


doc= 40921


Delderfield, Ronald Frederick (1912-1972), writer and playwright, was born on 12 February 1912 at 37 Waller Road, New Cross, south London, the third of the four children of William James Delderfield (1873-1956), a meat sales manager at Smithfield market and later a Devon newspaper proprietor, and his wife, Alice Emma, 'nee' Jones, the only daughter of a Welsh tea trader, whose family had moved to London from Aberystwyth in the 1850s. In 1918 the Delderfield family moved from south London to 22 Ashburton Avenue in Addiscombe, near Croydon, then a quiet rural suburb on the Kent-Surrey border. When he was eleven Delderfield was briefly enrolled at Selhurst grammar school, Croydon, which he disliked. The suburban world of Addiscombe would later provide the backdrop for Delderfield's first two major novels, 'The Dreaming Suburb' and 'The Avenue Goes to War' (1958). In 1923 the volatile James Delderfield inexplicably purchased the 'Exmouth Chronicle'. The family moved to Devon and Delderfield was sent to complete his education at West Buckland, a nearby boys' boarding-school. This school was to be affectionately portrayed as Bamfylde, at the end of Delderfield's life, in his novel 'To Serve them All my Days' (1972). 
After a course at Fulford's Business School Delderfield, aged seventeen, became editor of his father's newspaper in 1929. Eleven years of journalism taught him his craft as a writer. At the same time, always prolific, he began writing full-length and one-act plays, some of which were staged for short provincial runs. On 14 March 1936 he married May (Marnie) Evans ('b'. 1905/6), a Manchester laboratory assistant whom he met on holiday in Wales. The couple adopted two children. 
Delderfield did five years of peripatetic desk work in the RAF from 1940 because, severely short-sighted, he was deemed unfit for active service. 'Worm's Eye View', having been written in 1943, was staged in London in 1945. A comedy about the sufferings of wartime British servicemen at the hands of civilians, it ran in London for over five years until 1951. Of Delderfield's thirty or so published plays only 'Worm's Eye View' is now remembered. 
After the war the Delderfield family returned to Devon. There in 1956 he turned from writing plays to concentrate on novels and non-fiction. A lifelong fascination with Napoleonic times had already led to 'Farewell the Tranquil Mind' (1950). 'Napoleon in Love' was published in 1959, and there were several other books on this theme. 'Bird's Eye View', the first of four autobiographical works, appeared in 1954. He published a total of twenty-two miscellaneous short volumes of fiction and non-fiction. 
But it is for his ambitious multi-volume sagas -- straightforward Dickensian or Galsworthian story-telling in which the historical and geographical setting is as vital as the characterization -- that Delderfield is best-known. Published from 1966 to 1968, the three-volume 'A Horseman Riding By' tells the story of a Devon valley, its inhabitants, and its squire during the first two-thirds of the twentieth century. 
Delderfield's final and finest work, the Swann saga, began with 'God is an Englishman' (1970), continued with 'Theirs was the Kingdom' (1971), and ended with the posthumous publication 'Give us this Day' (1973.) The Swann books tell the story of Adam Swann, who steals a valuable necklace from a dead Indian mutineer in 1857 and uses the capital to start a London-based nationwide haulage business. The narrative sweeps epic-like through all the major events of history as the nineteenth century gives way to the twentieth and the Swann children grow up and move, somewhat implausibly, around the world. 
Never athletic, Delderfield was a heavy-set, myopic man who wore thick-lensed spectacles and who smoked heavily. He died from lung cancer at his home, Dove Cottage, Manor Road, Sidmouth, Devon, on 24 June 1972. 
A number of Delderfield's novels were serialized for television. 'A Horseman Riding By' was produced in 1977 and starred Nigel Havers as Paul Craddock. 'To Serve them All my Days', dramatized for the BBC by Andrew Davies and broadcast in 1981, featured Frank Middlemass as the headmaster Algy Herries. Delderfield's two-book love story 'Diana' (1960 and 1962) was also serialized by the BBC in 1984. 
Delderfield is remembered and respected as a story-teller rather than as a great novelist: 'as a purveyor of quality, classic realistic fiction for popular consumption, R. F. Delderfield has few peers' (Sternlicht, 134). 


@@@@@


doc= 40922


Delysia, Alice (1889-1979), actress, was born on 3 March 1889 in Paris, the daughter of Henri Lapize, sculptor. She made her first appearance as a chorus girl at the age of fourteen in 'The Belle of New York' by Hugh Morton at the Theatre du Moulin Rouge in Paris in 1903, and in 1905 went to New York as one of the chorus of French 'Gibson girls' in the Broadway production of 'The Catch of the Season' by Seymour Hicks and Cosmo Hamilton. In 1909, after working for several years in London, she left the stage. She was at that time living with Harry Fragson (born Leon Philippe Pot), singer and composer of the famous song 'Hello! Hello! Who's your lady friend?' Although there is no evidence that they were married, she worked under the name of Mme Harry Fragson. The couple parted -- a year before Fragson was murdered by his father following a quarrel over his mistress -- and Alice returned to the Paris theatre in 1912. 
Alice Delysia was discovered by C. B. Cochran at the Olympia variety theatre in Paris in 1913 when he was looking for talent for a revue he wanted to stage on the lines of those he had seen in the small variety theatres in Paris. Cochran took her to London in 1914 to star in his first revue, 'Odds and Ends' by Harry Grattan at the Ambassadors Theatre. Her rendition of the recruiting song 'We don't want to lose you, but we think you ought to go' was a triumph, and only after more than 500 performances was 'Odds and Ends' replaced by a new revue, 'More', also by Grattan, another great success, starring Delysia and the French actor Leon Morton. After the success of 'Pell Mell' by Fred Thompson and Morris Harvey in 1916, again starring Delysia and Morton, Cochran left the Ambassadors for a larger theatre and in 1917 put on the operetta 'Carminetta', with music by Emile Lassailly, at the Prince of Wales Theatre with Delysia, despite her lack of training as a singer. Her warm and effervescent personality contributed to her popularity in London, and she sang in many charity performances during the First World War. She entertained wounded troops, and took many French refugees and orphans into her home. In 1918 she returned to revue in 'As you were' by Arthur Wimperis (from the French) at the London Pavilion, which Cochran had refurbished and reopened: in this she played Helen of Troy, Queen Elizabeth, and Cleopatra, and the skin-tight black costume in which she appeared as Lucifer had to be modified after attracting the attention of the lord chamberlain. 
After the war Delysia remained in London to play in 'Afgar' by Fred Thompson and Worton David, a musical comedy set in a Moorish harem, staged by Cochran at the London Pavilion in 1919; this ran for 300 performances and she went to New York at the end of 1920 for the Broadway production. She returned to the London stage in 1922 in Cochran's 'Mayfair and Montmartre', which flopped after Delysia had to withdraw with a throat infection. She continued to delight London audiences throughout the 1920s, mainly in revues and musicals staged by Cochran, including Noel Coward's 'On with the Dance' in 1925 at the London Pavilion, in which she played a French lady's maid and with Hermione Baddeley sang the duet 'Poor little rich girl', Noel Coward's first song hit. She was in Jerome Kern's 'The Cat and the Fiddle' in 1932 at the Palace Theatre, and her last big London success was at the Gaiety Theatre in 1933, in 'Mother of Pearl', adapted for the English stage with Delysia in mind by A. P. Herbert (1890-1971) from Oscar Straus's 'Eine Frau, die weiss was sie will': she played an ageing actress whose lover is stolen by her daughter and her song 'Every woman thinks she wants to wander' was a big hit. On 8 November 1928 she had married Georges Emile Denis, general manager of a newspaper, the son of Nicolas Denis, store superintendent; the marriage ended in divorce in 1938. 
Believing that the only hope for France lay in Britain and General de Gaulle, Delysia joined the Entertainments National Service Association in May 1941, and served until the end of the war entertaining troops in north Africa, the Middle East, Normandy, Belgium, and the Netherlands: she was awarded the African Star of the Eighth Army. On 10 January 1944 she married Commander (Joseph Marie Antoine) Rene Kolb-Bernard of the Free French navy, who had heard her sing after Dunkirk and had asked to her to adopt the crew of the French submarine he was commanding. After the war she retired from the stage. Kolb-Bernard was appointed French minister in Nicaragua, and went on to hold a number of diplomatic posts, including that of French consul in the Canary Islands, where Delysia spent much of her retirement. He predeceased her. Alice Delysia died from cancer on 10 February 1979 in the French Convalescent Home, De Courcel Road, Brighton. 


@@@@@


doc= 40923


Chesser, Eustace (1902-1973), psychiatrist and social reformer, was born on 22 March 1902 at 3 Dalkeith Road, Edinburgh, second son of Arthur Chesarkie, a jeweller, and his wife, Rebecca Solomon, whose families had fled Russian pogroms. He was educated at George Watson's School, Edinburgh, subsequently qualifying in medicine (LRCPEd, LRCSEd, LRFPS) at Edinburgh in 1926, by which time he had changed his surname to Chesser. His first marriage, to Rose Golda Morris (1904/5-1960), daughter of Barnett Morris, took place in the same year, on 18 August. They had two children, a son (who also became a psychiatrist) and a daughter. Chesser spent some time in general practice in Cinderford and Manchester before moving to London in the early 1930s, where he took an extended sabbatical from medical practice, working for the London and Northern Medical Transfer Agency. As a clinical assistant at the Tavistock Clinic he underwent psychoanalysis, subsequently specializing in psychiatry, although his interpretation of Freudian concepts became increasingly liberal as he developed his own dynamic methods. He changed his name from Isaac to Eustace about 1937, and by 1940 was back in practice, first in Harley Street and subsequently in Wimpole Street, London. 
In November 1940 Chesser published the first, and probably the most enduringly popular, of more than thirty books, 'Love Without Fear: a Plain Guide to Sex Technique for Every Married Adult', aimed at ameliorating the vast amount of matrimonial misery caused by sexual ignorance. It had already sold 5000 copies by 1942, when the director of public prosecutions proceeded against it for obscenity, and Chesser remarked when the summons was served, 'you have left it a long time'. Instead of following the usual procedure of pleading guilty before a magistrate and paying a small fine, Chesser and his publisher chose to take the case before a jury, risking far heavier penalties. While Chesser presumably hoped to clarify the unsatisfactory state of the law on obscenity, there would have been unpleasant professional repercussions had he admitted his work to be obscene. An important concession was gained that the book should be judged as a whole rather than on the basis of isolated 'objectionable' passages. Chesser and his witnesses made a good case, but the outcome owed much to the summing up by the judge. After less than an hour the jury returned a verdict of not guilty. Chesser's medical qualifications were clearly a significant factor, and although he was personally vindicated the general state of the law remained unchanged until the 1959 'Obscene Publications Act'. 
Chesser's other works are too numerous to mention in full; he also wrote extensively in the press and was a frequent radio and television broadcaster. He was the central moving spirit of the survey 'The Sexual, Marital and Family Relationships of the English Woman' (1956). In an article for the British Medical Association annual booklet 'Getting Married' (1959), 'Is chastity outmoded? Outdated? Out?', he queried conventional restrictions and suggested that pre- and extra-marital sex ought to be individual choices. The subsequent 'Doctors in free love storm' in the press led the association to withdraw the entire booklet, though 20,000 copies had already been distributed. 
Chesser championed many sexually progressive causes, openly supporting abortion law reform and the decriminalization of homosexuality when both were taboo. Though his battles were mainly fought during the 1950s and 1960s, his associates in the Society for Sex Education and Guidance during the 1940s reveal roots in inter-war sex reform circles. Besides arguing the theoretical necessity of abortion law reform he took advantage of the loophole supplied by the 'R. v. Bourne' judgment (1938) to provide abortions at a nursing home in the Cromwell Road. In 1965 he admitted in an interview that 'the money played a bigger part' in earlier years than following his success as an author (Ferris, 194). 
Chesser discarded the Jewish faith of his upbringing in favour of humanism, and supported voluntary euthanasia. A rebel, enemy to authority and unthinking conventional attitudes, Chesser's candour and hatred of hypocrisy sometimes embarrassed, but friends paid tribute to his passionate interest in human affairs, a power, warmth, and radiance 'as enriching as they were unforgettable', and 'kindness and generosity beyond measure' ('BMJ', 29 Dec 1973). Chesser's wife died in 1960 and he married Sheila Blayney-Jones in 1961. In 1969 he suffered a serious illness which left him incapacitated for the rest of his life, although in 1972 he appeared as an expert witness in an obscenity trial. He died on 5 December 1973 at his home, 17 Wimpole Street, Marylebone, London, and was survived by his second wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 40924


Butler, Eliza Marian (1885-1959), German scholar, was born on 29 December 1885 in Bardsea, Lancashire, third daughter and third of the seven children of Theobald Fitzwalter Butler (1845-1914), a coal owner and iron manufacturer at Barrow in Furness, and his wife, Catherine Elizabeth Barraclough (died 1946). Her father wanted his children educated abroad, and Eliza (Elsie) was dispatched to Hanover. This led to a lifelong preoccupation with German literature and a lifelong scepticism about the Germans. She became a German scholar in spite of herself. 
After Hanover, a spell in Paris, and a year at Cheltenham, Butler entered Newnham College, Cambridge, in 1908 and obtained first-class honours in the medieval and modern languages tripos in 1910. Some schoolteaching was followed by research on Friedrich Hebbel in Bonn, where she was put off by what she saw as Germanic academic pettiness and was dismayed by nationalist attitudes. The outbreak of the First World War sent her home, and she taught French, then German at Newnham (with more detested schoolteaching in between), and was once almost arrested as a spy. In 1917-18 she served in the Scottish women's hospitals unit in Russia and Macedonia. Then, after she had taught for two years at Avery Hill Training College, Newnham offered her a lectureship in German. She would have preferred French or Russian. 
Still seeking a research topic, Butler turned to Professor J. G. Robertson (1867-1933) in London. He suggested Heine (who also disliked the Germans), and the result was 'The Saint-Simonian Religion in Germany' (1926), a large book which she claimed nobody ever read. Her second book was again out of the mainstream, a biography of the eccentric aristocrat Hermann von Puckler-Muskau, 'The Tempestuous Prince' (1929), whose ghost she claimed to have met, briefly, in Berlin. Still eager to escape from German, her next involvement, juxtaposing literary and psychological analysis, was with another flamboyant writer in 'Sheridan: a Ghost Story' (1931). 
After a sabbatical year visiting India with the Pali scholar Isaline Blew Horner (1896-1981), her companion from 1926 onwards, there appeared Butler's finest work, 'The Tyranny of Greece over Germany' (1935). The book is broad in its literary coverage; it is scholarly but highly readable; and it is a polemic. Whatever their own views on the matter, Butler argued, the Germans had not been liberated by Greek ideals, but had become obsessed with a distortion of those ideals while assimilating them less than any other nation. How, she asked, could German Hellenism have produced only pain and dionysiac frenzy, and she raised doubts about accepted views of Goethe and German classicism. The book was, predictably, not translated into German. A visit to Germany in 1936, too, was soured by antisemitism and swastikas. 
In 1936 Butler took the Henry Simon chair of German at Manchester University. Though increasingly depressed by the contrast between Germany's literature and its political present, she wrote a biography of another literary individualist, 'Rainer Maria Rilke' (1941), aiming again not just to present the poetry, but to dispel some of the Rilke myths. She was appointed in 1944 to the Schroeder chair of German in Cambridge, where her elder sister Kathleen Teresa Butler was mistress of Girton College. Her inaugural lecture, 'The direct method in German poetry' (25 January 1946) again tried to match German literature with a national psyche that produced Nazism. This led to three books on the ambivalent figure of the magus, which had always fascinated her: 'The Myth of the Magus' (1948), 'Ritual Magic' (1949), and 'The Fortunes of Faust' (1952). These interests prompted her to visit Aleister Crowley (1875-1947), the once-notorious diabolist, and her autobiography makes clear her strong sense of the supernatural. Her not infrequent encounters with ghosts are recounted in her autobiography in a deliberately doubting tone that has the effect of making them entirely believable. 
Butler was president of the Conference of University Teachers of German in 1948-9, and retired in 1951, living until her death in London, where she wrote two short novels, 'Daylight in a Dream' (1951) and 'Silver Wings' (1952), summed up in 'The Times' obituary as 'not very good' (14 Nov 1959), a judgement that she had herself ruefully accepted. 'Heinrich Heine: a Biography' and 'Byron and Goethe: Analysis of a Passion', both in 1956, were followed by a sparkling autobiography, 'Paper Boats' (1959); an incomplete study, 'Napoleon and the Poets', remains in manuscript in the Institute of Germanic Studies, London. Elsie Butler was sceptical but always scholarly, a feature overlooked by those who dismissed her work as frivolous. Her position as an outside observer allowed her to address problems that nationalist literary approaches did not even recognize. While able to respond to the essence of cultures (India, Greece, Russia), she was clearly attracted to a particular type of forceful literary individual, and with Heine, Byron, Puckler-Muskau, Rilke, and the others, she recognized beside their 'star quality' the conflicts between the inner self, the writings, and the image. London and Oxford gave her honorary doctorates in 1957 and 1959. She died at her home, 30 Dawson Place, Bayswater, London, on 13 November 1959, and a memorial service was held on 7 December in King's College chapel, Cambridge. 


@@@@@


doc= 40925


Flaherty, Robert Joseph (1884-1951), film director, was born on 16 February 1884 in Iron Mountain, Michigan, USA, the first of the seven children of an Irish father, Robert Henry Flaherty, a highly respected figure in iron-ore exploration in Canada, and a German mother, Susan Klockner. Educated in Minnesota, Michigan, and Ontario, Flaherty studied at the Upper Canada College (from which he was expelled) in Toronto, Canada, followed by the Michigan College of Mines (which he left after seven months). He married Frances Hubbard (died 1972), the daughter of the mineralogist Lucius L. Hubbard, in 1914, and with her had three daughters, Barbara, Frances, and Monica. 
Flaherty worked first as a surveyor for the Grand Trunk Pacific railroad from 1906 to 1908. Through an introduction from his father, in 1910 he was hired by Sir William Mackenzie, the mining and railroad magnate, to explore for iron ore on the Nastapoka Islands and Belcher Islands in the Canadian Arctic. During his extensive travels with Inuit guides, Flaherty developed a close affinity for the Arctic environment and its indigenous peoples. Mackenzie provided him with photographic equipment so that Flaherty might document the native people and geological features of the areas he explored on his expeditions. Flaherty became an expert photographer, producing a prodigious number of beautiful portraits of the Inuit. Overshadowed by his later film work, the photographs comprise an important and valuable contribution to early twentieth-century photography. In these portraits Flaherty suggests an inherent nobility of his Inuit subjects, while capturing a distinctive range of individuals. 
Recognizing the value of Flaherty's documentary skills, Sir William Mackenzie sent him to Rochester, New York, for three weeks to be instructed in the art of cinematography by the Eastman Company. This was to be his only formal training in film-making. On his following Arctic expeditions for Mackenzie in 1913-14, Flaherty travelled to Baffin Island and again to the Belcher Islands in Hudson Bay, off the coast of Arctic Quebec, where he mapped, sampled minerals, and filmed. In recognition, the Canadian government later named the largest of the Belcher Islands after him. Although Flaherty was a mineralogist by profession, he had a strong artistic sensibility, as demonstrated by his talents as a violinist and story-teller. He was also good-humoured and possessed a charismatic personality. Upon his return to Toronto, Flaherty edited the 70,000 feet of film he had shot in the Arctic, but was dissatisfied with the outcome. By his own account, 'it was a bad film; it was dull -- it was little more than a travelogue. I had learned to explore, I had not learned to reveal' (Barsam, 15). His first film lacked a compelling story. By accident, Flaherty dropped a lighted cigarette on the editing-room floor and the film's highly flammable nitrate stock instantly went up in flames, destroying the negative and burning Flaherty in the process. The only copy, known as the 'Harvard print' because it had been screened at the university, was later lost. 
None the less, Flaherty was captivated by the potential of film-making, and decided that this was where his future lay. He would try again. This time he was determined to make a film that captured the essence of Inuit life and the hardships the Inuit faced, and one that people would want to see. Raising the capital to do so became a frustrating process which extended over several years. With his wife, Frances, as his constant supporter, he lectured, worked on a book about his experiences, and approached film companies and institutions in an effort to raise the necessary finance. In New York he met Edward Curtis who was establishing a reputation as the leading photographer and film-maker of native American tribes. The influence and parallels between the two men's photographic and early film work is significant. Curtis had already achieved success with his dramatic recreation of Kwakiutl Indian ceremonies in his film 'In the Land of the Head Hunters' (1914). 
In 1920 Flaherty finally managed to secure sponsorship from the French fur trading company Revillon Freres, which was the major competitor of the long-established Hudson's Bay Company in the Canadian north. The fur company underwrote Flaherty's sixteen-month trip to make a film about the Inuit, using their trading post at Port Harrison (now Inukjuak) on the Ungava peninsula in Arctic Quebec as the base for his activities. Although the $53,000 from Revillon Freres came with few known pre-conditions, the issue of corporate sponsorship of 'Nanook' and Flaherty's final film, 'Louisiana Story' (1948), raises key questions about how the subjects were portrayed. In the resulting film, 'Nanook of the North' (1922), the Revillon Freres trader Captain Thierry Mallet is seen only briefly, but his representation is that of the kind white man who is on friendly terms with the Inuit. He is also the only white man to appear in the film. Mallet is seen playing records on his phonograph for Nanook, providing medicine for one of Nanook's children, and enjoying friendly banter. There are no suggestions of the more complex relations traders might have, of the relationship of dependence that developed, or of social issues and controversies associated with the increasing Inuit contact with other elements of white society, including the government and the church. 

'Nanook of the North' is a landmark film which presents a family's captivating story of survival, adapting to life in an extreme physical environment. Robert Flaherty is often referred to as the father of the documentary and the ethnographic film. Yet he is more than that. With 'Nanook of the North', Flaherty invented a new film language, a hybrid that combined elements of the ethnographic with the dramatic structure and cogent form of a fiction film. His methodology was brave and unusual, even by today's practices. He enlisted the aid of his subjects to make the film a collaborative effort. He trained Inuit assistants and paid them to develop and print the film stock on location and maintain the cameras. He showed his footage to his Inuit subjects in order to ensure their interest and support, and to gain their views on how to improve the story. Flaherty blurred the boundaries of the traditional film-maker and subject relationship. Although the film was a novelty in that it showed Inuit living out scenes from their daily lives, these non-actors were cast in their roles. The scenes, such as a seal hunt or the building of an igloo, were all staged for the camera. Nanook's very name was an invention -- a transliteration of the Inuktitut word for 'polar bear'. His actual name was Alakariallak. In the film he wears bear pants, in keeping with his stage name, even though the Inuit in Arctic Quebec did not. The highlight of the film was to be a polar bear hunt, but they could not find one. Nanook's 'family' had been cast. His wife Nyla was in fact a relative, Maggie Nujarluktuk, with whom Flaherty was to have a son, Joseph. Poignantly, Joseph Flaherty and his family were moved in the 1950s by the Canadian government to Grise Fiord on Ellesmere Island in the high Arctic, as part of a social engineering experiment designed to 'rehabilitate' them (Marcus, 13, 67). 
It was not Flaherty's intention to mislead; instead his objective was a meticulous visual attempt to enhance the impression of actuality. 'One often has to distort a thing to catch its true spirit', he said (Calder-Marshall, 97). The humanistic and collaborative nature of his venture is one he clearly felt: 'I wanted to show them, not from a civilized point of view, but as they saw themselves, as 'we, the people'' (Griffith, 36). Despite the absence of overt social issues in this film or in most of his later work, Flaherty was alarmed by what he saw as the detrimental impact of white people on Inuit culture. He wished to show 'the former majesty and character of these people, while it is still possible -- before the white man has destroyed not only their character, but the people as well' (Danzker, 72). Flaherty thus minimized examples of the white man's influence and culture in his film, deciding not to include scenes of the Inuit using rifles to hunt, for example. While some have referred to this approach as salvage ethnography, the film offers much more than an improvisatory document of pre-contact Inuit culture. In presenting a series of sequences, Flaherty uses imagination, humour, and artistry to reveal the ingenuity and impressive abilities of his Inuit friends, and their parallels with our own daily lives. 
Finding it difficult to secure a distributor for his unusual film, Flaherty persuaded the French company Pathe to take a risk. 'Nanook of the North' opened in New York on Broadway at the Capitol Theatre as a double bill with Harold Lloyd's new comedy, 'Grandma's Boy', on 11 June 1922. It was an instant hit with audiences and critics, and quickly received worldwide distribution to great acclaim. The film popularized Eskimo pie ice creams, refrigerators, and Nanook love songs. When Nanook's death from starvation was reported two years later, such was his fame outside the Arctic that the great hunter was mourned in Peking. It was part of the myth that even today the real cause of his death, suggested to be tuberculosis, the white man's disease that was to plague the north, has been conveniently obscured. 
To a large extent, most of Flaherty's later films continued to trace and reinvent the 'primal drama' archetype he featured in 'Nanook of the North', depicting man's relationship with his natural environment. At times this was presented as a heroic struggle against the odds, and in other films it was characterized by a quiet equilibrium. John Grierson coined the term 'documentary film' when applying it in a review in the 'New York Sun' to Flaherty's next film, 'Moana' (1926), thereby christening the new genre of factual film-making. While Grierson was using the word as an adjective, rather than as an example of the kind of socio-political documentary films of which he later became a proponent, the term has continued to be first associated with the work of Robert Flaherty (Barsam, 42). Following the commercial success of 'Nanook', Flaherty received a 'carte blanche' offer in 1923 from Jesse Lasky, head of Paramount Pictures, to go anywhere in the world to make another 'Nanook'-like film. Two months later he embarked for the Samoan islands in the south seas. This time he took his three young daughters, his wife, Frances, and his younger brother David as collaborators. While abroad, the book he wrote in collaboration with Frances, 'My Eskimo Friends' (1924), which described his adventures of making 'Nanook of the North', was published by Doubleday. 
On the island of Savaii, Flaherty and his team set about documenting the lives of Samoans. In this tropical paradise Flaherty was unable to discover a tale of survival, so he filmed the Samoans undertaking ritual dances and body tattooing, and a story involving the courting of a young couple. As with 'Nanook', Flaherty pushed his cinematography to the limits, and experimented with the use of colour-sensitive panchromatic film, achieving an extraordinary luminosity and beauty. Once again he trained his subjects to process the film on location, and exhibited the rushes to them as the film was being made. Flaherty further honed his skill in trying to achieve a non-ethnocentric representation, so that the film would reflect a more indigenous perspective. With 'Moana', the Flahertys adopted a more rigorous approach to realizing an internal ethnographic vision, though without the film actually becoming self-reflexive. After twenty months of filming and travelling, the Flaherty entourage returned to the United States with their 240,000 feet of film. Admired by the critics, the finished film was curiously publicized by the Hollywood studio as 'Moana: the Love Life of a South Sea Siren', but failed to achieve commercial success. 
Flaherty went on to experience a familiar cycle of attempts to raise funds from Hollywood and elsewhere for his film projects. Although he completed two short sponsored films, 'The Pottery Maker' (1925) and 'The Twenty-Four Dollar Island' (1927), more ambitious plans, such as one to make a film on the Acoma Pueblo in New Mexico, went unrealized. Invited by the producer Irving Thalberg to work on a film for MGM, 'White Shadows in the South Seas' (1928), to be filmed in Tahiti, Flaherty ultimately left the production when it was transformed into a romantic drama. Another feature film, 'Tabu' (1931), set in Tahiti and co-directed with the German director Friedrich Wilhelm Murnau, was fraught with creative differences between the two men. Flaherty's approach to film-making, characterized by lengthy periods of reflection and constant and prolonged observational filming, usually without the aid of a script, diverged entirely from prevailing professional practices. His methodology was considered too abstract and unconventional, and his only commercial success, 'Nanook', came to be viewed by the industry as an anomaly. 
Flaherty turned his sights towards Europe and accepted an invitation from John Grierson to make a documentary film for the Empire Marketing Board in London, entitled 'Industrial Britain' (1933). Michael Balcon of Gaumont-British then offered Flaherty the opportunity to film his next project, 'Man of Aran' (1934), focusing on the lives of the Aran islanders off the west coast of Ireland. Returning to his theme of primal struggle and the perils of living in a harsh environment, Flaherty choreographed a vision of traditional Aran life, including the islanders' attempts to turn rock into soil for their crops and hunt basking sharks in the mountainous seas. The islanders risked their lives at times to provide the director with the realism he sought, and the film captures convincing moments of real drama. Although criticized for presenting a romanticized view of island life and for not confronting the serious economic and political issues of the day, Flaherty's film was awarded the grand prix at the Venice film festival in 1934, in admiration of its heroic storyline and impressive cinematography. 
As a result, Flaherty was once again approached to direct a big-budget dramatic film. The British producer Alexander Korda engaged Flaherty to adapt Rudyard Kipling's 'Toomai of the Elephants'. Flaherty and his family set out for Mysore, India, with the crew, and spent months shooting large amounts of footage, often of tangential interest to the storyline. Unhappy with the film's direction and progress, the producer finally replaced Flaherty with his brother Zoltan Korda, and 'Elephant Boy' (1937) was completed at a studio in England. The young star of the film, Sabu, whom Flaherty discovered, went on to Hollywood, but the film marked an end to any ambitions Robert Flaherty had of harnessing the resources of mainstream cinema. 
Pare Lorentz, director of the new American government film service, provided Flaherty with his next documentary subject. 'The Land' (1942), which was made for the Agricultural Adjustment Administration, starkly documents America's depression-era dustbowl disaster and its impact on the land, animals, and people. The film is more akin to Griersonian concepts of documentary film-making, designed to increase public awareness of social issues, than to the lyrical approach of Flaherty's other work. Completed during wartime, 'The Land' is unlike his other work in being a film about victims. 'The Land' was suppressed and received its first screening before a private audience at the Museum of Modern Art in 1942. Often overlooked by film historians, perhaps because of the limited availability of prints and the fact that it does not fit neatly within the Flaherty aesthetic, 'The Land' deserves serious further study. 
In 1944 Standard Oil of New Jersey approached Flaherty with a view to making a film about the company's oil exploration activities in Louisiana. The sponsored film would come with a generous budget. As with Revillon Freres and 'Nanook of the North', both companies hoped for a beneficial association with Flaherty and a filmic vision that would cast their business practices in a positive light. Given the controversies surrounding the oil companies' later destruction of the bayous and wetlands of Louisiana, Flaherty's lyrical story about a Cajun boy and his encounter with the non-intrusive exploration activities of the oilmen could be seen as ironic. 'Louisiana Story' (1948), directed by Flaherty co-written with his wife, Frances, and filmed by Ricky Leacock, was a critical success, and Flaherty's final film. 
Flaherty died on 23 July 1951 at the family home, Black Mountain Farm, Brattleboro, Vermont, with his stature as a pioneer film-maker intact. The enormous influence of his handful of films and their contribution to the art of cinema have been continually reaffirmed by film historians and leading directors. Fred Zinnemann referred to Flaherty as his 'creative godfather'. Jean Renoir wrote that 'he was a man made of love. That is why he had so much feeling for the characters in his films.' Importantly, Flaherty's subjects are never presented as oddities, regardless of their exotic surroundings and unusual customs. Instead they are revealed as resourceful and sympathetic individuals who exist in harmony with their environment, whether chiselled in struggle or muted in quiet compatibility. 'A sympathetic understanding of peoples all over the world is becoming more and more important', wrote Flaherty, 'it is one of the urgent needs of our time. And here, surely, is a vital field for the motion picture' ('Flaherty Talking', 26). The sincerity of his humanistic mission and creative vision is evident in his writings and now classic films. 


@@@@@


doc= 40928


Leeper, (Alexander Wigram) Allen (1887-1935), diplomatist, was born on 4 January 1887 in Melbourne, Australia, the elder of the two sons of Alexander Leeper (1848-1934), warden of Trinity College, Melbourne, and his first wife, Adeline Marian (1853-1893), the eldest daughter of Sir George Wigram Allen, politician and philanthropist. His younger brother, Reginald Wildig Allen Leeper, was also a diplomatist. His father, a southern Irish protestant by descent, was fiercely loyal to the British empire. Leeper was educated at the Church of England grammar school, Melbourne, where he became head of school, and then at his father's college before proceeding in 1908 to Balliol College, Oxford. Having taken a first in Latin and Greek at Melbourne, he went on to take a first in Greats at Oxford in 1911. He found employment as an assistant in the Egyptian and Assyrian department of the British Museum in December 1912, which led to the publication of 'Cuneiform Texts from Babylonian Tablets in the British Museum' (1920). 
At the outbreak of war in 1914 Leeper attempted to enlist but was rejected as medically unfit, even for home defence. Determined to contribute to the war effort, he finally found war work in the propaganda department (Wellington House), moving from there to the intelligence bureau of the department of information. One of Leeper's colleagues was R. W. Seton-Watson, the proprietor of the journal 'New Europe'. Leeper began to write for 'New Europe' under the pseudonym Belisarius. He became particularly interested in Romanian issues, wrote a slim volume entitled 'The Justice of Rumania's Cause' (1917), and was one of the founders of the Anglo-Roumanian Society, for which he acted as honorary secretary. He was also the author of several numbers of 'The Times History of the War'. 
In March 1918 most members of the intelligence bureau moved to the Foreign Office to form the nucleus of the new political intelligence department, which played a central role in British planning for the Paris peace conference. Leeper arrived in Paris in December 1918 and remained there, without a break, until 1920, working throughout for the Foreign Office section on Balkan affairs. He was appointed one of the British members of the Romanian and Yugoslav territorial claims commission and, because the senior British member, Sir Eyre Crowe, was occupied with other aspects of the peace conference, came to play an important role in drawing the frontiers of the new Europe. The communist seizure of power in Hungary caused great concern among the allies, and when, in April 1919, it was decided to send a special mission under Jan Smuts both to discuss regional issues with the new regime and possibly to open a line of communication to Lenin's government in Russia, Leeper was chosen to accompany him. In September 1919 he accompanied Sir George Clerk on his special mission to Romania to secure the evacuation of its army from Hungary. His knowledge of south-eastern European issues was by this time sufficient for his name to be considered (alongside that of Arnold Toynbee) for the newly established Koraes chair in Greek studies at King's College, London. 
After returning from the Paris peace conference Leeper was appointed a regular member of the Foreign Office, with the rank of second secretary, in March 1920. He became assistant private secretary to the foreign secretary, Lord Curzon, in December 1920, acquiring great influence with Curzon and being almost wholly responsible for initiating a more open relationship with the press. On 2 April 1921 he married Janet Christina Monteith Hamilton ('b'. 1898/9), daughter of Vereker Monteith Hamilton, artist, and niece of General Sir Ian Hamilton. They had one daughter. In February 1924 Leeper was promoted to first secretary and seconded to Australia to advise the prime minister, Stanley Bruce, on the reorganization of that country's department of external affairs. His report was described by J. R. Poynter as 'an important document in the history of Australian foreign policy' (Poynter, 'Leeper, Alexander', 56). On his return from Australia Leeper was appointed first secretary at the Vienna legation in December 1924. He used his spare time while posted there to begin a study, published posthumously, 'A History of Medieval Austria' (1941). While in Vienna he witnessed the 'pan-European' congress and was the only Foreign Office official to take the idea seriously. He warned that Europe would ultimately form an economic bloc and that Britain would have to decide whether to be in or out. 
In November 1928 Leeper returned to London as a member of the League of Nations and western department and in August 1933 became its head upon his promotion to counsellor. His main work now came to concern arms control, and he was intimately involved in the Geneva disarmament conference. He worked closely with his chief, and old friend, Sir Robert Vansittart, sharing to some degree his world-view. Leeper in particular worked on the British proposal for the prohibition of aerial bombardment on the territory or shipping of another state, attempting to find a solution that maintained Britain's ability to deploy air power in the policing of its empire while giving it some measure of protection from aerial attack. A strong supporter of the League of Nations as a vehicle for improving international relations, he was prompted to adjust his views by the rise to power of the Nazis in Germany. 
A gifted linguist, Leeper could read fifteen languages with ease and converse in seven or eight. Together with his brother, he was an exponent of Britain pursuing cultural diplomacy. His principal recreational interests were reading, travel, and Shakespeare's plays. Religiously devout, he moved from the Anglican evangelical environment of his youth to Anglo-Catholicism. A deeply humane and modest person, he could, when necessary, forcefully argue a case to a senior figure with an unflinching courage. He was appointed CBE (1920) and CMG (1935). He died at 5 Collingham Gardens, Earls Court, London, on 24 January 1935, following the rupture of his gall-bladder. He was survived by his wife and daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 40929


Aveling, Edward Bibbens (1849-1898), Marxist campaigner, was born on 29 November 1849 at 6 Nelson Terrace, Stoke Newington, the fifth of eight children of Thomas William Baxter Aveling (1815-1884), Congregationalist minister, and his wife, Mary Ann (died 1877), daughter of Thomas Goodall, farmer and innkeeper, of Wisbech, Cambridgeshire. In 1863 he was sent with his brother Frederick to the West of England Dissenters' Proprietary School in Taunton, of which Frederick later became headmaster. He left after two years and received private tuition before enrolling in 1867 as a medical student at University College, London, where 'he gathered medals and awards like a child plucking flowers' (Tsuzuki, 77). He transferred to the science faculty when he was twenty and gained a BSc degree in 1870. After briefly working in Cambridge as an assistant to the physiologist Michael Foster, he returned to London in 1872. On 30 July of that year, in a ceremony at which his father officiated, he married Isabel Campbell Frank (1848/9-1892), daughter of John Frank, a prosperous poulterer who had died in 1868 leaving an estate of $25,000 of which Bell, as she was generally known, was a coheir. After two years the couple separated by mutual agreement. They never divorced and the marriage ended only with her death in 1892. Aveling claimed that she was unable to live with his atheism. Friedrich Engels understood her to have run off with a clergyman. The view that he had married her for money and left her when he had got all he could from her became widespread. 
From 1872 to 1876 Aveling was a teacher of elementary physics and botany at the North London Collegiate School for Girls, Camden Road. In 1876 he took his DSc and was made a fellow of the Linnean Society. Also in 1876 he became lecturer in comparative anatomy at the London Hospital, and began teaching science at King's College, London. In 1878 he was awarded a fellowship at University College. His failed marriage aside, he was on a climbing path of conventional success and acclaim, which he left in 1879 when he abandoned his application for the chair of comparative anatomy because the post required its holder to profess Christianity. In July 1879 he made a public pronouncement that he had been an atheist for two or three years. In June 1881 he lost his lectureship, largely because of his atheism. 
From early 1879 Aveling had been an anonymous contributor to the 'National Reformer', published by the National Secular Society (NSS), and been a friend (probably also a lover) of Annie Besant, one of the society's leaders. He now lectured, wrote, and taught extensively for the organization. The educational programmes at its hall of science in Old Street, London, were largely run by him. These were very successful, and Aveling was clearly a talented teacher. He made a living as a coach and published several textbooks, on biology, chemistry, botany, physiology, and physics. His atheism was informed by his reading of Darwin and he published several articles and pamphlets on Darwinism as well as a book, 'The Student's Darwin' (1881). In 1880 he was elected a vice-president of the NSS, a position which he held until 1884. In November 1882 he stood successfully for election to the London school board. His candidacy brought him into contact with H. M. Hyndman's Democratic Federation (later the Social Democratic Federation). It was probably around this time that his conversion to Marxism began, though he did not declare his new allegiance until April 1884. 
For a while Aveling managed to combine membership of the NSS with his socialist beliefs: during his editorship of the secularist G. W. Foote's periodical 'Progress' in 1883-4 he made it a socialist paper, for example, and in May 1884 he lectured on socialism in the hall of science. But although there were at this time many socialists in the NSS, it was essentially a movement for civil and religious liberty. Its leader, Charles Bradlaugh, was hostile to socialism. In 1884 Aveling announced that he was to begin living with Eleanor Marx (1855-1898), daughter of Karl Marx. This liaison produced extraordinary vitriol from Annie Besant and triggered Bradlaugh's decision to force Aveling out of the NSS in July 1884. It is likely that Bradlaugh was also influenced by financial misconduct on Aveling's part, but Aveling resigned from the NSS before his financial dealings could be fully investigated. 
Aveling and Eleanor Marx Aveling (as she became known) were elected to the executive council of the Social Democratic Federation (SDF) in 1884, but in December they were among those who left the SDF and founded the rival Socialist League under William Morris in protest against Hyndman's attempts to dominate the organization and his support for participation by the SDF in parliamentary elections. Hyndman, like many others, disliked Aveling intensely. Notorious both for the debts which he habitually incurred and for his numerous affairs with women, Aveling was widely regarded as being without scruples in his private life. The many accounts of his repulsive physical appearance are not borne out by surviving photographs and seem to be informed more by the 'moral dread' which he occasioned in some people than by his unremarkable features. William Morris's daughter called him a 'little lizard of a man' (Kapp, 264-5) and Olive Schreiner said that he looked like an illicit diamond buyer. According to Hyndman, 'nobody can be as bad as Aveling looks' (ibid.). Though he was plainly a hedonistic and untrustworthy man, his reputation for wickedness owes much to the factious and polemical world in which he worked, with its organized campaigns of personal abuse. Hyndman's hostility arose partly from Aveling's membership of the 'Marx clique'. His relationship with Eleanor brought Engels's steadfast patronage. In the spring of 1884, for example, Engels brought Aveling in to assist Samuel Moore in the English translation of 'Das Kapital', despite his having only a very basic knowledge of political economy. Aveling also translated Engels's 'Socialism, Utopian and Scientific'. Engels trusted Aveling in the role of popularizer of orthodox Marxism and in this respect if in no other Aveling deserved trust. He was a highly effective orator, and an uncreative thinker whose publications on Marxism (for example, 'The Student's Marx', 1892) were largely expository. 
The Socialist League was soon divided between anarchists and socialists, and the Avelings left its executive council in August 1885. On 1 May 1886 Aveling resigned as editor of its journal, 'The Commonweal', and on 31 August 1886 he and Eleanor sailed for America, where Aveling had been invited to make a speaking tour by the Socialist Labor Party (SLP) of North America. They travelled very extensively there and were generally well received, but Aveling's extravagant expenses claims caused a huge argument with the SLP, which was gleefully covered by the mainstream press in Britain and America and which continued to rumble in the socialist press until August 1887. 
After his return to Britain, Aveling took part in the new unionism of unskilled workers. In 1889 he helped Will Thorne draw up the rules of the Gas Workers' Union. He was active in the movement for an eight-hour working day, and in campaigns for free speech. An overarching objective was the weaning of radical workmen from the Liberal Party to prepare the ground for the formation of a workers' party. In January 1893 he attended the opening conference of the Independent Labour Party (ILP), as a delegate of the Bloomsbury socialists and the Legal Eight Hours and International Labour League. He was elected to its executive and to the committee of six charged with drafting the party's programme. But his personal unpopularity caused his influence in the party to wane and he was expelled from the ILP London district council in May 1894. He continued to be active in the legal eight-hour movement and in the Second International, and he resumed involvement with the SDF. 
Alongside his political career, Aveling, like Eleanor Marx, was involved in the theatre. From April 1885, as Alec Nelson, he had been a regular contributor to the 'Dramatic Review'. Three plays written by him under the same pseudonym were performed at the Shaftesbury Theatre in London in 1889, and a fourth was produced in 1890. He was involved with Eleanor in introducing English audiences to Ibsen's work. In 1892 he produced an operetta. In 1896 he produced and acted in his comedietta 'The Landlady'. On 8 June 1897 he secretly married an actress in this production, Eva Frye ('b'. 1874/5), using the name Alec Nelson. He left Eleanor in August but returned to her in September, probably because of a lack of money and his increasingly poor health. Since about 1894 he had been suffering from an abscess on his side, which was the result of kidney disease. He remained seriously ill and dependent on Eleanor Marx's very attentive nursing. In February 1898 he underwent surgery. On 31 March 1898 Eleanor committed suicide. Aveling's infidelity and the financial straits which his extravagance and then his illness had brought on her were undoubtedly factors in her death. There was widespread speculation that he had somehow participated in killing her. He outlived her by only four months, dying -- from complications arising from his operation -- on 2 August 1898 at his home, 2 Stafford Mansions, Albert Bridge Road, Battersea, the home he had established with his new wife after Eleanor's death. He was cremated in Woking, Surrey, on 5 August. Despite his numerous relationships with women, he is not known to have had any children. 


@@@@@


doc= 40930


Blavatsky, Helena Petrovna (1831-1891), founder of theosophy, was born at Yekaterinoslav (Dnepropetrovsk), Ukraine, at midnight on 30-31 July 1831, the daughter of Colonel Peter Hahn (died 1873), descended from the counts Rotenstern-Hahn of Mecklenburg, and of his wife, Helena Pavolovna Fadeev. She was a petted, wayward, invalid child whose mother, a novelist who advocated women's emancipation, died when she was small. From girlhood onwards she was a beguiling story-teller. On 7 July 1848 she married an older man, General Nikifor Vasilyevich Blavatsky, but separated from him in October 1848. 
Helena Blavatsky's claims to have become an intrepid traveller seem partly authentic. She sailed for Constantinople in 1848 and toured Turkey, Greece, Egypt, and western Europe during 1849-50. Her curiosity having been aroused by Fenimore Cooper's Red Indian novels, she went to Canada in 1850-51, and then proceeded to investigate New Orleans voodoo. Afterwards she visited Texas, Mexico, and Latin America. She reached India in 1852, but failed in 1853 to enter Tibet, which was then closed to foreigners. Instead she visited Java and Singapore before proceeding to England. She crossed from New York to San Francisco in a covered wagon during 1853-4, proceeded to Japan in 1855, returned to India, and finally in 1856 supposedly entered Tibet, where she was initiated into Buddhism. Next she lived in France and Germany before returning to Russia (1858-63). During these years she 'claimed to have ridden bareback in a circus, toured Serbia as a concert pianist, opened an ink factory in Odessa, traded as an importer of ostrich feathers in Paris, and worked as interior decorator to the Empress Eugenie' (Washington, 31). Boase believed she 'kept a gambling hell in Tiflis about 1863' (Boase, 2.430). 
Blavatsky travelled in Europe from 1863, and averred that as an adherent of Garibaldi she had sustained sabre and bullet wounds when the Italian patriot army was dispersed by French and papal troops at the battle of Mentana (1867). According to other statements, she was shipwrecked at Spetsai off the Greek coast in 1871. These excitements are far less momentous than her claim that after returning to Asia in 1867 she had re-entered Tibet, where she remained in spiritual seclusion studying esoteric mysteries until 1870. Credence that she was a solitary visitor in Tibet for a total of seven years and was initiated by Himalayan seers is not universal. 
Blavatsky, who had intermittently practised spiritualism from 1863, established herself as a medium holding seances in Cairo (1870-72). According to her insistent recollections, she had met a dematerializing Tibetan, Master Morya, in visions some time before a corporeal meeting in London during 1851. She identified Morya as a Rajput prince who was a member of the Great White Brotherhood of Mahatmas (masters), sublime sages whose strict training and absolute purity vested them with esoteric powers. These masters (she represented) were in touch with the infinite, lived on a higher plane than the rest of humanity, could dematerialize, and were clairvoyant. It was they who had made her an adept in their arcane knowledge during her Tibetan seclusion. A lord of the world, living in the Gobi desert, headed their hierarchy. The brotherhood also numbered Buddha, Confucius, Plato, Abraham, Moses, Solomon, Lao Tzu, Cagliostro, Mesmer, Roger Bacon, and Francis Bacon among its number. Blavatsky proclaimed herself as the chosen messenger of this celestial brotherhood without explaining why she had been chosen; she acknowledged that dark forces often vilified the human intermediaries who transmitted the doctrines of the masters. Contact with the spirits of the dead, at which she was an adept, was of little importance compared with communion with the living masters, she later insisted. 
In 1873 Blavatsky reached New York City in a condition of near destitution. Her prosperity began to revive after a meeting with Colonel Henry Olcott, whom she impressed with her powers as a medium. Although accused of fraud by another medium, Daniel Dunglas Home, she was undeterred. In 1875 she discovered that her masters could transmit their ideas through 'precipitated' letters which were communicated to her by automatic writing or mysteriously materialized in her own or other people's homes. 
Blavatsky's name had been linked during the 1850s and 1860s with those of a German baron, a Polish prince, and a Hungarian or Serbian opera singer, Agardi Metrovich; but suggestions that she was a 'grande horizontale' seem spurious. She enjoyed intrigue of every sort, as well as stormy rows; but her professed dislike of sexual activity seems sincere. Nevertheless, on 3 April 1875, supposedly after obtaining an American divorce, she married (perhaps bigamously) Michael C. Betanelly, an immigrant businessman from Russian Georgia. If they cohabited, it was only briefly. 
Blavatsky was richly imaginative and an omnivorous, highly suggestible reader familiar with Asian theology, Masonic, Rosicrucian, and Templar rituals, and the occult romances of Bulwer Lytton. These sources were invaluable in 1875 when she founded, with the support of Olcott and William Q. Judge, the Theosophical Society. This society aimed to form a nucleus of the universal brotherhood of humanity without distinction of race, creed, sex, caste, or colour; to promote the study of comparative religion, philosophy, and science; and to investigate the mystic or occult powers latent in life and matter. Overall Blavatsky was unsympathetic to Christianity, neglectful of Islam and Judaism, and considered Hinduism and Buddhism as the conduits of religious discovery. She promised her votaries that theosophy could cure human anguish by enriching the spirit and rejecting sterile intellectualism, secularism, and materialist philosophy and psychology. From early on it was identified with the nascent movement for the cremation of corpses. 
Having become high priestess of a new religious system (which, however, she insisted was a science), Blavatsky next produced its bible, 'Isis Unveiled' (1877). This hectic survey of magic and mystery was supposedly the result of astral dictation or other interventions by the mahatmas (masters). Its extracts and paraphrases from ancient writings challenged the mechanical and materialist spirit of the age, and provided spiritual stimulation at a time when religious faith seemed to be weakened. The book's first section belabours David Hume, Charles Darwin, and Thomas Huxley for constricting scientific notions to demonstrable laws governing the material universe. Blavatsky insisted that other laws of nature, hitherto accessible only to occult wisdom, were indispensable for full scientific understanding. She was especially antagonistic to Darwin, and kept in her room a stuffed bespectacled baboon, dressed in wing collar, morning coat, and tie, with a copy of 'The Origin of Species' tucked under its arm to express her contempt for evolution theory. The second part of 'Isis Unveiled' contained Blavatsky's exposition of Buddhism and thoughts on comparative religion. The book excited the hopes and passions of credulous, earnest, and perhaps ill-educated readers who were undeterred by its hodgepodge of ideas, quotations, and huge spiritual projections. 
Blavatsky became a US citizen in 1878 but never re-visited the country after sailing for India later that year. Arriving in Bombay in February 1879, she and Olcott started a magazine, 'The Theosophist', and became minor celebrities (viewed with deep suspicion, initially, by the imperial government). The Anglo-Indian journalist Alfred Sinnett was among those who found her sincere, brilliant, and life-enhancing. He became one of her most persuasive propagandists, but recognized her blunders: 'She was rugged and eccentric in appearance; she dressed anyhow -- in loose wrappers -- and smoked cigarettes incessantly. Worse than this, she was passionate and excitable, and often violent in her language. Namby-pamby conventionality shrank from her aghast -- to her grim satisfaction, for she loathed it. She had a loud voice, that grew harsh in its tones when she felt irritated, and something or other would irritate her fifty times a day. ('Review of Reviews', 3, 551)' 

In India, from 1879, Blavatsky and Olcott converted many adherents to theosophy. In 1880 they both became nominal Buddhists in Ceylon where the Buddhist Theosophical Society subsequently built many schools and had a long-term progressive effect on Sri Lankan education. Subsequently, in 1882, they established the headquarters of the Theosophical Society at Adyar, near Madras. By 1885 121 lodges (on a Masonic model) had been chartered by the Theosophical Society, 106 of them in Burma, India, and Ceylon. Independent theosophical sections were formed in the USA (1886), UK (1888), India (1891), Australia and Sweden (1895), New Zealand (1896), the Netherlands (1897), and France (1899). The theosophical movement always lacked administrative and doctrinal cohesion; moreover, it attracted members whose interest in esoteric contact with rulers of the universe suggested neuroses or worse. 
The frauds at seances perpetrated by Blavatsky became more reckless. She was an indiscreet woman who courted but could not control publicity. Eventually she was denounced as a fraud. Emma Coulomb, an unpleasant woman who had been involved with Blavatsky's Cairo seances of 1872, was unwisely employed as housekeeper at the society's headquarters. In 1884 she caused panic and indignation among theosophists by revealing the legerdemain behind some of Blavatsky's supernatural tricks: Richard Hodgson was dispatched by the Society for Psychical Research to Madras to investigate her allegations. Some months later in 1884 a Madras missionary magazine (which opposed theosophy for exalting those Oriental philosophies against which the Christians were working) obtained from Mrs Coulomb letters from Blavatsky betraying her as an impostor. The letters' authenticity was denied; but Hodgson decried her as a crafty, vulgar, and deceitful adventuress who should be shunned as a fraudulent medium rather than honoured as the chosen spokeswoman of hidden seers. A turbulent and destructive scandal ensued. 
Blavatsky left India in 1885, almost overwhelmed by obloquy, although her devoted adherents considered these denunciations as signs of grace. After living quietly in Italy, Germany, and Belgium, she established her own esoteric Blavatsky Lodge in London (1887), together with a theosophical magazine, 'Lucifer the Light-Bringer'. Her robust and captivating conversation impressed many in these final years. W. B. Yeats, who became a member of Blavatsky Lodge in 1888, likened her talk to Samuel Johnson's. She seemed to have: 'more human nature than anybody else... She sat there all evening, talking to whoever came -- vast and shapeless of body, and perpetually rolling cigarettes -- humorous and unfanatic, and displaying always... a mind that seemed to pass all others in her honesty. (Yeats, 'Memoirs', 24)' It was in this period that Blavatsky wrote her huge, complicated book 'The Secret Doctrine' (1888). Supposedly derived from stanzas written in a language of Blavatsky's own invention, Senzar, it covers cosmic evolution, the origins of the universe, the history of humankind (derived from higher beings of lunar origins), reincarnation, and other incomprehensible matter. 
Despite Blavatsky's huge, cumbersome bulk, she ran a heterogeneous community household of admirers and a busy volunteer staff. They were convinced that she was the visible agent of transcendent powers and individuals, and credited her with a stupendous revival of forgotten knowledge. She manipulated her followers, and thrived on strife, as Yeats noted in 1889 when she expelled three members for flirtation or gossiping: 'Madame Blavatsky is in high spirits. The society is like the 'happy family' that used to be exhibited around Charing Cross station -- a cat in a cage full of canaries. The Russian cat is beginning to purr now and smoothen its fur again -- The canary birds are less by three -- The faithful will be more obedient than ever. ('Collected Letters of W. B. Yeats', 1.162)' 

Blavatsky was a prolific correspondent whose own words near the end of life best describe her aims and self-assessment. She wrote in 1890: 'The Theosophical Society has been called the Royal Asiatic Society 'plus' philanthropy. The theosophical movement was a necessity of the age [because] it appealed to certain human instincts and aspirations, and held up a certain lofty ideal of perfectibility... its strongest allies were the human yearnings for light upon the problem of life, and for a nobler conception of the origin, destiny and potentialities of the human being.' She was convinced that: 'morals, peace and prosperity will be promoted by the universal belief in a life after death (whether eternal or broken up by a series of incarnations on the same earth), and in man's possession of a higher, undying SELF, latent spiritual powers, and consciousness.' Theosophy and its leaders were the victims of 'sectarian bigotry... frenzied calumny and downright falsehood' (Blavatsky, 'Recent progress', 174-6). 
Blavatsky was dishonest, rash, mischievous, and self-infatuated; but her intellect, physical powers, creative energy, and tenacity were exceptional. 'A very gifted and original woman', W. T. Stead rightly judged; 'a fiery, impulsive, passionate creature, full of failings, and personally the very reverse of beautiful' (W. T. Stead, 'Madame Blavatsky', 'Review of Reviews', 3.549). Latterly she was grossly overweight and was trundled about by her admirers in a wheelchair of eccentric design. Weakened by Bright's disease (kidney failure), she died of influenza on 8 May 1891 at her home, 19 Avenue Road, St John's Wood, and was cremated at Woking on 11 May. Her ashes were scattered at Madras. Her death precipitated further deep divisions in theosophy and the emergence of Annie Besant as one of its leaders. Besant, who in 1895 was confirmed as Blavatsky's 'de facto' successor, considered that 'she was much more a man than a woman. Outspoken, decided, prompt, strong-willed, genial, humorous, free from pettiness, and without malignity, she was wholly different from the average female type' ('Review of Reviews', 4, 41). 


@@@@@


doc= 40931


Browne, Thomas Alexander (1826-1915), novelist, was born in London on 6 August 1826, the eldest child of Sylvester John Brown, merchant and shipowner, and his wife, Elizabeth Angell, 'nee' Alexander. He lived in Australia from the age of five, when his father settled in Sydney after delivering a cargo of convicts to Hobart Town in his own barque, the 'Proteus'. The family moved to the new settlement at Port Phillip (Melbourne) in 1839, but Thomas stayed in Sydney as a boarder at Sydney College until 1841. After joining his family in Melbourne he was tutored by the Revd David Boyd, his former classics master at Sydney College. In 1844 he took up a cattle run called The Swamp near Port Fairy in Victoria, in partnership with his brother-in-law William Walker. He named it Squattlesea Mere, after the seat of Sir Roger Wildrake in Sir Walter Scott's novel 'Woodstock'; in his own novel 'The Squatter's Dream' (1890) it is called Marshmead. It remained his home until 1858, when he bought a larger run, Murrabit, on the Murray River, but began to spend most of his time in Melbourne, where his family returned to Hartlands, the house his father had built at Heidelberg in 1839-40. 
Brown visited England and Ireland in 1860 and the following year, on 1 August, married Margaret Maria Riley at St Thomas's Church in Mulgoa, near Sydney, officially changing the spelling of his surname to Browne soon after. His wife belonged to the colonial aristocracy, her father and grandfather having been among the first importers of Saxon merino sheep into Australia. Browne and his wife had four sons and five daughters. Immediately after his marriage he suffered a financial collapse that brought his career as a landed proprietor to an end. From 1864 to 1869 he subsequently managed another sheep station, Bundidgeree, near Narrandera, New South Wales, owned by two of his wife's brothers. In April 1871, thanks to family influence, he began a new career as a public servant, being appointed police magistrate and, soon after, gold commissioner at Gulgong, then the centre of the richest goldfield in New South Wales. After ten years there he served successively as magistrate and mining warden at Dubbo, Armidale, and Albury, before retiring to Melbourne in 1895. He died at his home, Iona, Kensington Road, South Yarra, Victoria, on 11 March 1915 and was buried in Brighton cemetery, Melbourne. 
Browne wrote sixteen novels, all under the pseudonym Rolf Boldrewood, borrowed from Scott's 'Marmion'. Eleven of them were serialized in Australian magazines in the 1870s and early 1880s, but it was not until 'Robbery under Arms', his classic tale of bushranging, cattle stealing, and goldmining, was published in London in 1888 that he became well known. Like his other novels, of which the best is 'The Miner's Right' (1890), it exactly suited the prevailing British taste for exotic adventure stories. In Australia, Browne's exaggerated respect for rank and his predilection for gentlemanly English heroes were mocked by his younger, more nationalistic contemporaries, but for all their romantic absurdities his best novels were deservedly praised for the authenticity of their scenes of life in the bush, their convincing rendition of Australian speech and character, and their lively evocation of recent historical events. 


@@@@@


doc= 40932


Caird, (Alice) Mona (1854-1932), writer, was born on 24 May 1854 at 34 Pier Street, Ryde, Isle of Wight, to John Alison, an inventor from Midlothian, and Matilda Ann Jane, 'nee' Hector. As a child she wrote plays and stories. On 19 December 1877 she married James Alexander Caird (died 1921), son of Sir James Caird, at Christ Church, Paddington, London. The couple resided at Leyland, Arkwright Road, Hampstead, London, for the remainder of their forty-four-year marriage. Their only child, Alison James Caird, was born at Leyland on 22 March 1884. 
At the beginning of her writing career, Caird briefly used the pseudonym G. Noel Hatton, but of the five novels she published between 1883 and 1915, 'The Wing of Azrael' (1889), 'A Romance of the Moors' (1891), and 'The Daughters of Danaus' (1894; repr. 1989), published under her own name, have received the most attention from literary critics. In 'A Romance of the Moors' she tells the story of Dick Coverdale and his lover, Bessie Saunders. The plot's catalyst involves Dick's meeting Mrs Margaret Ellwood, a widowed London artist who has lost her way on the moor, who introduces the two young people to the idea of independence. She advises Dick and Bessie to reject the traditional ideas about marriage and to marry when they are mature and able to act reasonably and responsibly. In the end Mrs Ellwood encourages Bessie to return to London with her where she can 'form other interests; that will bring [her] nearer to Dick, not take [her] farther away from him'. While this novel indicates that women's liberation can sometimes be accomplished peacefully, in 'The Wing of Azrael' Caird has the main character, Viola Sedley, murder her husband Philip to end a violent marriage. She escapes into the wilderness to avoid prosecution and she must reject her long-time lover, Harry Lancaster, to save him from a destructive association with her. The ideas expressed in these two novels, while poles apart in tone and action, reflect the positions on women's lives which Caird espoused in her non-fictional tracts and essays as well. 
In 1897 Caird collected essays which previously had been published in the 'North American Review', the 'Westminster Review', the 'Fortnightly Review', and 'Nineteenth Century' for her book 'The Morality of Marriage and other Essays on the Status and Destiny of Women'. Her general ideas are focused on equality for women in marriage and for equal partnerships in the home which will 'bring us to the end of the patriarchal system' ('The Morality of Marriage', 59) which she described as repressive both for men, who were trained to see only 'the woman's-sphere and woman's-responsibility condition of things' (ibid., 53), and for women, whose 'best qualities... will disappear' (ibid.) if they keep within such a system. Her essays are frequently derisive and she employs irony to make her points about the repressive order of society which cannot separate wives from other types of property. As a progressive thinker, Caird sought legal reforms in childcare and divorce which would improve women's social positions by removing the stigmas of irresponsibility and ignorance. Her views have been the subject of late twentieth-century feminist literary criticism concentrated on how she approached the issue of social change in her fiction and her essays. Her efforts earned her the label of 'feminist' in her lifetime and she has been described by John Sutherland as 'one of the most aggressive of the New Woman novelists' (Sutherland, 99). She was also active in the temperance movement, and was an outspoken antivivisectionist, publishing two works on the subject in 1894 and 1896. 
Mona Caird died of colon cancer on 4 February 1932 at 34 Woronzow Road, St John's Wood, London, where she had moved some time after her husband's death. At her death her name is given as Henryson Caird, suggesting that her husband had taken this extra surname some time after their marriage. Her probate record indicates that she owned property, Cassencary, at Creetown, Kirkcudbrightshire, Scotland. 


@@@@@


doc= 40933


Clinton, Elizabeth, countess of Lincoln (1574?-1630?), noblewoman and writer, was the daughter and coheir of Sir Henry Knevitt 
(Knyvett; died 1598)
of Charlton, Wiltshire, and Elizabeth, daughter and heir of Sir James Stumpe. Some time after 21 September 1584 (when the earl of Huntington wrote that he hoped the match would soon be settled) she married Thomas Clinton (otherwise Fiennes), Lord Clinton (1567/8-1619). The early years of the marriage were not easy. In August 1597, writing on the occasion of the recovery of his daughter-in-law, the privy council wrote to the earl of Lincoln reminding him 'what it is for young folks to want'. Prompted by the queen, they asked him to provide 'some convenient house where the young lord and lady may live with their children' (HoP, 'Commons, 1558-1603'). Elizabeth writes of having had eighteen children; at least nine survived infancy (five daughters and four sons). 
Clinton succeeded his father as third earl of Lincoln in 1616, and died three years later at his castle at Tattershall, Lincolnshire, on 15 January 1619. He in turn was succeeded by his third, but first surviving son, Theophilus ('c'.1600-1667), who married Bridget (died 1675), daughter of William Fiennes, first Viscount Saye and Sele in 1620. At the time of the third earl's inquest (1620), the countess and her three younger sons were living at Sempringham, Lincolnshire. 
In 1622 the dowager countess published a short tract on breastfeeding, 'The Countesse of Lincolnes Nurserie'. She dedicated the work to her daughter-in-law, who, she writes, 'doe goe on with that loving act of a loving mother' ('Nurserie', sig. A2'r'). She herself had not nursed any of her babies, and writes in contrition, having been 'partly... overruled by anothers authority, and partily deceived by some ill counsell, & partly I had not so well considered of my duty' (ibid., 16). She confesses that she believes 'the death of one or two of my little Babes came by the defalt of their nurses' (ibid., 18). Unpretentious in tone and unpreachy, firmly anchored in biblical sources, the dowager countess justifies her writing straightforwardly: 'Because it hath pleased God to blesse me with many children, and so caused me to observe many things falling out to mothers, and to their children; I thought good to open my minde concerning a speciall matter belonging to all childe-bearing women, seriously to consider of. (ibid., 1)' She discusses numerous worthy biblical women who nursed their children, and sets forth rather individual interpretations of biblical precepts and of God's works as proofs of her thesis. She ends by asserting that it is the duty of older women to exhort younger ones: 'Thinke alwaies, that having the child at your breast, and having it in your armes, you have 'Gods blessing' there. For children are Gods blessings. Thinke again how your Babe crying for your breast, sucking hartily the milke out of it, and growing by it, is the 'Lords owne instruction', every houre, and every day, that you are suckling it, instructing you to shew that you are his 'new borne Babes', by your earnest desire after his word; & the syncere doctrine thereof. (ibid., 20)' Clinton describes the 'Nurserie' as 'the first worke of mine that ever came in print' (sig. A2'r'), and it is her only known work. In 1625 Theophilus brought a suit in chancery against his mother in her capacity as guardian of the three younger sons. She probably died in 1630. 


@@@@@


doc= 40934


Cuninghame, William (c.1775-1849), writer on prophecy, was born at Bridgehouse, Ayrshire, the only son of William Cuninghame (died 1804) of Bridgehouse (who in 1779 purchased the estate of Lainshaw, near Stewarton, Ayrshire) and his second wife, Elizabeth, daughter of James Campbell, merchant, of Glasgow. He was educated in Kensington, London, later studying at Utrecht University before taking up an appointment in the Bengal civil service. While in India he came under the spiritual influence of the Baptist missionary William Carey. In 1804, upon the death of his father, Cuninghame inherited the Lainshaw estate and returned to Scotland. In 1818 he established a sabbath school in nearby Stewarton, subsequently seceding from the Church of Scotland after his views on grace and the atonement were criticized, his reasons being given in a pamphlet, 'Narration of the Formation of a Congregational Church at Stewarton' ('c'.1822). He criticized the kirk session's decision of 1826 to prohibit Wesleyan ministers (teachers at his school) from receiving communion in the church. Between 1827 and 1843 he served as minister of a Congregational church in Stewarton, providing funds for the construction of a large meeting-house and comfortable manse, and a suitable endowment. As patron, in 1839 Cuninghame led the successful protest against the proposed division of the parish of Stewarton by the presbytery of Irving, sparking off the celebrated Stewarton case (1839-43); this in turn made the Scottish Disruption almost inevitable. 
Cuninghame spent much of his time on his Lainshaw estate, where he developed an interest in scientific agriculture. Unmarried, his increasing deafness caused him to withdraw from much of outside life and to concentrate instead on the writing of over twenty books on prophecy and biblical chronology. He also published widely in a number of religious journals, especially the 'Christian Observer', sometimes under the pseudonym Talib or Sophron. Most influential of Cuninghame's numerous publications were his 'Dissertation on the Seals and Trumpets of the Apocalypse' (1813; rev. edn, 1817), which argued for a wholly literal interpretation of the prophecies, especially those of the second coming, and his 'Letters and Essays... on... Israel' (1822), which established that the Messiah would reign on earth at Jerusalem over the restored Jews, and that their restoration to Palestine would be a critical step in the 'end times'. Always interested in missions, he was an active supporter of the London Society for Promoting Christianity amongst the Jews and the Continental Society. His 'Letter... on... Jewish Colonisation' (1849) urged the formation of a society to promote the agricultural settlement of believing Jews in Palestine. A complete list of his works can be found at the end of his 'The Fulfilling of the Times of the Gentiles, a Conspicuous Sign of the End' (1847). 
When Cuninghame was tempted away from Lainshaw it was usually to attend some gathering connected with the burgeoning prophetic movement, such as the first of the celebrated Albury conferences (1826) organized by another wealthy Scot, Henry Drummond. Here and elsewhere Cuninghame advanced the 'historicist' view of prophecy, dominant in protestant theology, which asserted the progressive and continuous fulfilment of prophecy from the time of Daniel, the 'Old Testament' prophet, through to that of John, author of the 'Revelation' (as opposed to the 'futurist' view advanced by John Nelson Darby and the Plymouth Brethren, which claimed that the larger part of the 'Apocalypse' was still to be fulfilled at some future date). His writings were deeply pessimistic: he believed the world to be 'in the midst of the last great earthquake which precedes the second Advent' ('Christian Observer', 1814, 759). Despite his opposition to the futurist position, Cuninghame came to accept the notion of the 'rapture', or the coming of Jesus in the air to take away his church prior to the commencement of the great earthly tribulation, albeit not the 'secret rapture' advanced by many of his prophetic rivals. The '2300 year' question was at the centre of his polemical contribution to contemporary prophetical debate. In offering an interpretation of 'Daniel' 8:14 he claimed that the number 2300 (which in the text refers to days, but is understood as years) is correct, as opposed to Jerome's claim in favour of 2200 and the later 'Septuagint's' claim in favour of 2400. His determined views on the minutiae of prophetic speculation, however, brought him into sharp conflict with several leading prophetic scholars, including George Stanley Faber, James Hatley Frere, Edward Irving, and the historian Samuel R. Maitland. His correspondence with the prominent evangelical Edward Bickersteth led to the latter's conversion to premillennialism ('Christian Observer', 1850, 284). Cuninghame died at Lainshaw on 6 November 1849 and was buried there. With Faber and Frere, he ranks at the forefront of prophetic scholarship during the first half of the nineteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 40935


D'Albert, Eugen Francis Charles (1864-1932), pianist and composer, was born on 10 April 1864 at 4 Crescent Place, Glasgow, the son of Charles Louis Napoleon D'Albert (1809-1886) and his wife, Annie Rowell (1826/7-1911). His father, though born in Germany, was a musician of mixed Italian and French descent who had established himself as a dancing-master and composer first in London, then in Newcastle, where he met a local girl, Annie Rowell, whom he married in Paris in 1863. They then settled in Glasgow, where their son was born and brought up. 
At the age of ten D'Albert attended the New Music School in London, whose director was Arthur Sullivan, and he became the pupil of John Stainer and Ebenezer Prout. His talents as a pianist were soon noticed: at sixteen he played Schumann's piano concerto at the Crystal Palace, and a year later he played a concerto of his own composition in London under Hans Richter. Richter agreed to take him to Vienna, where he came to the notice of Brahms, Eduard Hanslick, and, through Richter's introduction, Liszt. His career henceforth was based entirely in Germany, where his fame as a pianist grew. Liszt referred to him as the 'young Tausig', and he toured widely, notably to the United States in 1904-5. In 1895 he was appointed conductor at Weimar but resigned immediately when he found that the position was shared by two others. He changed his first name from Eugene to Eugen and identified wholly with German culture. He took Swiss citizenship in 1914 and resided mostly thereafter in Zurich. His private life, like his concert career, was restless, for he was married six times and had eight children. Louise Salingre was his first wife. The second was the Venezuelan pianist, singer, and conductor Teresa Carreno, who had played to Abraham Lincoln in the White House before D'Albert was born. Little is known about his later wives, who were Hermine Finck, Ida Fulda, Fritzi Jauner, and Hilde Fels, or his final partner Virginia Zanetti. 
As a composer D'Albert was immensely prolific. He had considerable success with his piano and chamber music, and he gave a lot of attention to the stage, composing altogether twenty-one operas, all of which were staged in German theatres. His style derived from German Romantic music, especially that of Schumann and Brahms, with later modern touches in the manner of Richard Strauss and Hans Pfitzner, both of whom were his friends. He also formed close relationships with Engelbert Humperdinck and the dramatist Gerhart Hauptmann. His cello concerto (1899) is an appealing work in a compressed one-movement form modelled on Weber and Liszt. The seventh of his operas, 'Tiefland', first performed in Prague in 1903, was a worldwide success and has still not entirely disappeared from the repertory. 'Flauto solo', a comic opera first performed in 1905, was successful also. His last complete opera, 'Die schwarze Orchidee' (Leipzig, 1928), betrayed signs of a more playful modernism, but his debt to German traditions was strong. 'Tiefland' is based on a drama by the Catalan playwright Angel Guimera, with a story of violent sexual passion set in the foothills of the Pyrenees. It provides a link between Italian 'verismo' and German expressionist opera, although the orchestral textures recall a more Wagnerian language. D'Albert was also a prolific composer of lieder. 
D'Albert's fame as a pianist was based on a formidable virtuoso technique, sometimes compared to that of Busoni. He was not a teacher, but he imparted the spirit of his playing in his editions of Bach's preludes and fugues and of Beethoven's sonatas. He also transcribed Bach's organ works for the piano and composed a cadenza for Beethoven's piano concerto no. 4. His work as a composer, especially for the theatre, drew him gradually away from the concert stage, so that he never came to be recognized as truly the equal of Busoni, Paderewski, and the many other keyboard giants who emerged at the beginning of the century. D'Albert died in Riga, Latvia, on 3 March 1932, and was buried in Morcote, near Lugano, Switzerland. 


@@@@@


doc= 40937


Dando, Joseph Haydon Bourne (1806-1894), violinist, was born on 11 May 1806 at Somers Town in London. Nothing is known of his parents. He began to study the violin with his uncle Gaetano Brandi and was then a pupil of Nicolas Mori for seven years (1819-26). He was page to his teacher at the coronation of George IV, and later performed at the coronations of William IV and Queen Victoria. 
After leading some concerts in London, Dando joined the Philharmonic Orchestra (1831-55) and subsequently became a well-known orchestral leader in the capital and the provinces, appearing with orchestras such as those of the Classical Harmonists' and Choral Harmonists' societies. In 1832 he played in the first English performance of Beethoven's 'Fidelio' in the Haymarket Theatre. Dando did perform as a soloist, but it was as a chamber musician that he achieved his reputation. He is best known for organizing the first public concert in England with a programme consisting exclusively of string quartets. This benefit concert, with Dando leading, took place on 23 September 1835 at the Horn tavern, Doctors' Commons, and was followed by two more, on 12 and 26 October. The success of these performances led to the establishment of a regular series of quartet concerts involving Dando, at first at the same place, then at the London tavern, and finally at the Hanover Square Rooms. A group for the performance of chamber music was then formed, with Henry Blagrove, Henry Gattie (violins), Charles Lucas (cello), and Dando (viola), which performed together for seven seasons from 17 March 1836 to 29 April 1842, when Blagrove left the group. Dando then became leader and John Fawcett Loder played viola. The newly restored throne room of Crosby Hall in Bishopsgate Street became the venue for the concerts, in place of Hanover Square, until the deaths of Gattie and Loder in 1853. Dando and his colleagues gave first English performances of Haydn's 'The Seven Last Words' (15 April 1843), Mendelssohn's quartet in E[flat] (op. 44, no. 3), and Schumann's quartet in A minor. He was a friend of Spohr and of Mendelssohn, who played at one of the Crosby Hall concerts (8 June 1844). As a result of a stiffening of the third finger of his left hand, Dando was forced to give up the violin in the early 1870s and in 1875 became music master at Charterhouse School, Godalming, where he worked until a short time before he died, on 9 May 1894, at his home, Attwell Cottage, Peper-Harrow Road, Godalming. 
Dando was characterized by Dubourg, who considered him to be a leading contemporary violinist, as a man of 'agreeable manners' and 'professional merits' (Dubourg, 295); his playing was described as combining elegance of expression, neatness, and vigour when required. He was a popular teacher, a conductor of amateur orchestras, and also composed and arranged a small number of pieces. 


@@@@@


doc= 40938


Dannreuther, Edward George (1844-1905), pianist and writer, was born on 4 November 1844 in Strasbourg, the first of three children of Abraham Dannreuther (1814-1861), cabinet-maker and piano manufacturer, and his wife, Sophie, daughter of George Leonard Fischbacher of Strasbourg. Dannreuther spent his boyhood in Cincinnati, Ohio, whither his father had emigrated in 1846 to establish a piano manufacturing business. There he took music lessons with Frederick Louis Ritter, learning the cello and piano. In the autumn of 1859 he travelled to Leipzig, where he entered the conservatory in 1860 as a piano student with Moscheles, studying theory with Moritz Hauptmann and E. F. Richter, and numbering among his friends Grieg, Sullivan, and August Wilhelmj. In 1863 Henry Chorley, critic of 'The Athenaeum', brought Dannreuther to London, where immediately on his arrival he gave with great success the first complete English performance of Chopin's piano concerto no. 2 in F minor (11 April 1863) at the Crystal Palace; a fortnight later he performed Beethoven's concerto no. 4. In 1865 he made a tour of the United States with Carl Rosa, an account of which he was persuaded to publish by Dickens in his weekly journal 'All the Year Round'. At the same time he had also fallen in love with one of his pupils, Chariclea Anthea Euterpe Ionides (1844-1923), sister of Constantine Alexander Ionides, a wealthy patron of the arts. Initial opposition to their marriage from Chariclea's father led to a period of three years in which they did not see each other, but in 1870, after Dannreuther had considered returning permanently to America, they became engaged, and were married in the Greek church at London Wall on 5 August 1871. On settling in London, Dannreuther became a naturalized British citizen. 
During the 1870s Dannreuther established a reputation in London as a musical radical, with catholic tastes and wide-ranging interests. As a pianist he continued his career as a virtuoso, giving the first English performances of concertos by Grieg, Liszt (in A), Tchaikovsky (in B[flat] minor) and Scharwenka (in B[flat] minor), as well as Parry's concerto in Fsharp major. At his home at 12 Orme Square, Bayswater, he organized a series of semi-public chamber concerts, which began in 1876 and ceased in 1893, when the lease of the house expired. These concerts soon became known for their contemporary emphasis, with programmes consisting of works by Brahms, Sgambati, Tchaikovsky, Liszt, Wagner, Rheinberger, Richard Strauss, Parry, Stanford, and Mackenzie. But, of all contemporary composers, Dannreuther championed the work of Wagner, who was a close friend. In order to help raise money for the building of the theatre in Bayreuth he founded in 1872 the Wagner Society, two of whose series (1873-4) he conducted. In 1876 he went to Bayreuth for the first performance of 'Der Ring des Nibelungen', attending all the final orchestra and stage rehearsals. In May 1877, during the Wagner Festival in London, the composer was his guest at Orme Square. There, on 17 May, in the company of George Eliot, George Lewes, Parry, Walter Bache, and Alfred Forman, Wagner recited his newly completed poem 'Parsifal'. Wagner's theories of opera and drama were the subject of several of Dannreuther's articles, the most notable being 'Wagner and the reform of the opera'. In addition, he provided a lengthy article for 'Grove's Dictionary of Music and Musicians' and translations of three of Wagner's essays: 'Das Kunstwerk der Zukunft' (1873), 'Beethoven' (1880), and 'Uber das Dirigieren' (1887). Such was Dannreuther's ardour that he named his first four children -- Tristan, Sigmund, Wolfram, and Isolde -- after characters in Wagner's music dramas; his fifth child, Hubert, was named after Parry. 
Although in the first instance Dannreuther was best known to the public as a virtuoso, it is as a teacher and writer that he is now mainly remembered. He proved to be a vital catalyst in the early career of Parry and numbered among his other pupils Fuller Maitland, Frederick Dawson, William Hurlstone, and James Friskin. In 1895 he joined the staff of the Royal College of Music. He contributed several articles to 'Macmillan's Magazine' between 1875 and 1876 and wrote over thirty for 'Grove's Dictionary'. For the 'New Oxford History of Music' he wrote the sixth volume, 'The Romantic Period' (1905), but perhaps his most enduring work was his treatise on 'Musical Ornamentation' (2 pts, 1893-5), which remained a standard text for many generations. 
Dannreuther died at his home, Chester Studio, Gerald Road, Chester Square, Pimlico, on 12 February 1905, and was cremated at Golders Green. 


@@@@@


doc= 40940


Green, James (1771-1834), portrait painter, was born at Leytonstone in Essex on 13 March 1771, the son of John Green, builder, and his wife, Sarah. He was apprenticed to Thomas Martyn, a draughtsman of natural history, who resided at 10 Great Marlborough Street, London. When his apprenticeship expired, he entered the Royal Academy Schools in 1791, where he attracted the notice of Sir Joshua Reynolds, and copied many of his pictures. In 1793 he exhibited at the Royal Academy several views of Tunbridge Wells, and some portraits. On 13 February 1805 Green married at St Marylebone, Marylebone Road, Marylebone, Middlesex, Mary Byrne [Mary Green (1776-1845)], second daughter of William Byrne (1743-1805) ['see under 'Byrne family (per. 1765-1849)], the landscape engraver. She was a pupil of (L. A.?) Arlaud, and was a well-known miniature painter, exhibiting at the Royal Academy, the British Institution, and the Society of British Artists from 1795 to 1845. She was a member of the Associated Artists in Water-Colours from 1807 to 1810, and letters by her relating to this society are in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London. Her large miniature of Queen Adelaide, signed 'My Green', is in the Royal Collection. Foskett noted that 'she was a good artist who painted with freedom and placed her sitters well' (Foskett, 550). 
Green gradually attained a good reputation for his portraits in watercolour. In 1804 he had belonged for four years to an informal sketching club that included the patron and landscape painter Sir George Beaumont, Samuel Shelley the miniature painter, 'Nattes and Hills drawing Masters and Pyne, a designer, who met weekly in each others' houses during the winter months to sketch and converse on art' (Farington, 'Diary', 6.2271). His execution was more elegant than powerful, but his portraits do not lack dignity. Many of them have been engraved, including those of Benjamin West, president of the Royal Academy (original painting in the Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York) and Sir R. Birnie, both engraved in mezzotint by W. Say; George Cook, the actor, as Iago (Garrick Club, London), engraved in mezzotint by James Ward; and Joseph Charles Horsley ('the stolen child'), engraved by R. Cooper. In the National Portrait Gallery, London, there are portraits by him of Thomas Stothard RA, William Say, Peter Nicholson, and Sir John Ross, the latter being Green's last work. The portrait of Stothard was sold at Samuel Rogers's sale in May 1856, as by George Henry Harlow, whose works Green's portraiture resembled at times although it is signed 'James Green, 1830'. It was engraved by E. Scriven for the 'Library of the Fine Arts' (April 1833). Green also painted large subject pictures in oil, including 'Zadig and Astarte' (exh. RA, 1826, of which an engraving was reproduced in the 'Literary Souvenir', 1828); 'Bearnaise Woman and Canary', engraved, and reproduced in the 'Literary Souvenir' (1827); and 'Belinda'. His picture 'The Loves Conducted by the Graces to the Temple of Hymen' was painted in watercolour. Green also was a frequent exhibitor from 1806 to 1832 at the British Institution, where he showed mainly genre and subject pictures, and in 1808 was awarded a premium of $60. He was a member of the Associated Artists in Water-Colours. Many of his pictures were commissions, notably from Francis Chaplin of Riseholme, Lincolnshire. He resided for many years at Rathbone Place, London, and subsequently at 8 South Crescent, Bedford Square, London. He died at Bath on 27 March 1834. He was buried in Walcot church. On her husband's death Mary Green retired from her profession, though she continued to exhibit; she died on 22 October 1845, and was buried at Kensal Green, Middlesex. Her copies after Reynolds and Gainsborough were much valued. James and Mary Green had two children, Benjamin Richard Green and a daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 40941


Hilton, Marie (1821-1896), promoter of child welfare, was born on 11 July 1821 in London. Deprived of early parental care, she was brought up near Richmond, Surrey, by her grandmother, a rigid Anglican who forbade her to repeat a visit she had made to the village nonconformist chapel. She persisted, however, and when, after her grandmother's death, she moved to London in her twentieth year, she joined Westminster Congregational Church, and was active in church, Sunday school, and temperance work there. Subsequently she was briefly at East Retford, Nottinghamshire, and from 1843 in Brighton. At Brighton she became uneasy about the ordinance of the Lord's supper and for some years absented herself from it, subsequently attending Quaker meetings. In 1853 she married a Quaker, John Hilton (1820-1908); they had five children. In the early 1860s they moved from Brighton to London, where he was private secretary to the proprietor of a large manufacturing establishment: in connection with it was a non-sectarian mission church which claimed their active support. Marie Hilton was received into the Society of Friends in 1866. In 1868, following the 1867 cholera epidemic and the distress in east London consequent on the great strike in the shipping trade, she began to take part in mission and social work at Ratcliff Friends' meeting-house and the family moved to nearby Burdett Road. Impressed with the needs of mothers who had to be out at work, often leaving small babies with inadequate care, in the summer of 1870 she visited the creche at Brussels, which then catered for some 500-600 children. Fired by this experience she opened her creche in Stepney Causeway on 22 February 1871, with 10 infants and 15 young children. By the time of her death it catered for 120 children. 
Social work all too often went hand in hand with insensitive and sometimes aggressive sectarian teaching. Marie Hilton would have none of it and campaigned against 'the battle of creeds over the cradle', insisting that the confidence of the mothers could be won only by an appeal to their (sometimes hidden) love for the helpless and suffering. Her strong personality and intrepid courage enabled her to go into alleys where the police dared not venture and to enter, undaunted, the homes even of violent criminals if she felt she were needed. Her practical common sense, determination, and courage enabled her to overcome the mothers' fears and her opponents' accusations of pampering. She secured the patronage of Queen Victoria's daughter Princess Christian and the interest of the earl of Shaftesbury. Various auxiliary institutions were added to the creche, including an infirmary and a country home at Feltham, Middlesex. Marie Hilton, having a powerful intellect and considerable administrative ability, remained manager and fund-raiser, eschewing any supporting committee. On her death responsibility for 'Mrs Hilton's Creche' devolved upon her husband, who was treasurer, until 1899 when it was transferred to Dr Barnardos. 
About 1892 the Hiltons moved to Shore House, 19 Shore Road, South Hackney. Marie Hilton began to be troubled by acute gout and, after being bedridden for three months, died at home on 10 April 1896; her body was interred in the Quaker burial-ground at Wanstead. 


@@@@@


doc= 40945


Marx, (Jenny Julia) Eleanor (1855-1898), socialist writer and activist, was born on 16 January 1855 at 28 Dean Street, Soho, London, the sixth child of Karl Marx (1818-1883), revolutionary socialist philosopher, and his wife, Jenny (1814-1881), daughter of Baron Johann Ludwig von Westphalen, Trier city councillor, and his wife, Caroline. Eleanor, who quickly acquired among her intimates the lifelong nickname Tussy, was the youngest by eleven years of three sisters, the other three children of the Marx household having died in infancy. Although born in a cramped and insalubrious flat in Soho, Eleanor spent her early years in a terraced house in Kentish Town, to which the Marxes moved in September 1856, before settling in a spacious villa in Maitland Park in 1864. She attended the South Hampstead College for Ladies, leaving at the age of fourteen with rather a haphazard education. 
The Marx household itself, however, provided Eleanor with extensive exposure to politics and literature, which were to be her lifelong intellectual and practical interests. Her mother described her as 'political from top to toe'. She visited Ireland with her father's collaborator, Friedich Engels, in 1869 and passionately supported the Fenian cause. But it was the Paris Commune of 1871 and its bloody suppression that marked her serious introduction to political activism. Both her sisters married Frenchmen who were committed to the socialist cause, and both settled in France. Eleanor was active in helping to organize aid for the French refugees in London and was herself briefly arrested while on a visit to France in August 1871. 
The commune also left Eleanor Marx with a very different kind of legacy. She fell in love with, and became engaged to, Hyppolite Prosper Olivier Lissagaray, one of its more flamboyant refugees, who belonged to an old Basque family and was exactly twice her age. Both her parents strongly disapproved. She took a post in a ladies' seminary in Brighton for six months in 1873, but returned to London to look after her father, whose health had seriously and permanently deteriorated. Forbidden by parental authority to see Lissagaray, Eleanor threw herself into literary activity. She went regularly to the British Museum, where she worked for Frederick Furnivall's Philological, Chaucer, and Shakespeare societies. She became friendly with actors such as Ernest Radford and Dolly Maitland, and planned unsuccessfully for a career on the stage. Increasingly imprisoned by the ill health of her parents, to whose interests she felt she had 'sacrificed the best, precious years of my life', she was liberated only by the death of her father in 1883. 
In 1884 Eleanor began to live openly with Edward Bibbens Aveling (1849-1898), a married man and a well-qualified zoologist with oratorical talent, whose commitment to socialism was as genuine as his character was fickle. Her attachment to Aveling (whose name she used in conjunction with her own) did, however, provide Eleanor with a firm sense of direction. She began to give public addresses on social and political matters, thus developing her talents in explaining Marxism with reference to the practical needs and interests of her audience. She had been active in the early years of the Social Democratic Federation, sitting on its executive committee, but resigned in 1885 together with (among others) Belfort Bax and William Morris to found the Socialist League. Nor did she neglect her writing: she published a pamphlet entitled 'The Woman Question' (1886), translated Lissagaray's 'History of the Commune' (1886), produced the first English version of Flaubert's 'Madame Bovary' (1886), and even learned Norwegian to translate Ibsen. From 1887 onwards she became more directly involved in labour unrest: she made frequent visits to the East End of London, where she was particularly involved in the defence of Jewish workers, was active in support of the gas workers' and dockers' strikes of 1889, and sat for several years on the council of the Gas Workers and General Labourers Union. Further afield, she was present at the founding congress of the Second International in Paris in 1889, where she was an indefatigable translator and interpreter. Her finest hour was perhaps her speech at the Brussels Congress of the International in 1891. Published later as a penny pamphlet under the title 'Report from Great Britain and Ireland', it was a lengthy document presented in the name of the Gas Workers and General Labourers Union, the Legal Eight Hours and International Labour League, the Bloomsbury Socialist Society, and the Battersea Labour League. 
Although she attended the founding conference of the Independent Labour Party in Bradford in 1893 and again addressed the Zurich Congress of the International in the same year, Eleanor's morale began to undergo a slow but fatal descent. Always close to Engels, she felt herself increasingly excluded, particularly by his new housekeeper Louise Freyberger. There were several disagreements about how Marx's manuscripts should be dealt with, though Eleanor did edit and publish editions of her father's writings on eighteenth- and nineteenth-century history and politics. The death of Engels in September 1895 and his revelations about the paternity of Marx's illegitimate son, Frederick Demuth, whose paternity Engels had assumed and to whom Eleanor was very close, were hard blows from which she never recovered. She continued to lecture, began to collaborate again with the Social Democratic Federation, and was secretary to the committee organizing the 1896 London Congress of the International. But Eleanor Marx felt sidelined, as it was becoming clear that the influence of Marxism on the British socialist movement would be limited, and the mid-1890s saw a reversal of what had seemed an irresistible tide of working-class political progress. Her death was precipitated by Aveling's secret marriage to Eva Frye in June 1897. Eleanor learned about this in August, and although she continued to live on and off with Aveling she committed suicide by taking prussic acid on 31 March 1898 at her home, 7 Jews Walk, Sydenham, Kent. She was cremated on 5 April at Woking. 


@@@@@


doc= 40946


Negus, Arthur George (1903-1985), antiques expert and broadcaster, was born on 29 March 1903 in Reading, Berkshire, the only child of Arthur George Negus (died 1920), cabinet-maker, from Huntingdonshire, and his wife, Amy Julia Worsley (died 1925). He left Reading School in 1920 to join his father in his business making and restoring furniture. His father also owned a small shop, attached to his workshop, where he sold pieces of antique furniture, and when he died, ten months later, Negus took over the shop and began to go to auction sales, building up a business as an antique dealer. In 1926 he married Irene (Queenie) Amy Hollett ('b'. 1908); they had two daughters. 
Negus later worked for Reading Fine Art Galleries, travelling round England buying antique furniture, but after the beginning of the Second World War the showrooms were requisitioned, and he joined the police war reserve in 1941, spending the war as a clerk in the Criminal Investigation Department. In 1946 he joined Bruton Knowles & Co., a firm of fine art auctioneers and estate agents in Gloucester, taking charge of the antique furniture side of the business. There he worked as an appraiser, and prepared the catalogues for auction sales in private houses. He became a partner in 1972. 
When John Irving, a producer with the west region of the BBC in Bristol, had the idea for an antiques quiz on television, Negus, well known in the west of England for his skill in valuation, was asked in 1965 to take part as one of the resident experts in the first series of 'Going for a Song', in which two 'customers' competed in identifying and valuing objects which had been secretly valued by the two experts. An instant success, the series was transferred to national television later that year. Although Negus thought it was so popular because the participants often discussed quite inexpensive objects, which the viewers might have at home, it was Negus himself who was the real reason for its success. His enthusiasm and affable manner endeared him to viewers, and he was able to talk in an interesting and authoritative way about a wide variety of objects, even though he only claimed to have any expertise in English period furniture. Audience surveys showed that the only criticism of the show concerned the 'customers', who often did not know very much, and so did not contribute to the interest of the programme. 'Going for a Song' ran until 1977. It was soon joined in 1966 by 'Talking about Antiques' on the Home Service (later Radio 4) of the BBC, in which Arthur Negus and Bernard Price described and discussed photographs of antiques sent in by listeners. The 'Antiques Roadshow', in which he took part until 1983, travelled around the country discussing antiques, and became even more popular than 'Going for a Song'. Other television shows included 'Pride of Place' in 1966, in which he visited houses such as Hardwick Hall, Corsham Court, and Saltram House, describing the contents, while John Betjeman talked about the architecture, and 'On the Road', where he travelled in a yellow Rolls-Royce along old mail-coach routes such as that from London to York. He made many programmes in the 'Collector's World' series on such topics as furniture restoration, longcase clocks, and the history of the chair. Although at first he turned down invitations such as one in 1966 to join 'Call my Bluff' on the grounds that he had a business to run, he soon became a well-known television personality, making guest appearances in 'The Two Ronnies' and 'The Generation Game'. He was equally popular with radio audiences, and gave frequent talks on 'Woman's Hour'. A guest on 'Desert Island Discs' in 1967, he chose Ralph Edwards's 'Dictionary of English Furniture' as his one luxury. Although he had never spoken in public before 1965, he was soon much in demand, and gave talks all over the British Isles. 
Negus published 'Going for a Song: English Furniture' (1969; 5th edn 1977), and his autobiography, 'A Life Among Antiques' (1982). It was largely through him that the world of antiques was opened up to ordinary people, who were inspired to search in their own attics for treasures. He became a freeman of the City of London in 1976, and in 1982 he was appointed OBE. Arthur Negus died on 5 April 1985 at his home, 31 Queens Court, Queens Road, Cheltenham. 


@@@@@


doc= 40950


Davidson, Thomas (1840-1900), philosopher and adult educationist, was born on 25 October 1840 in Old Deer, Aberdeenshire, the elder child of the unmarried Mary Warrender, a farm labourer, and Thomas Davidson, a farmer. His brother, John Morrison Davidson, journalist and radical, was born in 1843. When his grandfather died, his grandmother, by now widowed mother, and aunt moved to the nearby village of Fetterangus. Despite the poverty of his family, after attending the village school in Fetterangus Davidson won a scholarship to King's College, Aberdeen, where he graduated in 1860. He then taught at Aberdeen grammar school and later in Tunbridge Wells. He remained an orthodox Christian until early manhood, when he flirted successively with German idealism, Comtean positivism, and a secular republicanism. In 1861 he became engaged to Maye McCombie, eldest daughter of William McCombie (1809-1870), founder and editor of the 'Aberdeen Daily Free Press'. When he denied the divinity of Christ, however, her family became unhappy about the proposed marriage. He yielded a bit, but when the dispute flared up again in 1865, he emigrated and taught briefly in Toronto before settling in the United States. He never married, but corresponded with Maye McCombie until her death in 1873. 
Davidson had an excellent command of Greek and Latin, and was at home in Arabic, Hebrew, and Sanskrit. He could converse in most modern European languages, and had a photographic memory. He was a kind and modest man, who kept every letter and document sent to him by others, but would lend his manuscripts to people without bothering much if they were not returned. In the United States, his learning found an initial home among the transcendentalists and radicals of Boston. Before long, however, he moved to St Louis, where he taught classical languages in public secondary schools. Although he joined the St Louis Hegelians, writing in the 'Journal of Speculative Philosophy' and translating works by German idealists, he was an Aristotelian with limited sympathy for their views. After eight years in St Louis, he went to live in Greece, and, from 1878 to 1883, in Italy, where he had a private audience with Pope Leo XIII. Reading Aristotle had convinced him there was a faculty above reason, expressed in religion. His youth had shown him the protestant church did not embody this faculty, so now he looked for it in the Greek Orthodox and Roman Catholic churches. Although neither offered what he wanted, he found a pure spiritual community at the Rosminian monastery in Domodossola, Italy. He lived there for eighteen months, writing 'The Philosophical System of Antonio Rosmini-Serbati' (1882). 
The key features of Davidson's philosophy remained fairly stable. He believed that the divine is immanent in humanity, the telos of the individual is perfection, and the way to perfection is a democratic society and an appropriate education. Later in life, he wrote a series of books outlining his ideal of a popular, democratic education designed to develop the whole self. More immediately, however, he wanted to develop a spiritual philosophy akin to Rosmini's, and embedded in an organization akin to the monastery at Domodossola, but free from Catholic dogma. In 1883 he moved to London to help his disciples form the Fellowship of the New Life. The fellowship set out to cultivate a perfect character in all by subordinating the material to the spiritual and by recognizing the communal nature of our being. Its more specific commitments emphasized the simple life and manual labour. Soon, however, the fellowship split in two, with the New Life constructing a socialist ethic on the foundation of Davidson's spiritual and ethical beliefs, and the Fabian Society turning to social and political matters. Although Davidson always opposed socialism as too material, he was a keen supporter of a more moral economy. He returned to the United States in 1884. 
Although Davidson formed an American branch of the New Life, and thereby played an important role in the ethical culture movement, the main organizations he established in America were educational ones. He began to host summer schools in the cultural sciences at his Glenmore retreat in the Adirondack Mountains. Famous philosophers such as John Dewey, William Harris, William James, and Josiah Royce discoursed here with visitors from the Educational Alliance, or Breadwinners' College, that Davidson started on the lower east side of New York city, a slum populated by Jewish immigrants from eastern Europe. This college was his greatest achievement, and one of the best examples of adult education in the history of the United States. It did much to transform a community, helping many second-generation immigrants become lawyers, teachers, and philosophers. One of its alumni recalled that when Davidson gave his first lecture, it was 'as if from nowhere a Moses appeared' (Kovar, 6). From those he taught and inspired Davidson took a love that made his final years happy ones. He died a year after an operation for appendicitis, in the General Hospital, Montreal, Canada, on 14 September 1900. 


@@@@@


doc= 40951


Davies, Benjamin Grey (1858-1943), singer, was born on 6 January 1858 in Pontardawe, near Swansea, the eldest son of an engineer who died when the boy was seven. Having learned to read music by the tonic sol-fa system, he sang alto in choirs competing in eisteddfodau, and in Caradoc's Choir at the Crystal Palace. His voice broke when he was fifteen, and he worked as a shop assistant in Swansea until he won first prize at the 1877 Swansea eisteddfod. This enabled him to study at the Royal Academy of Music with Fiori and Randegger (1878-80), where he won the Evill Prize. A student success in Mendelssohn's 'Hymn of Praise' led to an engagement to sing the tenor solo in 'St Paul' in Dublin, while another student performance, in Gounod's 'Faust', resulted in his operatic debut at Birmingham on 11 October 1881, with the Carl Rosa Opera Company, as Thaddeus in Balfe's 'The Bohemian Girl'; in 1885 he married Clara Perry, a soprano in the company. He continued to sing small parts, notably in J. W. Turner's company. 
Davies's first leading part came on 20 December 1886 at the Prince of Wales Theatre in London as Geoffrey Wilder in Alfred Cellier's 'Dorothy'. By now he was one of the rising stars among English tenors, beginning to succeed Edward Lloyd and Sims Reeves in public affections. He went on to sing the title role in the premiere (31 January 1891) and on alternate nights of the opening run of Sullivan's 'Ivanhoe', at $70 for four performances a week, according to the composer's diary. In 1891 he also sang Clement Marot in Messager's 'La Basoche', and the following year performed with Augustus Harris's company. Thereafter he turned his attention increasingly to oratorio, both in Britain (Cardiff Festival, 1892, in Dvorak's 'Stabat mater') and in America (where he made his debut at the 1893 Chicago World Fair); he returned to America almost annually. He made his Covent Garden debut on 25 July 1892 as Gounod's Faust. His many festival appearances included those at Norwich (1893-6), Leeds (1895), and Bristol (1896). He sang in Berlin in 1894. Davies was always a particularly welcome guest in his native Wales, where he sang at eisteddfodau, notably in Joseph Parry's oratorio 'Saul of Tarsus' at Rhyl in 1892. In 1916 he became vice-president of the newly formed Society of English Singers. His fine natural gifts, which included an attractive timbre and clear enunciation, disciplined by an excellent technique, enabled him to continue his career well into his sixties. In the 1920s he participated in Albani's benefit at Covent Garden (25 May 1925) and at the Handel Festival (1926). He died at Clifton Court, Clifton Hill, Bristol, Gloucestershire, on 28 March 1943. 


@@@@@


doc= 40952


(James) Ernest Renshaw (1861-1899), also a tennis player and sometime doubles partner, were born at Brandon Parade, Leamington, Warwickshire, on 3 January 1861, the sons of James Renshaw, of High Broughton, Manchester, a flax spinner, and his wife, Ellen Knight. James Renshaw died in September 1860, before his sons' birth, leaving an estate valued between $60,000 and $70,000. For two years the brothers attended Cheltenham College as day boys, before leaving in July 1874. Tradition has it that they learned to play tennis on asphalt courts in their home town, where Thomas Gem and J. B. A. Perera had established a club. Five years later they first entered the All England tennis championships at Wimbledon, but, overawed by the crowd, they chose not to play but to watch and learn. Their debut on court at the championships came in 1880, when Willie was beaten in the second round and Ernest, for once progressing further than his older brother, reached round three. Then began a period of successes. Willie won the men's all-comers' singles title from 1881 to 1886 (though Herbert Lawford won the challenge round in 1884-7), Ernest won it in 1888, and Willie won his seventh championship in 1889. Playing together they also won five men's doubles titles. 


@@@@@


doc= 40953


Renshaw, William Charles (1861-1904), tennis player, and his twin brother, 
The Renshaw twins revolutionized tennis technique and tactics. Rich enough to be full-time amateurs, they practised hard, including during winter at the Hotel Beau Site in Cannes on the French riviera. Until they came on the scene most players had attempted to bring to lawn tennis either the heavy cuts of real tennis or the wristy flicks of rackets. The Renshaws, in contrast, developed a distinctive lawn tennis style, often taking the ball early with volleys and smashes rather than waiting for it to bounce. They also radically changed the manner of playing doubles by having one player stand at the net to intercept and volley back returns of service. Willie was the better player, forceful, determined, and full of fire and dash, in contrast to the patient, graceful, and more restrained Ernest. The last appearance of a Renshaw at Wimbledon was in 1893, when the twins were drawn to play each other in the first round -- there being no seeding in those days -- but Willie withdrew in favour of his younger brother, who lost in the subsequent round. 
Ernest Renshaw died on 2 September 1899 at The Grange, Waltham St Lawrence, near Twyford, Berkshire. He had ingested spirits of carbolic acid but the subsequent inquest could find no evidence whether this had been taken intentionally or not. Willie Renshaw, described as a gentleman of independent means, died at Swanage, Dorset, on 12 August 1904 following epileptic convulsions. Neither twin was married. Their relatives donated a trophy, the Renshaw cup, to the All England club, which for many years was presented to the winner of the men's singles at the Wimbledon championships. 


@@@@@


doc= 40954


Trollope, George Haward (1845-1929), builder and Territorial Army officer, was born at Westminster on 20 January 1845, the elder son of George Francis Trollope (1817-1895), interior decorator and builder, and Constance Haward. His father had been apprenticed to the firm of Haward and Nixon, Constance's family's building business. At the age of fifteen Trollope joined the family building business, George Trollope & Sons, and had only a limited formal education. In the same year he enlisted as a private in the Queen's Westminster rifles, a militia unit. He rose through the ranks to become the commanding officer and, by 1891, a colonel. Thereafter he was commonly known to his peers and employees as 'the Colonel'. Trollope married Jessie, daughter of George Gouldsmith, auctioneer, on 8 April 1869; they had at least two sons, Fabian George Trollope and Howard Woolwright Trollope (who predeceased his father), and a daughter, Sybil L. H. Hickley. 
The family firm expanded during the 1850s by undertaking large speculative building projects in Belgravia, but in the later 1860s the economic slump found the building side of George Trollope & Sons dangerously over committed. Fortunately, the firm had been restructured in 1864 to take advantage of limited liability and the assets of its interior decorating, estate agency, and cabinet-making branches were protected. During the 1870s, particularly on the Cadogan estate in Chelsea, the firm re-established itself as builders of residential property. Its reputation was based on the very high quality of craftsmanship and the speed and flexibility with which contracts were executed. The consequent requirement for systematic overtime and disregard for the craft unions' working rules led to repeated outbreaks of industrial strife. 
Little is known of Trollope's role in the firm prior to 1891, although he did represent the company on the council of the Institute of Builders. He did not serve a formal apprenticeship in one of the building crafts. By the time that Trollope took control of the business he had acquired his father's hostility to trade unions and the cautious conservatism of his uncle Robert, also a director of the firm. Under his direction, Trollopes remained active in London's West End, building Claridge's Hotel and Alfred Beit's house in Park Lane. The firm also diversified into ship-fitting (making interior woodwork for liners) and the construction of country houses, particularly for South African financiers. Randlord clients included Barnato, Beit, Joel, Phillips, and Wernher. Trollope's imperialistic views and accumulated wealth may have helped to secure these contracts. 
In 1894-5 Trollope was at the centre of bitter industrial disputes in London. The trouble began at Beit's house in Park Lane where Trollopes' foreman refused to employ union bricklayers. During the ensuing strike a lurid poster headed 'Trollope's Black List' appeared and Trollope obtained a court injunction prohibiting it. The dispute spilled over onto a Mowlems site where the presence of a 'Trollope blackleg' provoked a strike. In both disputes the Central Association of Master Builders of London played a pivotal role, supporting the firms while moderating their intransigence in negotiations. Trollope served as the association's treasurer, 1892-3, vice-president, 1893-5, and president, in 1895-6. At one point he advocated that it should support the strike-breaking National Free Labour Association, but later changed his mind. 
The firm of Trollope and Colls was formed in 1903 and Trollope served as joint chairman until 1910. Although the Trollope family were the majority shareholders, Howard Colls appears to have been the driving force of the new firm. Colls had a greater technical understanding of reinforced concrete, structural steel, and other innovations in construction. Following Colls's death in 1910 Trollope became sole chairman of Trollope and Colls, a position he retained until 1924. He recruited Dr Oscar Faber as the firm's first chief engineer, apparently to compensate for the loss of Colls's expertise. During this period the firm undertook very substantial contracts. War work included factories, hospitals, camps, aerodromes, and even an aeroplane factory at Oldham which was the largest in Britain under a single roof (covering 6 acres). After the war large bank contracts were executed, including the construction of the Hongkong and Shanghai Bank building at a cost of $1 million. 
During the years 1910 to 1924 Trollope and Colls was transformed into a large public company with family directors and professional management. This change was emphasized by the fact that most of the family directors were on active service, overseas during the war. Despite his age, 'the Colonel' held staff appointments in France, Mesopotamia, and the eastern Mediterranean. He died at his home, Hammershott, Liphook, Hampshire, on 30 May 1929 at the age of eighty-four. His estate was valued at $75,000: this relatively modest sum may be explained by the references to gifts and loans to family members which appear in his will. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 40956


Burgoyne, Peter Bond (1844-1929), wine merchant, was born on 7 February 1844 at Dodbrook, Kingsbridge, Devon, the son of John Trist Burgoyne ('c'.1812-1856), beer and porter merchant, and his wife, Mary Ann Bond ('c'.1808-1854). Of his early years and education nothing is known, but in 1858, two years after his father's death, Burgoyne went to Newfoundland. He may have been apprenticed to Messrs Brooking & Co. of St John's, where he worked as a clerk, as he remained in the colony for no more than seven years. On his return to England in 1865 Burgoyne took employment as an estate agent before becoming a clerk to a London wine shipping firm of which he later became manager and where he was largely responsible for the introduction of Hungarian wines into England. In 1871 he set up in business on his own account, trading from offices and cellars at 50 Old Broad Street, London. On 28 March 1872 he married Marie Henrietta Johanna (1848/9-1934), daughter of Charles Achilles, artist of Acton. 
Following an introduction to Dr Alexander Charles Kelly, manager and principal shareholder in the Tintara Vineyard Company of McLaren Vale in South Australia, Burgoyne agreed to represent the company, and the Tintara Vineyard Association was established in 1872. Existing prejudices for the wines of the Old World made sales difficult to secure, and by the end of year the agency was relaunched as the Australian Vineyards Association, dealing in Australian wines generally. The difficulties experienced by those attempting to introduce Australian wines to the British public at this time were not easily overcome and the debts mounted up. In 1876 the Australian Vineyards Association was purchased by Walter Watson Hughes, a wealthy expatriate and owner of the Fairfield vineyard in South Australia's Clare valley. Wiping the slate clean, Hughes entered into partnership with Burgoyne, who reverted to selling European wines while the Australian wine trade was developed. 
The greatest impediment to the trade was the duty structure which tended to penalize Australian wine merchants, who invariably had to pay a surcharge of 150 per cent over and above the standard duty of 1's'. per gallon on wines above 26 degrees of proof spirit. In his evidence before the select committee on wine duties in May 1879, Burgoyne repeatedly stated that the natural wines of South Australia contained an average of 29 degrees of proof spirit, and claimed that vineyards in the colony were going out of production because of the high rate of duty in Britain. Not one to miss a marketing opportunity, he was quick to produce five samples of Fairfield wines for the committee to taste. 
Burgoyne's fortunes took a turn for the better in 1886 when the duties were modified to accommodate colonial wine growers. This prompted a move to larger premises at Dowgate Hill, London, and the offer of a prize of 50 guineas to be awarded to the exhibitor of a claret style of wine at the Jubilee International Exhibition, to be held in Adelaide in 1887, and other prizes to be offered under the auspices of the South Australian Agricultural Society. In 1888 agents were appointed in Adelaide and Melbourne, and in 1893, on the first of several visits to the colonies, Burgoyne invested in vineyard and cellar accommodation in the Rutherglen district of north-east Victoria. Despite competition from the South Australian government's bonded depot in London, and other importers, Burgoyne soon became the leviathan of the trade selling half a million gallons of wine annually, mainly blends which were marketed under a number of registered brands. 
In 1903 the business of P. B. Burgoyne was converted to a limited company. A publicity brochure from this period, 'The quality wines of the empire', quoted the chancellor of the exchequer, Sir Michael Hicks Beach, who remarked in the Commons in 1899 that 'Messrs. Burgoyne have annually during twenty-eight years paid more duty on Australian wines than all the rest of the trade put together'. The wines of the Cape were another departure for Burgoyne, whose name was commemorated by an award at the Western Province Agricultural Society's annual show for many years after his death. 
Burgoyne died at his home, Broadlands, Ascot, Berkshire, on 4 September 1929. Numerous bequests were made to long-term members of his domestic and business staff, and a bequest of $1000 was made to the National Hospital for Consumption, Ventnor, Isle of Wight, which Burgoyne served for a total of thirty-eight years, twenty-six of them as chairman. The family business of P. B. Burgoyne & Co. Ltd was continued by Burgoyne's son Cuthbert John (1875-1955), and grandson John Fenner Burgoyne ('c'.1900-1976). 


@@@@@


doc= 40958


Browne, Sir Granville St John Orde (1883-1947), army officer and colonial official, was born at Woolwich on 26 October 1883, the son of Captain Charles Orde Browne, soldier, and his wife, Annie Maria Michell. He was educated at Wellington College and at the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, from where he was commissioned into the Royal Horse and Field Artillery in 1902. He was posted to South Africa and Mauritius from 1903 to 1907, serving in the 1906 Zulu rising. He returned briefly to Britain from 1907 to 1909, in which year he was seconded to the Colonial Office as an assistant district commissioner in the British East Africa Protectorate (later Kenya). 
Orde Browne continued as an administrative officer until 1915 when he was recommissioned into the Royal Artillery. He then served throughout the German East Africa campaign being promoted to the rank of major, appointed CBE, and mentioned in dispatches four times. In view of his later career it is likely that the suffering of conscripted African labourers during the campaign, over 40,000 from the East Africa Protectorate alone dying from neglect or disease, left a lasting impression upon him. 
The nature of British colonialism changed greatly after the war. Colonial governments were now seen as trustees for a dual mandate, formalized by Lord Lugard, of developing territories both for the world at large and also for their inhabitants. The mandate was reinforced by a new measure of accountability to the British parliament, which on occasions took a serious view of abuses of power, such as the harsh exploitation of labour in Kenya in the immediate post-war years. 
To these wider perspectives of colonial administration Orde Browne returned, first as a senior commissioner in 1921 and then as labour commissioner in 1926, both posts in Tanganyika where the League of Nations mandate colonial government was additionally accountable to Geneva. He married Margaret Florence, daughter of the Revd H. Fearnley-Whittingstall, in 1923; they had three daughters. While serving as senior commissioner Orde Browne was charged with the investigation of labour conditions in the territory and the task of making recommendations for the establishment of a labour department. He later produced an interesting anthropological study, 'The Vanishing Tribes of Kenya' (1925). This work secured him a reputation outside Africa as a result of which, sponsored by the Institute of African Languages and Cultures, he wrote 'The African Labourer' (1933), a seminal study from which all colonial territories were to benefit. The work falls into three parts, the first being a study of practices at the time, in particular housing, diet, wages, the contractual obligations of employer and employee, penal sanctions, recruitment, women, juvenile and child labour, migrant labour, and forced labour, set out together with immediate needs for improvement. The second part is an examination of labour legislation in all the European colonial territories in Africa, and the third and final part is concerned with international draft labour conventions and their application in Africa. 
The work was published in 1933, two years after Orde Browne's retirement from the colonial service. In 1934 he became a consultant member of the International Labour Office's committee of experts on native labour. In the course of this work he visited the Belgian Congo, Portuguese East Africa, and later, in 1937, Northern Rhodesia. In 1938 he was appointed the first labour adviser to the secretary of state for the colonies, a post he held until his death in 1947. In this capacity he visited the West Indies in 1938, west Africa in 1939, and in 1941 Ceylon, Mauritius, and Malaya, and, after the war was over in 1945, east Africa. During each visit Orde Browne made a careful analysis of the local problems and in detailed reports, later published as command papers, offered practical suggestions usually, but not always, well received in colonial secretariats; among them was a recommendation for the establishment of labour advisory boards. In his time in office it became accepted that the British Trades Union Congress could offer advice to the Colonial Office on colonial labour issues, and in the case of the West Indies (later to be a precedent for other colonies), that emergent trade unions should be guided and assisted rather than discouraged. He also continually urged research into the social problems facing urban, mine, or plantation workers at work away from their traditional home areas. 
Orde Browne's achievement was to provide an entirely new, constructive thinking about African labour, a subject generally ignored prior to his work, an achievement that before long resulted in the creation of specialist labour departments with trained staffs in all but the smallest of British colonies. These, as he foresaw, included both field inspectorates and technical staff for matters such as factory inspections, trade unions, workmen's compensation, and trade testing. These departments drew on his expertise and clarification of their functions. While labour conditions in British colonies could never approach the ideal, substantial improvements in conditions of work and wages, elimination of abuses, and compensation for injury were in large measure due to his inspiration. In January 1947 he was knighted for his services. Orde Browne died on 12 May 1947 at the Middlesex Hospital, London. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 40959


Temple, Emily Mary, Viscountess Palmerston (1787-1869), political hostess, was born on 21 April 1787, the fifth surviving child of Elizabeth Lamb, nee Milbanke, Viscountess Melbourne (bap. 1751, d. 1818). She was ostensibly and legally the child of Peniston Lamb, first Viscount Melbourne (1745-1828), but her natural father was probably George O'Brien Wyndham, third earl of Egremont (1751-1837). She received her formal education (such as it was) from governesses, but learned the skills for her future life as a political hostess from her adored mother and her mother's close friend, Georgiana, duchess of Devonshire. She also acquired their loose interpretation of sexual morality, a firm sense of family, and the 'Devonshire House drawl', a distinctive mode of pronunciation common to the whig aristocracy. She enjoyed a particularly close relationship with two of her four brothers, William Lamb, later second Viscount Melbourne, and Frederick Lamb, later Baron Beauvale and third Viscount Melbourne. (Her only sister, Harriet, died in 1803.) 
The charming, coquettish Emily Lamb made her society debut in 1804, and her elegant figure, grey eyes, dark hair, and translucent complexion won her many male admirers. Women, especially those of an age to be her rivals in the marriage market, were less taken with her. Lady Melbourne was ambitious for all her children, and encouraged the suit of the young, handsome, rich whig peer Peter Leopold Louis Francis Nassau Cowper, fifth Earl Cowper (1778-1837). The couple were married on 20 July 1805 at Melbourne House in London. But Cowper was dull. Having so much, he lacked ambition, and despite the hopes of the whig grandees he never came to anything as a politician; it was only the sparkle of his wife that kept him from fading completely into obscurity. As early as December 1805 Lady Harriet Cavendish (no admirer of Lady Cowper) observed that: 'He is never with her and affects great indifference and neglect, though I believe he really cares for her as much as he can for anything and she seems tolerably contented, though I hear she is reduced to rejoice when he comes home drunk, as he talks to her more then than at any other time. (Cavendish, 139)' Although initially much in love with her husband, Emily Cowper was not one to put up with such treatment for long. She followed her mother's dictum and provided her husband with an indisputable heir -- George, Viscount Fordwich, born in June 1806 -- and then (her husband complaisant) proceeded on her merry way through a throng of admirers, suitors, and lovers. The paternity of her four further children -- Emily, William, (Charles) Spencer, and Frances, born between 1808 and 1820 -- was a matter for speculation then and is now, but William bore a striking physical resemblance to his mother's most consistent lover, Henry John Temple, third Viscount Palmerston (1784-1865), who was also supposed to be the father of her youngest child, Frances. 
After Lady Melbourne's death in 1818 Emily assumed responsibility for her brothers, and much of her energy was directed towards the management of (or interference in) their affairs. William's tormented marriage with Lady Caroline Lamb and the wreckage of his political career in the 1820s was a matter of lasting concern, and with Frederick, a career diplomat, she maintained a regular political and social correspondence. She also inherited her mother's role as a leader of fashionable society, becoming (with Lady Jersey and Madame de Lieven) one of the 'lady patronesses' of the society balls held at Almack's, and a regular member of the court of George IV. By the late 1820s she had established herself as a hostess to the Canningite whigs, which grouping included both her brother William and her lover Palmerston, at the Cowper mansion, Panshanger, in Hertfordshire. When the widowed Melbourne became home secretary in 1830 and then prime minister in 1834, Lady Cowper naturally assumed the role of his hostess; her ties to the ministry were cemented by Palmerston's position as foreign secretary. She sincerely mourned the death of Lord Cowper, on 27 June 1837, barely a week after the accession of Queen Victoria, and consequently played little public part at the court during the first year of Victoria's reign, though she offered advice to Melbourne on his handling of the young queen. The marriages of her children, especially her daughters, were also a major preoccupation: her namesake, Lady Emily, had inherited all her mother's liveliness, and it was something of a surprise to society at large when in 1830 she decided to marry the earnest, evangelical tory Anthony Ashley-Cooper, later seventh earl of Shaftesbury. Despite considerable personal attractions, her younger daughter, Lady Frances, was more difficult to suit, and Frances was still unmarried when, on 16 December 1839, Emily Cowper and Palmerston were finally married. Lady Frances (who did not like Palmerston) was not amused. The queen, young love embodied, felt sure the match between the elderly couple would make Albert smile, but she gave them a condescending blessing because Palmerston 'is quite alone in the world, and 'Lady C.' is a very clever woman, and 'much' attached to him' ('Letters of Queen Victoria', 1st ser., 1.255). But if Victoria and Albert represented the love match of the century, Emily and Palmerston ran them a close second. 'What is the use', Palmerston was to write, 'of People being Married, if they are to pass their Lives away from Each other?' (Reynolds, 6). At the age of sixty-two Emily refused to travel alone with 'Poodle' Byng, an old admirer, lest it arouse Palmerston's jealousy. 
The wife of the foreign secretary had important social obligations, for in addition to any political entertaining she might undertake on behalf of the ministry, she was expected to receive and entertain the diplomatic corps in London and in the country, and she was required to present the wives and daughters of the corps at court. Lady Palmerston threw herself into the part with gusto, but the ministry was on its last legs, and when it fell in September 1841 she and Palmerston took themselves off on a tour of his Irish property. A period out of office she considered beneficial, for it would allow the whig party, 'grown supine and tired', to 'start up like a Giant refreshed' ('Letters of Lady Palmerston', 257). 
Lady Palmerston was soon established, in office and out of it, as the premiere political hostess in London. Her regular Saturday parties during the season at 5 Carlton House Terrace and, from 1855, at Cambridge House, Piccadilly (which conveniently had two gates, facilitating the arrival and departure of her guests' coaches), were packed with politicians, diplomats, and courtiers, peers, bishops, and office-seekers, as well as a smattering of carefully selected journalists, notably John Delane of 'The Times', and the inevitable array of debutantes with their ambitious mamas. The point about Lady Palmerston's 'drums' was that everybody who counted, or who aspired to count, went to them. They served to bolster the governments in which Palmerston was involved, and to forge support for him in opposition, but they were not restricted to his political colleagues. In a time of great fluidity of political parties and personal allegiances, at Lady Palmerston's everyone could meet. Only when Palmerston suffered personal indignity or when party feeling ran particularly high did Lady Palmerston exclude his opponents from her soirees, and then only for a few days. But the huge Saturday night parties for hundreds were only part of her role. More intimate gatherings, dinners (often preceding a big evening party), and country house parties at the Palmerstons' Hampshire home, Broadlands, were directed with aplomb by Emily, to explicitly political ends. She was a great believer in the power of social influence, and when a contentious vote was forthcoming in the house she would declare 'Stay! we will have a party!' (Airlie, 'Lady Palmerston', 2.43). Few political men cared to admit the power of such influence, the insinuating charm of social recognition, the frisson from hearing the latest political gossip at first hand, the satisfaction of wives and daughters at being invited to balls and parties at Cambridge House; fewer still admitted that their votes in the house, or their acceptance or refusal of office, could be affected by the warmth of Lady Palmerston's greeting, or the heartiness of her husband's; but Palmerston's friends and enemies alike acknowledged the importance of his wife's hospitality in maintaining his position. 
Emily Temple entertained indefatigably for her husband for twenty-five years. As importantly, she was his friend and confidante: Henry Greville thought that 'no other human being than his wife share[d] his confidence' ('Diary of Henry Greville', 4.259). She was not a political thinker, but had a firm grasp of the realities of the political system and its operation. She had learned her political loyalties at her mother's knee; family, not ideology or party, was her ultimate master, and in her eyes Palmerston could do no wrong. As an intelligence gatherer with sources in Britain and all over continental Europe she had no equal. She had a reputation for indiscretion, but it was always calculated: 'She always understood full well what she was telling, to whom she was telling it, when and where it would be repeated, and whether the repetition would do harm or good... no one ever knew from or through Lady Palmerston what Lord Palmerston did not wish to be known. ('The Times', 15 Sept 1869)' After the deaths of her brothers William and Frederick, in 1848 and 1853, she inherited the Lamb estates, at Brocket Hall in Hertfordshire, Melbourne in Derbyshire, and elsewhere. The Palmerstons' health failed slowly but inevitably in the 1860s, but the parties went on, and Emily continued to listen to Palmerston from the ladies' gallery of the House of Commons, or anxiously to await his late-night return from the house. Palmerston died, still in office as prime minister, at Brocket on 18 October 1865. Emily was devastated, but consoled herself with her children and grandchildren. She moved out of Cambridge House into 21 Park Lane in January 1866, and divided her time between Brocket, Broadlands, London, and her children's houses. London society continued to call on Lady Palmerston until her death at Brocket on 11 September 1869; six days later she was buried next to her husband in Westminster Abbey. 


@@@@@


doc= 40960


Lieven, Dorothea Khristoforovna, Princess Lieven in the Russian nobility (1785-1857), political hostess, was born in Riga, Latvia, on 17 December 1785, the daughter of General Christoph von Benckendorff and his wife, Juliane ('nee' Baroness Schilling von Canstatt). Her success in life owed much to her parents' powerful connections at the Russian court. Her father was governor of Riga, and enjoyed the full confidence of Emperor Paul I, while her mother was a childhood friend of the empress, Maria Feodorovna, whom she had accompanied to Russia on her marriage to Paul. It was thanks to the Empress Maria that Dorothea entered the Smolny Institute, Russia's leading school for noble girls, and became a lady-in-waiting at court a year before leaving the classroom. 
Dorothea's marriage on 24 February 1800 to Count Khristofor Andreyevich Lieven (1774-1839) was also arranged by the empress: inevitably, it determined much of her subsequent life. Though a much older aristocratic family than the newly ennobled Benckendorffs, the Lievens were also Baltic protestants, with exceptionally strong connections at court. Lieven's mother, Charlotta, was governess of the imperial children and subsequently mistress of the robes. She was the Empress Maria's closest friend and confidante in Russia, and remained close to the younger generation of Romanovs, including the emperors Alexander I and Nicholas I. It was thanks to her influence that her son was an aide-de-camp general by 1798 and head of Paul's military campaign chancellery, the key post linking the monarch to the army. Subsequently he served as minister in Berlin, and then as minister and ambassador in London from 1812 to 1834. It was during this posting that his wife acquired her reputation as a hostess and intriguer. 
Dorothea Lieven rapidly made her mark on London society, becoming one of the lady patronesses of the exclusive dances held at Almack's. In this capacity she formed a friendship with Emily, Countess Cowper, the mistress and eventual wife of Palmerston. Devoutly committed to the principle of autocratic government, Madame de Lieven (as she was generally known) was to use her social influence to promote the interests of Russia and the Holy Alliance for the next twenty years. Her extensive family connections at the Russian court -- her brother, Alexander von Benckendorff, was the first chief of the so-called 'third section and gendarmerie', the state security police -- enabled her to pass the unofficial information she garnered through her salon in London on to the Russian government. In 1818 at the congress of Aix-la-Chapelle she became the mistress of the Austrian chancellor, Metternich: although they met infrequently, they continued a regular political correspondence. Another regular correspondent, Lord Grey, was believed to have been her lover in the 1820s. She claimed to have used her influence with him to secure the foreign secretaryship for Palmerston in 1830, believing that he would provide a pro-Russian voice in the whig cabinet. Palmerston, however, proved a political disappointment to Princess Lieven (that title having been conferred in 1826), and in consequence of a diplomatic incident in 1832 he was held responsible by the princess for the recall of the Lievens to Russia in 1834. On their departure 'The Times' observed that 'there never figured on the Courtly stage a female intriguer more restless, more urgent, more arrogant, more mischievous, more (politically, and therefore we mean it not offensively) odious than this supercilious Ambassadress'. Thereafter Dorothea Lieven was unremitting in her hostility to Palmerston, and after 1838, when she became the mistress of Guizot, derived satisfaction from thwarting his international plans. 
Distress at the circumstances of her departure from London was exacerbated in 1835 by the deaths of Princess Lieven's two youngest sons from scarlet fever. Her own inability to adapt to the harsh Russian climate caused her health to deteriorate. She departed for Paris, where she eventually re-established her salon. The liaison with Guizot contributed to a breach with her husband, who died in January 1839. Living in Paris without any official position, she nevertheless remained a significant point of contact between the Russian and French governments, playing a role in the negotiations connected to both the outbreak and the conclusion of the Crimean War. Dorothea Lieven died at home in the rue St Florentin, Paris, on 26 January 1857, and was buried in the Lieven family cemetery at Mesothen, her nephew's estate near Mitrau in Courland. 
Dorothea Lieven's sustained influence reflects not just her powerful international connections but also her native wit, charm, and intelligence, all of which were remarkable. Not a deep, still less a warm-hearted, woman, she lived for the world of high politics, and enjoyed to the full her influence and reputation. Her husband's recall to St Petersburg in 1834 was thus a devastating personal blow. Her role, unusual but not unique, was made possible by the context of aristocratic 'ancien regime' Europe, and the intermingling of politics and social life in the diplomatic salons. Of these, none was more famous in the nineteenth century than Dorothea Lieven's, whether in London or Paris. Several of her voluminous correspondences -- including those with Metternich, Guizot, Lady Holland, Lady Palmerston, Lord Aberdeen, and Lord Grey -- have been published, and are a fine source for historians of early nineteenth-century diplomacy and London political society. 


@@@@@


doc= 40964


Saunders, George (1859-1922), journalist, was born at Rattray, Perthshire, the elder son of 
George Saunders was marked by his father's values; a strict Presbyterian, he knew his 'Bible' nearly by heart. He was educated at Rattray parish school and Dundee high school, then went to the University of Glasgow where he won prizes in moral philosophy, English literature, and foreign languages. He matriculated, a Snell exhibitioner, at Balliol in 1881. Drawn by his deep interest in German philosophy, Saunders studied textual criticism and did research on the 'New Testament' at the universities of Bonn and Gottingen. He spoke French and German fluently, but with a pronounced Scottish burr, and read Greek and Latin for pleasure throughout his life. Another literary passion was poetry; he knew his Burns as well as his 'Bible'. 
Saunders inherited his father's interest in politics, as well as his devout Presbyterianism. Although his political sentiments were modelled on his father's, he was not liberal in his moral judgements; if a person, or a nation, offended his sense of propriety or his self-conscious dignity, his strictures were harsh and unyielding. In 1884 Saunders was admitted to the Inner Temple. A chance introduction to the peripatetic editor of the 'Pall Mall Gazette', W. T. Stead, intervened and Saunders found himself in France interviewing General Boulanger. Pleased with Saunders's work, Stead hired him as his personal assistant for a trip to Russia to interview Tsar Alexander III. Being a foreign correspondent appealed to Saunders's love of facts and accuracy, his skill with foreign languages, and his political interests. He felt, as a journalist, 'like a trout lying with its nose upstream' (Wilson, 4). Travelling home from Russia, Saunders stopped in Berlin, where he accepted a job as a correspondent for the London 'Morning Post'. It was a momentous year for Germany; two emperors were buried in quick succession and the young Wilhelm II came into his fateful inheritance. For the next twenty years Saunders, once described as 'Scottish to the bone' ('Note on George Saunders', Saunders MSS), lived and worked in Berlin, first for the 'Post' and from 1897 as 'Our Own Correspondent' for 'The Times'. 
George Saunders was moderately tall and large-boned, with bright blue eyes and a luxuriant moustache. A vital man, he walked fast, loved to play golf, and astonished Berliners by playing at curling on their city's frozen rivers. His words, like his actions, were forceful and direct and he had the courage born of strong convictions. Shrewd and observant, Saunders's outward reserve masked -- but did not diminish -- his passionate patriotism and his moral fervour. Saunders was no stranger to Germany, although by the 1890s the country he had known as a student was vanishing. Along with the desires of a grandiose young emperor, burgeoning prosperity fostered demands for expansion and international prestige. Saunders was intensely aware of the effect these changes had on both people and politics, turning Germany, in his view, into a 'parvenu' country with all of the attendant moral failings. His marriage in 1893 to Gertrude Hainauer, the daughter of Oscar Hainauer, a Berlin banker and art collector, was a personal and a professional asset. It was a happy marriage, producing three sons and two daughters; one son, Malcolm, rose to the rank of commander in the Royal Navy. Through his German relatives, Saunders had social contact with many prominent people in Berlin. This advantage, along with a thorough knowledge of the language, literature, and history of Germany, often provided Saunders with privileged information. 
Diligent and productive during his years with the 'Morning Post', Saunders made his name writing for 'The Times'. For Germans wielding political power -- thanks to his heated and repeated warnings as to the true aim of Germany's foreign policy and the unhealthy nature of her government -- that name became anathema; the Kaiser himself called him 'a first class swine' ('History of The Times', 3.462). In England it was the reverse; to the editor of 'The Times', Saunders was 'a Prince of Correspondents' (ibid., 3.649). Sir Edward Grey, the foreign secretary, admitted later: 'We now know that the line [he] took sprang from knowledge, [and] a good many of his countrymen owe some apology to the memory of Mr George Saunders for having underrated his sincerity and knowledge' (ibid., 3.371, n. 3). 'The Times' moved Saunders to Paris in 1908. Germany was not spared his deeply critical attention while he worked to solidify the occasionally shaky entente between Paris and London. When his dire warnings came true in 1914, Saunders wanted to 'do his bit'; he joined the political intelligence department of the Foreign Office where his experience and expertise were welcomed, earning him an OBE at the war's end. Glasgow also honoured him with an LLD. Saunders lost one son in the war and survived it himself by only four years. His final crusade was against the imposition of an impossible peace on a Germany verging on economic, political, and moral collapse, but he was not heard. Saunders died of cancer at his home, Potswarn, Woking, on 10 September 1922. 


@@@@@


doc= 40965


Mudford, William Heseltine (1839-1916), journalist and newspaper editor, was born at 45 St George's Street, Canterbury, on 1 March 1839, son of William Mudford (1782-1848) and his wife, Amelia Camp. He came from a journalistic background: his father was the proprietor of the 'Kentish Observer' and the 'Canterbury Journal', and, according to his 'Times' obituarist, Mudford's education 'owed nothing to public school or university training'. He went to work for the London 'Standard' in the 1860s, becoming a member of the newspaper's parliamentary staff of twelve, and was greatly aided by his mastery of Gurney's shorthand system. 'The Standard' was a morning paper, but in 1860 an evening edition was also produced; the paper was owned by James Johnstone (1815-1878), and at the time when Mudford joined it was edited by Thomas Hamber. It was pro-conservative, but always asserted its independence of Conservative Party managers, and was described by the 'New Quarterly Review' in 1860 as 'with them [the Conservative Party] and not of them' (Koss, 1.137). But by the end of the 1860s 'The Standard' was in something of a decline, and Johnstone decided to replace Hamber with Mudford, who was by now an experienced journalist. The date of Mudford's appointment is uncertain, but the most likely conjecture is 1871. James Johnstone later acknowledged Mudford's success by making a codicil in his will which gave Mudford the editorship of the newspaper 'for his lifetime or until such time as he shall voluntarily resign the editorship'. The family beneficiaries of Johnstone's will were excluded from interfering with the running of the paper, and Mudford, who was to have a salary of $5000 a year, was left with effectively absolute power over 'The Standard' after Johnstone's death in 1878. 
In the same year 'The Standard's' new premises in St Bride Street were completed. Mudford had on his staff a highly talented set of journalists and literary men, including G. A. Henty, Charles Norris, Alfred Austin, Byron Curtis, and, later, Sidney Low. The paper had earlier benefited from Conservative Party subsidies in the 1860s, but its rapid rise in circulation in the 1870s and its dramatic increase in the 1880s (between 1874 and the mid-1880s circulation rose from 176,000 to over 250,000), allied to Mudford's safeguarded editorial position, enabled Mudford to assert the paper's independence of Conservative Party control or interference. 'The Standard' became one of the most prosperous and influential newspapers of the day, and was second only to 'The Times' as a morning paper. Mudford proved himself to be a good manager as well as editor: he used a daily American cable service, and paid $800 for cable dispatches during the Anglo-Afghan War of 1878-80. He replaced old machinery and paid his talented staff well: some 500 in number, they cost the newspaper $1500 a week in salaries alone. 
Mudford had access to the leading politicians of the time, but once he achieved absolute control of 'The Standard' he deliberately set out to distance himself from direct contact with political society. The story that Mudford rose from the dinner table to receive the card of a 'great statesman' (Lord Carnarvon) with the words 'Tell him I'm out' is probably apocryphal, but it exemplifies his new style. But, while Mudford was anxious to demonstrate his freedom from political entanglements, he was prepared to exploit those of his staff who maintained them. T. H. S. Escott, one of his leader writers, enjoyed close contact with Joseph Chamberlain in the early 1880s. Chamberlain was disappointed by his lack of status in the new Liberal administration; the result was a series of leaks relating to the government's Irish policy in 1880-82, which gave Mudford some exciting exclusives. On 6 April 1881, for instance, 'The Standard' received advance information on the terms of the 1881 'Irish Land Bill'. Even when this source dried up, 'The Standard' was still capable of surprising Gladstone. On 17 December 1885 it announced Gladstone's conversion to home rule for Ireland. Gladstone's son Herbert had discussed his father's position on home rule with the editor of the 'Leeds Mercury', Wemyss Reid; 'The Standard' obtained the news, possibly through a leak from Reid, who dined with Mudford on 16 December, or through the National Press Association. On 17 December it was published as an exclusive, with a call for a general election as the 'best way of defending the integrity of the Kingdom and the loyalists of Ireland'. 
But, although the news was sensational, it was not printed in 'The Standard' in a sensational style. There were no brash headlines: Mudford was an old-fashioned editor of a quality newspaper. But this proved a weakness as well as a strength. In the 1890s 'The Standard' began to lose its leading position, and its circulation was overtaken by rivals representing the 'new journalism', such as the 'Pall Mall Gazette', 'The Star', and the 'Daily Mail'; they invaded 'The Standard's' readership, which Mudford described as the 'villa resident order of Englishman'. On 31 December 1899 Mudford relinquished his editorship to Byron Curtis (1843-1907); four years later the paper was sold to Arthur Pearson, and by 1914 it was receiving subsidies from Conservative Party funds. But its influence in foreign affairs survived Mudford's departure. 
Mudford's absolute power as editor was reflected in his relationships with his staff, which were cordial, but firm. On 14 October 1891 Byron Curtis refused to accept an article on the leadership of the House of Commons written by Alfred Austin following a discussion with Lord Salisbury, Curtis being unwilling to take the responsibility for it in Mudford's absence. Mudford occasionally admonished Escott for badly composed leaders. Despite his lack of personal contact with his staff, he was considered a good judge of men. His declared policy of 'independence' must be qualified in the light of his use of journalists who had close political contacts, but he never surrendered his editorial veto: although he allowed Austin to send Lord Salisbury his leaders for amendment, he frequently amended the changes. The danger of exercising too much independence is revealed in A. J. Balfour's description of 'The Standard' in 1893 as 'of no earthly value to the party in the way of making opinion, as their criticisms are a foregone conclusion' (Koss, 1.337). 
Mudford was a cultured and likeable man of a broadly conservative disposition, with an interest in radical toryism. He was described by one of his contemporaries as of medium height, broad-chested, and of strong build. He lived a reclusive retirement at his house, Westcombe Lodge, Wimbledon Common. On 14 October 1916 he slipped and fell into the fireplace; he died at the house from his injuries on 18 October, and was buried at Putney Vale cemetery two days later. Mudford's standing as an editor came from his freedom from proprietorial control, that of his newspaper from his discreet contacts with government sources, a combination which explains J. L. Garvin's description of him as 'the consummate -- though almost invisible -- editor of the 'Standard'' (J. Garvin, 'The Life of Joseph Chamberlain', 1, 1932, 307). 


@@@@@


doc= 40966


Lavino, William Edward (1846-1908), journalist, was born on 10 March 1846 at Lower Broughton, Lancashire, the son of Joseph George Lavino ('b'. 1810), a Dutch protestant businessman naturalized as a British subject in 1850, and Elizabeth Matilda Lavino ('nee' Reiss). Lavino was educated in England before being sent, aged fifteen, to study civil engineering in Hanover. About 1861 his parents moved to Paris; Lavino later joined them and spent two years at the Ecole Superieure du Commerce. He was engaged in commerce in Antwerp between about 1865 and 1867, before becoming secretary to Bertrand Fourquet, a Parisian merchant commissioned to supply material for the modernizing efforts of the Ecuadorian dictator, General Gabriel Garcia Moreno (1821-1875). Lavino soon became private secretary to General Francisco Javier Salazar (1824-1891), the Ecuadorian minister to France, and held the post until 1874, when Salazar left Paris. 
In 1874 he was offered the post of secretary to the San Salvador legation but Lavino's career lay not in South American diplomacy but in assisting the formation of European opinion, especially in the troublesome arena of Anglo-French relations. His cosmopolitanism, intelligence, tact, and sensitivity gained the widest possible scope for their exhibition in journalism. He began with a scoop for the 'New York Herald' when he persuaded the exiled Marshal Bazaine to publish a self-justification for the paper. He then became editor of the London-based 'Continental Herald', before his career began in earnest as assistant to the Paris correspondent of the 'Daily Telegraph' in 1874. In 1878 he moved to Vienna as that paper's representative, a position he held until 1892 when he was appointed, on Lord Rosebery's recommendation, to 'The Times'. Over the next sixteen years he garnered increasing recognition as one of the paper's most influential correspondents. Since he was positioned at the diplomatic crossroads of Europe, Lavino's letters and columns reveal both an absorption in contemporary crises, and a growing fear of the international issues of the future, notably the future of Anglo-German relations. 
In 1903 Lavino replaced Henri de Blowitz as Paris correspondent for 'The Times'. As early as 1896 Lavino had written of the need for a 'rapprochement' with France, and he is best known for his association with the Anglo-French 'entente cordiale' of 1904. There seems little reason to accept uncritically the judgement of contemporaries that Lavino was of primary importance in sealing the 'rapprochement'. However, inasmuch as good personal relations between British and French politicians were crucial corollaries of the entente, Lavino's close contacts with Theophile Delcasse and Eugene Etienne, his dispatches and the avowedly diplomatic agenda which informed -- if it did not propel -- his journalism, must have influenced public and private 'rapprochements'. Over the years he developed a strong belief in the deep-rootedness of German antipathy to Britain, its inexorable evolution into hostile action, and the concomitant need for the security of an equally innovative Anglo-Russian agreement to supplement the entente. This assessment of the European diplomatic situation was shared by Sir Donald Mackenzie Wallace, and Valentine Chirol at Printing House Square. It formed an agenda that was given a great deal of publicity, and which was difficult for politicians to avoid. The influence of 'The Times' on diplomacy before the First World War, if difficult to locate precisely, can never be ignored, and Lavino was one of its vital correspondents. 
Lavino was, for his contemporaries, a solitary figure. He never married, and in both Vienna and Paris he forsook society for the diplomatic world. He died suddenly at 7 rue de la Chaise, Paris, on 4 August 1908, from complications arising from diabetes and an operation for a strangulated hernia; he was buried in Poissy. 


@@@@@


doc= 40967


David Hogg Saunders (d. 1904), writer, editor, and merchant, of Dundee and Craigmill, Blairgowrie. David Saunders, a staunch believer in God and the Liberal Party, published poems and articles under the pseudonym 'The Christian Democrat' in his paper, the Dundee 'People's Journal'. His reputation as an insightful political moderate spread beyond his native Dundee, winning the grateful recognition of Gladstone. 


@@@@@


doc= 40970


Wormell, Richard (1838-1914), mathematics writer and teacher, was born on 17 September 1838 at Humberstone Gate, in Leicester, the eldest son of Robert Wormell, a slater, and his wife, Mary 'nee' Joyce. Nothing is known of his social circumstances and early education except that the journals of the mathematician Thomas Archer Hirst refer to him as a former mason and bricklayer. In his early twenties Wormell moved to London to become a pupil teacher at the Borough Road Normal College, Southwark, where his interest in geometry was consolidated. In 1865, while teaching at an elementary school in Westminster, he gained the external BA degree of the University of London. At this time he lodged with the mother of William Barrett, who was then assisting John Tyndall at the Royal Institution. Barrett's conversations fired Wormell's scientific interests and inspired him to develop a mathematical theorem concerning Foucault's pendulum. Barrett took the proof to Tyndall, who showed it to his friend, Hirst. Impressed, Hirst became Wormell's patron, encouraging him to take the London MA degree in mathematics, for which he obtained top marks and a gold medal in 1866. In the same year Wormell was appointed mathematics instructor and deputy headmaster of the new Central Foundation School in Finsbury, whose establishment was being funded by city banks, merchants, and guilds to prepare 'scholars for the practical way of life'. No Latin was taught, and because the curriculum emphasized science, technology, commerce, and languages, the teaching of mathematics was particularly central. Undeterred by heavy teaching responsibilities, Wormell gained an external BSc degree in 1868. In the same year, when the foundation stone for the school's permanent building in Cowper Street was laid, Wormell's teaching was publicly commended. In 1868 he also published textbooks on plane geometry and arithmetic, the first of his twenty-five textbooks. These books were all characterized by their child-centred, Pestalozzian approach. In teaching geometry, for example, its applications had to be studied alongside logical demonstrations which, controversially, avoided the Euclidean order of proof. 
In 1870 Wormell married Dora Gildon Guy, only daughter of J. Guy of Twickenham; they had five sons and three daughters. Wormell spent 1873 with Hirst teaching mathematics at the Royal Naval College, Greenwich, only to return to the Cowper Street School as the unanimous choice for the vacant headmastership in 1874. During his tenure, which lasted until his retirement in 1900, he was very active as an educationist. He was a founding member of the reforming Association for the Improvement of Geometrical Teaching in 1871; he was a council member of the College of Preceptors from 1875, its president in 1905-8, and the editor of its 'Educational Times' from 1883 to 1893. He was one of only two headteachers to serve on the Bryce royal commission on secondary education in 1894-5, and was president of the Headmasters' Association in 1895-6. 
In 1875 Wormell persuaded J. P. Gassiot to endow his school with workshops and laboratories for teaching mechanical and electrical engineering. Evening classes conducted at the Cowper Street School helped inspire T. H. Huxley's report on technical education for the City and Guilds Institute in 1877. In November 1879, what was to become the City and Guilds' Finsbury Technical College was launched in the school's workshops by H. E. Armstrong and W. E. Ayrton. To Wormell's intense disappointment, however, it was the electrician S. P. Thompson who was made principal of Finsbury College in 1885. 
After his retirement in 1900, Wormell lived at Roydon in Essex, where he died at his home, The Grange, on 6 January 1914. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 40972


Venn, John Archibald (1883-1958), historian and college head, was born at Cambridge on 10 November 1883, the only child of John Venn (1834-1923) of Gonville and Caius College and his wife, Susanna Carnegie, 'nee' Edmonstone. He was educated at Eastbourne College, admitted at Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1902, took a third class in both parts of the historical tripos, and proceeded BA 1905, MA 1909, and LittD 1929. In 1906 he married Lucy Marion (1882/3-1958), only child of Professor William Ridgeway. They adopted a daughter in 1932. For several years Venn and his father, than whom he could not have had a more experienced teacher in prosopography, compiled historical data on members of the university, and their 'Book of Matriculations and Degrees... 1544 to 1659' appeared in 1913. He also helped to edit five volumes published between 1911 and 1916 of an admissions register of his own college to 1900, and completed the second volume of John Peile's expansive and unfinished 'Biographical Register of Christ's College' (1913). He played tennis and enjoyed ornithology and motoring; though not a player of the game he invented a bowling machine which bowled out the Australian cricketer V. T. Trumper in three successive deliveries. 
After army service in the First World War, Venn worked as a statistician in the food production department from 1917 and he remained an adviser to the Ministry of Agriculture while pursuing an academic career. From 1921 until 1949 he held the Gilbey lectureship in the history and economics of agriculture at Cambridge, and also served on many international, national, and local committees and the councils of academic bodies such as the British Association for the Advancement of Science. His last major position of that kind was as chairman of a government commission on the sugar industry in British Guiana in 1948-9. Such appointments are listed in 'Who Was Who, 1951-1960'. He was made a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries, and in recognition of the wartime evacuation of the medical school from London to Queens' a 'perpetual student of Bart's', a title which delighted him. Venn's interest in farming was almost exclusively academic and confined to its history and organization, but he contributed useful counsel when agriculture was the object of several experiments between the wars, and was not reluctant to expose economic fallacies and practical obstacles. He wrote a standard book, 'Foundations of Agricultural Economics' (1923), enlarged in 1933, and other papers in the subject. 
Venn was elected fellow of Queens' College, with which his family had been associated since the eighteenth century, in 1927, served as junior bursar, and while still junior fellow was elected its president in March 1932, when he became the youngest head of a Cambridge college. He was generous to Queens' in his lifetime and by his will, and with his wife was a hospitable host despite his own teetotalism. He was ambitious for Queens' and ready to delegate responsibilities to its officers and to support them. He also served on the council of the senate and as vice-chancellor during the exacting disruption of war (1941-3). His high sense of the traditional dignity of his offices as president and vice-chancellor and of the respect due to them rather than to himself personally meant that those who did not know him sometimes mistook formality for aloofness. After the war the university appointed him its first honorary keeper of the archives, and he largely established the post on a permanent footing. He was awarded a Coronation Medal in 1953 and was made CMG in 1956 for public services. He died at the president's lodge on 15 March 1958 after being in poor health for a year, and was buried on 20 March. His wife survived him by only ten days. 
At heart Venn was always a historian. He published meticulous statistics of Oxford and Cambridge matriculations since 1544 in 1908 and 1930. Yet the work which occupied him for most of his life and for which he has been best remembered, the 'Alumni Cantabrigienses: a biographical list of all known students, graduates and holders of office at the University of Cambridge from the earliest times to 1900', was planned with his father. Two volumes of the first part to 1751 appeared before John Venn's death, and his son saw the series through to completion in a further eight massive, closely printed volumes between 1924 and 1954. He had many amanuenses but carefully controlled the entire labour of abstracting millions of facts from a wide variety of manuscript and published sources, and scrutinized all the proofs. He had the subject at his fingertips and, perhaps not surprisingly for one whose favourite author was Sir Thomas Browne, it provided him with endless anecdotes. The 'Alumni' project was befriended and heavily subsidized by the syndics of the university press whose secretary, Sir Sydney Roberts, wrote of Venn's 'immense courage and determination' in accomplishing his vast plan (letter of 24 Jan 1959, registry file 3580/59). He was not a medievalist and his biographies down to 1500 were superseded by A. B. Emden's 'Biographical Register' of 1963, but the bulk of the work, comprising more than 125,000 entries, has not been paralleled, let alone surpassed. Without them the social and academic history of Cambridge and of the English establishment at large written since the 1940s would have been much poorer. 


@@@@@


doc= 40978


Koch, Ludwig Karl (1881-1974), broadcaster and sound recordist, was born on 13 November 1881 at Eschersheimer Landstrasse 20, Frankfurt am Main, Germany, the second of the three children of Karl Theodor Koch, businessman, and his wife, Auguste Hess. Ludwig Koch's parents, both of whom were Jews, were enthusiastic music-lovers who introduced him into Frankfurt's rich musical scene where, while still a boy violinist, he was admitted to Clara Schumann's music circle. Later Koch studied singing, subsequently enjoying a short though successful career as a concert singer which was ended by the outbreak of the First World War. On 30 May 1912 Koch married Nellie Sylvia Herz, 'nee' Ganz (1892-1973), and they had a son and a daughter. His fluent French led to Koch's joining military intelligence early in the war, where he gained a special expertise in matters pertaining to prisoners of war. On the signing of the armistice in 1918, he was appointed chief delegate for repatriation for the French-occupied zone of Germany. However, he gradually resumed his participation in musical activities, giving up his work for the German government in 1925. In 1928 he was invited by the German subsidiary of Electric and Musical Industries (EMI) to organize a cultural branch of the gramophone industry; this coincided with a revival of his childhood interest in animals. 
In 1889, when Koch was eight, his father had presented him with an Edison phonograph and a box of wax cylinders purchased at the Leipzig fair; so Ludwig commenced recording the voices of his numerous pets. His new responsibility for the development of cultural gramophone recording enabled him to begin, from 1929, the recording of animal sounds in earnest, using up-to-date equipment. Among several innovations, he conceived the idea of the sound-book: attaching gramophone records to an otherwise normal illustrated book. 
Being a Jew, Koch's life under the Nazi regime became increasingly intolerable. Following confrontations with minor officials, he decided early in 1936 to flee to Britain. He was obliged to leave some of his precious recordings behind, but, encouraged by Sir Julian Huxley, he succeeded in interesting the ornithologist and publisher Harry Witherby in his plan for a sound-book of British wild birds. By a fortunate coincidence, E. M. (Max) Nicholson had been commissioned by Witherby to write a book on British birdsongs and he readily offered to collaborate with Koch and make it a sound-book. Koch immediately set about recording birds in the English countryside with tremendous enthusiasm. Before the end of 1936 'Songs of Wild Birds' was published, followed by two other sound-books by 1938. 
Early in the Second World War, Huxley suggested to Koch that he offer his services to the BBC, and by the end of the war his unmistakable voice accompanying his sound recordings had become universally familiar. His extraordinary, yet attractive and rather musical, Germanic pronunciation of English undoubtedly accounted in some measure for his popularity on the radio. As a broadcaster, Koch became especially associated with the natural history radio programmes emanating from Bristol from 1946 onwards. In 1948 the BBC purchased his entire collection of animal recordings and he joined the staff to make more of them by undertaking fieldwork throughout the British Isles. For several years after his retirement in 1951 from the BBC he continued to undertake expeditions to record wildlife sounds, including one to Iceland when he was seventy-one. His entire collection is now housed in the National Sound Archive at the British Library. 
To the radio listeners of the 1940s and 1950s, Ludwig Koch, who was appointed MBE in 1960, was the man who brought the sounds of the countryside into their homes in a way that had been impossible before. He was a happy, humorous character whose magnetic radio personality played a significant role in heightening the British public's appreciation of wildlife. On 4 May 1974, aged ninety-two, he died peacefully in Harrow, Middlesex; he was cremated at Pinner cemetery, Harrow, on 13 May. 


@@@@@


doc= 40981


Nicholas, Thomas Evan (1879-1971), poet and political activist, was born on 6 October 1879 at Y Llety, a smallholding in the parish of Llanfyrnach, Pembrokeshire, one of the five children of David (Dafydd) Nicholas (1844-1928), a farmer, and his wife, Elizabeth (Bet) Evans, 'nee' Thomas (1844-1937). After attending primary school at nearby Hermon, he studied for the Congregational ministry at the Gwynfryn Academy in Ammanford and was ordained at Llandeilo in 1901. On 1 October 1902 he married Mary Alice (1879-1965), the daughter of Thomas Hopkins, a watchmaker and jeweller of Ammanford. He spent a year as a minister in Dodgeville, Wisconsin, before returning to Wales to take up the pastorate of Seion in the industrial village of Glais in the Swansea valley in 1904; although he only spent ten years there, he was associated with that place for the rest of his life and was generally known in Welsh as Niclas y Glais. 
Already firmly egalitarian in outlook, Nicholas was to develop his political creed, which he claimed was communist long before he had read Marx because it sprang from his Christian beliefs, in a south Wales which, over the next decade, brought harsh reminders of the clash between workers and the capitalist system: the Cambrian Combine lock-out and Tonypandy riots of 1910 and the Senghennydd pit disaster of 1913, the worst in the annals of British coalmining, were among the events which helped to shape his thinking. His early verse, published in 'Salmau'r werin' (1909), 'Cerddi gwerin' (1912), 'Cerddi rhyddid' (1914), 'Y rhyfel anghyfiawn' (1914), and 'Dros eich gwlad' (1920), blazed with millenarian biblical imagery; its message was that it is not man's spiritual imperfections but the inhuman economic system under which he lives that is responsible for social injustice, oppression, and war. Having joined the Independent Labour Party (ILP) he became a prominent public speaker, a regular contributor to the Welsh column of the party's newspaper, 'The Merthyr Pioneer', and a close friend of its editor, Keir Hardie, MP for Merthyr Tudful, whose opposition to militarism he shared. 
In 1914 Nicholas left Glais to become minister of Llangybi and Llanddewibrefi in Cardiganshire, where he began organizing the county's agricultural workers and lead miners and using his pulpit to denounce what he considered to be an imperialist war which was against the interests of the working class. His sermons were monitored by Home Office informers for 'treasonable' sentiments, and in 1918, after he had delivered a particularly outspoken sermon in his own chapel, there was an unsuccessful attempt to prosecute him under the 'Defence of the Realm Act'. When he founded the No-Conscription Fellowship many chapels closed their doors to him, and at the war's end he abandoned the ministry in disgust. In the election of 1918 he stood as the ILP candidate in Aberdar, part of Hardie's old constituency, with the backing of the local trades council, the Labour Party, and the co-operative movement. His programme was uncompromisingly anti-imperialist and socialist, supporting people's control of industry, the concept of a League of Nations, self-government for Ireland and autonomy for Scotland and Wales, and the Bolshevik Revolution of October 1917; he was defeated by the 'Britisher' candidate, Charles Butt Stanton, who polled 22,834 votes against the 6229 cast for Nicholas. It was the Russian Revolution which confirmed his Marxist ideals and inspired him to write many of the poems in which his vision of international brotherhood, peace, and proletarian solidarity was expressed. 
In 1921, with his wife, Nicholas trained as a dentist, and he established practices first at Pontardawe and then at Aberystwyth, where he remained for the rest of his life. Between 1917 and 1945 he delivered more than a thousand lectures on the Soviet Union, which he had visited, and in 1920 he was a founder member of the Communist Party of Great Britain, but he did not resume his political journalism until 1937, when his column in the weekly newspaper 'Y Cymro' began to appear under the title 'O fyd y werin'; one of his main concerns was to warn against appeasement of Hitler and Mussolini. He also founded at about this time, with J. Roose Williams, the short-lived paper 'Llais y Werin'. On 11 November 1940 he was arrested, with his son Islwyn (one of his four children), and detained in Swansea and Brixton prisons, but the charges were shown to be spurious after a vigorous campaign was mounted by the labour movement, and they were released after two months. The fruit of this episode was 'Llygad y drws' (1940), a sequence of 288 sonnets which he had scratched on a slate in his cell, copied out on toilet paper, and then arranged to be smuggled out of gaol by a sympathetic warder; an English version was translated by Daniel Hughes and others and published as 'Prison Sonnets' in 1948. 
Nicholas's career as a poet had two phases. Up to about 1920 he wrote, for the most part, poems of political polemic, alternately vitriolic and apocalyptic, and most effective when the bludgeon of rhetoric was supplemented by the cutting edge of irony. In his later books, notably 'Terfysgoedd daear' (1939), 'Canu'r carchar' (1942), 'Y dyn a'r gaib' (1944), 'Dryllio'r delwau' (1941), and ''Rwyn gweld o bell' (1963), the stridency of the earlier period was held in check by a greater economy of diction and control of form (particularly the sonnet), though the conflict between labour and international capitalism, and the Christian imperative to improve man's lot on earth, remained his favourite subjects. A selection of his poems (with English prose translations) appeared posthumously in the volume 'Tros ryddid daear' (1981) under the aegis of Cymdeithas Niclas, the society named in his honour. 
Nicholas was the most eloquent and uncompromising spokesman for the ILP and the Soviet state in the Welsh language. Acclaimed by Harry Pollitt in 1949 as 'Wales's greatest man', he combined a rigorous Marxist analysis of society with what he saw as most progressive within the Welsh radical nonconformist tradition. Among his 'betes noires' were the capitalist system, the Roman Catholic church, and the monarchy. Communism was for him the creed which gave meaning, hope, and dignity to the lives of ordinary people, and all his writing, whether in verse or prose, was dedicated to that ideal. His poetry, while Welsh in form, is consistently socialist and internationalist in content, and awaits the wider recognition it deserves. 
The poet, whose genial personality won him many friends in Wales and abroad, died at his home, Glasynys, in Elm Tree Avenue, Aberystwyth, on 19 April 1971; after a funeral service at Baker Street Independent Chapel, his ashes were scattered on a slope of the Preseli hills above Y Llety, where he had been born. 


@@@@@


doc= 40983


McCormack, John Francis (1884-1945), singer, was born on 14 June 1884 in the Bawn, Mardyke Street, Athlone, co. Westmeath, Ireland, the second son and fifth of the eleven children (five of whom died in infancy or childhood) of Andrew McCormack, a foreman at the Athlone Woollen Mills, and his wife, Hannah Watson. Both parents were from Galashiels, Scotland, where his father had worked in the tweed mill, although his paternal grandfather was from Sligo, in the west of Ireland. His father had a fine voice and sang in the church choir, but although McCormack sang from an early age he had no formal singing lessons. He was educated by the Marist Brothers before winning a scholarship to the Diocesan College of the Immaculate Conception, Summerhill, Sligo, in 1896. Leaving school in 1902 he narrowly failed to win a scholarship to the Dublin College of Science, and was working as a clerk while preparing for the civil service entrance examination when he was encouraged by his friends to audition for the Palestrina Choir at the pro-cathedral in Dublin. He sang in this choir for two years under the direction of Vincent O'Brien, and won the gold medal in the solo tenor class at the Feis Ceoil, the National Irish Festival in Dublin, in 1903. This led to an invitation to America to take part in the musical entertainment in the Irish village at the St Louis World Fair in 1904. On his return he raised funds to study singing with Vincenzo Sabatini in Milan from 1905 to 1906. On 2 July 1906 he married Lily, daughter of Patrick Foley, a Dublin innkeeper. A soprano, she had been another gold medal winner at the 1903 Feis Ceoil. They had one son and one daughter, and in 1918 adopted another son, the sixteen-month-old child of Lily's brother. 
McCormack made his opera debut on 13 January 1906 at Savona, near Genoa, using the name Giovanni Foli, as Fritz in Pietro Mascagni's 'L'Amico Fritz', but after failing to get any engagements in Milan he returned home early in 1907 and moved to London, where he began to build a reputation as a ballad singer in concerts and at private parties. After a successful appearance in one of Arthur Boosey's Queen's Hall Ballad Concerts in 1907 he was taken up by Sir John Murray Scott, a wealthy patron of the arts, who arranged an audition at Covent Garden. McCormack made his Covent Garden debut on 15 October 1907 as Turiddu in Mascagni's 'Cavalleria rusticana', the youngest tenor to sing a major role at the Royal Opera House. This was followed by Don Ottavio in Mozart's 'Don Giovanni'. He was then engaged for the 1908 season, and sang in the gala performance to celebrate the state visit of the French president, Emile Loubet. He was re-engaged as a 'primo tenore' for the grand season each summer until 1914, performing sixteen roles, including Alfredo in Giuseppe Verdi's 'La traviata' with Luisa Tetrazzini, and Rodolfo -- his favourite role -- in Giacomo Puccini's 'La Boheme' with Nellie Melba. 
McCormack's European reputation grew as he was invited to sing at the Salzburg Festival by Felix Weingartner, and to perform in Verdi's 'Rigoletto' at the Teatro San Carlo in Naples in 1909, and in 1909, thanks to Tetrazzini, he was invited to New York by Oscar Hammerstein. He made his New York debut at the Manhattan Opera House with Tetrazzini in 'La traviata', and after the Metropolitan Opera bought the Manhattan Opera Company in 1910, changing its name to the Chicago-Philadelphia Opera Company, McCormack remained for the 1910-11 season, making his first appearance at the Metropolitan Opera on 29 November 1910 with Nellie Melba in one of the company's weekly performances there. 
McCormack's concert career began to take off in America in 1912, and in 1914 he made New York his home, eventually taking American citizenship. But he became unpopular in England because of his outspoken Irish nationalism, and he did not sing there from 1914 until 1924. He gave up opera soon after the war. He had always been a poor actor, and his voice was lighter than that of the leading Italian operatic tenors. Although Enrico Caruso regarded McCormack (known as the Irish Caruso) as the finest tenor of his time, he had never been universally admired as an opera singer. But as a recitalist he was unsurpassed, and he had an enormous popular following, especially in America. He toured throughout the world in the 1920s and 1930s, his concerts always starting with serious songs by Handel or Mozart, and German lieder, usually by Brahms or Hugo Wolf, before moving on to the Irish ballads and sentimental popular songs. Although often accused of pandering to his audience's craving for sentimental songs he claimed never to have sung music he did not want to sing. His most famous songs were 'I hear you calling me', which he recorded eight times, and 'Mother Machree'. He always sang with his head raised, his eyes shut, and his legs wide apart, with a closed book clasped to his chest. His voice declined rapidly after 1932, and he retired from the concert platform in 1938, when he sold his house in Hollywood and settled in Ireland. He made one film, 'Song o' my Heart', in 1929, and in 1936 made a brief appearance in 'Wings of the Morning', the first British film to be shot in Technicolor. He came out of retirement at the beginning of the Second World War to make a concert tour with Gerald Moore on behalf of the Red Cross, and appeared in the first series of the 'Irish Half Hour' in 1941 to 1942 on the BBC. But he was unable to sing after 1942, when he developed emphysema. 
What was most striking about McCormack's voice was the beauty and sweetness of his tone, and the clarity of his enunciation. He became famous partly through his gramophone recordings, starting in 1904 when he made eight recordings on wax cylinders for the Edison Bell Company. Most of his recordings were of the lighter side of his repertoire, but one of the most famous was 'Il mio tesoro', from 'Don Giovanni'. 
A devout Catholic, McCormack was honoured many times by the pope for his services to Catholic charities, and he was especially proud of his hereditary title of papal count, awarded by Pope Pius XI in 1928. When the Eucharistic Congress was held in Dublin in 1932, and the pontifical high mass was celebrated by the papal legate in Phoenix Park, McCormack, wearing his uniform as count of the papal court, sang Cesar Franck's 'Panis angelicus' before a congregation of one million. He became a privy chamberlain of cape and sword to the pope in 1933. 
Although slim as a young man McCormack developed a vast appetite, and became very fat. He lived extravagantly and had expensive hobbies, with an art collection that included Corot's 'Nymphs Bathing', Franz Hals's 'Man', and a Rodin sculpture, and he was addicted to horse-racing, although he never realized his ambition to own a Derby winner. James Joyce used him as a model for Shaun the Post in 'Finnegans Wake' (1939). McCormack died of pneumonia on 16 September 1945 at his home, Glena, Booterstown, overlooking Dublin Bay, and was buried at Dean's Grange cemetery, Dublin. 


@@@@@


doc= 40987


Strahan, Alexander Stuart (1833-1918), publisher, was born in St Quivox, Ayrshire. He was the sixth of nine children of John Strachan (died 1853), a messenger-at-arms and sheriff's officer in the highland town of Tain, Ross-shire, and his wife, Jane. Alexander attended the Tain Academy. In 1843, during the Disruption of the Church of Scotland, the Strachans became members of the new Free Church. In 1853, the Free Church editor, Hugh Miller (1802-1856), who was a family friend, arranged for Alexander to be apprenticed to his publisher, the Edinburgh firm of Johnstone and Hunter. Within a few years Alexander changed the spelling of his surname. He also returned to the Church of Scotland, becoming a congregant of the Revd Norman Macleod the younger (1812-1872). Many years later Strahan, who had a lifelong interest in theology, explained that the Free Church had never seemed to him to be an institution in which an open and enquiring mind could find satisfaction. 
In 1858, in partnership with William Isbister, Strahan founded the publishing firm of Strahan & Co., which moved from Edinburgh to London in 1862. In its early years the company specialized in devotional works, illustrated literature for children, and inexpensive reprints of American titles. After moving to London, the firm also published fiction, poetry, and essays by such popular authors of the day as A. K. H. Boyd, Robert Buchanan, Dora Greenwell, Jean Ingelow, Edward Jenkins, Henrietta Keddie ('Sara Tytler'), Charles Kingsley, Eliza Lynn Linton, Frederick Locker-Lampson, George MacDonald, Dinah Mulock, W. B. Rands, and Alexander Smith. Strahan established several important periodicals, including 'Good Words' (founded in 1859 under the editorship of Norman Macleod), the 'Sunday Magazine' (1864), and the 'Argosy' (1865), which were notable for the high quality of the woodcuts contributed by such artists as W. Holman Hunt, Arthur Boyd Houghton, and J. E. Millais. The 'Contemporary Review', which Strahan regarded as his most important literary enterprise, began publication in 1866; one of the contributors was W. E. Gladstone, whose Liberal politics Strahan endorsed. In 1869 Strahan founded 'Good Words for the Young', edited by George MacDonald, and acquired the 'Saint Paul's Magazine', which had been launched in 1867 with Anthony Trollope as editor. Although Strahan made extensive use, in advertisements, of the names of his editors, in fact he was primarily responsible for conducting the periodicals. 
Contemporary accounts emphasize Strahan's frenetic energy, extreme generosity, haphazard business practices, and unbounded egotism. Friends were impressed by his zeal to provide good but inexpensive literature 'for the people', and by his commitment to Christian social reform. But as a moderately evangelical Presbyterian, Strahan was distrusted by secularists, by Anglicans, and by doctrinaire Calvinists. As for his business associates, they complained that all too often he financed his enthusiasms at their expense. Strahan was already deeply in debt to his printers and stationers when, in 1868, he persuaded Alfred Tennyson to sign a five-year contract with Strahan & Co. His creditors charged that he was far too lavish in his payments to Tennyson and other authors, and, in 1872, Strahan was forced to resign from the company. He retained the copyrights to several publications, including the 'Contemporary Review'. In 1874 the name of the original firm was changed to Isbister & Co. 
For several years Strahan struggled unsuccessfully to regain his position as a major publisher. In 1876 a group of evangelicals formed Strahan & Co. Ltd to acquire Strahan's various copyrights; Strahan was hired to be the company's 'editorial director', but he was dismissed from this position in 1881. In 1882 Strahan & Co. Ltd was declared bankrupt, and the 'Contemporary Review' was repurchased by Isbister & Co. Although in the 1880s Strahan published a few books under the imprint 'Alexander Strahan', his career was effectively at an end. 
In 1878 Strahan married Lisbeth Gooch Seguin (died 1890), a writer of children's stories and travel books. They had two sons, Stuart Seguin Strahan and Geoffrey Bennoch Strahan, born in 1880 and 1882, and a daughter, Mary, born in 1884, who married Dr Ralph Martin Soames. Strahan died on 24 May 1918, at his daughter's home in Reigate, Surrey. In 'The Times' obituary, he was recalled as one who had been 'a power to be reckoned with in the publishing world of the 'sixties and 'seventies' ('The Times', 29 May 1918). He was buried in Brompton cemetery, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 40988


Young, Sir Frederick (1817-1913), imperial publicist, was born on 21 June 1817 at Mitre Building, Limehouse, London, the third son of the seven children of George Frederick Young (1791-1870), London shipbuilder and politician, and his wife, Mary ('c'.1790-1876), youngest daughter of John Abbot, brewer of Canterbury. Young was educated first by his mother and then, from the age of ten, at Dr Burnet's school at Homerton, Middlesex, for five years. In 1833 he joined a family business, Young, Dowson & Co., copper merchants, as clerk; from 1839 he was a partner (the firm continued to make brass fittings for ships until 1911 but was latterly moribund). In the 1840s he also set up with Christopher Dowson as a baker of ships' biscuits, living on the premises in Limehouse and there entertaining Browning, Domett, and other 'colloquials'. With his father he was actively involved in promoting Victoria Park in east London (1840-45) and in the management of the London Hospital. He also helped to found Bromley cricket club, travelled to Europe and the Mediterranean, and dabbled in a few literary ventures. Above all he pursued his wish to marry his childhood sweetheart Cecilia ('c'.1820-1873), daughter of Thomas Drane, brewer of Torquay. In 1836 they agreed not to meet for three years, after which they were allowed to engage to marry in five years. They married in April 1845 and soon had four children. 
At this time Young came under the spell of his father's close associate in the colonization of New Zealand, Edward Gibbon Wakefield. Already a shareholder in the New Zealand Company, Young became shipping manager in 1850 to the Canterbury Association, an experiment in high-Anglican colonization, and he helped to send out 1500-2000 emigrants before the venture failed in 1852. Throughout his long life Young regarded Wakefield's 'Art of Colonisation' (1849) as the bible of British colonialism, inspiring his own interest in emigration (or 'transplantation' as he preferred) as well as informing his guiding principle of imperial federation. In 1857 Young left east London for Cobham, in rural Surrey, to bring up his family; he also enjoyed hunting, joined the volunteers, and helped to rebuild the parish church. He produced several 'penny readings' (see 'Long Ago and now', 1863), including an admiring biography of Garibaldi, whom he met in 1864. In 1867 the family were obliged to move back to London (to Kensington) and Young resumed an active role in the East End, promoting working-class emigration -- he was chairman of the National Colonial Emigration League -- and standing (unsuccessfully) for the new Tower Hamlets school board in 1870. As chairman of the Epping Forest Fund he did much to secure the act of 1878 which preserved its open spaces. In the 1880s as a trustee of the Beaumont Trust he helped to found the People's Palace in Mile End. He was also chairman of the Tower Hamlets magistrates until 1894. 
Above all Young became a vigorous proponent of the ideal of closer imperial unity. He took a leading part in protests against the withdrawal of British troops from New Zealand in 1868-9, an episode which contributed to the foundation in 1868 of the Royal Colonial Institute (RCI), of which he became a fellow in 1869 and a member of council in 1871. The sudden and unexpected death of his wife in July 1873 threw Young into intense despondency. But after a recuperative European tour with his daughters, he became honorary secretary of the RCI, in 1874, and threw himself enthusiastically into its affairs, doing much to raise its public profile. He initiated a correspondence published as 'Imperial Federation' in 1876, and for the rest of his life forcefully advocated the idea of an imperial parliament. He did much to keep the ideal of 'Greater Britain' in the public mind, and took an active part in the Imperial Federation League (1883-93) and in the British Empire League. Having attended, on behalf of the RCI, the first Colonial Conference in 1887, he became KCMG in January 1888. 
Young kept up a regular correspondence with like-minded British and colonial politicians, including the seventh duke of Manchester. Later in life he travelled to South Africa (1889) and Canada (1901), propagating the cause he believed essential to Britain's destiny. In line with his father's earlier protectionism he supported 'fair trade' in the early 1880s and commercial union of the empire in the 1890s; in 'Exit Party' (1900) he hailed Rosebery as the leader of a non-partisan Liberal Imperialism but turned to Chamberlain's tariff reform in 1903. Slim and erect in bearing, but repetitious with age, Young survived as a venerable patriarch of empire, campaigning for a monument to Wakefield in New Zealand in 1907 and active in the Royal Colonial Institute as late as 1909. By then he was living in straitened circumstances, tended by his daughter Ada, and he was eventually reconciled to his son, Brigadier-General Sir George Frederick Young (1846-1919), whose allegedly unsuitable marriage in India in 1874 -- to Caroline, widow of Captain W. A. Cripps -- had led to their estrangement. Young died at his home, Leny, Cobham, Surrey, on 9 November 1913 and was buried with his wife at Reigate, Surrey, on 12 November. 


@@@@@


doc= 40989


Krapf, (Johann) Ludwig (1810-1881), linguist of Swahili and first protestant missionary in east Africa, was born on 11 January 1810 at Derendingen near Tubingen, in the kingdom of Wurttemberg, the youngest of four children of Johann Jakob Krapf (1773-1846), peasant farmer, and his wife, Katherina Maria Braun (1776-1846). In 1823 Ludwig Krapf entered the Anatolian school in Tubingen, where Latin, and later Greek and Hebrew, were among the subjects he learned. When he was still in the first form his father bought him an atlas of the world, and the young Ludwig wondered why so much of north-eastern Africa had been left blank; a little later a bookseller in Tubingen lent him an odd volume of Bruce's 'Travels to Discover the Source of the Nile', from which he learned of the existence of hyenas. At seventeen he entered the missionary college at Basel and remained there for two years. After a break to reconsider his vocation he returned to the college and was duly ordained in the Lutheran faith. 
Krapf's original plan was to go to Smyrna as a missionary, so he began learning Turkish and modern Greek but, in 1836, the secretary of the London-based Church Missionary Society (CMS) was recruiting missionaries in Basel, and offered him a post in Abyssinia. He accepted, and was to remain with the society for nineteen years. In 1837, aged twenty-seven, Krapf travelled to Egypt, and thence to Abyssinia, where a CMS station had been founded in 1830 by Samuel Gobat. At first he worked in the Adwa area of Tigre. Then, in June 1839, he moved to Ankober, the capital of the kingdom of Shoa, at the invitation of King Sahela Sellasie. In 1841 an English embassy under Major Cornwallis Harris arrived at Ankober and Krapf was able to render assistance as an interpreter. During this time he and another missionary assembled a collection of more than seventy Ethiopic manuscripts, which they presented to the British Museum. Krapf remained in Shoa until 1842, when he returned to Egypt. In that year he was awarded a doctoral degree by the University of Tubingen. 
In September 1842, in the British chapel at Alexandria, Krapf married Rosine Dietrich (1817-1844), the widow of another Basel missionary. He then returned to Abyssinia, hoping to re-enter Shoa, but permission was refused. In 1843 Rosine gave birth to a daughter, who lived for only a few hours. Frustrated in his endeavours to work among the Oromo (Galla) people, largely on account of opposition from Christian Abyssinians and from rival Roman Catholic missionaries, Krapf and his wife sailed for Zanzibar in 1843. Atkins Hamerton, Britain's first consul in Zanzibar, presented Krapf to the sultan, Sayyid Sa'id bin Sultan al Busa'idi, who had recently transferred his capital from Muscat to Zanzibar. Armed with a letter of introduction from the sultan, Krapf, the first European Christian missionary in east Africa since the Portuguese occupation, arrived in Mombasa in March 1844, where he was welcomed by the 'liwali' (the sultan's representative), Ali bin Nasir al-Busa'idi. Krapf and his wife were accommodated in Leven House, a property then owned by the sultan and close to the harbour. In July 1844 Rosine Krapf died, and was followed to the grave a few days later by her second infant daughter; both were buried at Mkomani, on the mainland north of Mombasa. 
Krapf's first major task was to learn the Swahili language, which is both the language of the Swahili coast and also, in an attenuated form, the lingua franca of the east African interior. Indeed, Krapf was probably the first European to realize the potential of Swahili as a lingua franca, and the first to grasp that Swahili belonged to the 'Bantu' family of languages (as they were later to be called). In 1849 he had published the first printed text in Swahili (three chapters of 'Genesis' in roman script), and in 1850 the first systematic Swahili grammar appeared in Tubingen. In 1854 Krapf donated two Swahili manuscripts to the library of the Deutsche Morgenlandische Gesellschaft, the first to reach Europe. In 1882 'A Dictionary of the Suahili Language' was published posthumously in London. 'Of course the work cannot claim to having exhausted the complete treasure of the Suaheli language, but in fact no dictionary of any language can lay claim to absolute perfection' (CMS archives, CA5/016/172, 1878). However, there was some controversy as to Krapf's contribution. He wrote: 'In course of time, when [Johannes] Rebmann had mastered the language, he of course added his mite to the original ground-work of Dr Krapf' (CMS archives, CA5/016/160, 1880). The interest of this great pioneer lexicon is now historical rather than practical, but it also contains many valuable notes on Swahili customs. Altogether there are some twenty-five publications credited to Krapf's name, many concerned with language. He is considered the father of Swahili studies. 
In 1844 Krapf had paid a brief visit to 'kaya' Rabai, a settlement in the 'nyika', Mombasa's hilly hinterland. In 1846 he was joined by a compatriot, Johannes Rebmann (1820-1876), and the two men went to live among the Rabai people who, from this time onwards, were to experience almost continuous exposure to European Christian missionaries. In 1848 Rebmann became the first European to see the snow-capped peaks of Kilimanjaro, Africa's highest mountain, while in the following year Krapf became the first European to see Mount Kenya. 
After visiting Wurttemberg in 1850, Krapf returned to east Africa in 1851. In 1854 he visited the CMS headquarters in London, when it was decided that he should go to Jerusalem at the end of that year to confer with Bishop Samuel Gobat. He returned briefly to Abyssinia in 1855, when he met Emperor Tewodros. In 1856 his connection with the CMS ended, and he returned to Wurttemberg, devoting much of his time to translation work. In 1858 the publication of his 'Reisen in Ostafrika' ('Travels in east Africa') set an early, but seldom equalled model of careful observation. In 1867 he was again in Abyssinia, as an interpreter attached to the British army that Sir Robert Napier led to Magdala. Krapf was married again in 1857, to Charlotte Pelargus, and had one daughter. In 1862 he was back in east Africa in order to help Thomas Wakefield (1836-1901) of the United Methodist Free Church to found a mission in 'kaya' Ribe, not far from 'kaya' Rabai. In 1868 Krapf's second wife died and in the following year he married Nanette Schmid; they had no children. He died at his home in Kornthal, Wurttemberg, on 26 November 1881, and was buried there. 
Krapf's journeys prepared the way for the exploration of the great lakes and the sources of the Nile, while his contribution to evangelization, linguistics, and geography increased the tempo of the European scramble for Africa in the 1880s. From time to time Krapf has been compared to David Livingstone, but, in truth, Krapf was overshadowed by Livingstone, and never experienced the popularity that he enjoyed. In New Rabai the primary school (1848) was named after the mission's first convert to Christianity (the mission made one convert in its first ten years), but the secondary school (1967) was named after Krapf himself, while a small museum was established in 1998, with assistance from the German government, commemorating Krapf and Rebmann. In Nairobi, the building housing the German embassy was also named after Krapf. In 1934, at Mkomani, Mombasa, near the graves of Rosine and her infant daughter, a memorial to Krapf was unveiled with inscriptions in Swahili and English; an inscription in German was added later. Subsequently the Krapf Memorial Heritage Park was restored in 2009 with funds donated by the German embassy in Nairobi. 


@@@@@


doc= 40990


Austin, Henry (1811/12-1861), civil engineer and sanitarian, was the son of William Austin, medical practitioner, of Bloomsbury Square, London. Two sisters and at least one brother survived to adulthood. Austin was a pupil of Robert Stephenson, with whom he worked on the London and Birmingham and London and Blackwall railways. During work on the second project Austin became 'deeply impressed with the miserable conditions of the dwellings of the working class suburbs through which the railway was carried, and with the belief that many of the evils he saw could be remedied by sanitary knowledge' ('Letters of Charles Dickens', 1.21). On 15 July 1837 Austin married Letitia Mary (1816-1893), daughter of John Dickens and sister of Charles Dickens. The couple had no children. 
In 1829 and again in 1847 Austin was involved with the expeditions led by Lieutenant Thomas Waghorn (1800-1850) on overland routes to India, and for the later trip he advised on railway routes through the Alps. Having struggled for some years in private practice, Austin became prominent in the movement for sanitary improvement that began in the early 1840s, serving as honorary secretary to the Metropolitan Improvement Society in 1842 and to the Health of Towns Association in 1845-7. His success in the latter post led to appointments as secretary to the royal commission on the sanitation of the metropolis in 1847-9 and as secretary to the General Board of Health (GBH) in 1848-52. He was also chief consulting engineer to the first and second commissions on consolidated metropolitan sewers, in 1847-9. 
In 1852 Austin resigned the secretaryship of the Board of Health to become a superintending inspector. After the elimination of the board in 1854 he served as chief inspector under the 'Public Health Act' (until 1858), and under the 'Local Government Act' office from 1858 until his death. In addition to his routine inspections of towns and public works projects, Austin was the author of 'Thoughts on the Abuses of the Present System of Competition in Architecture' (1841), which called for more knowledgeable juries, and of 'A Report on the Means of Deodorizing and Utilizing the Sewage of Towns' (1857), which led to renewed enthusiasm for sewage recycling by broad irrigation, in the early 1860s. 
Though a staunch centralist on matters of local government, Austin was quiet and tactful and able to work well with such difficult and disparate superiors as Edwin Chadwick and Sir Benjamin Hall. He was one of the few people Chadwick trusted and was responsible for checking the claims of the other GBH engineers and often, in practice, for making the decisions about requests by towns for permission to raise loans for public works. Although a staunch proponent of Chadwick's pipe-sewerage theories in the early 1850s, he later admitted that he pushed this unproven technology too far. 
Austin had a long and close friendship with Charles Dickens. The two collaborated on numerous projects: amateur theatricals in the early 1830s; 'exposes' of sanitary conditions published in Dickens's 'Household Words' in the early 1850s; many philanthropic projects; and the remodelling of several of Dickens's houses. Austin's intimate knowledge of the profession of architecture and some of his concerns, such as the incompetent administration of architectural competitions, are reflected in Dickens's novel 'Martin Chuzzlewit' (1843-4). Austin died at his home, The Hollies, Little Ealing, London, on 9 October 1861, of acute laryngitis. On a petition from Dickens, Chadwick, and Lord Shaftesbury, his widow was awarded a small government pension. 


@@@@@


doc= 40991


Edmonds, Thomas Rowe (1803-1889), actuary and political economist, was born on 20 June 1803 in Penzance, the third of seven children of Richard Edmonds (1774-1860), solicitor, and town clerk of Marazion, Cornwall, and his wife, Elizabeth (1770-1840), daughter of Thomas Nicholas and his wife, Mary Rowe. He was the brother of Richard Edmonds, the antiquary and geologist. Edmonds attended Cornwall School, Penzance, and Trinity College, Cambridge, where he took his BA in 1826. He settled in London and in 1832 became actuary to the Legal and General Life Assurance Society, a position he held until his retirement in 1866. 
Recent scholars have paid little attention to Edmonds, and then almost exclusively with reference to his first book, 'Practical moral and political economy, or, The government, religion, and institutions most conducive to individual happiness and to national power' (1828). This work offers a critique of early industrial capitalism characteristic of Ricardian socialism. Some scholars have found in it anticipations of Karl Marx's theory of surplus value and the conception of capitalism as a historical stage to be succeeded by a more communal stage, which Edmonds called the 'social system'. Like others of his generation who proposed improving the lives of the working class by changing institutions, Edmonds felt obliged to respond to Thomas Malthus. In his 'Enquiry into the principles of population, exhibiting a system of regulations for the poor; designed immediately to lessen, and finally to remove, the evils which have hitherto pressed upon the labouring classes of society' (1832) Edmonds rejected Malthusian pessimism about social reform and tried to show instead that at each stage of human history, human misery is the result of ignorance and of poor government, both remediable conditions. In commercial nations poverty is mainly due to the unequal distribution of property and to the utter dependence of workers on their masters. Nevertheless, Edmonds acknowledged that in a nation like Britain a surplus of labour depressed the income of workers. The best solution to the problem of poverty was to eliminate that labour surplus. This was to be done mainly by promoting emigration to the colonies and by encouraging the working class to delay or forgo marriage. An improving standard of living and rising expectations were the best guarantee that the latter would happen. Changes in the poor law, public encouragement for workers to become independent producers or manufacturers, public patronage of the arts, cultivation of wastelands, the encouragement of investment in life insurance, education, and moral reform all have a place in his plan. 
In 1832 Edmonds also published 'Life tables founded upon the discovery of a numerical law, regulating the existence of every human being, illustrated by a new theory of the causes producing health and longevity', a book in which he announced the discovery of a mathematical law describing how human mortality changed in geometrical series during three periods of life. It also presented three theoretical or model life tables constructed using his law of mortality. Nearly three decades later Edmonds was involved in a dispute in the 'Assurance Magazine' (1859-61) over his claim that his law was different from the one Benjamin Gompertz had published in the 'Philosophical Transactions' in 1825. While his critics were right about his mathematics, Edmonds can claim originality for his theoretical tables, which he demonstrated corresponded to the best available life tables constructed on vital experience, and for his discussion of the uses to which they could be put. He elaborated these applications in a series of twenty articles in 'The Lancet', fifteen of these in the years 1835-9, in two articles in the 'British Medical Almanack' (1835-6), and in a further article in the 'Actuary Magazine' (1855) showing how his methods could be used to study mortality differences between population groups, to measure the sanitary condition of a population, and to study the relationship between mortality and morbidity. Edmonds's publications in the 1830s influenced William Farr, who designed the national system of vital statistics at the general registrar office. 
About the time of his retirement Edmonds published three articles in the 'Philosophical Magazine', one on a new formula for the law of mortality and two others describing in mathematical terms the behaviour of saturated steam. He was elected a fellow of the Statistical Society of London in 1836 and served as a member of its committee on vital statistics. He gave important testimony to the parliamentary select committee on assurance associations in May 1853. He was proposed for the fellowship of the Royal Society on several occasions but never succeeded in gaining election. 
Little is known about Edmonds's personal life. He married Elizabeth Elspith Ruddack on 12 July 1833 and had at least two children. His eldest son, Frederic Bernard Edmonds, achieved some notice as a natural philosopher. During his retirement Edmonds continued to live in London. Although well-known in his prime, for the last twenty-five years of his life he seems to have been totally forgotten; he received none of the usual notices on his death. He died at 72 Portsdown Road, Maida Vale, on 6 March 1889. 


@@@@@


doc= 40992


Rumsey, Henry Wyldbore (1809-1876), medical practitioner and writer on sanitary reform, was born on 3 July 1809 in Chesham, Buckinghamshire, the eldest of five children of Henry Nathaniel Rumsey, surgeon, and his wife, Elizabeth Frances Catherine, daughter of Sir Robert Murray. Rumsey's early education was conducted by various tutors. At the age of sixteen he began formal medical studies with John Attenburrow at Nottingham Hospital. Rumsey completed his training at St George's Hospital, London, where he was a house pupil of the eminent surgeon Caesar Hawkins. He became a member of the Royal College of Surgeons in 1831 and a fellow in 1844. 
In 1831 Rumsey briefly worked as physician to Lord Dillon in Oxfordshire before returning to Chesham to take over his father's practice. There, in 1835, he married Frances Sophia Langston, who survived him. In 1838 Rumsey took up a practice in Gloucester, and also served as surgeon to the town dispensary. In 1851, partly to recover from a breakdown in his health brought on by his work as a cholera inspector, Rumsey moved to Cheltenham, where he built up a select practice. 
Rumsey made his intellectual reputation, though not his fortune, through public health. His unique talent in sanitary reform was to grasp the need for rational organization at a time when old paternalist mechanisms for health care through charity and the old poor law had broken down and were being replaced by the ruthless efficiency of the new poor law, and while piecemeal public health legislation struggled to keep up with the problems posed by an industrial urban environment. His lifelong concerns were clearly expressed in his first sphere of interest, the provision of health care to the poor. 
Rumsey was involved with a self-supporting dispensary -- a form of friendly society through which the poor could pay for medical services by small, regular subscriptions -- early in his career. His first publication, 'Medical Relief for the Labouring Class on the Principle of Mutual Insurance' (1837), set out a model of best administrative practice for such institutions, which prevented patients or practitioners from abusing the system to acquire unnecessary care or inflated fees. In 1835 Rumsey became honorary secretary to the sick poor committee of the Provincial Medical and Surgical Association, one of the largest and most influential professional societies. In this post he gathered materials for a series of reports on medical relief for the poor which provided the basis for an unsuccessful bill for the better regulation of medical relief. By 1838 his expertise was such that he was called as a witness before the poor-law committee of the House of Commons. He also testified before the 1844 select committee on medical poor relief. 
By the 1850s Rumsey's interest in health care provision had broadened to encompass comprehensive government control of medical services. He published widely on the subject, and his ideas were drawn together in his most famous work, his 'Essays on State Medicine' (1856). Rumsey made unfavourable comparisons between the rational organization of state medicine in continental Europe, especially Germany and France, and the English lack of system which bred piecemeal and often ill thought out legislation and overlapping systems of government inspection, and gave substantial public health responsibilities to an unpopular autocratic lay poor-law board. Instead, Rumsey advocated that all medicine should be controlled through a central council of health, and operate through evenly sized districts rather than the existing patchwork of parish and civic authorities. The council would oversee the content and standards of medical education and determine the appropriate number of practitioners. It would supervise systematic medical care for the poor, funded through local taxes (a system partly modelled on the Irish dispensaries), and the application of comprehensive programmes of action against epidemics. Rumsey continued to criticize poor-law medical relief, arguing that medical care was in no way pauperizing, and should be made readily available. An address to the British Medical Association in 1867, later published as 'On State Medicine in Great Britain and Ireland' (1867), succinctly reiterated his criticisms of the lack of system in public health and demanded a rational, national organization of trained state physicians to oversee the health care and the accurate registration of deaths -- the inadequacies of the system and the problems of basing policy on the statistics derived from this source became one of Rumsey's favourite topics in his later years. This paper inspired the formation of a joint committee of the British Medical Association and the Social Science Association to call for a reorganization of sanitary administration. Rumsey was duly appointed to the resulting royal sanitary commission in 1868. 
Rumsey's work brought him considerable recognition in his own lifetime. Obituarists ranked his skills in sanitary theory as second only to those of John Simon and William Farr. In 1863 Rumsey was nominated a member of the General Medical Council, in 1867 he received an honorary MD from Trinity College, Dublin, and in 1874 he was elected to the Royal Society. Rumsey was also an honorary member of the Metropolitan Association of Health Officers and a fellow of the Royal Medico-Chirurgical Society. Towards the end of his life Rumsey got into financial difficulties; these were eased in 1875 by a testimonial fund, chaired by William Farr, which raised over $1000 and obtained a civil-list pension of $100 per annum. By this time Rumsey was too ill to receive the grant in person. He suffered a stroke in January 1875 and died on 23 October 1876, at 1 Tatchley Villas, Prestbury, near Cheltenham. 


@@@@@


doc= 40993


Woodall, Sir Corbet (1841-1916), gas engineer, was born on 27 August 1841 at Liverpool, the youngest of the three sons of William Woodall, manager of Liverpool gasworks, and his wife, Martha Basson. After education at the Crescent School, Liverpool (run by Congregationalists), he followed his brothers into the gas industry; he became the most notable of a dynasty of gas engineers stretching over four generations. After a couple of years gaining experience under his eldest brother, William Woodall, at Burslem in the Potteries, Corbet moved to London in 1859 to work at Woolwich under Robert Morton, one of the leading gas engineers of the day. 
When he was twenty-four Woodall was appointed engineer and manager of the small Stockton-on-Tees municipal gas works; he was one of many young men given major responsibilities in the rapidly expanding industry. There he was responsible for rebuilding the works on a substantially larger scale. Woodall's talents were quickly recognized and he began to act as a consultant to other gas undertakings in the north-east. After four years he returned to London as engineer and manager of the large Vauxhall gasworks of the Phoenix Company, where he could again combine his duties with private consultancy. His reputation as an engineer grew rapidly. He was interested not only in the making of gas but also its utilization. When electric lighting first threatened the gas lighting market in the late 1870s, he worked closely with a lighting manufacturer, William Sugg, to improve standards of street lighting. Their technical changes and designs were particularly successful and were widely adopted both in Britain and overseas. Woodall presented many technical papers to the Institution of Gas Engineers, of which he was elected president in 1877-8, 1897-8, and 1912-13; he was also an active member of the Institution of Civil Engineers and the Institution of Mechanical Engineers. When the Phoenix was taken over in 1880 by the neighbouring South Metropolitan Gas Company under Sir George Livesey, Woodall's near contemporary, his consultancy practice was so well established that he was able to devote himself to it full-time. 
Woodall soon became recognized as one of the world's leading gas engineers, and he travelled widely abroad. As well as inspecting gasworks and advising on improved methods of gas making, he was in great demand to represent companies, giving evidence before parliamentary committees and acting as valuer or arbitrator in proceedings between companies. In 1889 he visited the USA on behalf of the Gas Light and Coke Company to advise on the practicability of new gas-making methods as an alternative to the traditional coal carbonization process used in Britain. In 1897 Woodall was invited to join the court of Gas Light and Coke; he also became a director of a number of other British and foreign gas companies. 
In 1865 Woodall married Anne, daughter of W. H. Whiteman of Craydon; they had five daughters and five sons, four of whom entered the gas industry. Henry went into partnership in his father's consultancy and also became a director of the Gas Light and Coke Company. Harold was an engineer at Bournemouth and, in partnership with Arthur Duckham, developed the use of vertical retorts for gas making in Britain in place of the traditional horizontal retorts. Their contracting firm, Woodall-Duckham, became internationally known. 
For some years before Woodall became a director of Gas Light and Coke, the company, which operated largely north of the Thames, had been in fierce rivalry with South Metropolitan, which supplied gas in south London. Although Gas Light and Coke had been the first gas company established in Britain (in 1812), South Metropolitan under Livesey was more technically advanced and better managed, and could therefore sell its gas much more cheaply. This caused considerable public unease, but with Woodall's guidance and great practical and managerial experience, the rehabilitation of the Gas Light and Coke Company began. Woodall's influence in technical matters was complemented in commercial matters by David Milne-Watson. On the death in 1906 of the governor of the company, Sir William Makins, Woodall was appointed to succeed him as head of what had become the largest gas company in the world. 
As a young engineer, Woodall defended existing patterns of labour relations against nascent trade unionism. In later life he became convinced of the advantages of the partnership between managers and employees so enthusiastically promoted by his friend Livesey. When Woodall became governor of Gas Light and Coke he introduced 'co-partnership' to the company and, following his lead, it was adopted by far more companies after Livesey's death than during the latter's lifetime. Woodall was also instrumental in developing various training schemes for employees. He helped to form a Territorial Army battalion largely composed of employees, of which he was honorary colonel. In 1912 he received the honorary degree of DSc from the University of Leeds. In the following year, he was knighted for services to the gas industry. A Liberal in politics, he was active only at a local level, whereas his brother William was MP for Stoke-on-Trent (1880-85), and Hanley (1885-1900). He was appointed a JP for Bromley, Kent, in 1911. He was a committed Congregationalist and a generous supporter of charities. 
In 1914 Woodall began to suffer from heart problems and spent much time in the south of France; but he never fully recovered, and died at Phyllis Court, Torquay, on 17 May 1916. Survived by his wife, he left estate valued at $97,442 11's'. 9died In a fitting tribute, his successor as governor of the Gas Light and Coke Company, David Milne-Watson, argued that he 'would have made a great statesman, a great lawyer or a great diplomatist' ('DBB'). Along with Sir George Livesey, he was one of the leading gas engineers of the time. 


@@@@@


doc= 40994


Greenway, Charles, first Baron Greenway (1857-1934), oil industrialist and merchant, was born in Taunton on 13 June 1857, the only son of the three children of John David Greenway, a draper, and his wife, Lucy Emily Wiffen, of Essex. He was educated at Taunton, and after working for a London cotton trader, in 1876 he joined the London branch of a Calcutta-based mercantile company headed by (Charles) William Wallace. 
In 1883 Greenway married Mabel Tower of Caterham, a solicitor's daughter; they had a son and two daughters. Two years later, he moved to India to take a post with the merchants Ralli Brothers. Then in 1893 Wallace, back in Britain, invited Greenway to join the Calcutta office of what had become Shaw, Wallace & Co. Since 1891 Shaw Wallace had been marketing agent in the subcontinent for the kerosene of the Burmah Oil Company, and when Greenway joined them he immersed himself mainly in the oil side of this prosperous firm; later he became senior partner. Thanks to his energy and commercial acumen, Greenway rapidly built up Burmah Oil's trade throughout India, the largest single market in the eastern hemisphere outside Europe. This success aroused very determined opposition from larger rivals, especially Royal Dutch-Shell's marketing subsidiary in the East, the Asiatic Petroleum Company. After a prolonged price war, in 1905 Burmah Oil reached a market-sharing agreement with Asiatic; yet by the time Greenway left India three years later, Burmah Oil was supplying nearly half the kerosene marketed there. 
Wallace called Greenway home for a far more demanding assignment. In May 1908, extensive oil deposits had been discovered in Persia. Under the shah's original concession, granted in 1901 to William Knox D'Arcy and later taken over by a syndicate including Burmah Oil, a separate company had to be set up. As the only executive director of Burmah Oil in London, Wallace bore the main burden of launching that company, and needed Greenway's immediate help. Greenway proved to be resourceful over large and small matters alike, even borrowing furniture from Wallace's firm for the new offices. In April 1909 the Anglo-Persian Oil Company (from 1954 the British Petroleum Company) was floated in London, to considerable popular interest. With the great imperial figure of Donald Smith, Baron Strathcona and Mount Royal, as part-time chairman, Wallace took charge as managing director, and Greenway became his executive assistant with a seat on the board. In 1910 Wallace handed over the managing directorship to Greenway, who thus had the major responsibility (as vice-chairman under Wallace) for technical and financial matters. Two years later John Cargill, the chairman of Burmah Oil (which was Anglo-Persian's largest shareholder) became alarmed at Greenway's resolve to bid for a concession in neighbouring Mesopotamia (later Iraq), because there were already problems over pipeline-laying and refining in Persia, and the marketing of refined products. Cargill therefore refused to authorize further funds for Anglo-Persian and Greenway at once turned for assistance to the British government. The subsequent period, during which he carried out many arduous negotiations in Whitehall, took Greenway to the brink of exhaustion, but it ended successfully in two agreements signed in May 1914. The first lord of the Admiralty, Winston Churchill, was anxious to obtain a secure source of fuel oil for the navy at a time when there were no substantial oil deposits in the British empire, except in remote Burma. The Treasury thus acquired a 51 per cent stake in Anglo-Persian, while the Admiralty signed a contract to purchase large quantities of fuel oil over the next twenty years. 
Greenway became chairman of Anglo-Persian in 1914 but continued as managing director until 1919. It was very largely his initiatives that converted the company from merely a producer in Persia into a vertically integrated oil major, capable of taking its place in the world league. Between 1914 and 1918 he planned systematically to this end. Most importantly, he laid the foundations of a fully-fledged selling organization by acquiring in 1917 the British Petroleum Company, the marketing subsidiary of a recently expropriated German company. He also placed orders with British shipyards for a fleet of tankers, to escape from Shell's domination of the tanker-chartering market. Longer-term plans included the building of a refinery in Britain, at Llandarcy, near Swansea; this was completed in 1921. 
Greenway received a baronetcy in recognition of his public services in 1919, and thereafter he continued to extend Anglo-Persian's activities world-wide. He set in motion exploration projects in many parts of the world, and established oil-bunkering stations on the principal sea routes as well as marketing organizations in most European countries. Recognizing that future developments required the expertise of scientifically trained top management, in 1921 he recruited as technical adviser Sir John Cadman, a distinguished professor and government scientific adviser, who had been chairman of the petroleum executive and of the inter-allied petroleum conference during the First World War. Cadman later became deputy chairman of Anglo-Persian, and was chairman designate when Greenway retired in 1927. In recognition of his signal achievements, a barony, named for Stanbridge Earls, Greenway's Hampshire country home, was bestowed on him in that year. In retirement Greenway took no part in public affairs but enthusiastically pursued a range of leisure activities. He enjoyed entertaining on a generous scale. As well as riding and shooting, he played golf on his private course and fished in the River Test. 
Greenway's most marked attribute was an exuberance of spirit, which invigorated not only himself but also those aides striving with him for the latest objective. He set himself practical goals, which more often than not he achieved through persistence. He never flinched from the company's tussles with commercial rivals, and particularly with Shell, which, quite as pertinaciously, had striven to clip the wings of the fledgeling Anglo-Persian. Greenway was a past master at playing the patriotic card and whenever public figures accused Shell of being unpatriotic and mercenary, that company suspected his malign influence. Since Greenway had no scruples about denigrating rivals in Whitehall circles, those rivals not unexpectedly denigrated him before a wider world. Henri Deterding of Royal Dutch-Shell declared that Greenway would never have got anywhere near the top of a major corporation but for the backing of the British government. 
The American radical author Upton Sinclair, in 'Oil!' (1927), characterized Greenway as 'Old Spats and Monocle'; yet in essence he was a tough merchant adventurer. Indeed, no establishment figure could have matched Greenway's almost single-handed achievements in preserving the independence of the Anglo-Persian Oil Company and transforming it into a corporation that dominated oil production in the Middle East until the end of the Second World War. Greenway died on 17 December 1934 at Stanbridge Earls. 


@@@@@


doc= 40995


Beresford, John Davys (1873-1947), novelist and essayist, was born on 7 March 1873 at the rectory, Castor, Northamptonshire, to an evangelically minded couple, the Revd John James Beresford (1822-1897), a Church of England clergyman, and his wife, Adelaide Elizabeth Morgan ('b'. 1836), of Welsh extraction. J. D., as he was known, was doted on by his mother, especially after, owing to the neglect of a nurse, he suffered the trauma of infantile paralysis at three and a half and was left permanently lame. His rather ascetic father viewed this affliction of his second son as an embarrassment and consequently neglected J. D.'s education, which he himself recalled as 'a very haphazard affair'. He did attend various schools, including Oundle in 1886 and notably the Peterborough King's School in 1887-9, but had no particular ambitions. 
At sixteen Beresford lackadaisically accepted his father's suggestion that he become an architect, and for eight years he slaved as a draughtsman in London. At twenty-one he experienced a 'conversion' from religious orthodoxy to independent thinking and evolutionism. By 1901 he was making 'spasmodic efforts to write short stories'; another turning point occurred in 1903 when he read 'Human Personality and its Survival of Bodily Death' (1903), a book by the psychical researcher F. W. H. Myers that sparked Beresford's fascination with abnormal psychology and led him to adopt permanently an idealist position. During that year he also married Linda Lawrence, 'nee' Brown (1872-1917), a former actress, though the marriage lasted only until about 1907 owing to his wife's infidelity and the couple's financial distress. However, in 1907 his fortunes improved when he began a long career as a reviewer, initially with the 'Westminster Gazette' and later with the 'Manchester Guardian'. He also began to publish idealistic short stories. 
Beresford first achieved critical acclaim in 1911 with the publication of two novels indicative of two trends in his novel writing. 'The Early History of Jacob Stahl' is an autobiographical 'Bildungsroman' that deepens realism in the manner of Wells and Bennett by attending to unconscious motivation and the spiritual quest of the protagonist. The reviewers lauded it, along with the two other volumes, 'A Candidate for Truth' (1912) and 'The Invisible Event' (1915), comprising a trilogy, as a psychological masterpiece, and this acclaim placed him in the forefront of modern novelists. Beresford penned another thirty-seven novels in this vein of realism, notably 'The House in Demetrius Road' (1914), 'The Monkey Puzzle' (1925), 'Seven, Bobsworth' (1930), and 'Cleo' (1937). After about 1924 these novels became increasingly concerned with the mystical awakenings of his protagonists. 
Beresford's other novel of 1911, 'The Hampdenshire Wonder', is a speculative narrative, the first novel to consider seriously the consequences of an individual's reaching a higher evolutionary stage than his contemporaries. It earned the praise of the likes of G. B. Shaw and has since become an influential classic of scientific romance. Beresford gave play to this speculative aspect of his vision sporadically during his career, most notably in 'Revolution' (1921), 'What Dreams May Come' (1941), and 'The Riddle of the Tower' (1944), but also in brief whimsical short stories, especially those collected in 'Nineteen Impressions' (1918) and 'Signs and Wonders' (1921). 
Beresford's early successes drew him from the fringe into neo-Georgian literary circles, and he formed friendships with other writers including H. G. Wells, Dorothy Richardson, Katherine Mansfield, and especially Walter de la Mare. In May 1913 he married Beatrice Evelyn (Trissie) Roskams (1880-1975), boarding-house keeper, with whom he had four children, two of whom, Marcus (pseudonym Marc Brandel) (1919-2010) and Elisabeth (1926-2010) ['see 'Beresford, (Beatrice) Elisabeth], became professional writers. From 1923 to 1927 the family sojourned in France, and in 1931 they settled in Brighton. By this time Beresford's marriage had begun to deteriorate, partly because of his increasing interest in unorthodox spiritual beliefs such as faith-healing, an interest not shared by his conventionally religious wife. In 1937 he met Esme Wynne-Tyson, a writer on a similar spiritual quest, and in 1939 they began a fruitful collaboration, eventually totalling eleven books. In that year Beresford separated from his wife and he and Wynne-Tyson maintained a platonic relationship while living in a series of vegetarian guest houses. At one of these, Kildare, in Sydney Gardens, Bath, he suffered a stroke, and he died there in his sleep a week later, on 2 February 1947. 
Since then Beresford has been almost completely neglected, but at the height of his fame in the mid-twenties he was considered by Frank Swinnerton and others as one of the most reflective lights, along with E. M. Forster, of the younger generation of Georgian realists, and the 'intellectual' among them. However, his goal to illustrate in fiction his fundamental principles, such as the spiritual rather than material nature of the universe, occasionally caused him to be overly didactic and practically guaranteed that he would never be a popular writer. This goal prompted him to eschew modernist experimentation, and that position lost him critical acclaim in the latter part of his career. 
Beresford deserves attention for several reasons. He was one of the first and most knowledgeable of English novelists to explore in his fiction the 'new' dynamic psychologies of F. W. H. Myers, Henri Bergson, Freud, and Jung. His 'God's Counterpoint' (1918) represents an early foray into the explicitly psychoanalytic novel. In several critical essays he articulated more clearly than his contemporaries the strengths and limitations of the use of the new psychology in fiction. He dealt equally perceptively with a number of other unpopular advanced ideas, some of which have since gained acceptability, including pacifism, vegetarianism, and faith-healing. His speculative novels remain particularly relevant because of their depiction of societies based on co-operative principles and their espousal of pacifism. 
Beresford's life was often unsettled: he suffered from a sense of dividedness, and he was frequently harried by financial anxiety. Yet those who knew him commented most often on his gentleness, tolerance, compassion, kindness, and loyalty to friends, qualities buoyed by a wry sense of humour. He was intensely self-conscious, a quality he believed hampered his writing, despite his handsome appearance: he stood a full 6 feet tall, had an athletic physique, a face striking for its suggestion of deep contemplation, and piercing blue eyes. 


@@@@@


doc= 40996


Bell, Ernest (1851-1933), publisher and animal welfare campaigner, was born on 8 March 1851 at West Croft, England's Lane, Hampstead, Middlesex, the second son of the publisher George Bell (1814-1890) ['see under 'Bell family] and Hannah Simpson (died 1875). Ernest went to St Paul's School, and was admitted as a pensioner to Trinity College, Cambridge, on 5 June 1869, graduating BA (1873), and MA (1876). He became converted to vegetarianism at Cambridge in 1874 after having read a pamphlet by Thomas Low Nichols entitled 'How to Live on Sixpence a Day'; Bell was known throughout his life for his spartan habits and simple tastes. After Cambridge he went to Dresden to learn German. He was first married to Elize Wilhelmina Wolfel (died 1881?), with whom he had a daughter, and in 1893 married Marie Anna von Taysen; there were apparently no children. 
Bell spent most of his adult years in the family publishing business, G. Bell & Sons, in Portugal Street, Kingsway, London, joining as partner in 1888. Ernest became a competent editor for the company, translating Bohn's 'Standard Library of Classics' from German, and editing the popular 'All England Series of Athletic Sports'. It may be due to him that from the 1890s G. Bell & Sons is also found publishing for the Vegetarian Society and the Humanitarian League. Bell was known to be the first English publisher to develop an interest in the works and followers of the American primitivist philosopher Ralph Waldo Emerson. Bell's personal beliefs brought him further publishing successes and a public profile later in his career. He was described as modest and retiring, with an amiable personality and firm convictions: 'it may be that others were more prominent... but no contemporary leader has equalled him in effective humanitarian work in all its phases. His main purpose was to lighten the load of the suffering man and beast' ('Vegetarian Messenger and Health Review', 310). After 1893 he gave much of his time to administration and fund-raising for three main reform causes: vegetarianism, humanitarianism, and animal welfare. Bell's fervency, family wealth, and publishing background made him an effective organizer. He became the honorary secretary of the Hampstead branch of the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, and was later chairman of the Anti-Vivisection Society. At various times he was on the governing councils of the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds, the National Canine Defence League, the Cat's Protection League, the Pit-Ponies Protection Society, and the Anti-Bearing-Rein Association. He was in particular a main force behind the Animals' Friend Society (founded 1834). Twenty-two separate societies joined in giving him a lifetime award in 1929 in recognition of his work for animal causes. He was also an early member of the Humanitarian League, which had close connections with the Vegetarian Society; he became vice-president of the Vegetarian Society in 1896, and finally its president in 1914, a long tenure which only ended with his death in 1933. 
Throughout his life Bell donated much of his income to his societies, including donating all the profits from the best-selling 'Bell's Joy Book' (1926, a collection of printed games and puzzles) to the Vegetarian Home for Children, of which he was a strong supporter. His first known publication, 'The Animals' Friend' (with 68 illustrations), was published in 1904. This was followed by 'Christmas cruelties', in 1905, published in 'The Humane Review' by the Humanitarian League; and a well-known series of schoolbooks called the 'Animals Life Readers'. The 'Animals' Friend' magazine, which he edited, ran into the 1920s and was revived as an imprint for pamphlets and books after 1926, when he succeeded his brother Edward Bell ['see under 'Bell family] as chairman of G. Bell & Sons. In 1920 he published 'In a Nutshell: Cons and Pros of the Meatless Diet'. Bell was active into old age -- his well-known 'Fair Treatment for Animals', which first appeared in the 'Animals' Friend', was still in print, and his final text, the 'Proper Relationship between Men and the other Animals', was published in 1927. Bell died on 14 September 1933, at his home, Althorpe, Waverley Grove, Hendon, Middlesex. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 40998


Lind-af-Hageby, (Emilie Augusta) Louise (1878-1963), animal welfare campaigner, was born in Sweden on 20 September 1878, the daughter of Emil Lind-af-Hageby, a lawyer, and granddaughter of a chamberlain to the king of Sweden. She attended Cheltenham Ladies' College for a short period from 1896 and made her main home in England from 1902 until her death, becoming a British citizen in 1912. 
In 1900 Lind-af-Hageby went to Paris with her friend Liesa Schartau; a visit to the Pasteur Institute there allegedly led directly to her crusade against animal experimentation. She succeeded Frances Power Cobbe (1822-1904) as doyenne of the British anti-vivisectionist movement. Like Cobbe, she used vigorous journalism and public speaking to pursue her campaigns, especially under the auspices of the Animals Defence and Anti-Vivisection Society (later the Animal Defence Society) which she founded in 1906, and as founder-owner, editor, and main columnist of the 'Anti-Vivisection Review' for forty years from its establishment in 1909. In her voluminous writings and many speeches she, like Cobbe, linked the case for opposition to animal experiments to the cause of animals generally, to opposition to authoritarian public health, and, especially, before 1914, to the cause of women's emancipation. 
Lind-af-Hageby's public career as an anti-vivisectionist in England began in 1903 with the publication, with Liesa Schartau, of 'The Shambles of Science'. This purported to be an eye-witness account by the two young women of their experience in physiology classes which they had attended in 1902-3 while enrolled as visiting students at the London School of Medicine for Women. Their claims to have witnessed a conscious dog at a demonstration in University College, London, were widely publicized by Stephen Coleridge (1854-1936), secretary of the National Anti-Vivisection Society. When Coleridge was successfully sued for libel by Professor W. M. Bayliss (1860-1924), the physiologist leading the demonstration, Lind-af-Hageby was a key witness for the defence at the much publicized trial. Afterwards, a chapter entitled 'Fun', depicting the jocularity with which students and teachers allegedly regarded a conscious dog's suffering, was withdrawn from subsequent editions of 'The Shambles of Science'. 
The allegations made in Louise Lind-af-Hageby's book and at the trial were central concerns of the second royal commission on vivisection (1906-12), to which she gave extensive evidence. In 1906 anti-vivisectionists erected a statue of the Brown Dog in Battersea, which became a focus of contention between anti-vivisectionists and medical students and among local residents and politicians until it was removed in 1910. Lind-af-Hageby's regular public speaking and writing in favour of both the Brown Dog and women's suffrage during this period reinforced the association between anti-vivisection and the cause of women. She attacked animal experimentation as morally and scientifically wrong, urging the development of an alternative 'science of anti-vivisection' with which to criticize an erroneous biological method ('Anti-Vivisection Review', 1, 1909, 23) She attributed growing support for the cause of animals and the enfranchisement of women to 'a general undercurrent of rising humanity', and saw these as stepping stones towards a new humanitarian morality 'which consciously or unconsciously is coveted in all efforts to help the down-trodden and suffering' (ibid., 91). 
Lind-af-Hageby was the main instigator of the first of two international anti-vivisectionist congresses held in London in July 1909. Her congress promoted gradualist tactics as the best means of ending animal experimentation whereas the other brought together those unwilling to contemplate compromise. In 1913 she was a central figure in another much publicized libel case, this time as unsuccessful plaintiff against Dr C. W. Saleeby (1878-1940), a prominent eugenicist and temperance campaigner who, she alleged, had accused her of being 'a systematic liar' in her campaign against vivisection. 
In the First World War, Louise Lind-af-Hageby founded the Purple Cross Service, authorized by the French war office, for sick and wounded warhorses. She continued to promote the welfare of animals affected by war during the 1920s, 1930s, and the Second World War, leading an animal protection deputation to the disarmament conference of the League of Nations in Geneva in 1932. Although public support for the anti-vivisectionist cause declined after the end of the war, her own implacable opposition to scientific use of animals continued, often in close association with her great friend Nina, duchess of Hamilton (1878-1951), in whose memory she established the Ferne Animal Sanctuary in Dorset in 1954. She died at her home, 7 St Edmunds Terrace, Regent's Park, London, on 26 December 1963. 


@@@@@


doc= 40999


Oldfield, Josiah (1863-1953), lawyer, physician, and writer on health, was born at Ryton, Shropshire, on 28 February 1863, the son of a provision dealer, David Oldfield, and his wife, Margaret, 'nee' Bates. He attended Newport grammar school, and then went to Oxford to read theology, matriculating with a non-collegiate affiliation on 15 April 1882. He graduated BA in 1885. He then trained as a barrister at Lincoln's Inn (BCL 1888) and practised on the Oxford circuit. He was married with at least one daughter, Josie. 
Some time during his stay at Oxford, Oldfield became a vegetarian and turned towards medicine, which became a second career. He took his medical diploma at St Bartholomew's Hospital, and subsequently founded the Humanitarian Hospital of St Francis, of which he was for some years chairman and senior physician. He was also warden and senior physician to the Lady Margaret Fruitarian Hospital at Sittingbourne. The Fruitarians were members of an Order of the Golden Age, with headquarters at Barcombe Hall, Paignton, in Devon. They were dietary reformers who abstained from all foods obtained by the cruel infliction of pain, and who lived mainly on gathered, preferably uncooked, fruits, vegetables, nuts, and grains. Oldfield became a prolific popular health author for the vegetarian and humanitarian cause, publishing on average a book every two years between 1892 and 1953. His first two books, 'The Cost of Living' (1892) and 'The Ideal Diet in Relation to Real Life' (1892), were both published by the Vegetarian Society, as were 'The Influenza' (1892), 'Tuberculosis, or, Flesh-Eating a Cause of Consumption' (1897, 2nd edn), and other dietary tracts on indigestion, rheumatism, and appendicitis. The Ideal Publishing Union issued Oldfield's 'The Evils of Butchery' (1895), 'A Groaning Creation' (1895), 'The Voice of Nature, or, What Man should Eat' (1898), and also 'The Claims of Common Life, or, The Scientific Relations of Humans and non-Humans' (1898), a book which discussed the ethics of killing animals, and the social responsibility of science -- 'science increases the rights of animals by deepening the rights of man' (p. 71). 
Oldfield addressed the rights of man when he founded the Society for the Abolition of Capital Punishment in 1901, with an accompanying book; he also took a study tour of India that year, looking at political grievances. He remained active in legal reform circles, publishing 'Hanging for Murder' (1908), and becoming chairman of the Romilly Society in 1910. He was admitted to the Jamaican bar in 1920, and became a fellow of the Royal Society of Medicine in 1920. During the First World War Oldfield raised and commanded a casualty clearing station and was mentioned in dispatches; he was invalided out with the rank of lieutenant-colonel. 
Between 1905 and 1935 he published a steady stream of successful commercial books on natural diet cookery and aspects of what was then becoming known as naturopathy -- such as 'The Best Sixpenny Cookery' (1916), 'The Raisin Cure' (1923), 'The Dry Diet Cure' (1925), 'Fasting for Health and Life' (1924), 'Deep Breathing and Breathing Exercises' (1928), 'Eat and be Happy' (1929), and 'The Beauty Aspect of Health and Living' (1935). He was still writing prolifically in his eighties, with his series comprising 'Mystery of Marriage' (1949), 'Mystery of Birth' (1949), and 'Mystery of Death' (1951), and a Fruitarian longevity tract, 'The Crown of Grapes: Eat Right and Live Long' (1952). By this time he was living in Fruitarian retreat at Margaret Manor, Doddington, near Faversham, Kent, listing his recreations in 'Who's Who' as tree planting and Fruitarian lecturing. The Fruitarians published his final volumes of letters and a valedictory 'Popular Guide to Fruitarian Diet and Cookery' in 1952. Oldfield died at Doddington on 2 February 1953. 


@@@@@


doc= 41000


Williams, Howard (1837-1931), writer and advocate of vegetarianism, was born on 6 January 1837, at Whatley rectory, Somerset, the fifth son of the Revd Hamilton John Williams (1796-1879) and his wife, Margaret Sophia, daughter of Thomas Taunton. He was educated at home and was admitted as a pensioner to St John's College, Cambridge, on 1 July 1856, graduating BA in 1860 and MA in 1863. On 20 November 1860 he married Eliza Smith, daughter of Robert Webb Smith, captain in the Indian army; there is no record of any offspring. 
Williams may have had private means, possibly assisted by tutoring, since he had no known career other than scholarly writing. His first book, 'The Superstitions of Witchcraft', was published in 1865. Williams turned vegetarian in 1872 and also became an anti-vivisectionist. In 1883 he published the book that made his name, the 'Ethics of Diet, or, A Cantena of Authorities Deprecatory of the Practise of Flesh-Eating'. The 'Ethics of Diet' was the first comprehensive history of European vegetarianism, from Pythagoras to contemporary nineteenth-century dietary reformers, and is still authoritative, and a vegetarian classic. It used the portrait form customary to hagiography, listing fifty 'great men' and their literary productions on vegetarianism, with a further seventeen added to the second edition in 1896. It was turned into a popular edition in 1906 and was translated into Swedish, and more famously into Russian by Count Tolstoy. Williams turned to humanitarianism in the 1880s, being present at the founding of the Humanitarian League in 1890, and was on its council for some years thereafter. He wrote the 'Pioneers of humanity' for the league's journal in 1907; this article later became a popular pamphlet. Williams continued scholarly work on other subjects in the 1880s, bringing out a survey of Pope and Swift's letters in 1885, and translating a selection of Lucian's dialogues in 1887, but increasingly preferred to live a private life gardening, tutoring, and going canoeing, from his home at Aspley Guise near Woburn in Bedfordshire. He died at Aspley Guise on 21 September 1931. 


@@@@@


doc= 41002


Foote, George William (1850-1915), radical journalist and secularist, was born at 2 How Street Cottages, Plymouth, on 11 January 1850, the son of William Thomas Foot, customs officer, who died when he was about four. He was brought up an Anglican by his mother, Ann Foot, 'nee' Winzar, but joined the Unitarians when he was fifteen. In January 1868 he went to London to work in a West End library, and was soon involved in radical freethought, starting both the secular Sunday school and the Young Men's Secular Association at the Old Street Hall of Science in 1869, and contributing to Charles Bradlaugh's 'National Reformer' from 1870. He also served as secretary of the London Republican Club (1870) and National Republican League (1871). In 1876 he opposed Bradlaugh's domination of the secularist movement, starting his own paper, the 'Secularist', and the following year, with G. J. Holyoake and Charles Watts, formed the British Secular Union as an anti-Bradlaughite organization. 
Bradlaugh's exclusion from the House of Commons in 1880 brought an indignant Foote back to mainstream secularism. Abandoning his hitherto mild and literary approach to freethought, in May 1881 he started the monthly 'Freethinker' (weekly from September), in which he attacked Christianity with barbed wit and a series of infamous cartoons for which he was twice prosecuted for blasphemy. Tried at the Old Bailey before Mr Justice North in March 1883, he received a year in Holloway prison, but on an earlier charge subsequently heard before Lord Chief Justice Coleridge at queen's bench the jury was divided. Coleridge's liberal summing up, that there was a distinction between the manner and the substance of an alleged blasphemy, remained the basis of the blasphemy law in England until 1979. 
As Bradlaugh became increasingly involved in parliamentary affairs, Foote emerged as the principal organizer of secularism at a time when the movement was declining in popularity. He founded the London Secular Federation in 1888 and succeeded Bradlaugh as president of the National Secular Society in 1890. As a leading member of the Metropolitan Radical Federation (founded 1886) Foote was primarily an individualistic champion of free expression, opposed to socialism and increasingly disillusioned with democratic mediocrity. In 1887 he debated the question 'Is socialism sound?' with Annie Besant at the Old Street Hall of Science. In the long run his defence of liberalism alienated many former supporters who were attracted to socialism, and he faced increasing criticisms for his failure to recreate the success which secularism had enjoyed under Bradlaugh. With declining support came financial difficulties, quarrels with other leaders, and a period of bankruptcy from 1901 until 1905. He nevertheless was largely responsible for the survival of secularist radicalism into the twentieth century. 
Foote ran his own publishing business from 1882 under various titles, latterly the Pioneer Press, and edited the 'Freethinker' until his death, as well as the more ephemeral 'Secularist' (1876), 'Liberal' (1879), 'Progress' (1883-7), 'Radical Leader' (1888), and 'Pioneer' (1903-4). He wrote over eighty publications, mostly pamphlets of a polemical nature. Some of his best writing came in the form of weekly editorial essays in the 'Freethinker', published as 'Flowers of Freethought' (1893-4). His ambitions beyond religious controversialism remained literary, and behind the public image was a cultured scholar with a wide knowledge of English literature, a devotee of Shakespeare, and a friend and admirer of George Meredith. 
Foote's first marriage, to Henriette Mariane ('b'. 1850/51), daughter of Adolph Heimann, a professor of German, on 20 March 1877, ended with her death in October of the same year. His second wife, Rosalia Martha ('b'. 1862/3), daughter of Leopold Angel, a silversmith, supported his work but remained in the background. They were married on 12 April 1884, and had four children: a son, Francis, and three daughters, Helen, Florence, and Dorothy. In later years Foote suffered from bronchitis, which led the family to move out of London to Westcliff-on-Sea in 1903. He died at his home there, 39 Meteor Road, on 17 October 1915 and was cremated at the City of London crematorium, Ilford, on 21 October. 


@@@@@


doc= 41005


Tyson, (Dorothy Estelle) Esme Wynne- (1898-1972), writer, was born on 29 June 1898, at 26 Stansfield Road, Stockwell, London, the only child of Harry Innes Ripper (1871-1956), a City of London stockbroker, and Minnie Maude (1874-1940), daughter of a talented amateur actor, William Pitt. Her two maternal aunts, Molly and Mona, as well as her mother, had been on the stage, encouraging her early theatrical career. Her first professional appearance was in 'The Blue Bird' at the Haymarket, which made her a child star. She adopted the stage name Esme Wynne, which she used also as a pseudonym for her early dramas. In 1912, when both were appearing in 'Where the Rainbow Ends', she befriended Noel Coward. Sharing an enthusiasm for the theatre, the teenagers performed dances in 'futurist' pyjamas and devised sketches and stories. A series of 'curtain-raisers' (Coward had played in Esme's one-act play 'The Prince's Bride', produced on 2 February 1912) appeared under the joint 'nom de plume' Esnomel: 'The Last Chapter' (produced in 1917), 'To Have and to Hold' (unproduced), and 'Women and Whisky' (produced in 1918). Esme also wrote lyrics to set to Coward's music; her song 'Faith' was included in his play 'I'll Leave it to You' (produced in 1920). 
But as the theatre had united the pair, so it divided them. Coward became famous. On 22 June 1918 Esme married Linden Charles Tyson (1897-1977), a former army officer who was serving in the RAF; he changed his surname to Wynne-Tyson in 1919. More crucially, at twenty-four, she experienced what she called 'the mystic experience of rebirth' on reading Mary Baker Eddy's 'Science and Health', a book 'that described the 'sort' of God that I 'could' love' (Wynne-Tyson to Air Marshal Sir Victor Goddard, 14 July 1960, Wynne-Tyson MSS). She also became a vegetarian, and her only child, Jon, was born in 1924. 
In 1926 Esme published her first novel, 'Security', a period piece of nervy social disorder dealing with the 'lengths a woman will go to to ensure security for herself and her children when it is jeopardised by the sins of the father' (jacket copy). A friend, the novelist G. B. Stern, found it 'very subtle, very original' (G. B. Stern to E. Wynne-Tyson, 28 Oct 1926, Wynne-Tyson MSS); the 'Daily Telegraph' wrote that 'very few first novels show such a mastery of style' (26 Nov 1926). Although Esme later disparaged it as somewhat artificial, she turned it into a successful play, sold to Lee Shubert, who produced it in New York (Maxine Elliott's Theatre, 28 March 1929) and London (Savoy Theatre, 13 March 1932). Her second novel, 'Quicksand' (1927), made the process in reverse, as an adaptation of her play 'Little Lovers', originally a collaboration with Coward (Aldwych Theatre, 1922). The book portrays Wynne-Tyson and Coward (its dedicatee) as Paul and Pauline Myse, talented and attractive siblings. 
Esme described her third novel, 'Momus' (1928), as 'the 'imagined' love affair between Bernard Shaw and Mrs Pat Campbell' (Wynne-Tyson to Goddard, 3 Feb 1961, Wynne-Tyson MSS). Reviewers found its 'brilliant effect' marred by 'pitiless cleverness in the execution' ('Times Literary Supplement', 6 Dec 1928). Coward pointed out its various inconsistencies but agreed that it was the 'best thing you've ever done' (Coward to Wynne-Tyson, October 1928, Wynne-Tyson MSS). Esme's early work is fraught with modern sexual mores; marriage is seldom happy; consolation is to be found in culture, or, increasingly, in religion. Such religiosity explains the 'cool welcome' for 'Melody' (1929), a novel suffering, in the words of her son, from 'the common problem of how to make an essentially good person interesting' (Wynne-Tyson). The largely autobiographical 'Incense and Sweet Cane' (1930) completes the quintet. A daughter witnesses the break-up of her parents' marriage through alcoholism and violence; her tragic death reconciles them. Esme's own marriage ended in 1930, when her husband left her for another woman; they were divorced in 1947 (he was to remarry twice). 
Despite the increasing maturity of Esme's fiction, she began to turn her back on it, as she had turned her back on the stage, although she wrote another play, 'Forty Love' (Grafton Theatre, 4 October 1931). In the 1930s her writing concentrated on freelance journalism, in which her philosophical interests were beginning to dominate. 'Prelude to Peace' (1936), positing a world-brotherhood educational movement, was well received by some educationists. In 1938 she met the novelist J. D. Beresford, with whom she henceforth shared an 'intense mental and working collaboration' (Wynne-Tyson, 353). Although not a Christian Scientist, Beresford was 'deeply interested in spiritual healing'. 'I found in J. D. more of the image and likeness of God... than I found in any other man' (E. Wynne-Tyson to E. N. Holstius, 3 Jan 1958, Wynne-Tyson MSS). They collaborated on ten published novels, but for contractual reasons only three bore their joint names: 'Men in the Same Boat' (1943), in which seven shipwrecked men are subsequently found 'in another... existence, [each] fulfilling his own idea of happiness' (Wynne-Tyson); 'The Riddle of the Tower' (1944), foreseeing industrialization as reducing human beings to mere insect status; and 'The Gift' (1947), 'a beautifully etched portrait of a young man who in thought and deed practises the Christian ethics' ('Western Mail', September 1947). The last was successful enough to go into three editions. 
The post-war period had less time for Christian philosophy; none the less, after Beresford's death in 1947 Esme continued in his tradition with 'The Unity of Being' (1949) and 'This is Life Eternal: the Case for Immortality' (1951). 'Mithras: the Fellow in the Cap' (1958) examined, with autodidactic zeal, the sun-worshipping cult, discerning the pagan roots of Christian rites with 'disturbing conclusions about Christian orthodoxy' (J. Wynne-Tyson, 354). 'The Philosophy of Compassion: the Return of the Goddess' (1962) argued that religious fundamentalists opposed to Darwinism were unable to see that Christianity is a stage in religious evolution, unfortunately become patriarchal. Indeed, 'The Philosophy of Compassion' is her 'Origin of Species', in which the problems of the human condition are ascribed to male hegemony. A last work, 'The Dialectics of Diotima', was published by her son in 1969. Vivacious and quizzical, Esme was 5 feet 5 inches tall, with green eyes and small features. She died at St Richard's Hospital, Chichester, Sussex, on 17 January 1972. 
Esme Wynne-Tyson epitomizes a particular breed of woman of the post-First World War period: self-taught and liberated to a degree; drawn to art, theatre, or literature; and challenging, in the post-war climate, both the values of the previous generation and the lack of values in their own. Writing to Coward after the publication of 'Mithras' in 1960, she referred to their teenage aspirations; his for theatrical success, 'mine... to 'know the Truth'. It has taken much longer, but it has happened... Your wish... has given you much pleasure in the fulfilment. Mine has given me much inward content, but the dreadful irony of mine is that, after finding the Truth... I discover that it is the very last thing the world wants to hear about. (E. Wynne-Tyson to N. Coward, 24 Feb 1960, Wynne-Tyson MSS)' But the world turned again, and in the latter years of the century her eclectic belief system, that of a 'passionate rationalist' (J. Wynne-Tyson, 'Aryan Path', April 1972), has been somewhat vindicated. 


@@@@@


doc= 41009


Spring-Heeled Jack (fl. 1837-1838), mystery assailant, was first reported, though not named, in early January 1838, when the lord mayor of London made public a letter he had received, signed 'A resident of Peckham': 'It appears that some individuals (of, as the writer believes, the higher ranks of life) have laid a wager with a mischievous and foolhardy companion (name as yet unknown) that he durst not take upon himself the task of visiting many of the villages near London in three disguises -- a ghost, a bear and a devil; and, moreover, that he will not dare to enter gentlemen's gardens for the purpose of alarming the inmates of the house. The wager has been accepted, and the unmanly villain has succeeded in depriving seven ladies of their senses. ('The Times', 9 Jan 1838)' The publication of this letter elicited a host of reports of incidents, dating from the autumn of the previous year, from all around the periphery of London. Though the correspondents who answered the lord mayor's call for more information shared the belief that a malicious prankster was responsible, plainly many of their informants (frequently their servants) did not, but believed the incidents supernatural. They involved a mysterious figure who appeared, always after dark, chiefly in the forms of a bear, a man in armour, or the devil himself, and either frightened or attacked people by lacerating them or, more commonly, tearing at their clothing with his talons. His most usual target was young women. 
By mid-February 1838 the assailant was known as Spring-Heeled Jack. The first first-hand report of an attack was published: an eighteen-year-old named Jane Alsop had answered the door at her father's house in Old Ford, near Bow, and been attacked by a figure who 'vomited forth a quantity of blue and white flames from his mouth' and 'tore at her neck and arms with his claws' before scampering away across the fields ('The Times', 22 Feb 1838). An inconclusive investigation followed: one witness cast doubt on the severity of the attack and on the possibility of the fire-breathing; another told of seeing an unidentified 'young man in a large cloak' nearby; and the principal suspect, a carpenter called Millbank, was so drunk on the night of the attack that he could remember nothing of what had taken place. 
The scare was now at its height. There had been reports from upwards of thirty locations around London. Rewards were posted; the police baffled; and, in parts of London, 'females... afraid to move a yard from their dwellings unless... very well protected'. More incidents followed -- some obviously the work of lacklustre imitators (two were arrested); others more serious. In one, Jack breathed blue fire at one Lucy Scales in an alley in Limehouse, leaving her, according to the doctor who was called to examine her, 'suffering from hysterics and great agitation, in all probability the result of fright' ('Morning Post', 7 March 1838). 
Though there were no further attacks in this, the original, panic of 1837-8, Spring-Heeled Jack lodged in the popular consciousness and stuck there. He was celebrated on stage and in penny dreadfuls, and took on a new folkloric persona as a waylayer of solitary travellers. An assault on a woman in Teignmouth in 1847 gave rise to a 'Spring-Heeled Jack investigation'; his name was also associated with the Peckham ghost of 1872 and the Sheffield Park ghost of 1873, and when Aldershot Camp was plagued by series of ghostly visitations in 1877 the perpetrator was labelled Spring-Heeled Jack. He last appeared in Liverpool in 1904 (Dash, 66-97). 
In the reports of all the incidents from the second part of his career, after 1838, Jack's principal characteristic is his agility: he moves with incomparable swiftness and leaps over obstacles 6, 8, and even 15 or 20 feet high. Those who believed he was of flesh and blood ascribed this preternatural ability to his wearing boots with springs in their heels. But, curiously, his christening as Spring-Heeled Jack predates any reference to his jumping ability or spring-heeled shoes, and why he was so named is unknown. It may simply have referred to the light elastic shoes which -- naturally enough for one so elusive -- he was originally described as wearing; it certainly connoted that elusiveness. Later generations, to whom the name's original force had been lost, reinterpreted it, and it informed their reports of his exploits. 
Who, then, was the original Spring-Heeled Jack? The notion that he was a nobleman fulfilling the terms of a bet was a popular, and entirely reasonable, contemporary explanation of the scare of 1837-8. It excludes the supernatural; it explains how the perpetrator could manage the logistics of the enterprise and (through intimations of a cover-up) how he had escaped justice; and it makes some sense out of what would otherwise have been entirely random and meaningless events. The chief suspect was (and, for some, remains) Henry de la Poer Beresford, marquess of Waterford, the hottest blood of the day ('N&Q' Haining, chap. 4). 
Yet there is no direct evidence for this explanation. The notion of a wager was only ever a hypothesis, necessary because the alternative -- that a monster, or the devil himself, was walking abroad in Peckham -- was 'too absurd for belief'. And the hypothesis fails to explain why, as contemporary reporters complained, no first-hand witness to Spring-Heeled Jack could be found in early February 1838, although the story was on everyone's lips. To the sceptical folklorist, this absence suggests that the story was a rapidly disseminating urban legend -- or rather, two legends: among the servant and working classes, from whom Jack selected his victims, a straightforwardly supernatural story of a polymorphous monster (very like traditional accounts of diabolical spirits visiting the earth); and, among the letter-writing middle classes and metropolitan newspaper men, a rationalized version, involving a young blood, a well-stocked costume cupboard, and a wild wager. Viewed in this light, both tales, as befit the products of the mythopoeic imagination, reveal a number of societal concerns -- most interestingly, perhaps, given the historical context, a tension between the irrational countryside and the rational town. 
The extreme of this sceptical position would be to deny that there was any truth in the story; to label it a narrative of hysteria, sprung from some small trigger that, once sprung, gathered its own momentum. As part of this momentum (to which the lord mayor contributed the decisive shove) imitators abounded, and assaults which appeared to fit the pattern were assimilated to it. The fact that, just before she was attacked, Lucy Scales had been reading about the Alsop case consorts neatly. Corroboration, too, might be found by comparison with the cases of other mystery assailants, such as the Halifax Slasher, who provoked hysteria and vigilantism in equal measure in Halifax in November 1938, or the Monkey Man, who terrorized areas of New Delhi in May 2001. In both cases, in the end, the police stopped looking for the attackers and announced that they did not exist. 
Yet this explanation of Spring-Heeled Jack as a hysterical chimera leaves some questions unanswered (why the name? why -- and what was -- the blue flame?) and simply postpones others. Most importantly, the question of who (the devil) was Spring-Heeled Jack simply metamorphoses into the equally puzzling question of why (on earth) did his story catch on? It may be the most reasonable explanation for the phenomenon available, but it fails to go to the heart of the matter. 


@@@@@


doc= 41011


Simmonds, Peter Lund (1814-1897), newsagent and journalist, was born on 24 July 1814 in Aarhus, Denmark. He was adopted by Lieutenant George Simmonds RN -- but his precise origins and the events leading to his adoption are obscure. The Simmondses were a naval family and their home at Portsea Island, Hampshire, was near the country's chief naval dockyard. From the age of twelve Peter served as a midshipman on the 'Cygnet', under the command of his uncle, James Gooding. In 1831 he was sent to Jamaica as a bookkeeper. The West Indies, in this tumultuous period of slave emancipation, made a deep impression on him; the experience formed the basis for all his later interests. His return to England in 1834 coincided with a remarkable proliferation of periodicals and he first emerged as a journalist editing 'The Garland' (1836), a provincial miscellany of news and literature, and as main contributor to 'The Alligator' (1841) which was devoted to West Indian matters. On 1 January 1838 he married Ellen Mary Molesworth (it seems that they later separated), and set up in Chichester as a 'newspaper agent', obtaining and circulating newspapers and journals from around the world, until 1841, when he moved to London to become secretary to the dynamic William Shaw, editor of the 'Mark Lane Express'. Simmonds's interest in the overlap of science and trade was signalled by his membership of the Statistical Society of London; his essay in this society's 'Journal', 'Statistics of newspapers in various countries' (1841) remains a useful survey of the world's press of that period. From 1842 to 1844 he served as sub-editor of the 'Farmer's Encyclopaedia', and was at some time later engaged as city editor of 'The Globe'. In 1844 he began to publish 'Simmonds' Colonial Magazine' which promoted the cause of colonial development, and criticized governmental 'apathy and supineness on the one hand and gross ignorance and misrule on the other' ('Simmonds' Colonial Magazine', 7, 1846, preface). By this time he had established a worldwide communications network of impressive efficiency, and contributed to an enormous range of publications on a wide variety of subjects. In 1848, in keeping with the family tradition, he became a freemason. After the Great Exhibition of 1851 Simmonds was engaged to help with the display in South Kensington of 'trade products and objects of natural history' sponsored by the Royal Society of Arts, of which he became a member in 1853. Subsequently he delivered nineteen major papers and published thirty-three substantial articles in the society's 'Journal', was made an honorary life member in 1862, and three times received the society's silver medal. It was Simmonds who successfully proposed Karl Marx for membership of the society. In 1861 he began a new periodical, 'The Technologist: a Monthly Record of Science Applied to Art and Manufacture'. Its main concerns were with informed descriptions of natural resources and their acquisition, processing, and utilization, combined with the promotion of emigration as the solution to social problems. To these interests he added another, in which he was far ahead of his time -- the recycling of materials. His book 'Waste Products and Undeveloped Substances, or, Hints for Enterprise in Neglected Fields' (1862) is a wide-ranging treatment of the subject. During these years he was closely involved with many international exhibitions, including those in London of 1862, Paris of 1867 and 1878, and Melbourne of 1880, and he was made of chevalier of the Legion d'honneur in 1878, and a knight of the Crown of Italy in the same year. He helped establish natural science museums in Australia and Japan. His involvement with 'The Technologist' ceased in 1866; in 1870 he started 'The Journal of Applied Science' which covered similar topics, and continued for 146 issues until 1882. Thereafter, he was unable to sustain the journalism and lecturing which had been his main sources of income, though he continued to produce works such as 'A Dictionary of Useful Animals' (1883). Despite a life of constant labour he was not prosperous and became increasingly impecunious. In 1892, sponsored by the prince of Wales and the archbishop of Canterbury (both freemasons), he was granted a pensioner's place at the Charterhouse in London. In mid-September 1897 he was knocked down by an omnibus in the Gray's Inn Road and died at the Charterhouse two weeks later, on 3 October. He was buried at Charterhouse burial-ground in Bow cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 41013


Hadfield, James (1771/2-1841), assailant of George III, is of unknown parentage. Critically wounded at the battle of Roubaix in 1794, he sustained eight sabre wounds to his head before being captured by the French. After making his way back to England, he fell under the sway of a millenarian cult, becoming convinced that his death at the hands of the state would effect the second coming. Hadfield apparently reasoned that treason -- or even attempted treason -- would carry mortal punishment, and thus conspired with Bannister Truelock to assassinate George III at Drury Lane Theatre on the evening of 15 May 1800. As the king acknowledged the orchestra's playing of the national anthem, and the audience rose to its feet to welcome him, Hadfield climbed on a seat and fired a horse pistol at the royal box. The assailant's actual intention remains a mystery because when the king, unhurt, insisted on speaking to the soi-disant assassin, Hadfield greeted him by saying, 'God bless your royal highness; I like you very well; you are a good fellow' (Quen, 1221). 
Despite such patriotic sentiment Hadfield was placed on trial for high treason, which although doubtless a dire prospect none the less entitled him to certain privileges not accorded the ordinary felon. Chief among these was the right to be represented by counsel, in this case perhaps the most brilliant attorney of his day, Thomas Erskine, the later lord chancellor. Erskine's task was extremely difficult since the common law required a complete derangement for an insanity acquittal: 'lost to all sense... incapable of forming a judgement upon the consequences of the act which he is about to do' (Moran, 499). Hadfield's ability to secure a firearm, place himself at the theatre in such a position to secure the best possible aim, and name the king as his intended target appeared to speak against any appearance of complete madness. Erskine wisely chose to confront directly the traditional criterion of total deprivation of memory and understanding. Could such a person even be capable of committing an act, criminal or otherwise? In place of a total derangement, Erskine asserted that delusion 'unaccompanied by frenzy or raving madness [was] the true character of insanity' (Eigen, 49). Hadfield's particular delusion, according to the attorney, stemmed unambiguously from his millenarian beliefs, even to the point of requiring death by the state. This characterization was reinforced by two surgeons and a physician who supplied a physical basis for the insanity -- brain damage due to war wounds -- and a mental consequence: Hadfield's belief that he was ordained to die in a manner that paralleled Christ's execution. 
Following this unequivocal testimony, Lord Chief Justice Kenyon halted the trial, announcing to the court that the case 'was clearly an acquittal' and that 'the prisoner, for his own sake, and for the sake of society at large, must not be discharged' (Walker, 78). The significance of Hadfield's acquittal in the evolving jurisprudence of criminal intent remains in question because there is no way of knowing whether the court found most persuasive Erskine's deft application of the defendant's delusory ideas to the attempted regicide, or the plain evidence of head trauma manifest in the still detectable sabre wounds to Hadfield's scalp. Nevertheless, Erskine succeeded in introducing the first form of partial insanity into the English criminal trial, challenging the notion that total derangement alone merited an acquittal. The verdict also had a lasting effect on the treatment of future insanity defendants. Prior to this case, defendants acquitted on the grounds of mental derangement were simply released to their families, their parish, or, most often, to no one in particular. Following the Hadfield verdict, parliament hastily passed the 'Criminal Lunatics Act' of 1800, mandating that defendants acquitted on the grounds of insanity must be kept in strict custody until 'His Majesty's pleasure be known'. After Hadfield, the special verdict 'not guilty by reason of insanity' carried automatic and indefinite commitment to some sort of institution: one could be acquitted of a crime and still face life confinement, as Hadfield's experience vividly demonstrates. 
Following his acquittal Hadfield remained locked in a cell for most of the remaining forty-one years of his life, an incarceration interrupted only for a short time when he escaped from Bethlem Hospital to be captured in Dover as he was about to flee to France. Subsequently taken to Newgate prison, Hadfield was finally transferred to the newly opened criminal department at Bethlem, where he averred 'the loss of liberty was worse than death' (Moran, 516). He died there of tuberculosis on 23 January 1841 aged sixty-nine. 
Although Hadfield's acquittal did not result in a courtroom precedent to rival the 1843 McNaughtan rules, the introduction of delusion into courtroom testimony has had far-reaching, although perhaps not immediately obvious, effects. Erskine's invitation to the jury to broaden its conception of insanity to consider not just the beastly histrionics of raving mania, but the quietly methodical consequence of impelling ideas, blurred the lines separating total from partial insanity. Hadfield saw the world through a lens so profoundly distorted by a ruling delusion that even the act of regicide was not a moral wrong. Indeed, it was a moral duty. In consequence, jurors over the past two centuries have faced the dilemma of assigning criminality to an act that to any sane person would seem an unambiguous legal wrong, but which to the profoundly deluded represented no moral wrongdoing at all. 


@@@@@


doc= 41014


Baillie, Donald Macpherson (1887-1954), Church of Scotland minister and theologian, was born on 5 November 1887 in the Free Church manse at Gairloch, Ross-shire, the second son of the Revd John Baillie (1829-1891), Free Church minister of Gairloch, and his wife, Annie Macpherson (died 1932). After her husband's death Annie Baillie almost single-handedly brought up her three boys, John, Donald, and Peter, in a rigidly Calvinist atmosphere, determined that all three were destined to be ministers. The youngest, Peter, was allowed to become a medical missionary but was drowned soon after his arrival in India. Donald and his brother, John Baillie (1886-1960), learned from discussions with their mother around the family table to delight in rigorous thinking, but as they encountered a broader and more humane atmosphere in school and university they came increasingly to question scholastic Calvinism and sought a theology which was more open, vibrant, and engaged. 
After education at Inverness Royal Academy, Donald took a first in philosophy at the University of Edinburgh, and then proceeded to study theology at New College, Edinburgh, and at Marburg and Heidelberg universities, where he studied under Wilhelm Herrmann, Adolph Julicher, Ernst Troeltsch, and Johannes Weiss. He acted for three years as assistant to James Seth, the professor of moral philosophy in Edinburgh University, and was ordained in the United Free Church of Scotland in 1918. He held the charges of Bervie (1918-23), St John's, Cupar (1923-30), and St Columba's, Kilmacolm (1930-34), before being appointed in 1934 to a newly established chair in systematic theology at St Mary's College, University of St Andrews. He held this post until his death, and established a formidable reputation as an attractive teacher of great ability and a preacher of clarity, depth, and spirituality. 
In addition to translations of F. D. E. Schleiermacher and various articles Baillie published only two books during his lifetime. His Kerr lectures, 'Faith in God and its Christian Consummation' (1927; 2nd edn with introduction by John MacIntyre, 1964) was a fine example of the Kantian-Ritschlian tradition of protestant liberal theology, and also showed a singular openness to the new 'theology of crisis', particularly as represented by Emil Brunner, and to the concept of paradox, which was to play an important role in Baillie's later theology. His 'God was in Christ: an Essay on Incarnation and Atonement' (1948) quickly became a theological classic and has had sustained influence on modern Christology in the English-speaking world, particularly with its suggestion that the 'paradox of grace' -- 'Not I, but Christ in me' illumines the incarnation. 'A toned down Christology', Baillie affirmed, 'is absurd. It must be all or nothing -- all or nothing on both the divine and human side' (p. 132). His robust yet modest writing was characterized by great lucidity, honesty, and spiritual depth. Like his brother John he represented the best of the Scottish tradition of liberal evangelical theology, combining reverence with intellectual rigour and passion. 
Baillie's posthumous publications -- 'The Theology of the Sacraments and other Papers' (1957), and two volumes of sermons, 'To whom Shall we Go?' (1955) and 'Out of Nazareth: a Selection of Sermons and Lectures' (1958) -- served to consolidate his international reputation as a creative and constructive theologian. 
Donald Baillie played a leading role in the ecumenical movement in Scotland, where he was convener of the Church of Scotland inter-church relations committee. He was prominent in the faith and order commission of the World Council of Churches, particularly at its Edinburgh 1937 and Lund 1952 conferences. He chaired the commission on intercommunion which reported to the 1952 World Conference on Faith and Order at Lund, and he was highly regarded as one of the most eirenic and constructive of ecumenical theologians. 
A lifelong bachelor, with a wide and varied circle of friends, Donald Baillie suffered for most of his life from asthma, and died from emphysema on 31 October 1954, significantly, perhaps, the eve of All Saints' day, at Maryfield Hospital, Dundee. He was buried on 3 November at the western cemetery, St Andrews. 


@@@@@


doc= 41017


Keeling, Enoch Bassett (1837-1886), architect, was born on 15 March 1837 in Sunderland, the son of Isaac Keeling (1789-1869), a Wesleyan minister there, and his wife, Esther. He was baptized on 16 June 1837 at Sans Street Wesleyan Chapel, Bishopwearmouth. He was articled in 1852 to the Leeds architect Christopher Leese Dresser, and attended Leeds School of Practical Art. Keeling established himself in London in 1857 and was elected an associate of the Royal Institute of British Architects in 1860, the year of his marriage to Mary Newby Harrison (1841-1882). 
Keeling quickly picked up substantial church-building commissions, most notably St Mark's, Notting Hill (1862-3), St George's, Campden Hill (1864-5), and St Paul's, Upper Norwood (1864-6). Relatively inexpensive, freely planned, highly eclectic in their Gothic, these churches combined strident polychromy and unconventional decoration with new structural materials, especially iron. Critics acknowledged their ingenuity, but deplored their eccentricity. Reaction to Keeling's first major secular building, the Strand Music Hall (1863-4), was intensely hostile. Though remarkably innovative, with such features as overhead lighting from a multicoloured glass ceiling, its wild medley of ornament was ridiculed and condemned. Worse still, the Strand was a commercial disaster: heavily implicated financially, Keeling was declared bankrupt in 1865. He apparently abandoned architecture for a while, and quit the Royal Institute of British Architects in 1872, but re-emerged in the late 1870s to design commercial buildings in the City, their functionalism strikingly different from his churches; examples include 18 Tokenhouse Yard (1880) and Tokenhouse Buildings (1882). Combining property development with architecture, he also produced the ponderous apartment block of Prince's Mansions, Westminster (1884-6). But personal problems overwhelmed him: his wife died in childbirth in 1882, their infant son in 1884. Keeling drank excessively, and died at his home, Dunwood House, Paradise Row, Stoke Newington, of cirrhosis of the liver on 30 October 1886; he was buried in November in Abney Park cemetery, Stoke Newington. 
Although H. S. Goodhart-Rendel considered him a 'rogue' architect (Goodhart-Rendel, 251), Keeling's idiosyncrasies were dynamically related to central developments in high Victorian Gothic: this has not saved his buildings, most of which have been destroyed or radically altered. 


@@@@@


doc= 41018


Garcke, Sidney Emile (1885-1948), road transport administrator, was born on 6 January 1885 at 52 Bassein Park Road, Shepherd's Bush, London, the son of Emile Oscar Garcke (1856-1930), founder of the British Electric Traction company, and his wife, Alice, 'nee' Withers. He attended the University of London before starting work with BET. He was invited to join the board in 1907 and in 1908 he married Clare Lorraine. They had at least one son and one daughter. 
BET interests in the west midlands, where they owned or operated numerous tramways, included a bus company in Birmingham which had been experimenting with motors. Garcke was sent to help deal with the problems of running buses in a big city, and when it was decided to revert to horse-drawn transport he persuaded his board to let him transfer the motor vehicles to a less demanding area. In due course this led to the formation of the East Kent Road Car Company, and, more importantly, to the system of 'area agreements', designed to avoid competition, which Garcke negotiated with Walter Wolsey of Thomas Tilling. These agreements generated a closer working relationship, and Garcke became chairman of the joint holding company, Tilling and British Automobile Traction, formed in 1928. His relationship with Sir J. F. Heaton, the chairman of Tillings, was an uneasy one; none the less he supported Heaton's settlement with the railway companies, which prevented them from acquiring control of the major British bus operators. 
Garcke was a member of the first council of the Institute of Transport, founded in 1919, and was awarded the institute's Road Transport (Passenger) medal in 1923. He was also a member of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers. He unsuccessfully contested the Kingswinford division of Staffordshire as a Conservative in the general election of 1929. In line with BET policy, he served from time to time as chairman or director of several of the company's bus operating subsidiaries. In 1943 he joined the board of Dennis Brothers, bus and coach manufacturers, becoming chairman in 1945. When H. C. Drayton succeeded R. J. Howley as chairman of BET, Garcke retired from the board. 
Garcke played a significant part in the establishment of the motor bus industry, and is said to have remarked that whereas his father laid down tram lines, he was responsible for digging them up, as BET moved from electric traction to the internal combustion engine. He was made a CBE in 1941 in recognition of his contribution to the establishment of the bus industry, to which he bequeathed the system of agreed territorial monopolies which the leading companies have sought to maintain ever since, with varying degrees of success. He died at his home, Felhurst, Grand Avenue, Hove, Sussex, on 3 October 1948. 


@@@@@


doc= 41019


Garcke, Emile Oscar (1856-1930), company director and constructor of electric tramways, was born in Saxony. He came early to Britain, and was naturalized on 17 March 1880, but details of his early background and education have not survived. Their outcome was to provide him with a grasp of the commercial potential of electrical power, and his single-minded application to business enabled him to become the prime mover in the establishment of the British Electric Traction Company (BET), of which he was to be chairman from 1911 to 1920. 
Appointed secretary of the Brush Electrical Engineering Company in 1883, Garcke subsequently became managing director, and by the 1890s he had become known in the City for his business acumen, as well as for his command of the new technology. He represented the London chamber of commerce at a conference called by the Board of Trade which led to the passing of the 'Light Railways Act' 1896. This statute enabled tramways to be constructed without the restrictive provisions of the 'Tramways Act' 1870, and thus offered new opportunities for investment, which he was able to exploit. 
Registered on 26 October 1896, BET became the chief promoter of tramway schemes throughout the country. The first to be developed were at Hartlepool, Kidderminster, Oldham, and Stoke-on-Trent; and forty were operating by 1899. Two years later BET was responsible for 124 miles of electric tramway. 
Garcke was to become the object of criticism from the left wing of politics, BET being attacked as 'the octopus' by the 'Daily News' and 'Daily Chronicle', and regarded with animosity by proponents of municipal socialism, including George Bernard Shaw. But the policy of constructing tramways in order to utilize the unused day-time generating capacity of the company's power stations proved successful; and despite some early financial problems BET emerged from the First World War in a strong position. 
Garcke had a sophisticated understanding of business management, and adroitly managed the relationship between BET and its eighty or so tramway operating companies. The latter all had separate accounts, as Garcke was insistent that each subsidiary should stand or fall on its own balance sheet. In essence, BET was a holding company, and Garcke summarized the firm's structure as one of 'independence and autonomy of the separate companies in regard to their own affairs, but solidarity in regard to the general questions of principle and policy' (Fulford, 33). 
Although Garcke's confidence in the electric tramway played such a great part in the growth of BET he recognized the potential of the motor bus as early as 1900, and by 1906 a subsidiary company was running buses in London. However, Garcke conceived of buses as feeders to the tramway network, and the development of the bus companies owed more to his son, Sidney Emile Garcke. The latter, indeed, later remarked that 'I have spent a lot of time taking up the tramways my father laid' ('DBB'). 
Garcke's genius was recognized by the financial world, and after a reconstruction in 1915, under his chairmanship, BET attracted men well suited to carry on his policies. In 1920 he was succeeded as chairman by J. S. Austin, continuing as deputy chairman and chief executive until he retired in 1929, handing the reins to R. J. Howley. 
In 1882 Garcke married Alice, daughter of John Withers, a brush manufacturer; and the couple had at least one son. Garcke was the author, together with J. M. Fells, of 'Factory Accounts, their Principles and Practice' (1887), which was one of the first systematic discussions of cost accounting for a British readership. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Statistical Society, and also became a member of the Institute of Actuaries. 
Garcke's commitment to electrical engineering led him to be instrumental in forming the electrical section of the London chamber of commerce, and he was a member of the executive committee of the Federation of British Industry. He was a member of the Institution of Electrical Engineers, and also founded the Tramways and Light Railway Association. In 1896 he launched the annual 'Manual of Electrical Undertakings', often known as 'Garcke's Manual'. He was a founder member of the Institute of Transport. 
Garcke died of a heart attack on 14 November 1930 at his home, Ditton Meads, at Pinkneys Green, Cookham, near Maidenhead; his wife survived him. The company he founded remained a leading power in the bus industry under the chairmanship of Howley and H. C. Drayton, until J. S. Wills, who had married Garcke's granddaughter, sold the operating companies to the state-owned Transport Holding Company in 1968. 


@@@@@


doc= 41020


Heaton, Sir (John) Frederick (1880-1949), road transport administrator, was born on 18 October 1880 in Bradford, Yorkshire, the son of a warehouseman in the woollen trade, and his wife, Mary Ellen, 'nee' Speight. He attended Bradford Technical College and studied accountancy, taking eighth place in the examinations of the Society of Incorporated Accountants and Auditors. In 1915 he was appointed accountant in the south London firm of Thomas Tilling. Originally 'jobmasters', with a fleet of horse-drawn omnibuses, Tillings had successfully motorized its services by 1912, when it entered into a pooling agreement with the London General Omnibus Company, which limited its motor bus fleet to 150. As a consequence it moved into provincial operation, and in 1916 began to develop a series of 'area agreements' to regulate competition between the Tilling subsidiary businesses and those of the British Electric Traction company (BET). 
It was at this point that Heaton became Tillings' company secretary, being elected to the board in 1921. The family was persuaded to leave the management of the business in his hands, and when Richard Tilling, a son of the founder, died in 1929, Heaton succeeded to the chair a year later; thereafter he was effectively in sole command. 
Richard Tilling had established the policy of collaboration with BET, and in 1928 a jointly owned holding company, Tilling and British Automobile Traction, was formed, in whose management Heaton was closely involved. This made him a key player in the struggle to prevent the four railway companies from acquiring control of the provincial bus companies. The BET board left him to confront Sir Ralph Wedgwood, general manager of the London and North Eastern, and to reach a settlement which, while giving the railways a share of the bus companies' profits, never gave them more than 49 per cent of the equity. 
Under Heaton's direction, Tillings acquired a number of businesses which were not put into joint ownership with BET. He managed the group with attention to detail, in contrast with the hands-off attitude of the BET board to its own subsidiaries. Policy differences built up between them, and in 1942 the joint holding company was wound up and the businesses concerned were transferred to one or other of the parents. The divergence of policy may account for the voluntary sale of the Tilling group to the British Transport Commission in 1948, for $24 million, when BET turned down a comparable settlement. 
Having seen the distribution to his shareholders of the greater part of the British Transport Commission 3 per cent stock, in which payment was made, Heaton retired. He had transformed the Tilling family business into one of the two ownership trusts that dominated the bus industry in England and Wales from 1916 to 1948, and left his mark in the management policies of the industry after nationalization. 
Heaton served on the Inland Transport War Council from 1941 to 1944, and was unpaid chairman of Short Bros. (Rochester and Bedford), on behalf of the government, from 1942 to 1945. He was knighted in 1942. He had a reputation for ruthlessness, and a somewhat abrupt manner, but those who knew him personally saw a man with a sense of humour, and a range of kindnesses that were never publicized. His management style, centralized and authoritarian, remained evident in the industry up to the later days of the National Bus Company in the 1980s. 
Heaton was twice married: in 1908, at St John the Baptist parish church, Kidderminster, to Ethel Irene Roberts, the daughter of a chemist; and in 1927, at Briskley Street parish church, Kent, to Mary Stewart Macleod, 'nee' Thomson, a widow. Of his three sons and two daughters, all but one daughter survived him. His main interest outside business, apart from his family, was his farm at Cam Court, Cirencester, Gloucestershire. He died of cancer of the prostate, on 27 April 1949, at his home at The Firs, Croxley Green, Hertfordshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 41021


Howley, Richard Joseph (1871-1955), transport company director, was born on 9 July 1871 at Rich Hill, co. Limerick, the son of Lieutenant-Colonel John Howley, deputy lieutenant. He was educated at Oscott College, the Jesuit establishment near Birmingham, and at the University of Dublin. He trained as an engineer, and joined the British Electric Traction company in that capacity in August 1899. 
Howley moved to executive duties and became joint manager (with C. H. Dade) in 1912, and was appointed to the board in 1923 with responsibility for administration. He succeeded the founder, Emile Garcke, as chief executive in 1929, and became deputy chairman in 1930. When J. S. Austin retired in 1942, Howley took over the chairmanship, which he handed in 1946 to H. C. Drayton. He remained on the board until 1953. During much of this time he served as chairman or on the board of several subsidiary companies, notably the Birmingham and Midland Motor Omnibus company ('Midland Red'). He played a significant part in the diversification of BET from power generation and traction to become the parent of a large group of bus companies, with interests extending into non-transport activities. 
In his public life Howley was a member of the tramways committee of the Board of Trade, and afterwards served from 1917 to 1919 on the railways priority committee. In 1919 he was a founder member of the Institute of Transport. In his evidence to the royal commission on transport (1929-31) he made his mark on the future of the bus industry. The commission was examining a draft bill produced by a Ministry of Transport committee on the licensing and regulation of public service vehicles, under the chairmanship of Sir Henry Percy Maybury (1864-1943). Howley's evidence led the commission to modify Maybury's draft bill so as to set up 'ad hoc' regional licensing authorities, rather than give the powers to county and county borough councils. Nevertheless his submissions did not neglect the interests of his company, nor those of the larger firms in the bus industry. 
Howley was a quiet man, who never married, but he was noted for his singleness of purpose. He took over as chairman of BET when a long-standing partnership with the Tilling group was breaking up, and he had little sympathy with the policies of Sir J. F. Heaton, Tilling's chairman. This difference of opinion was reflected in the decision of the board under Drayton's chairmanship not to sell BET bus companies to the British Transport Commission in 1948. Howley's influence, both on BET and on the statutory control of the British bus industry, remained significant in the late twentieth century. 
Howley was appointed CBE in 1919, for his war work, and he was awarded the Road Transport (Passenger) Medal of the Institute of Transport in 1924. He died on 2 April 1955 at his home 49 Hallam Street, Marylebone, London, leaving $230,710 gross. 


@@@@@


doc= 41024


Lindley, Sir William Heerlein (1853-1917), civil engineer, was born on 30 January 1853 at 50 Ferdinand Strasse, Hamburg, Germany, the eldest son in a family of four children of William Lindley (1808-1900), an English civil engineer, and his wife, Jeanne Julie (1828-1862), daughter of Martin Edward Heerlein, a Hamburg merchant. He was educated in London at private schools in Greenwich and Blackheath and matriculated at London University in 1869. 
In 1870 Lindley began his practical training as a pupil of his father, who was working on the construction of new waterworks at Budapest. During his father's absence he was left in charge of the work. In 1873 he became his father's assistant at Frankfurt am Main in Germany, and from 1874 to 1879 he acted as his father's representative and as resident engineer there. His father retired in 1879 and Lindley became chief engineer of the sewerage works in the city. On 24 March of that year he married Fanny Henriette Getz (1858-1923), the daughter of a well-established physician in Frankfurt; their three children, two daughters and a son, were all born in the city. In 1882 the direction of Frankfurt's water supply was also entrusted to Lindley and later in the same year his appointment as the city's chief engineer meant that all its engineering works came under his direction. 
During twenty-two years in this post Lindley carried out numerous works: these included construction work on the harbour, new quay walls along the river and embankments with storehouses, and also the conversion of the old stone Main-Neckar railway bridge into a road bridge (the Wilhelmsbrucke). In the course of the latter project he developed a system of boring numerous small tube wells down into fine sand in a long row and coupling them to a suction pipe, and this was subsequently widely copied. Lastly, in 1889, he designed a new electrical supply works. In 1891 he served as a member of the commission of experts, and also as president of the jury at the great Frankfurt Electro-Technical Exhibition. 
At the end of 1879 Lindley had also taken over his father's civil engineering practice outside Frankfurt and abroad, extending to at least forty-eight cities. In this capacity he was responsible for the design of waterworks for Moscow, Tiflis, Trieste, Jassy, Bucharest, Craiova, Ploesti, Pitesti, and Warsaw, but only the last four were actually built. He was also consulted as to the water supply of Vienna, Amsterdam, Dorpat, Kovno (Kaunas), Lodz, and St Petersburg. Designs for drainage systems were also prepared and executed in Prague, Wurzburg, Mannheim, Tolz, Hanau, Homburg, Elberfeld, Samara, Ploesti, and WLocLawek. 
Lindley was a prominent figure in the engineering profession. President of the German commission on electric stray currents and of the standardization committee of the German Gas and Water Engineers, he also represented Germany in the international pipe-threads standardization committee. Other bodies on which he served included the commission for the regulation of the Danube and the German commission of the government board of health. Appreciation of the value of his work was shown by the presentation to him of diplomas at technological exhibitions in Turin (1890), Dijon (1893), Chicago (1893), and Lwow (Lemberg) (1894). In 1893 he was made a knight of the iron crown of Austria, and in 1894 the order of the Corona d'Italia was conferred on him. His professional expertise was also recognized in Britain. He served on the royal commission on canals and waterways in 1906, and was honoured with a knighthood in 1911. 
Lindley became a member of thirty-two prestigious organizations, including the Institution of Civil Engineers (1878), the French Society of Sanitary Engineers (1897), and the Society of German Gas and Water Engineers. In 1914 the University of Darmstadt presented him with the honorary degree of doctor of engineering. Lindley's last great undertaking was the construction of a water supply system in the city of Baku in the Caucasus. These works were completed in February 1917, just before the outbreak of the Russian revolution, and led to his being presented with the freedom of Baku. In July 1917 he returned to London. He died at his home, 74 Hazlewell Road, Putney, on 30 December 1917. He was buried at Putney Vale cemetery, on 2 January 1918. 


@@@@@


doc= 41029


Barr, Amelia Edith (1831-1919), novelist, was born on 29 March 1831 in Ulverston, Lancashire, the daughter of Mary Singleton ('c'.1806- 'c'.1858) and William Henry Huddleston (died 'c'.1863), a Methodist minister. Her father's vocation required the family to move frequently; she spent her early childhood in Shipley, Yorkshire, began school at Penrith in Cumberland, moved to Ripon, Yorkshire, and then to Castletown, on the Isle of Man. It was while living in Castletown, she recalled in her autobiography, 'All the Days of my Life' (1913), that 'I began to seriously try to write' (Barr, 58). At sixteen, when her father lost his independent fortune through a friend's fraud, she went as a teacher to a boarding-school in Downham Market, Norfolk. The family fortunes were partially restored a few months later by a gift of property from her mother's uncle, but upon seeing her father, not her mother, draw the first rents to cover his losses, she learned the lesson that a married woman's property was not her own. 
Determined to support herself, Amelia Huddleston returned to teaching; when the school employing her failed, she entered the normal school at Glasgow, leaving after a few months to marry, on 11 July 1850, Robert Barr (died 1866), a local businessman. When Barr's woollen mills failed, she urged him to emigrate, and they sailed for New York city, arriving in September 1853. They first established themselves in Chicago, Illinois, where she opened a school for girls; leaving hurriedly after her husband made enemies, they paused in Memphis, Tennessee, before moving on to Texas, finally settling in Austin. She moved to Galveston, Texas, in 1866 with her husband and five surviving children (she had already lost a daughter in Chicago and two more children in Austin), where almost immediately Robert Barr, her two sons, and another newborn boy died of yellow fever. 
With three daughters to support, Amelia Barr returned to New York in 1868, where she at first made her living as a teacher. Encouraged by one of her employers, who told her 'If you can write, you can live' (Barr, 311), and by Henry Ward Beecher, whom she had met briefly years before in England, she began placing stories in magazines. She confined herself to essays and stories for more than a decade before publishing her first novel, 'Jan Vedder's Wife' (1885), which firmly launched her career as a writer of popular historical romances set in England and the United States. Among her more than sixty other books were 'The Bow of Orange Ribbon: a Romance of New York' (1886), 'The Maid of Maiden Lane' (1900), and 'Remember the Alamo' (1888), the latter surviving to inspire a film in the 1960s starring John Wayne. As a reviewer of 'Bernicia' (1895) observed, she had found a formula and, 'standing always well within its clearly defined lines, continue[d] to give out the white bread and cream which a large public has learned to expect and to enjoy' ('The Bookman', 167). The formula's steady proceeds allowed her to maintain a country house, Cherry Croft, at Cornwall-on-Hudson, New York. A heat stroke in July 1918 proved to be her final illness; Amelia Barr died on 10 March 1919 in Richmond Hill, Long Island, New York, and was buried on 13 March in Sleepy Hollow cemetery, near Tarrytown, New York. 


@@@@@


doc= 41030


Holme, (Edith) Constance (1880-1955), novelist and short-story writer, was born on 7 October 1880 at Owlet Ash, Milnthorpe, Westmorland, the youngest of the fourteen children of John Holme (1829-1905), land agent and, after his retirement in 1880, local magistrate and deputy lord lieutenant of Westmorland, and his wife, Elizabeth Cartmel (1836-1931), whose parents owned land in nearby Farleton. Constance Holme's parents were both of long-established northern stock. John Holme represented the third generation of a family branch which had settled in Milnthorpe in the late eighteenth century and had acted since then as land agents for the nearby Dallam Tower estate. Both her parents were impressively handsome and had a local reputation for stand-offishness, John Holme being an intimidating figure to the village children. Constance Holme inherited some of their looks and some of their remoteness: a photograph taken when she was eighteen shows a clear-eyed, long-nosed, sensitive-lipped face narrowing to a dimpled, rather weak chin. She loved and admired both her parents and in middle life made periodic visits to Somerset House to trace her ancestry. 
Constance Holme's formal education, of the conventional 'young lady' variety, began about 1888. She was first a weekly boarder at a small Methodist school, Oakfield Place, in nearby Arnside. From about 1893 she attended Buckingham House, a school in Birkenhead, finishing her education at Cedar Lodge, Blackheath, London, a school run on strict lines and Church of England principles. Her few years of education in the south constituted the longest period Constance Holme was absent from the estuary and hill landscape she loved, which provided the inspiration and setting for all her work. She achieved national publication first with a poem in the 'Westminster Gazette' (5 October 1907), but for some years her larger-scale successes were entirely local: two full-length novels, 'Staggie Three' (1905) and 'Hugh of Hughsdale' (1906), serialized in the 'Kendal Mercury' between 1909 and 1911; and a dialect play, 'Duck Egg Dick', performed in Kendal before a capacity audience in 1912. Her deepest wish was to attain success as a playwright, but this largely eluded her: only two of the many plays she wrote achieved performance in London, 'The Home of Vision' in 1919 and 'I Want' in 1931. The poetry she wrote throughout her life, and occasionally published in 'Country Life', is skilful but minor. 
Constance Holme aroused metropolitan critical interest when she was almost thirty-three with her novel 'Crump Folk Going Home' (1913). This and her next two novels, 'The Lonely Plough' (1914) and 'The Old Road from Spain' (1916), were set in the immediate Milnthorpe area and drew their material from the upper- and middle-class worlds of landowning and land agency which she knew intimately and described with both realistic accuracy and poetic feeling. 'The Lonely Plough', its dramatic climax drawn from the great River Kent flood of 1907, established her national reputation as a regional novelist of uncommon force and distinction, and became the book most identified with her name. 
Constance Holme's ties with the world into which she had been born were strengthened by her marriage to Frederick Burt Punchard (1867-1946) of Kearstwick, Westmorland. The wedding, a grandly feudal local occasion, largely attended, took place at St Peter's, Heversham, on 8 February 1916. Like John Holme, Frederick Punchard was a land agent: educated at Sedbergh School, he had succeeded his father in 1906 as agent at Underley Hall, the estate outside Kirkby Lonsdale of Lord Henry Bentinck. Marriage brought Constance Holme an indulgent if far from handsome husband thirteen years older than herself, and a visit in 1917 to Garsington Manor: Lady Ottoline Morrell, the literary hostess who lived there, was Lord Henry Bentinck's sister, and Constance Holme was by now a minor literary lion. Soon after her marriage, she settled at The Gables, Kirkby Lonsdale, where she spent the next twenty years. Though only 10 miles from Milnthorpe, she was frequently homesick. 
Retaining her maiden name as author, Constance Holme published five more novels while living at Kirkby Lonsdale: 'Beautiful End' (1918); 'The Splendid Fairing' (1919), for which she was awarded the Femina Vie Heureuse prize (later won by Mary Webb and Virginia Woolf) in May 1921; 'The Trumpet in the Dust' (1921), arguably her finest work; 'The Things which Belong' (1925); and 'He-who-Came' (1930). All five novels differ from their predecessors in having a tighter, often single-day time scheme, and in concentrating on characters from a humbler social level. This shift of focus is accompanied by an increase in psychological intensity: the restricted, often disappointed lives with which Constance Holme chooses to deal are presented with a penetration, and an austere beauty, sometimes reminiscent of Hardy and Conrad, the latter of whom she admired passionately. 
Constance Holme's novels were reviewed regularly, and with consistent respect, by 'The Athenaeum', 'The Spectator', and the 'Times Literary Supplement'. This respect was shared by the publisher to Oxford University, Humphrey Milford, who not only reprinted all of them in the Oxford 'World's Classics' series during the 1930s, but also took the unusual step of putting straight into the series, in 1937, Constance Holme's collection of short stories entitled 'The Wisdom of the Simple'. This proved to be her last published book, although over the final decades of her life she almost succeeded in completing one more novel, 'The Jasper Sea', which had as its protagonist a village handyman and gravedigger. 
When her husband retired from land agency in 1937, Constance Holme returned with him to Milnthorpe, to live again at Owlet Ash. Recurring ailments (nervous disorders of the stomach, sciatica, neuritis, tetany) made her later years difficult, as did her sense that the world was changing out of recognition, and for the worse. During the Second World War she became more reclusive; on 25 April 1946 her husband died of bronchopneumonia; and by the autumn of 1953 she was living, alone and much shrunk physically, in a single room of the Georgian house she could no longer afford to maintain. In February 1954 she moved to a small terraced house, 13 Orchard Road, Arnside. By a sad irony reminiscent of some of her novels, her eldest sister, Annie, whom she had hoped to be living next to, died at the age of ninety-two, just as she moved in. She herself died in the following year, on 17 June 1955, of cancer. The funeral, attended by fewer than twenty people, took place on 20 June 1955 at St Thomas's, Milnthorpe; she joined her husband in a grave just across the road from the family home she had had to sell. Structural alterations were already in progress. 


@@@@@


doc= 41036


Plummer, Alfred (1841-1926), Church of England clergyman and biblical scholar, was born on 17 February 1841 at Heworth vicarage, co. Durham, third son of the Revd Matthew Plummer (1807/8-1898), vicar of Heworth and his wife, Louisa, daughter of J. D. Powles. He was educated at Lancing College, Sussex, and at Exeter College, Oxford (Gifford exhibitioner; first class in moderations, 1861; second class in 'literae humaniores', 1863). He was fellow of Trinity College, Oxford (1865-75; tutor and dean, 1867-74), master of University College, Durham (1874-1902; 'ad eundem' MA 1874; honorary DD 1882; junior proctor 1875; senior proctor 1877-94; sub-warden 1896). He was ordained deacon in 1866, but proceeded no further in orders. He married on 29 December 1874 Bertha Katharine ('b'. 1852/3), daughter of the Revd William Frederick Everest canon of Truro; they had one son and one daughter, and his wife survived him. He retired in 1902 and lived until his death in Bideford, Devon. He died suddenly (while playing the piano) on 17 April 1926, at his home, Dulany, Bideford. 
Plummer's career at Oxford was good though hardly outstanding, but his election to a fellowship at Trinity suggests that he had made a good impression on his seniors. His subsequent achievements and writings reveal sound and careful scholarship but few sparks of brilliance and originality. There is probably some truth in the story that at Durham, where in addition to college administration he taught theology, he lectured through the gospel of 'St Luke' at the rate of about two chapters a year. A more serious estimate was that his lectures, which explained the text of the Greek 'New Testament' in great detail, were much appreciated by men who cared for scrupulous scholarship, but disliked by those wanting to pass examinations with minimum effort. He was a respected and well-liked head of house, who never sought or received the cheaper sort of popularity. He was widely known by his nickname, Polycarp. 
The impression given by Plummer's career, and by anecdotes of his teaching, is confirmed by his numerous publications. That he enjoyed a reputation as a careful and accurate scholar of wide reading is attested by the fact that he was a founding and long-serving general editor of the 'International Critical Commentary', in which his colleagues were S. R. Driver and C. A. Briggs. Plummer was himself a notable contributor to the series. His commentary on 'Luke' in 1896 was one of the first of the series to appear. The epistles to the 'Corinthians' were originally assigned to A. Robertson, a friend of Plummer at Oxford and Durham, but Robertson's appointment as principal of King's College, London, and later as bishop of Exeter, made it necessary for Plummer to collaborate with him on '1 Corinthians' and to take over '2 Corinthians' completely. His expositions are solid rather than original, and based on detailed study of the Greek text. He kept his Greek scholarship up to date. In the index to 'Luke' there are no references to papyri; in the index to '1 Corinthians' (1911) there are twenty-one (together with forty-six to A. Deissmann and eighteen to J. H. Moulton, the two earliest exponents of the newly discovered papyri). 
Plummer also wrote commentaries, mostly on a smaller scale, on 'Matthew', 'Mark', 'John', 'Philippians', '1 and 2 Thessalonians', the pastoral epistles, 'James', '2 Peter', 1, 2, and 3 'John', and 'Jude'. Some of these were written in retirement, but at that time Plummer turned rather to church history, especially English church history. He evidently hoped to demonstrate and also to encourage the catholicity and holiness of the Church of England; Johann Joseph Ignaz Dollinger, the Bavarian priest and church historian, was an important influence. Plummer's most important books were 'The Church of the Early Fathers' (1887); 'Lectures on English Church History, 1575-1649' (1904), '1509-1575' (1905), '1649-1702' (1906); 'The Church of England in the Eighteenth Century' (1910); and 'The Church in Britain before AD 1000' (1911). Plummer also published sermons and devotional works. 
In addition to his own writing of church history Plummer translated some of the works of Dollinger (who dissented from the infallibility decree of the First Vatican Council). More important was his personal contact with Dollinger, whom he visited, in Munich and at Tegernsee, fifteen times between 1870 and 1889. It seems that he first sought acquaintance with Dollinger as an outstanding church historian, but a friendship developed which led to extensive conversations dealing with many topics -- in history, theology, and politics, both ecclesiastical and secular, especially in Germany and England but also elsewhere. These were recorded by Plummer in notebooks (later preserved at Pusey House, Oxford, and edited by R. Boudens, 1985). Plummer himself presented some of the material in 'The Churchman' and 'The Expositor'. Of special importance are his accounts of the two reunion conferences held at Bonn in 1874 and 1875 under Dollinger's presidency between representatives of the Old Catholics, the Church of England, and the Orthodox church, with some occasional and not very significant Lutheran participation. Important theological and ecclesiastical questions were discussed and a measure of agreement reached, but with little or no practical result. 
Those who knew Plummer in Durham recalled 'the pale-faced, bearded figure, the deep voice, the usual address, 'My dear fellow'' ('Durham University Journal', 24, 1926, 439). 


@@@@@


doc= 41037


Gossip, Arthur John (1873-1954), Church of Scotland minister, was born on 20 January 1873 at Hillhead, Glasgow, the son of Robert Gossip, a newspaper editor, and his wife, Margaret Grieve Mundell, daughter of David Mundell of Inverlaul, Loch Broom. Gossip was educated at George Watson's College, Edinburgh, after which he attended Edinburgh University, graduating MA in 1898. He prepared for the ministry of the Free Church of Scotland at New College, Edinburgh, and was licensed in that church in 1898, serving first as assistant in the Morningside church, Edinburgh, 1898-9, before serving a succession of pastoral calls. The first was to St Columba's Church, Liverpool, where he was ordained on 3 November 1899. In December 1901 he moved to the West United Free Church, Forfar. From September 1910 he was minister of St Matthew's United Free Church, Glasgow. Following service as a chaplain at the front in Belgium and France during the First World War, 1917-18, he served at the Beechgrove church, Aberdeen, from 1921. In 1928 he was appointed by the general assembly of the United Free Church to be professor of Christian ethics and practical training in the divinity school of the United Free Church (known after 1929 as Trinity College). He taught at Glasgow University until his retirement in 1945, his position having become a university chair in 1939. Gossip married Janina (Nina) Henderson Carslaw (died 1927), daughter of W. H. Carslaw of Helensburgh, on 4 January 1900; they had three sons and two daughters. 
Gossip's publications included 'From the Edge of the Crowd' (1924) and 'Experience Worketh Hope' (1944), both of which, along with 'The Hero in thy Soul', were dedicated to his wife. Other works included 'In Christ's Stead' (1925), 'The Galilean Accent' (1926), and 'In the Secret Place of the most High' (1947). He also wrote the exposition of the gospel of 'St John' in 'The Interpreter's Bible Commentary' (1952) and the appreciation prefaced to W. M. Macgregor, 'The Making of a Preacher: being the Warrack Lectures, 1942-1943' (1946). Gossip was himself the Warrack lecturer in 1925 and the McNeil-Frazer lecturer, 1932-5. He received the honorary degrees of DD from Edinburgh (1929) and LLD from Glasgow (1946). 
While Gossip invested the greater portion of his life in an academic setting, as John Mauchline, the principal of his college, wrote of him, 'he remained in many ways a preacher'. It is indeed as a preacher, and not as a scholar, that he is best remembered. Ironically, though he wrote several popular books of sermons he is remembered chiefly for one sermon that emerged from his darkest hour. 'But when life tumbles in, what then?' was the first sermon he preached after the sudden death in 1927 of his wife while he was minister of Beechgrove. When, in 1928, he included this sermon in his anthology 'The Hero in thy Soul', he wrote, 'I have not had the heart to work over it; and it is set down as it was delivered' (A. J. Gossip, 'The Hero in thy Soul', vii). The sermon remains a memorable affirmation of Christian faith in the face of grief. After his retirement in 1945 Gossip lived at Inverton, Kingussie, Inverness-shire. He died in Glasgow on 26 May 1954. 


@@@@@


doc= 41040


Walford, Lucy Bethia (1845-1915), novelist and artist, was born on 17 April 1845 at 11 Brighton Crescent, Portobello, Edinburgh, the seventh child of Frances Sara Fuller Maitland (1813-1877), poet and hymn writer, and John Colquhoun (1805-1885) of Luss, Dunbartonshire, a sportsman, naturalist, author of 'The Moor and the Loch', and former military officer. Her paternal grandfather was Sir James Colquhoun, baronet, and her grandmother was Lady Janet Colquhoun (1781-1846), a religious writer. Other family connections included her aunt, the evangelical novelist Catherine Sinclair (1800-1864). Lucy Colquhoun led a privileged childhood, spending summers either at her mother's family home near Henley-on-Thames, Oxfordshire, at the highland family seat at Rossdhu, Dunbartonshire, or in touring the Western Isles. Educated at home by German governesses, she began reading avidly at an early age and was strongly influenced by the works of Charlotte Yonge, Susan Ferrier, and, in later years, Jane Austen -- influences reflected in her subsequent writing. In 1855 the family moved to 6 Eton Terrace in Edinburgh, but dissatisfaction with the accommodation prompted a move shortly after to 1 Royal Terrace. Here the family entertained members of Edinburgh society, including the painter Noel Paton, who encouraged Lucy Colquhoun to take up painting. Success came in 1868 when she exhibited work at the annual Royal Scottish Academy exhibition, a practice she continued for several years following. About this time she also began writing secretly and her first short piece was published in May 1869 in the 'Sunday Magazine'. In June of that year she married Alfred Saunders Walford (died 1907), magistrate, of Cranbrook Hall, Ilford, Essex, and they moved to London; they had two sons and five daughters. 
In 1874, after many years of work, Lucy Walford published her first novel, 'Mr Smith: a Part of his Life', with the Edinburgh firm William Blackwood & Son. A light-hearted treatment of domestic life, it proved a great success and was admired by Queen Victoria, to whom she was presented at Buckingham Palace a year or so later as a consequence. Coventry Patmore also admired it, and he praised her in the 'St James Gazette' as the equal of Thomas Hardy. Her subsequent works continued in the same vein and included 'Pauline' (1877), 'The Baby's Grandmother' (1884), 'Cousins' (1885), 'Stiff Necked Generation' (1889), and 'The Havoc of a Smile' (1890). Her last novel, 'David and Jonathan on the Riviera', was published in 1914. She also wrote extensively for various London journals, including 'The World', and from 1889 to 1893 served as the London correspondent for the New York-based publication 'The Critic'. By the time of her death on 11 May 1915 at her London home, 17 Warwick Square, Pimlico, Lucy Walford had published more than forty-five books, including two memoirs, 'Recollections of a Scottish Novelist' (1910) and 'Memories of Victorian London' (1912). 


@@@@@


doc= 41041


Smith, Georgina Castle (1845-1933), children's writer, was born on 9 May 1845 at 15 Cambridge Terrace, Bayswater, London, the fourth of eight children of a solicitor, William Meyrick (1809/10-1898), and his wife, Eliza, 'nee' James ('b'. 1817/18). She was a bookish child who suffered from hay fever and asthma. Her father appears in directories as tenant of a series of houses in Bayswater until 1872, when he disappears from them both as householder and as solicitor. It seems likely that he was the William Meyrick who was declared bankrupt on 5 June 1874, and that the appearance of Georgina Meyrick's first children's novel in December 1873, when she was twenty-eight, can be linked to a family financial disaster. Her father, who died abroad, apparently deserted the family. 
Georgina Meyrick's first book, 'Nothing to Nobody' (1873), published, like all her books, under the name Brenda, was a 'street arab' or 'waif' tale in the tradition of 'Jessica's First Prayer' (1867) by Sarah Smith. In 'Nothing to Nobody' a Sunday school teacher reforms an orphan called Daddy Long Legs, and its emphasis on practical philanthropy and its mildly evangelical Anglicanism are typical of the author's work. It was successful enough for Georgina to write another street arab tale in time for the following Christmas, a tale which became her most popular work. First advertised in December 1874, 'Froggy's Little Brother' was a famous tear-jerker about two orphan boys. Froggy works as a crossing-sweeper to support his little brother Benny, but the climax is Benny's saintly death. It remained in print for most of the next fifty years, becoming a staple 'prize book', and was filmed in 1921. 'Froggy' was illustrated by a young solicitor, Castle Smith (1849-1936), whom Georgina Meyrick married shortly afterwards (7 October 1875). They set up house at 49 Avenue Road, St John's Wood, London, and had five children. His forename was Castle, but his wife and family used the surname Castle Smith. Brenda continued publishing fairly steadily: thirteen children's books came out in the next fifteen years, then between 1890 and 1932 another eight books, including two novels for adult readers and a sequel (1914) to 'Froggy's Little Brother'. Although she did not entirely abandon the street arab formula, and almost all her books incite the reader to philanthropy, many of her later stories focus on middle- and upper-class children. This is true of two of the most charming, 'Five Little Partridges, or, The Pilot's House' (1885), about a middle-class family's annual migration to the seaside, which portrays (family tradition asserts) her own children, and 'The Earl's Granddaughter' (1895), about the conversion of an upper-class girl to good works. The last contains a thinly disguised picture of the entire community in Lyme Regis, Dorset, to which town the Castle Smiths retired, and where at her home, the Corner Cottage, she died on 27 December 1933; she was buried in the Lyme Regis cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 41042


Prest, Thomas Peckett (1809/10-1859), writer and playwright, was probably the Thomas Prest who was born on 13 May 1810 and baptized at St Mary's, Marylebone Road, London, the third child and second son of William Prest, blacksmith, and his wife, Ann, 'nee' Pecket. Having been apprenticed to a printer, he became a compositor and he appears in London in the early 1830s, writing and performing songs for the saloons and singing clubs, and working as a general literary hack for minor publishers of the unstamped press. He edited and largely wrote ephemeral penny periodicals, including 'The Weekly Penny Comic Magazine, or, Repertory of Wit and Humour' (1832), 'The London Singer's Magazine and Reciter's Album', volume 1 (1834?), 'The Magazine of Curiosity and Wonder' (1835-6), and 'Tales of the Drama' (1836-7). He also wrote melodramas for the Pavilion Theatre. 
Prest's quest for new material drew him to the work of Dickens, and in 1836 Edward Lloyd, then a minor publisher of ephemera, issued Prest's 'The Sketch Book', by 'Bos' in penny numbers. In April 1837, a year after Dickens (Boz) had begun 'Pickwick Papers' (1836-7) in monthly shilling parts, Prest began writing a penny weekly serial, 'The Posthumorous Notes of the Pickwick Club, or, The Penny Pickwick', by 'Bos' (1837-8). Prest's version freely adapted and expanded Dickens's work for a working-class readership. Aided by spirited woodcuts by the popular cartoonist C. J. Grant, 'this disgraceful fabrication', as G. A. Sala noted, 'had an immense sale' (Sala, 74). At over 850 pages it was considerably longer, and at the time probably sold more copies, than Dickens's original. Prest followed this success with other adaptations, including 'Oliver Twiss' (1838), 'Nickelas Nicklebery' (1838), 'Pickwick in America!' (1839), 'A Legend of the Tower of London' (1840) by 'J. H. Hainsforth' after the novel by W. H. Ainsworth, and a plagiarism of Henry Cockton's 'Valentine Vox', 'The Adventures of Valentine Vaux' by Timothy Portwine (1840). 
These penny serials established Edward Lloyd as a popular publisher, and alerted him and his rivals to the potential of cheap fiction written specifically for the rapidly expanding mass urban readership of the time. Lloyd commissioned Prest to write more sensational novels, paying 10's'. a number, money which is said to have financed Prest's drinking at his favourite tavern, the White Swan, Salisbury Court, Fleet Street. Prest has been commonly credited with being the author of 'Sweeney Todd, the Demon Barber of Fleet Street', but recent scholarship has revealed that the tale was actually the work of James Malcolm Rymer. Prest's most popular single work, the gypsy romance 'Ela the Outcast' (1839-40), was followed by over sixty 'bloods' written for Lloyd in the 1840s. These showed a remarkable versatility in adapting literary genres -- historical fiction after Scott in 'The Hebrew Maiden' (1840), naval in 'Gallant Tom' (1840), Gothic in 'The Death Grasp' (1841), and domestic in 'Emily Fitzormond' (1841), while a novel like 'The Death Ship, or, The Pirate's Bride and the Maniac of the Deep' (1846) combines them all. Possibly as a result of ill health his fiction output decreased in the 1850s, and his last major novel was 'Grace Walton, or, The Wanderers of the Heath' (1857). He continued to write melodramas, notably 'The Miser of Shoreditch' (the Standard Theatre, 1854) and 'Lucy Wentworth' (prize-winning play, the City of London Theatre, 1857). 
Although not possessing a major creative talent Prest wrote vigorous, stylized prose that popularized penny fiction at the moment when an increasingly literate working-class public were tiring of political and educational reading and looking for entertainment. With his knowledge of popular taste and in particular melodrama he adapted middle-class writing for a popular audience, facilitating a significant stage in the development of literature for the masses. He married, on 7 November 1842 at St Saviour's Church, Southwark, Elizabeth Barbara, daughter of George Moss. His wife died in 1843 and there were no children. He died of phlebitis at his home, 9 George Street, Thornhill Bridge, Islington, London, aged forty-nine, on 5 June 1859 and was buried in St Pancras and Islington cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 41044


Moore, Thomas Edward Laws (c.1820-1872), naval officer and polar explorer, was born in Brompton, Chatham, Kent. Nothing is known of his family or youth. He entered the Royal Navy as volunteer of the first class on 19 October 1833, but his early years in the service cannot be traced. From 1839 to 1843 he took part in James Clark Ross's Antarctic expedition as mate and magnetic observer on the 'Terror', and was promoted lieutenant on 4 October 1843 on his return. In 1845 he was sent to the Cape of Good Hope with Lieutenant Henry Clerk RA; they were to make a magnetic survey between the Greenwich meridian and 140 degree E, towards the Antarctic continent, to fill in a gap left by Ross in 1839-43. In the hired barque 'Pagoda' Moore sailed to within 100 miles of the continent, making detailed observations, despite the very poor conditions and the fact that he was working without supporting vessels. He reported his findings very briefly in the 'Nautical Magazine' (1846) and they were described more fully in Clerk's account, communicated by Edward Sabine, in the 'Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society' (1846). In 1846 Moore was sent to Hudson Bay in the 'Prince Albert' to make similar observations. He was elected fellow of the Royal Society on 1 June 1854 for his 'skill, zeal, success in making magnetic observations at sea' (certificates of candidates for election to the Royal Society, 1801-81, no. 42). His sponsors were John Barrow junior, Francis Beaufort, F. W. Beechey, and James Clark Ross. 
On 11 January 1848 Moore was promoted commander and in the same year set out in the 'Plover' to the Bering Strait to seek Franklin and help his search for the north-west passage. On this voyage he earned the disapproval of John Rae for having 'an Esquimaux girl in his cabin for purposes which were too evident' and 'selling spirits to the natives' (Jones, 'Governor Moore', 38). He returned in 1852, having discovered nothing as Franklin's ships had been lost some years earlier, but he did some useful surveying. He was promoted to captain on 15 January 1852. 
In 1855, with no prospect of further commands at sea, Moore was appointed governor of the Falkland Islands. Despite the company of his wife, Eliza (whom he had married at some point before 1854), and his first daughter, and his secretary, Captain John Sibbald RN (who had been in the 'Terror' with him), he found the place desolate, his duties monotonous, the people 'worse than savages', and 'drunkenness the prevailing habit' (Jones, 'Governor Moore', 39). Even the clergyman and his wife were often drunk, and Moore had to suspend the surveyor for insubordination. After a year he could write 'the officers have taken a turn and are behaving better' (ibid., 39) and when he left the islands in 1862 the colony was in a better condition: drunkenness was less rife, thanks in part to Moore's reading room and temperance hall, and a new surveyor and clergyman proved more co-operative. 
Moore was promoted to rear-admiral in the retired list in 1867. In 1871 he had a stroke and he died on 10 April 1872 at his home at 5 Victoria Place, Stonehouse, Plymouth, from congestion of the lungs. He was buried in St George's Church, Stonehouse. He was survived by his wife, three daughters, and a son. 
Moore's promotion was slow, partly for lack of influence and partly because he was retiring by nature. Although relatively little known today, his magnetic observations were a useful contribution to polar exploration. 


@@@@@


doc= 41047


Madan, Falconer (1851-1935), librarian and bibliographer, was born on 15 April 1851 at Cam vicarage, Gloucestershire, the fifth and youngest son of George Madan (1807-1891), vicar of Cam, and his wife, Harriet (1813-1904), daughter of William Gresley. He was educated at Crewkerne grammar school (1861-4) and Marlborough College (1864-70), and won a scholarship to Brasenose College, Oxford in 1870. There he gained first-class honours in honour moderations, and second-class honours in 'literae humaniores' in 1874. He was elected a fellow of Brasenose in 1876, and entered the Bodleian Library as a sub-librarian in June 1880. His college fellowship lapsed at this point, but was renewed in 1889 (when he was also appointed, until 1913, university lecturer in palaeography), and he was made an honorary fellow in 1912. On 29 December 1885 he married Frances Jane ('b'. 1861) daughter of Harrison Hayter. They had three sons and two daughters. 
Madan's grasp of minute scholarly detail, already demonstrated in collections for the revision of Liddell and Scott's 'Greek-English Lexicon', found immediate expression at the Bodleian, where he was at first engaged in the cataloguing of accessions and arrears of manuscripts. His classical training also involved him in the cataloguing of printed books in Latin and Greek (including early books). An awakened interest in printing and the book trade in Oxford rapidly assumed importance in his library work, and he was thus able both to fill gaps in the Bodleian's holdings and to amass a major collection of his own. 
Bodleian manuscript holdings had hitherto been published (in Latin and in great detail) in a series of volumes known as 'Quarto Catalogues'. In 1890 the curators agreed, upon the suggestion of Andrew Clark, a junior proctor and fellow of Lincoln College, who was advised by Madan, that both existing collections and future accessions should be recorded in a briefer form and with an English apparatus. Madan was the principal architect of the 'Summary Catalogue', and worked on it until 1912; three volumes and part of a fourth appeared under his name, from 1895 to 1906, and his work was also acknowledged on the title-pages of subsequent volumes. The accuracy and content of his work are still seen as exemplary. 
Madan's relations with E. W. B. Nicholson, Bodley's librarian from 1882, were at first friendly, but deteriorated to a point when librarian and sub-librarian only communicated in writing. Madan not only compiled a series of detailed notes in criticism of the librarian, but from time to time supplied this criticism to curators, to other members of the university, and, anonymously, to the press. 
Upon Nicholson's enforced retirement in 1912, Madan succeeded him as librarian, at the age of sixty-one. On the outbreak of war in 1914, he was granted an extension for five years, and retired in 1919. As librarian, he continued his predecessor's policies, although bringing to the office greater caution and stability, a characteristically close attention to administrative detail, and the financial prudence which a time of war demanded. In particular, the library's financial deficit was eliminated. The 'Bodleian Library Quarterly' was established by Madan in 1914. He was president of the Library Association from 1914 to 1915. 
Upon retirement, Madan devoted himself to his bibliographical interests. The nature of these necessitated a presence in the library as regular as that of a librarian in office, and it remained so, and was much valued by his former colleagues, until his death. 
Although Madan was somewhat critical of the founding constitution of the Bibliographical Society, he became a member in 1892, and contributed substantially to its first 'Transactions' (1893), with a discussion of bibliographical method, illustrated by a specimen of his forthcoming 'Oxford Books'. One of the society's earliest preoccupations was with the establishment of a standard for bibliographical description, and Madan contributed forcefully to the debate, in which A. W. Pollard and W. W. Greg also participated. In 1909 he followed this by elaborating his 'degressive principle', by which different levels of detail in description were provided for books, according to their perceived importance. He was the society's president from 1919 to 1922. 
It was in his work on the press in Oxford, together with his abilities as a manuscript cataloguer, that Madan's greatest achievement lay. The first volume of 'Oxford Books' appeared in 1895, the second in 1912, and the third in 1931. The completion brought him the Bibliographical Society's gold medal in 1932. Madan was a founding member of the Oxford Bibliographical Society in 1921, and its president from 1924 to 1926. He died on 22 May 1935 at his home, 94 Banbury Road, Oxford, and was buried at Wolvercote. Even at the time of his death, he was seen as one of the last scholar-librarians; he was certainly the last to be equally at home in the worlds of both manuscripts and printed books. 


@@@@@


doc= 41048


Craster, Sir (Herbert Henry) Edmund (1879-1959), librarian and historian, was born at the family seat, Beadnell Hall, Northumberland, on 5 November 1879, the third son (but only child of the second marriage) of Edmund Craster (1824-1898), formerly of the Bengal civil service. His mother, who died a fortnight after Edmund's birth, was Barbara Stewart, daughter of the Revd H. T. Lee, of Dinas Powys, Glamorgan. He was educated at Clifton College and as a scholar of Balliol College, Oxford (1898-1903), where he took first classes in Greats and in modern history, and in 1903 he was elected to a prize fellowship at All Souls College, to which he remained attached for the rest of his life. He married on 25 April 1912 a fellow Northumbrian, Alice Ida, only daughter of Gilfrid George Baker-Cresswell, of Preston Tower, Chathill. They had a son (who became an inspector of ancient monuments) and two daughters. 
The Craster family had been established at Craster Tower, near Embleton, since the twelfth century, and Edmund Craster's Northumbrian affinities determined the course of his historical interests. His antiquarian ability showed itself early in mature and accomplished archaeological and numismatic articles stimulated particularly by the major Romano-British excavations of the time at Corstopitum (Corbridge). Craster's keen eye for detail and ability to discern the historical significance of archaeological or documentary evidence were put to good use as editor of volumes 8 to 10 (1907-14) of the spaciously conceived 'History of Northumberland'. The first two volumes, dealing with the south-east corner of the county, were dominated respectively by the regality and monastery of Tynemouth and by the history of the Delaval family of Seaton Delaval. Craster prepared the bulk of the text himself, efficiently marshalling charter and documentary materials. Volume 10, on Corbridge, was timely after an exciting period of excavation, and equally well prepared. 
In 1912 Craster was appointed sub-librarian of the Bodleian Library in Oxford, working especially on the 'Summary Catalogue of Western Manuscripts', started by Falconer Madan. Craster was responsible for the volume on the more recent accessions (1924), and for those on the collections acquired by the university in the seventeenth century, published in 1922, and (with collaborators) in 1937. Discoveries made in the course of redescribing the manuscripts were published frequently in the 'Bodleian Quarterly Record'. He was promoted keeper of Western manuscripts in 1927 and in 1931 succeeded Sir Arthur Cowley as Bodley's librarian. 
Gross congestion and under-funding made it a very difficult time to have taken charge of the Bodleian. Craster had to see through a programme of library extension that had after prolonged discussion been agreed by the university. This deliberate and retiring scholar, who moreover suffered from a severe speech impediment, immediately showed himself thorough and decisive, good at delegation, and equal to the administrative tasks ahead. His own strong but dutifully understated preference had been for a completely new library on an extendable site then available, but he followed his curators' wishes in overseeing the construction of the 'New Bodleian' bookstack at the end of Broad Street and its co-ordination with the existing central buildings. Designed by Sir Giles Gilbert Scott and built with substantial support from the Rockefeller Foundation, its foundation stone was laid in June 1937 and it was ready for opening by June 1940, though its official opening had to be postponed until 24 October 1946. Craster directed the systematic planning of the building with great skill. His sure touch was seen also in improvements in staffing levels and salaries, in the finances of the Bodleian, and in its catalogues. He retired under the age rule in 1945, and later wrote a 'History of the Bodleian Library, 1845-1945' (1952), a full and perspicacious account notable for its candour when dealing with recent events in Bodleian history. 
In retirement Craster resumed historical work that had been decreased but never suspended during his library career, and he succeeded Sir Charles Oman as librarian of the Codrington Library at All Souls. There too he carried out some much needed reforms, including the reclassification of the books and the provision of a bookstack. At the time of his death, in Oxford on 21 March 1959, he had written much of 'The History of All Souls College Library', which was completed by E. F. Jacob and eventually published (with the text of Jacob's memorial address on Craster) in 1971. 
Craster, who became a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries in 1911, had taken a DLitt in 1916, and was awarded an honorary LittD by Cambridge in 1934. He was knighted in 1945. Several portraits of him by Augustus John exist, but the small carved head forming a corbel on the south exit of the Bodleian quadrangle is reckoned the best likeness of this great figure in the history of the Bodleian Library. 


@@@@@


doc= 41049


Bicknell, Clarence (1842-1918), archaeologist and botanist, the youngest son of Elhanan Bicknell (1788-1861), financier and art patron, and his third wife, Lucinda Sarah (1801-1850), sister of Hablot Knight Browne, was born at Herne Hill, Surrey, on 27 October 1842. Herman Bicknell, orientalist and traveller, was his brother. Clarence was admitted to Trinity College, Cambridge, in January 1861, graduated BA in 1865, and proceeded MA in 1873. Despite the Wesleyan and Unitarian influences in his family background and its liberal and reformist independence of thought, which characterized his own attitudes later, he chose a conventional career in the Church of England: he was ordained deacon in 1866, priest in 1868, and held curacies at St Paul's, Newington, Surrey (1866-72), and Stoke upon Tern, Shropshire (1875-81). 
For health reasons Bicknell adopted the practice of wintering abroad. In 1878 he visited Bordighera on the Italian 'coast of flowers', a congenial setting for a man with wide natural history interests and a particular expertise in botany. Here in the following years he ministered to the religious needs of the large British community, made the Villa Rosa his home, and created the Bicknell Museum. The museum had a dual purpose: to house his books and naturalist collections, but also to provide a meeting-place in which the local community could pursue their cultural and intellectual interests. He included a stage for concerts, and the two large pots designed to receive umbrellas bear inscriptions in Esperanto, testifying to his enthusiasm for an international language. Esperanto appears again on a plaque in Bordighera's English library, built by Bicknell largely at his own expense. A typically Victorian innovator, he was also a vegetarian, an enemy of the water-closet in the cause of organic husbandry, and a spartan devotee of personal ablutions in icy mountain torrents. 
In 1885 Bicknell published 'Flowering Plants and Ferns of the Riviera and Adjoining Mountains', illustrated with eighty-two of his own paintings, and in September of that year he made what was to be a momentous journey to the Val des Merveilles, a series of glacial lakes in the maritime Alps at about 2200 yards along the western flank of Mount Bego. Six years earlier he had made an abortive attempt to inspect the rock engravings there, on which there was little reliable information, but unseasonably late snow had thwarted him. At this second attempt he sketched about fifty of the mysterious prehistoric designs. His curiosity was aroused, but his principal occupation continued to be his botanical work, culminating in 1896 with the publication of his 'Flora of Bordighera and San Remo'. 
In the following summer Bicknell rented a house at Casterino on the gentler slopes of Mount Bego, where he could combine his studies of alpine plants and the rock engravings. In September he sent a piece of incised rock to the British Museum with a report of his discoveries. Increasingly his summers were spent in amassing his collection of drawings, rubbings, and photographs, on which he based his first papers in Italian scientific journals. In 1902 he published in Bordighera 'The Prehistoric Rock Engravings in the Italian Maritime Alps', and a further account of his explorations followed in 1903. The unwelcome news that year that his rented base in Casterino had been sold, and that no other was available, was met with his decision to build a place of his own. All materials had to be transported by mules from Tende. Work began in 1905 and a year later Casa Fontanalba was ready for Bicknell's annual visit in June to 'my beloved mountain cottage and the free life I so enjoy' (Bicknell to Baroness Helene von Taube, 29 Sept 1913, NHM, 92 BIC). 
The pattern of Bicknell's life was now set. Although he visited Ceylon in 1907 to see the island's plants and butterflies, and Britain in 1910 and 1913, his increasing preoccupation was with the innumerable representations of a horned creature or stag-headed god and of typical Bronze Age daggers, and with the strange patterns defying interpretation, which cover so many rock surfaces at 2000-2500 metres surrounding the great peak of Bego. With his assistant Luigi Pollini, Bicknell gradually built up his astonishing documentation of over 11,000 petroglyphs which form the basis of his 'Guide to the Prehistoric Rock-Engravings in the Maritime Alps', published in 1913. By his labours over twelve summers he had focused international attention on one of the major monuments of European archaeology, and he continued to add to the record. On 18 August 1913 he wrote to Baroness von Taube: 'Luigi and I have been camping out for 2 nights, 4 hours away, and again exploring the rock figures... I cannot do quite as much as ten years ago... but I intend to fight on as long as possible, and so help those that come after. (Bicknell to Baroness Helene von Taube, NHM, 92 BIC)' Bicknell died unmarried at Casa Fontanalba on 17 July 1918 and was buried in the cemetery at Tende. Fifty years later the publication of French and Italian translations of his 'Guide' was undertaken by the International Institute of Ligurian Studies, which had inherited Bicknell's museum and its traditions, in this area of historically alternating national sovereignty. To mark the occasion France and Italy combined to honour Bicknell's memory with laudatory plaques on his chalet at Fontanalba and on the rock face at Les Mesches, the gateway to Mount Bego. Nor has his distinction as a botanist been forgotten: a subspecies of the giant knapweed, which is a speciality of the alpine area, was officially named in 1973 'Leuzea rhapontica bicknellii'. 


@@@@@


doc= 41050


Malibran, Maria Felicia (1808-1836), singer, was born at 3 rue de Conde, Paris, on 24 March 1808, the second child of the Spanish tenor Manuel Garcia (1775-1832) and his wife, Maria Joaquina Sitches (1780-1854), a singer and actress. Her elder brother, Manuel Patricio Garcia (1805-1906), a teacher of singing, founded the English branch of this musical dynasty; her younger sister became the prima donna Pauline Viardot (1821-1910). Owing to her father's profession Maria's childhood was peripatetic, and she moved from Naples and Rome, where her father collaborated with Rossini, to Paris, and then to London, where she made a successful debut at the King's Theatre on 11 June 1825, in Rossini's 'Il barbiere di Siviglia'. She had been trained by her father. 
In October 1825 Garcia took his family and a few more singers to New York, where they introduced Italian opera to the New World. Maria was the prima donna, performing operas mainly by Rossini. In 1826 in New York she married a naturalized American merchant, Eugene Malibran (1781-1836), twenty-seven years her senior, probably in order to escape from her tyrannical father. In November 1827 she returned to France, alone. 
Maria Malibran arrived in Paris just when the political and artistic ideas which were to culminate in the events of 1830 were gathering momentum. Her success was immediate. Her remarkable voice and musicianship, and her typically Romantic style of acting -- passionate, frenetic, highly individual -- exactly expressed the mood of the moment. In Paris, where she was prima donna at the Theatre Italien for the next four years, her influence on the Romantic generation -- particularly on writers -- was considerable. As Rossini's Desdemona she became a Romantic icon. She also sang frequently in England, where she was acclaimed as an outstanding singer, but did not have the cult status which she soon acquired in France and, later, in Italy. 
In 1829 Maria fell in love with the Belgian violinist Charles de Beriot (1802-1870). She succeeded in obtaining a civil annulment of her marriage in 1835, and married Beriot on 29 March 1836. From 1832 until her death she sang in Italy and England. In Italy she became the supreme interpreter of Bellini's music, and her final season at La Scala (1835-6) marked the apogee of her career. She spent the summer of 1836 in London, where she was engaged by Alfred Bunn to sing operas -- including 'Fidelio' -- in English. On 5 July, while riding in Regent's Park with Lord William Lennox, she had a fall, which affected her health. 
In September Maria appeared at the Manchester festival. On leaving the stage after a sensational performance on 14 September she became seriously ill; from then on she was attended by three Manchester doctors. But Beriot, losing hope, summoned her homoeopathic doctor, Dr Belluomini, from London. He arrived on 18 September, dismissed the Manchester doctors, and refused to consult them. However, she died in her room at the Mosley Arms Hotel on 23 September. The cause of death was unclear. Immediately after his wife's death Beriot, having given instructions that she should have a simple funeral and that there should be no post-mortem, left Manchester with Dr Belluomini. This created a very unfavourable impression. 
The festival committee decided to give La Malibran (as she was known) a grand civic funeral, which took place on 1 October. All the dignitaries of Manchester attended, and thousands of people filed past her grave in the collegiate church (now Manchester Cathedral). However, that afternoon a letter was received from Beriot in Belgium saying that he now wished his wife to be buried there. Public opinion opposed this; and there was criticism from the medical profession, which considered that a post-mortem should have been held. Homoeopathy was fiercely attacked in the national and medical press. 
When the diocesan court (Chester) granted a faculty to Beriot to disinter his wife's coffin, a group of Mancunians, the Memorialists, lodged a caveat. It was only when Malibran's mother came to Manchester that the Memorialists relented, and the faculty was granted to her. The coffin was exhumed on 20 December, and reburied at Laeken cemetery, Brussels, on 5 January 1837. 
Malibran was dark-haired, slight, attractive rather than beautiful; vivacious and amusing, she nevertheless had an aura of melancholy. She was the most charismatic singer of her epoch, and a charming and intelligent woman. Alfred de Musset's 'Stances a la Malibran' (1836) was the finest tribute to her. 


@@@@@


doc= 41052


Woodroffe, Sir John George (1865-1936), judge and tantric scholar, was born on 15 December 1865, the eldest son of James Tisdall Woodroffe, a lawyer, and his wife, Florence Hume. After completing his schooling in Woburn Park School, Surrey, he studied at University College, Oxford, and was awarded a second-class degree in jurisprudence. In 1889 he was called to the bar at the Inner Temple. 
Like his father, who had been the advocate-general of Bengal and legal member of the government of India, Woodroffe opted to serve in India and enrolled as an advocate in the Calcutta high court in 1890. His contribution to enriching legal knowledge in India was aptly acknowledged when Calcutta University elected him the Tagore law professor for 1896-7 and made him a fellow. The government of India appointed him as the standing counsel in 1902. He was elevated to the bench of the Calcutta high court in 1904, and he held the high office with distinction for the next eighteen years. In 1905 Woodroffe married Ellen Elizabeth, daughter of S. D. Grimson; they had a son and a daughter. In 1915 he became the chief justice of Bengal and was knighted. After retiring from the judicial service in 1923, he served as reader in Indian law for seven years at Oxford University. 
Woodroffe wrote a number of authoritative legal texts on civil and criminal law. With the Indian jurist Ameer Ali he compiled 'Law of Evidence Applicable to British India' (1898) and 'Civil Procedure in British India: a Commentary on Act V of 1908' (1908). Based on S. L. Phipson's 'Law of Evidence', the former contained both explications of clauses of the 'Indian Evidence Act' and commentaries on it. Sir John's 'Criminal procedure in British India (being a commentary on Act V of 1898 as amended up to date)' (1926) was an impressive treatise on both procedural and substantive criminal law in British India. His Tagore law lectures, published as 'The Law Relating to Receivers in British India' (1900) and 'The Law Relating to Injunctions in British India' (1919), long remained standard reference works. 
Like William Jones, Sir John had an abiding interest in promoting oriental learning. With an unusual mastery of Sanskrit he enriched the understanding of Hindu philosophy, especially the Shakta school of thought which believes in the worship of the divine power (Mahashakti) as the Great Mother Mahadevi of the universe. Many of his commentaries on Tantra, a branch of the Shakta philosophy, were published under the pseudonym Arthur Avalon. In 'Shakti and Shakta: Essays and Addresses on the Shakta Tantrashastra' (1918) he demonstrated that Shaktaism was neither irrational nor obscurantist. Sir John claimed this work to be Shakta doctrine's first British account from an Indian standpoint. In 'Mahamaya: the World as Power: Power as Consciousness' (1929) Sir John joined co-author Pramatha Natha Mukkhayopadhyay to show how the doctrine of Shakti offered an alternative conception of consciousness to western philosophy. He criticized the 'racial and credal bias' of those European scholars who used 'exaggerated' Christian notions of 'universal piety and morals' to characterize Hinduism as 'the most puerile, impure and bloody of any system of idolatry'. Instead, in 'Principles of Tantra', part 1, in 'The Serpent Power' (1919), and in the commentaries for the 'Tantric Text Series', he underlined Tantra as 'the great Mantra and Sadhana Shastra (Scripture)' wherein lay the source of fundamental concepts concerning 'worship, images, initiation, yoga'. In his foreword to 'The Tibetan Book of the Dead' (1927) Woodroffe explained the science of death in the context of Tibetan Mahyana Buddhism. His 'The Garland of Letters' (1922) was an interesting collection of studies in Mantra-Shastra, a term commonly applied to Tantra-Shastra. 
Sir John sought oriental knowledge to unravel the racial, religious, and political presuppositions that underlay Britain's cultural conquest of India. Like many orientalists he exposed the basic fallacies within European critique of Indian culture written from a 'rationalist' standpoint. He juxtaposed western materialism to Indian spiritualism, but was confident that the Indian spirit, shaped by ideas and instincts of thousands of years, would assert themselves. Not unnaturally, a work by Kathleen Taylor, 'Sir John Woodroffe, Tantra and Bengal' (2001), has described Sir John in its subtitle as 'an Indian soul in a European body'. But it is doubtful if he could impress upon the English audience his positive impressions of Indian civilization; for 'most hearers found it difficult to follow him in the bewildering mazes of the subject' ('The Times'). However, Woodroffe's glorification of Indian spiritualism was itself a part of the colonial sociology of knowledge. His characterization of the Indian civilization as essentially spiritual and primarily Hindu (Woodroffe, xii) undermined both the material and eclectic aspects of Indian culture. 
Sir John Woodroffe died on 16 January 1936 at the Villa Aurelia, boulevard du Tenas, Beausoleil, Alpes Maritimes, France. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 41053


Hyde, Edward, third earl of Clarendon (1661-1723), army officer and colonial governor, was born on 28 November 1661, the only child of Henry Hyde, second earl of Clarendon (1638-1709), and his first wife, Theodosia ('bap'. 1640, died 1662), daughter of Arthur, first Baron Capel. He was named after his grandfather Edward Hyde (1609-1674), lord high chancellor of England under Charles II, and took the title Viscount Cornbury in 1674. He was first cousin of Mary II and Queen Anne owing to the marriage of his aunt, Anne Hyde (1637-1671), in 1660 to the duke of York, later James II. 
Although he was enrolled at Christ Church, Oxford, at the age of thirteen, Cornbury's formal education took place primarily at the Academie de Calvin in Geneva from 1680 to 1682. He was appointed lieutenant-colonel of the Royal regiment of dragoons in 1683, and his valiant service at the battle of Sedgemoor during Monmouth's rebellion (1685) earned him a full colonelcy and command of the dragoons at the age of twenty-three. On 10 July 1688 he married Katherine O'Brien, Baroness Clifton of Leighton Bromswold (1673-1706) on her mother's death in 1702, a descendant of the Irish earls of Thomond and the duke of Richmond and Lennox, yet with only distant financial prospects. The marriage produced two daughters and a son, who predeceased their father. 
The revolution of 1688 broke Cornbury's allegiance to James II, as he was the first English officer to defect to the invading Prince William of Orange. His sturdy devotion to the Church of England was a leading motive, as was his connection to the protestant court of Princess Anne, where in 1685 he had been appointed master of the horse to Prince George. William of Orange vowed in 1688 never to forget the 'seasonable service' of Cornbury's timely defection ('Correspondence', 2.213-15). Yet, when in 1689 Clarendon and his son urged Anne's right of succession above William's, both William and Mary turned against them. As a nonjuror Clarendon received no offices, and Cornbury's regiment was taken from him. The family now confronted a time of financial distress from which it never fully recovered. Cornbury's sole office after 1690 was as MP for Wiltshire (1685-7, 1690-95) and for Christchurch (1695-1701), where his fundamental loyalty to the crown soon became apparent. 
In 1702 William appointed Cornbury governor-general of the royal colony of New York; later that year Queen Anne added the governorship of the newly royal colony of New Jersey. Well qualified for these posts by military experience and imperial allegiance, Cornbury strengthened the defences and political stability of New York. Fractious New Jersey, often beset by land disputes, was less easily tamed. An opposition party, led by gentleman landowner Lewis Morris, employed slander and Grub Street satire -- newly emergent in colonial politics -- to assail the governor's reputation for financial and moral integrity. Accused of venality, bigotry, and transvestism, Cornbury was replaced as governor in December 1708. After successfully defending his administration and reputation in England and succeeding to the title third earl of Clarendon (1709), he was sworn of the privy council, took a leading role in the House of Lords from 1710 to 1723, and in 1714 served as Queen Anne's envoy-extraordinary to the court at Hanover. He died on 31 March 1723 at Chelsea, Middlesex, and was interred in the family vault at Westminster Abbey on 5 April. 


@@@@@


doc= 41054


Capper, Sir John Edward (1861-1955), army officer, was born at Lucknow, India, on 7 December 1861, the second son of William Copeland Capper of the Bengal civil service and his wife, Sarah, the daughter of William Taylor Copeland. His younger brother, Major-General Sir Thompson Capper, was killed at Loos in September 1915. John Capper was educated at Wellington College and commissioned lieutenant in the Royal Engineers on 2 July 1880; he was promoted captain on 1 November 1889 and major on 1 April 1899, after being employed primarily on military and public works in India and Burma. However, he did also see active service in the Tirah campaign on the north-west frontier in 1897. On 10 October 1895 he married Edith Mary (1868/9-1942), the daughter of Joseph Beausire of Noctorum, Birkenhead: they had one son, killed in action in 1916, and one daughter. 
From October to December 1899 Capper was deputy assistant director of railways in South Africa, and on 29 November 1900 he received a brevet lieutenant-colonelcy. Capper then remained in South Africa until February 1903, commanding locally raised units before becoming commandant of Johannesburg; he received the CB in 1902. Having received his substantive lieutenant-colonelcy on 7 October 1905 and a brevet colonelcy on 28 January 1906, Capper was posted to command the Balloon School at Aldershot on 27 May 1906; he remained commandant until October 1910. Capper piloted the army's first airship, 'Nulli Secundus', in a flight over London in 1907. Having been promoted substantive colonel on leaving Aldershot on 7 October 1910, and after a brief period of half pay, Capper became commandant of the School of Military Engineering at Chatham, a position he held from 7 April 1911 to 28 September 1914. He was then posted to France as deputy inspector-general on the lines of communication as a temporary brigadier-general. On 9 May 1915 he became chief engineer of the 3rd corps, and two months later he became chief engineer of the Third Army, having received promotion to major-general on 3 July 1915. However, on 3 October 1915 he received command of the 24th division. In May 1917 he moved to command the machine-gun corps training centre but on 28 July he took up the appointment of director-general of the tank corps and on 1 September director-general of the War Office tank directorate, having also been considered as a possible director-general of military aeronautics. 
Capper was both intelligent and technologically aware. Consequently he was readily convinced of the tank's potential for large-scale operations. Indeed he was to present a more practical version of J. F. C. Fuller's 'Plan 1919' to the general staff in July 1918, by which tanks would have played a major role had the war persisted into 1919. Unfortunately, however, Capper's poor communication skills and pomposity gave his subordinates at tank corps headquarters the entirely opposite impression that he was unreceptive to their ideas, to the extent that they nicknamed him the Stone Age. Capper was appointed KCB in 1917; he left the War Office in July 1918, before commanding the 64th division in Britain from November 1918 to April 1919, and number one area in France and Flanders from June to September 1919. He became lieutenant-governor and commander-in-chief on Guernsey on 1 July 1920, and retired on 1 July 1925, having been appointed KCVO in 1921. He was colonel commandant of the Royal Tank Corps from September 1923 and a governor of Wellington College from 1928 until 1946. Capper died on 24 May 1955 at the Esperance Nursing Home, Eastbourne. 


@@@@@


doc= 41055


Cox, John Charles (1843-1919), antiquary and ecclesiologist, was born on 29 March 1843 at Parwich, Derbyshire, the sixth of the seven children of Revd Edward Cox (1802-1869) and Anna Horsfall (1803/4-1888). He had two brothers and four sisters. In 1843 his father was vicar of Parwich and in 1849 the family moved to Luccombe, Somerset, where his father was initially curate, then rector from 1856. John attended Repton School briefly in 1858, and continued his education at Somersetshire College, Bath. He entered Queen's College, Oxford, in 1862, but left without graduating in 1864-5. In December 1865 he was admitted as a partner in the Wingerworth Coal Company, Derbyshire, through his uncle, Henry Cox. On 23 October 1867 he married a distant cousin, Marian Smith ('b'. 1840). They had seven sons and three daughters born between 1868 and 1885, and lived at Chevin House, Hazelwood, near Belper, Derbyshire, until 1879. 
Cox remained a partner in the coal company until 1885 and also benefited sufficiently from a generous marriage settlement to be financially independent; he was described in the 1871 census as a county magistrate, landowner, and colliery proprietor. Between 1868 and 1875 he aroused controversy as a magistrate giving public support to a number of radical causes. He wrote several political pamphlets at this time, the first being 'On the Established Church of Ireland' (1868). He was one of the founder members of the Land Tenure Reform Association in 1869. His chairmanship of two riotous meetings in Derby in 1871 and 1873 to which he had invited Sir Charles Dilke led to the lord chancellor's being petitioned (unsuccessfully) to remove him as a JP. He was president of the National Reform Union between at least 1873 and 1874. He stood as a parliamentary candidate for the National Education League at the Bath by-election on 28 June 1873, but withdrew before the poll. He also stood for Dewsbury as a radical Liberal at the general election of February 1874, when he secured 47 per cent of the votes; a local song, 'The Death of J. C. Cox' (1874), commemorated his failure. Much of his energy at this time was devoted towards helping agricultural labourers. He was the most active member of the consultative committee of middle-class supporters of the National Agricultural Labourers' Union, founded in 1872, and developed a close friendship with Joseph Arch, president of the union. With his brother Henry Fisher Cox, he wrote a series of articles for 'The Examiner' on 'The rise of the farm labourer' (1872-3), and the two brothers financed Arch's newspaper, the 'English Labourer', first published in June 1875. His involvement as a JP with the union was raised in the House of Commons on 25 March 1873, and he was summoned before the Farringdon magistrates on 15 April 1873 for obstruction when chairing one of its meetings. 
Despite his early enthusiasm for disestablishment, Cox considered himself a churchman. After attending Lichfield College in 1879, he was ordained deacon in the Church of England in 1880 and priest in 1881. He was appointed curate of Christ Church, Lichfield, in 1880, and of Enville, Staffordshire, in 1883. He became rector of Barton-le-Street, Yorkshire, in 1886 and then of Holdenby, Northamptonshire (1893-1900). Some of his sermons were published, but he was best known in this period for his writings as a local historian, particularly of Derbyshire. His most substantial work was his earliest, 'Notes on the churches of Derbyshire', based on articles published anonymously in the 'Derbyshire Times' in 1871-3, but enlarged to four volumes between 1875 and 1879. Cox was a fellow of the Royal Historical Society by 1873; he was awarded the Lambeth degree of doctor of laws in 1885 for his work on the records of the dean and chapter of Lichfield, and was elected fellow of the Society of Antiquaries of London in 1887. He wrote more than thirty articles for the journal of the Derbyshire Archaeological Society, and was its editor from 1885 to 1891. He also edited two national journals, 'The Reliquary' (1887-1909) and 'The Antiquary' (1888-94). While in Yorkshire he helped found and was first president of the East Riding Antiquarian Society. In 1899, as chairman of the Brixworth Board of Guardians, he gave a paper in favour of old-age pensions -- recalling his long interest in social issues -- to the Annual Poor Law Conference. 
In 1900 Cox moved to Sydenham, Kent, and concentrated on writing. His later works established him as the leading authority on the English medieval parish church, and he was highly regarded for the breadth of his knowledge and the thoroughness of his historical research. A lucid writer in the nineteenth-century discursive tradition, Cox was so prodigious in his output that some of his works are rightly criticized for lacking accuracy and finish. The British Library catalogue contains about eighty references under his name. He contributed to numerous magazines, newspapers, and local and national archaeological journals. He was on the advisory council for the 'Victoria History of the Counties of England' and compiled the sections on religious houses, ecclesiastical history, and forestry in thirteen volumes (1903-8). He edited for Methuen the series of the 'Antiquary's Books' (1904-11) and also wrote several of them, notably 'Parish Registers of England' (1909). He was the author of nine of Methuen's 'Little Guides' to English counties (1903-16), and five of the 'County Churches' series published by George Allen (1910-13). Cox's 'How to Write a History of a Parish' (1879) was one of his most popular works, and reached five editions by 1909. His 'English Parish Church' (1914) was the recognized handbook on the subject for many years. 
Cox loved ancient ritual and the medieval church, and was indignant about the iconoclasm of the Reformation. He caused a considerable stir when he was received into the Roman Catholic Church on 25 April 1917 in the church of St Benedict, Stratton on the Fosse, Somerset, by the Revd Ethelbert Horne, OSB, of Downside Abbey. He suffered a cerebral haemorrhage at his home, 13 Longton Avenue, Sydenham, in November 1918, and died in the Brooklyn Nursing Home, Beckenham, on 23 February 1919. He was buried from the church of Our Lady and St Philip Neri, Sydenham, at Elmers End cemetery, Beckenham, on 28 February 1919. 


@@@@@


doc= 41059


Rose, Sir Philip, first baronet (1816-1883), lawyer and political agent, was born in Wycombe, Buckinghamshire, on 12 April 1816, third son in the family of four sons and one daughter of William Rose (1776-1846), doctor of Wycombe, and Charlotte (1785-1869), daughter of William Baly of Wycombe. Rose's family was civic-minded and supplied several mayors to Wycombe, including his father and his brother William, a surgeon. Rose was educated at Totteridge School, near Wycombe, and grew up a neighbour of the Disraeli family at Bradenham. In 1833 he was articled to a Beaconsfield lawyer, John Charsley. In 1836 he began working for Williamson and Hills, London, and was admitted a solicitor. In 1838 he became a partner in Barker and Rose, which by 1845 was the thriving Westminster firm of Baxter, Rose, and Norton, with a lucrative practice in electoral litigation and railway bills in the 1840s boom. Rose began his own shrewd investment career, and his family life similarly flourished. In 1840 he married Margaretta (died 1889), daughter of Robert Ranking of Hastings; they had seven sons and three daughters. In 1847 he built his neo-Elizabethan mansion, Rayners, at Penn in Buckinghamshire. 
When in 1846 Benjamin Disraeli suggested that Rose become his 'confidential man of business' (Disraeli, 4.1484), it was a definitive step for both. If Mary Anne Disraeli was the 'perfect wife', Rose was the perfect lawyer -- a 'virtuous 'bourgeois'' (R. Blake, 449) and 'type-A' personality whose efficiency, probity, and absolute discretion were precisely what was needed to make Disraeli respectable. Without Rose's management (and personal loans), Disraeli's unwieldy load of debt would have continually impeded his progress. Rose, however, saw Disraeli's potential and its benefits for himself. Gradually he stabilized and managed the creative financing which established Disraeli as a Buckinghamshire landowner at Hughenden with a secure parliamentary seat. In return Disraeli provided Rose with social and professional stepping-stones; he recommended him to influential friends, nominated him to the Conservative Club, and joined other prominent figures in publicizing the Brompton Hospital for Consumption, which Rose founded in 1841. 
As Disraeli ascended, so did Rose. As chancellor of the exchequer in 1852 Disraeli appointed Rose chancery taxing officer at $2000 p.a. This was not wholly recompense for past services; it freed Rose to work on Disraeli's reorganization of the amateurish and blatantly corrupt Conservative Party machine. In 1853 Rose became election manager, unpaid and largely unseen 'Principal Agent' (Stewart, 280) between the constituencies and Disraeli's whip, Sir William Jolliffe. He drew up an initial agenda, found suitable agents, attended to voter registration, and tried with some success to institute central funding. The detailed dossiers he compiled on every constituency between 1855 and 1859 were the basis for improved Conservative election strategy in the 1860s. He also undertook party liaison with newspapers and was general manager of Disraeli's own paper, 'The Press'. The Conservative government of 1858 made him county court treasurer because, Disraeli told Derby, 'No language can do justice to the labors of Rose for our party' (Disraeli to Derby, 14 April 1858). He then worked closely with Disraeli and Derby on their 1859 'Reform Bill'. Some leaders felt that 'such a man' (Hardinge, 138-9) had no place at their councils and questioned his figures. These were, however, firmly based on first-hand research into voters and constituencies. Possibly his bias 'for the middle class men' (Rose to Earle, Bodl. Oxf., MS Hughenden R/I/B/73a) was simply too democratic for the Conservatives. 
Ironically for a man almost pathologically horrified by corruption, Rose's official party work ended in charges of electoral collusion after Disraeli's secretary, Ralph Earle, withdrew from Berwick in 1859. The subsequent inquiry cleared Earle, Rose, and Disraeli, but Rose had already resigned. He continued unofficial research and electioneering, but expanded into a more congenial area, international finance, where he invested profitably for himself and his clients, including Disraeli (under Rose's name). He travelled widely and negotiated foreign bond issues, such as an 1865 conversion of the Turkish debt (known as the 'fly paper' bonds), and he liked to recount how he suggested purchase of the Suez Canal to Disraeli eighteen months before the 1875 coup. In 1868 he helped found the first investment trust, the Foreign and Colonial Government Trust, and the Association (later Corporation) of Foreign Bondholders, while serving on the boards of many City companies. In 1872 he strongly dissociated himself from his partners' decision to act for the notorious Tichborne claimant, and in the autumn retired from the firm to concentrate on his companies and work with the French financier Emile d'Erlanger. His relationship with Disraeli was now very close; in 1870, during one of Rose's recurrent collapses from overwork, Disraeli wrote anxiously, 'I have no friend dearer to me than yourself' (Disraeli to Rose, 20 Oct 1870, Bodl. Oxf., MS Hughenden R/I/A/239). Disraeli got posts and promotions for Rose's sons and sons-in-law, while Rose managed litigation and finance and supported 'the Chief' through his bereavement of sister (1859), brother (1868), and wife (1872). One of Disraeli's first creations in his second administration (1874) was a baronetcy for Rose, a formal recognition of his party services but also a personal gesture of gratitude, 'Fancy', Rose wrote to Montagu Corry, 'such an honor for such an 'umble individual' (Rose to Corry, 4 June 1875, Bodl. Oxf., MS Hughenden B/XX/R/74). 
Disraeli's death in 1881 left one last task, the sorting of Disraeli's papers. Rose's notes often provide valuable personal perspectives, but as keeper of the flame he was positively incendiary. He burnt many papers, mainly on financial matters, and 'removed' others which he thought scandalous. He only reluctantly agreed, for example, not to destroy correspondence on Disraeli's sexual affairs, and a brief summary replaced letters about Disraeli's involvement with the gaming debts of Derby's younger brother. Rose died of long-standing chest and respiratory problems at his home, 1 Cromwell Road, Kensington, on 17 April 1883, two days before Disraeli's statue was unveiled in Parliament Square, and was buried at St Margaret's Church, Tyler's Green, Buckinghamshire, on 21 April. 
Rose's eldest son, 


@@@@@


doc= 41062


Baker, Mary (bap. 1791, d. 1864), impostor, enjoyed a brief period of celebrity beginning when, on Good Friday 1817, a young woman wearing a black turban and speaking an unknown language was found wandering in Almondsbury, north-east of Bristol. Her black hair was long and thick, she had large brown eyes, full lips, and very white teeth, and she aroused the sympathy of the American-born Elizabeth Worrall, wife of the town clerk of Bristol, who had rented the local manor house, Knole Park. The girl became excited when she was shown pictures of China, and when she was offered a bed for the night at The Bowl inn she identified a drawing of a pineapple with the word 'ananas'. Mrs Worrall's husband, Samuel, known as 'Devil' Worrall and a notorious drunkard, then intervened, declaring that the young woman was a beggar and must be taken to Bristol and tried for vagrancy. It was during her brief imprisonment there that she was identified by a Portuguese sailor, Manuel Enes, who claimed to understand her language: she came from an island called Javasu, had been kidnapped by pirates, and had managed to jump overboard in the Bristol Channel. She was a princess, and her name was Caraboo. 
There followed a triumphant summer at Knole. Surrounded by admirers, Caraboo provided examples of the written language of Javasu, performed an exotic war dance involving a gong, showed great skill in archery, cooked a chicken curry, and swam naked in the lake. She had to contend with a Greek manservant who believed her to be a fraud, and was once woken in the middle of the night by shouts of 'Fire!' She betrayed no sign of alarm. Her authenticity was proved beyond question by Dr Wilkinson, a polymath from Bath who gave subscription lectures on everything from electricity to washable wallpaper. He considered that incisions on the back of her head could have been made only by oriental surgeons. By showing her Edmund Fry's 'Pantographia', a manual of languages, he identified her native dialect as Rejang, spoken in Sumatra. Samuel Worrall, keen to inspire confidence in his private Tolzey Bank, welcomed the presence of a royal visitor, and authorized Wilkinson to publish his findings in the newspapers, asking for any further information about the princess. 
Information was provided almost immediately by a Mrs Neale, who ran a boarding-house in Bristol. The 'Princess Caraboo' was in fact Mary Willcocks, the daughter of Thomas Willcocks, a cobbler from Witheridge in Devon. For a short time she was internationally famous, and there was much merriment at the expense of Dr Wilkinson, Mrs Worrall, and her husband, whose bank shortly afterwards collapsed. 
Mary Willcocks had been baptized in Witheridge church on 23 November 1791 and had suffered as a child from rheumatic fever. Since then, according to her father, she had 'never been right in the head'. Always a tomboy, she had left the village when she was nineteen, lived rough on the road, and arrived in London very ill. After a crude cupping operation in a poorhouse hospital that left the scars found by Dr Wilkinson, she had worked as a nursemaid for a family in Clapham, telling the children wonderful stories. She had become fascinated by Hebrew prayers and by the Jewish family next door, and was sacked for attending a Jewish wedding without her employers' permission. Thereafter she succeeded in getting herself admitted to a Magdalen hospital, a home for fallen women, having admired the uniform brown dresses and straw hats of the inmates; when her innocence was discovered, she was expelled. She drifted north across the river to jobs in Smithfield and Islington, and may, as she claimed, have travelled to France: she certainly spoke a smattering of French. She became pregnant, and hired a cab from the Bay Tree in Tottenham Court Road, where she was working, to a secret address where the child was born. After a short time in the workhouse, she took it to the foundling hospital, claiming first that the father was an Exeter bricklayer named John Edward Baker, and then a Frenchman that she had met in a bookshop. The child died, and she again took to the road, travelling with Gypsies, whose language and rituals are recognizable in Princess Caraboo's performance at Knole. Her appearance at Almondsbury followed a period of begging in Bristol. Seeing the success of Breton girls in their traditional headdresses, she made herself a turban and pretended to be French. Taken to the French consul, she claimed to be Spanish. Invited to meet a Spanish cook, she had been reduced to talking what she called her 'lingo'. 
After Caraboo's exposure, Mrs Worrall paid Mary Willcocks's passage to America under the supervision of two Moravian sisters. She arrived in Philadelphia to find herself famous, and was persuaded by a showman called Sanders to appear at the Washington Hall as 'Princess Carraboo', dancing and speaking her language. The show was not a success, and in her last letter to Mrs Worrall, written in November 1817, she was in New York, complaining of the horrors of celebrity. She appears to have remained in Philadelphia until 1824, when she returned to London and exhibited herself in New Bond Street as Princess Caraboo, again without much success. She may then have visited the south of France and Spain, but was back in Bedminster, south of the river in Bristol, in 1828, where she was married. She used her cousin's name, Burgess, and described herself as a widow. Her husband, oddly enough, was called Richard Baker, and they had one daughter born the following year. For the next thirty years she supplied leeches to the Bristol Infirmary, respectable, genteel, and apparently embarrassed (as when children ran after her calling 'Caraboo!') by her earlier notoriety. She fell dead in Mill Street, Bedminster, on Christmas eve 1864, and was buried in Hebron Road burial-ground. Her daughter, Mary, carried on the business, living alone in Bedminster in a house full of cats until her death in a fire in February 1900. 


@@@@@


doc= 41067


Helena, Princess (1846-1923), was born Helena Augusta Victoria in London at Buckingham Palace on 25 May 1846, the third daughter and fifth child of Queen Victoria and Prince Albert. Her pet name in the family throughout her life was Lenchen. A lively child, fearless and inclined to be a tomboy, she tended to quell any brotherly teasing with a swift punch on the nose and gained a reputation for being lively, outspoken, and awkward. Countess Blucher, a close friend of the family, once regretted that 'She is wanting in 'charm'' (Battiscombe, 76). Like her sisters she was educated at home, and studied history, modern languages, and domestic arts. 
On 5 July 1866 Helena married Prince (Frederick) Christian of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Augustenburg (1831-1917), in the private royal chapel at Windsor, Berkshire. At first they made their home at Frogmore House, Windsor -- a gift from Queen Victoria -- and they then moved to Cumberland Lodge nearby, six years later. After the queen's death in 1901 they were also given a London residence, Schomberg House, in Pall Mall. 
The eldest of their five children, Prince Christian Victor (1867-1900), was the first member of the royal family to attend school (Wellington College) instead of being educated privately by a tutor at home. He served with the army in the Asante kingdom and in the South African War, and died of enteric fever at Pretoria. Their second son, Prince Albert (1869-1931), was brought up in Germany as heir to the duchy of Schleswig-Holstein; he was obliged to enter the German army, though his refusal to fight against his mother's country during the First World War was respected. The third son, Harold, born in 1876, lived for only eight days. Their daughters Princess Helena Victoria (1870-1948) and Princess Marie Louise (1872-1956) both supported their parents tirelessly in their charity work in hospitals and the Young Women's Christian Association. Marie Louise was the only child to marry, but her childless union in 1891 with Prince Aribert of Anhalt was dissolved in 1900. 
Helena devoted much time and effort to charitable causes. She set up and helped to supervise a holiday house for deprived and handicapped London children near Cumberland Lodge, and she was a founder member of the Red Cross. Her daughters helped to roll bandages for the wounded of the Russo-Turkish War in 1877, and she was active in voluntary work during the First World War. In 1872 she became founding president of the School of Art Needlework, later the Royal School of Needlework, set up to provide employment for women. For some years she was president of the Royal British Nurses' Association, in which capacity she was bold enough to go against the advice of Florence Nightingale. She actively supported the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children; was for years a regular district visitor in the parish of Holy Trinity, Windsor; and took a keen interest in the Eton Mission at Hackney Wick, east London. On one occasion she enjoined a meeting of the Ladies' Association for the Care of Friendless Girls not to defer to her -- 'you must try not to mind me at all' (Prochaska, 115) -- but she was far from being a background presence in her endeavours and presided over committee meetings with a sense of leadership that befitted Queen Victoria's daughter. 
In 1884 Helena wrote a foreword to an edition of the letters to Queen Victoria of her late sister Alice, grand duchess of Hesse and by Rhine (1843-1878), prefaced with a biographical sketch by Dr Karl Sell. A revised edition was published in 1885 in which Sell's text was replaced by a memoir of Alice by Helena herself. Some three years later she translated and wrote an introduction to a new edition of the memoirs of Wilhelmina, margravine of Bayreuth, sister of Frederick the Great, and also in due course an edition of the margravine's correspondence with Voltaire. She loved music and was an accomplished pianist; as a girl she had played duets with the conductor and pianist Charles Halle, and artists such as Jenny Lind and Clara Butt were among her personal friends. 
In appearance Helena was plump and dowdy. Placid, level-headed, and businesslike in personality, her somewhat authoritarian spirit was tempered by sound common sense. During a national dock strike the archbishop of Canterbury composed a prayer of intercession, to be read in every church, that the dispute might be settled. At a service in Windsor Chapel one Sunday she picked up the leaflet from her pew, examined it carefully, and put it down, remarking -- in what her daughter Marie Louise described as 'the penetrating Royal Family whisper, which carried farther than any megaphone' -- 'That prayer won't settle any strike' (Princess Marie Louise, 17). 
Helena and Christian celebrated their golden wedding anniversary in July 1916 -- remarkably, in view of the fifteen years' age difference between them -- and she was the only child of Queen Victoria to enjoy such an achievement. Although Britain and Germany had been at war for nearly two years, she was delighted to receive a congratulatory telegram from her nephew Kaiser Wilhelm II, passed to them through their niece Margaret, crown princess of Sweden. Christian died on 28 October 1917. Shortly after her seventy-seventh birthday Helena fell ill with influenza, and died at Schomberg House on 9 June 1923. She was buried in the Albert Memorial Chapel at Windsor on 15 June. 


@@@@@


doc= 41068


Charles Edward, Prince, second duke of Albany (1884-1954), duke of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha, was born at Claremont House, Esher, on 19 July 1884, the posthumous son of Prince Leopold, duke of Albany (1853-1884), Queen Victoria's youngest son, and his wife, Princess Helen of Waldeck-Pyrmont (1861-1922). He was given the names Leopold Charles Edward George Albert, and was known as Charles Edward. Prince Leopold suffered from haemophilia, but a haemophilic man cannot pass the condition to his son, so Charles Edward was healthy. He had one sister and was brought up by his widowed mother. He was educated at Sandroyd School, Surrey, and at Park Hill School, Lyndhurst, Hampshire, and in 1898 he went to Eton College. 
The duchess of Albany wanted Charles Edward to follow his father to Oxford, but her plans were overruled when in 1899 her husband's elder brother Alfred, duke of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha, lost his only son and heir. The duke of Connaught was next in line to the duchy of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha, but refused the inheritance for himself and his son, and, under intense family pressure, Charles Edward was named as heir. At fifteen years old he was uprooted from Eton, where he was happy, and taken to Coburg for his education. Finding that Duke Alfred wanted to separate her from her son, Helen took refuge with her own brother-in-law King Wilhelm of Wurttemberg and found a tutor for Charles Edward, who spoke very little German. Later the Kaiser arranged for him to go to the Leichterfelde military academy at Potsdam to study for the Prussian army. Charles Edward also attended Bonn University. 
In July 1900 Charles Edward succeeded his uncle, and a regency was instituted under Prince Ernest of Hohenlohe-Langenburg. A conscientious young man with a taste for the arts and music, Charles Edward became popular in Coburg. He was less happy in Berlin, where his cousin, Kaiser Wilhelm II, appeared to resent him and lost no opportunity to bully him. In 1905 Charles Edward came of age, and on 11 October he married Princess Viktoria Adelheid of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Glucksburg (1885-1970), whom he had loved for some time. They were happy, and had five children. 
The duke still felt close to his old home in England. He often returned there and was on good terms with the royal family. His eldest son had Edward VII for a godfather, and his sister Alice, countess of Athlone, married Prince Alexander of Teck, brother to Queen Mary, the consort of George V. The outbreak of the First World War found the duke in England and faced him with a painful dilemma. He told his sister he would like to fight for England, but duty demanded his return to Coburg, where people were turning against the ducal house for its English connections. A show of patriotism was imperative. A lame leg from a bobsleigh accident made active service impossible at first, but Charles Edward supported his own Coburg troops on the eastern and western fronts throughout the war and his sympathies became more German as the years passed. In Britain he was denounced as a traitor. Forced to abdicate the ducal throne of Coburg in November 1918, he was stripped of his British titles in 1919, but there was still some sympathy for him in the British establishment, where it was remembered how German nationality had been forced upon him. 
A disappointed man, in the early 1930s Charles Edward was drawn to the Nazi party by its confident militarism, which was strongly reminiscent of imperial Germany, and by fear of communism. He attended Nazi rallies and held several appointments, becoming president of the German Red Cross in 1933 and a party member in 1935. He longed for better relations with Britain: as president of the Anglo-German Fellowship he visited England and was active in canvassing the prince of Wales and other prominent men thought to be pro-German. In this way the Nazi regime sought to make use of his connections. His enthusiastic reports to Berlin reflected hope, but not reality: he idealized memories of Eton and never understood that by the 1930s his boyhood contemporaries saw him as a foreigner. 
The Second World War shattered Charles Edward's hopes of closer friendship between England and Nazi Germany and brought personal grief. His second son and son-in-law were killed in action and his adherence to Nazism deepened. He never acknowledged the brutality of the movement and remained unrepentant even when placed in an internment camp in 1945. He was almost crippled by arthritis and had a malignant tumour on his face: the spread of the disease to his eyes could not be halted. Too ill to face trial for his Nazi activities in person, Charles Edward was found guilty in his absence and fined by a de-Nazification court in August 1949. He lived on in complete retirement and in worsening health, and died in his flat in the Elsasser Strasse in Coburg on 6 March 1954. He was temporarily interred at Schloss Callenberg beside his son on 11 March, and finally buried there on 12 October. 


@@@@@


doc= 41069


Stanley, (Beatrice) Venetia (1887-1948), prime minister's confidante, was born at Easthorpe, Malton, North Riding of Yorkshire, on 22 August 1887, the youngest of the seven children to survive to adulthood of Edward Lyulph Stanley (1839-1925), educationist, who succeeded as fourth Baron Stanley of Alderley in 1903 and as fourth Baron Sheffield in 1909, and his wife, Mary Katharine (1848-1929), daughter of Sir Isaac Lowthian Bell, baronet, industrial pioneer, of Washington, co. Durham, and his wife, Margaret. 
Venetia Stanley had impeccably Liberal credentials, and she was a close friend of H. H. Asquith's elder daughter, Violet. Asquith was often credited, as he wrote in March 1915, with 'a slight weakness for the companionship of clever and attractive women', and by 1907 Venetia had been enrolled in what his wife, Margot, called his 'little harem' ('Letters to Venetia Stanley', 471, 1). She came with Violet to some of Asquith's meetings during the second 1910 election, and the two of them joined him and Edwin Samuel Montagu (1879-1924) during a Sicilian holiday in January 1912. A few weeks after that Venetia was with him one Sunday morning, as he later recorded, when 'the scales dropped from my eyes... and I dimly felt... that I had come to a turning point in my life' (ibid., 532). Letter writing was one of Asquith's recreations. His letters to Venetia became more frequent, and he contrived to meet her when she was in London. Although, unlike an earlier Venetia Stanley (1600-1633), she had few pretensions to beauty, she was superbly equipped to be what Violet called the premier's 'companion in brightness' -- intelligent, sympathetic, and fond of fun (ibid., 6). She showed no great anxiety to marry and settle down. 
In December 1913, as the wrangle on the naval estimates began and the long-awaited home rule crisis neared, Asquith came to discuss politics with Venetia and to discover how much they interested her. During the next sixteen months she heard from him or read a great many political and war secrets, and remained, as far as is known, completely discreet about them all. On 27 January 1914 part of his letter to her was written 'in the full stress of cabinet discussion' ('Letters to Venetia Stanley', 43); but hardly anyone except Margot realized that Venetia had become much more than a favoured member of a small group. During the early summer of 1914 Venetia seems to have grown anxious about the premier's increasing dependence on her friendship, and to have warned him that he could not remain the centre of her life. She was too fond of Asquith and too much flattered by his devotion to make these warnings effective: when she saw how much she had distressed him she would 'make him happy again' by saying 'anything he wanted' (ibid., 558). 
It is practically certain that Venetia never became the premier's mistress, but by the early months of 1915 his dependence on her had become almost obsessional. On 30 March he wrote to her four times. He had no idea that she had already decided to free herself from the relationship. Edwin Montagu had proposed to her in 1912. Asquith, like others, believed that Venetia's refusal then represented her settled will. Apart from being physically ill-favoured, Edwin was subject to a provision in his father's will intended to deprive him of a substantial inheritance if he married outside the Jewish faith. The war had altered her attitude more than the premier realized: the young men were being killed at the front, and the conventions which had come near to barring a religious conversion such as this were losing their force. On 12 May 1915 Asquith was appalled to receive Venetia's letter announcing her engagement to Edwin. This shock may well have affected his handling of the coalition crisis which erupted two days later. The end came at the worst possible time; but, after giving him some years of help and support, this romantic friendship had reached an intensity which spelt danger whenever it might end. 
The marriage of Edwin and Venetia, which was celebrated on 26 July 1915, some days after she had been received into the Jewish faith, proved unhappy, her liaison with Beaverbrook in 1919 being the most notorious of her infidelities. Edwin was almost certainly not the father of her daughter, Judith ('b'. 6 Feb 1923). His death in November 1924 brought little change to her lifestyle; but she retained to the last her courage and her ability to hearten much harassed men. She was one of the few who could lighten Winston Churchill's 'black dog' moods. She died of cancer at her Norfolk home, Breccles Hall, near Attleborough, on 3 August 1948, and her ashes were interred in Edwin's grave there according to her instructions. 
From September 1910 Venetia seems to have kept all Asquith's letters: her collection contained more than 560 items. During the 1920s she complied with requests for selected copies, first from Beaverbrook and later from Asquith himself. These were used in 'Politicians and the War', volume 1, and in Asquith's 'Memories and Reflections', volume 2, both volumes being published in 1928. In both, the source of the extracts (which were much garbled) was concealed. Asquith presented his as being derived not from letters, but from 'contemporary notes'. To the distress of Violet Bonham Carter, Roy Jenkins had access to a complete text for his 'Asquith' (1964), and one was also available to Randolph Churchill and Martin Gilbert for the relevant volumes of their 'Winston Churchill' series. A substantial selection, including virtually all the letters of political importance, was edited by M. Brock and E. Brock and was published in 1982. 


@@@@@


doc= 41071


Alsager, Thomas Massa (1779-1846), financial journalist and businessman, was born on 27 September 1779, probably at Southwark, Surrey, the fifth of the nine or ten children of Thomas Alsager (1738?-1790), a setter in the cloth trade, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Crosby (died after 1790) of Southwark. The source of his unusual second name is unknown, but it may be derived from Massey, a common surname around Audley, Staffordshire, where the Alsager family originated. 
Little is known of Alsager's formal education, though he probably attended school at Congleton, Cheshire, between the ages of five and eleven, returning to London after his father died. Three years later he began a seven-year apprenticeship as a setter in the family business at Southwark, stretching semi-finished cloth to the width then required by law. Alsager appears to have prospered in the twenty years or so after 1800, and his interests grew to include a bleaching works at Faringdon. 
If, as seems likely, Alsager was largely self-educated, the results were remarkable. He was a first-rate scholar and linguist, and it was said that he could perform competently on all the instruments of the orchestra. By 1813, the date of his first recorded meeting with Charles Lamb, Alsager was clearly both comfortably situated and highly cultivated -- doubly qualified to become an associate of the so-called Elian circle around Lamb. His contribution was not on a par with Coleridge or Wordsworth, but he was a congenial host and a good listener, qualities that were much appreciated. He was a good friend to Leigh Hunt when he was imprisoned in 1813. It was Alsager's copy of George Chapman's 'Homer', loaned to John Keats in 1816, which inspired the latter to write 'On First Looking into Chapman's Homer'. It was also Alsager, in 1818, who was largely responsible for persuading William Hazlitt to deliver his celebrated 'Lectures on the English Poets'. On 30 May 1823 Alsager married Elizabeth Roper (died 1845), when she was seventeen. They had thirteen children in all, eleven daughters and two sons, of whom eight daughters and one son survived infancy. 
Alsager's closest friend, also from Southwark, was the journalist Thomas Barnes, who had been appointed editor of 'The Times' in 1817. In the same year, at the age of thirty-eight, Alsager joined him, taking up the post of City correspondent and supplying music criticism from time to time. When John Walter (1776-1847), the chief proprietor, sold some of his shares in 1819 Alsager bought a modest interest in 'The Times'. By the end of the year he was ensconced in the paper's newly established City of London office, from where he began to report and comment on the markets. Alsager 'appears to have been the world's first financial editor' ('Financial journalism'). 
The craze for financial speculation in 1825 stimulated the demand for news from the City, and most of the leading London dailies responded. 'The Times', which published Alsager's 'money article' on a daily basis from 1825, was soon regarded as 'the chief authority on these matters, and became the favourite medium for circulating official and semi-official communications' (Marks, 1904). Alsager's City intelligence was regarded as highly reliable; he had good connections and was close to the Rothschilds. His views, especially as they related to the currency, foreign investment, and joint-stock banking, were rather conservative. 
Alsager became an increasingly important figure at Printing House Square after 1827, when he purchased a partnership in 'The Times'. He was by then already known as the joint manager, with William Delane. 'The Times' prospered under their stewardship until the mid-1840s. It seems likely that Alsager's most important contribution, apart from drawing in financial advertising through the prestige achieved by his money article, was to accelerate the flow of news from abroad by developing 'express' channels of communication exclusive to 'The Times'. 
As his career flourished, Alsager moved to the fashionable West End, first to a house in Mecklenburg Square, described by Lamb as 'almost too fine to visit', and then, in 1830, to 26 Queen Square, Bloomsbury. He also appears to have maintained a home in Kingston, Surrey. His lifelong devotion to music could now be indulged munificently, and Queen Square was the venue for an influential series of recitals which led eventually to the formation of the Beethoven Quartet Society. Alsager was particularly devoted to Beethoven's music, and sponsored, in 1832, the first performance in England of the mass in D. Mendelssohn was one of a number of distinguished European participants in Alsager's musical matinees. 
Alsager's other great interest was the Worshipful Company of Clothworkers, which he entered after completing his apprenticeship, eventually becoming master in 1836-7. Having discovered that the company had neglected its duties in administering various charitable trusts, he undertook painstaking research to clarify the position and, despite some opposition, instituted a system of monitoring committees to ensure that the company avoided further embarrassments of this kind. It was transformed into one of the most efficiently run of the City livery companies. 
Having achieved eminence as a journalist Alsager's demise was especially tragic. He was widely praised when 'The Times' punctured the bubble of railway speculation in November 1845, though at least one rival newspaper claimed that he had a personal interest in creating a bear market. There were also damaging accusations that 'The Times' had puffed the Direct London and Exeter line, in which Alsager and Delane held shares. A year later, in October 1846, Alsager left 'The Times' under a cloud, having been accused by the chief proprietor of misrepresenting the financial position of the printing department. Though this did not amount to more than a complacent acceptance of Delane's creative accounting, the termination of his connection with the paper he had served for almost thirty years was a damaging blow. The depression which afflicted him following the death of his wife a year earlier intensified, and on the first anniversary of her funeral, 6 November 1846, he attempted to take his own life, using a knife to cut his throat and slash his left wrist. He lingered until 15 November, when he died exhausted. The coroner resisted pressure to declare that Alsager had been of unsound mind in his last days which would have spared his family the ignominy of a midnight burial. He was buried at Kensal Green. 


@@@@@


doc= 41072


Austen, John Archibald (1886-1948), artist and book illustrator, was born on 5 January 1886 at 19 George Street, Buckland, Kent, the son of Walter John Clement Austen, a journeyman joiner, and his wife, Priscilla Jane Hooker. He initially trained as a carpenter, but in 1906 he moved to London, where he studied art, including life drawing, and, according to Dorothy Richardson, became 'a long-haired studio exquisite' (Richardson, 22). He was much influenced by the work of Aubrey Beardsley, and to begin with his art was very imitative; his first illustrations were decorative and 'stylish', with a tendency to exaggeration in the drawings of figures. His early work was in pen and ink, but he later also employed wood-engraving and pencil and wash. 
Soon after the First World War, Austen became acquainted with Austin Spare, an artist of unusual gifts and of an even more unusual personality, who produced some fine figure drawings as well as some rather strange 'psychic' drawings. With Alan Odle and Harry Clarke, Austen contributed drawings to Spare's sumptuously produced but short-lived quarterly, the 'Golden Hind' (1922-4), and in 1925 Austen, Spare, Odle, and Clarke exhibited at St George's Gallery in London. In the late 1920s illness forced Austen to leave London and return to Kent, to Jesson, near Canterbury. In London he was 'the perfect aesthete, precious, even in appearance, to the finger-tips; and a trifle cynical' (Richardson, 22), but back in the country he combined more simple rural pursuits such as gardening with his continued artistic work, including teaching at the Thanet School of Art. In 1937 his book 'The ABC of Pen and Ink Rendering' was published by Pitman. 
Throughout the 1920s Austen refined his style and, although his illustrations were still mannered and showed his lingering fascination with patterns, by the 1930s they became much simpler. His illustrations for Disraeli's 'Ixion in Heaven' (1925) may well show his final escape from Beardsley's influence, even though throughout his career he was perhaps more of a decorator than an illustrator and often took an active part in designing many of the books he illustrated. Over his lifetime he illustrated some forty books, among them many classics of English literature such as 'Moll Flanders', 'The Pickwick Papers', and 'As You Like It', for publishers Bodley Head, Oxford University Press, and William Jackson. His humorous, bold, and simple wood-engravings for Aristophanes' 'The Frogs' (1937), issued by the Limited Editions Club, were followed by other work for that publisher, and culminated in a commission to illustrate and design a large two-volume edition of Spenser's 'The Faerie Queene', with wood-engravings made to resemble Elizabethan tapestries. Austen began work on the book in 1939 and continued through the early years of the war, but he died before it could be finished. Agnes Miller Parker completed it after his death, which took place on 27 October 1948 at his home, Rose Cottage, Burmarsh Road West, Hythe, Kent. He left a widow, Ruby Florence. 


@@@@@


doc= 41073


Blow, Detmar Jellings (1867-1939), architect, was born on 24 November 1867 at the Two Ashes, Forest Hill, Sydenham, Kent, the third of five children of Jellings Blow (died 1898) and his German-born wife, Johanna Antoinette Finke (died after 1910). His father was a merchant in the City of London and the family later moved to 96 Cheyne Row in Chelsea; his mother was taught to play the piano by Clara Schumann. Blow went to Hawtreys School before beginning his architectural education in 1883 at the South Kensington School of Art, where he met Edwin Lutyens. Articled for a four-year period to the firm of Wieson, Son, and Aldwinckle, Blow attended the Architectural Association evening classes from 1887. In June 1888 he was awarded the Architectural Association travelling studentship and, in November, first prize in the class of design. 
On commencing his travelling studentship in France, Blow met John Ruskin by chance on 25 June 1888 at the Tete de Boeuf in Abbeville. As a direct result Blow put off his studies at Beauvais Cathedral, and spent the next six months travelling with Ruskin, an experience that was to shape the rest of his career. Soon after his return he met William Morris and Philip Webb, whose principles as inculcated through the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings (SPAB) instilled in Blow the belief that architecture had to be undertaken at first hand, through a direct involvement in the building process. Like Morris, he considered architecture an art rather than a profession. Later he attended the master's deathbed in 1896. Decking a yellow harvest wagon with willow boughs and vine leaves, he drove Morris's coffin to the grave in a waggoner's smock. 
In 1892 Blow won the Royal Institute of British Architects' Pugin scholarship with his drawings of Beauvais Cathedral and Barfreston church in Kent. Before this Webb had introduced him to his first client, Hugh Fairfax-Cholmeley, for whom he built Mill Hill (1891), a small house in Brandsby, Yorkshire. Under Webb's guidance Blow had determined to forsake the conventional architect's office for an itinerant lifestyle and he lived on site throughout much of the construction period, thus embarking on the first and perhaps most significant period of his career, as a wandering architect. 
Webb introduced Blow to work on site for the SPAB also, as a result of which he repaired the church tower at East Knoyle, Wiltshire (1892). His involvement in other SPAB projects included the rescue of the Old Post Office (1896), a small medieval manor house in Tintagel, Cornwall (now belonging to the National Trust). He worked on site at Lake House, Wiltshire (1897), and on other church towers at Clare, Suffolk (1898-9), and Amesbury, Wiltshire (1901). Blow's early clients included Lord Antrobus at Amesbury Abbey and he was on hand when one of the trilithons at nearby Stonehenge fell in a gale on the last day of 1900. Antrobus, then the owner of Stonehenge, worked in conjunction with Blow, the SPAB, and the Society of Antiquaries and, although the fallen stone was not re-erected until 1958, Blow straightened an adjacent leaning stone, all that remained standing of the largest of the trilithons, in 1901. 
Detmar Blow's work as a wandering architect encompassed new work as well as old. Sharing a London base from 1897 with Alfred Powell -- another itinerant SPAB architect to emerge from under the wing of Philip Webb -- the two men worked on Long Copse, Ewhurst, Surrey, from 1895, with Powell taking the lead. From 1897 Blow worked in association with another of their friends, the architect and furniture designer Ernest Gimson. He built three cottages in the Charnwood Forest near Leicester to Gimson's designs. A larger-scaled product of their association, the flint-walled and thatch-roofed Happisburgh Manor, Norfolk (1900), is attributed solely to Blow. 
Throughout this period Blow worked with a band of itinerant masons, two of whom -- Frank Green and James Neale -- had been with him from the start at East Knoyle and taught him their trade. Indeed both men continued to work for Blow into the twentieth century, Green being on site at Wilsford Manor (1904) near Salisbury and Neale at Little Ridge, later extended and known as Fonthill House, near Tisbury, Wiltshire (also 1904; dem. 1972). These new houses represent the culmination of Blow's wandering career: hand-built by craftsmen, they were made of local materials and by local building techniques. Both incorporated materials from earlier houses. 
Blow's timeless way of working was swamped by demand. His meteoric rise as a society architect followed, and partnership with the Frenchman Fernand Billerey in 1905 added a fashionable 'beaux-arts' dimension to the practice's output. Together they undertook an enormous number of commissions in the years leading up to the First World War, rivalling Lutyens in the country house market. Typical of the practice's output were the enlargement and alteration of Breccles Hall, Norfolk (1907; later altered again by Lutyens); Heale House, near Salisbury, Wiltshire ('c'.1910); and Broome Park, Kent (from 1911), for Lord Kitchener. New houses included Horwood, Buckinghamshire (1911). Blow and Billerey worked on many London houses too: their interior at 10 Carlton House Terrace and the enlargement of 34 Queen Anne's Gate both attracted attention. 
On 5 November 1910 Blow married Winifred Gertrude, the second daughter of the Hon. Hamilton Tollemache, in St Paul's Cathedral. His itinerant mason friends were given pride of place in the front pews and the house Blow built from 1913 for his growing family (eventually consisting of two sons and two daughters) at Hilles, near Painswick, Gloucestershire, harks back to his earlier style. During the Edwardian years Blow became increasingly friendly with the maverick second duke of Westminster, freeholder of the Grosvenor estate in London. This led to considerable work for Blow and Billerey, including Mimizan, a hunting-lodge outside Bordeaux for the duke himself (1911), and buildings on his Mayfair estate. The commission for Government House, Salisbury, Rhodesia (1911), also came through the duke. During the First World War, Blow at first worked for Kitchener in France, but following the latter's death in 1916 he accepted a post as the duke of Westminster's private secretary, with an undefined overview of his London estates. This led to friction with the Grosvenor estate's surveyor, Edmund Wimperis. When Wimperis resigned in 1928, Blow succeeded him. Although he had given up architecture himself, he used his influence with the duke to promote Lutyens and his former partner Billerey as consultants for major development schemes on the Mayfair estate, notably the rebuilding of Grosvenor Square. In March 1933, however, Blow was abruptly dismissed, following unproven allegations of dishonesty. He retired with impaired health to Hilles, where he died from coronary thrombosis on 7 February 1939. Like Morris, he was carried to his hillside grave near by, overlooking Gloucester, on a farm cart. 


@@@@@


doc= 41074


Charles Edmund Brock (1870-1938). Born in London on 5 February 1870, the son of Edmund Brock (1841-1921), a scholar in medieval and oriental languages and a reader at the Cambridge University Press, and his wife, Mary Ann Louise, 'nee' Pegram (1836-1914), he was the eldest of a large family of which two other sons were also to make their living from their art. 


@@@@@


doc= 41077


Champion, Harry (1865-1942), music-hall entertainer, was probably the William Henry Crump born at 30 Grafton Street, Mile End, London, on 8 April 1865, the son of Walter Henry Crump, a tailor who was later a butcher and licensed victualler, and his wife, Louisa Ann, 'nee' Scantlebury. He had at least one brother and sister, who both outlived him. Few personal details are known about Champion's early life, as 'about his real name he was secretive' ('The Times', 15 Jan 1942). He was apprenticed to a boot clicker. Nevertheless his main interest was the music-hall, and he made his debut at the Royal Victoria Music Hall in Old Ford Road, Bethnal Green, in July 1882, as 'Will Conray, comic'. He toured round the minor halls of London's East End, variously described as comic, character vocalist, and character comic and dancer, and the following year ventured into other parts of the capital. He probably appeared in these early days in 'blackface', at least in part when he sang plantation songs. 
Late in 1886 Champion introduced a new act entitled 'From Light to Dark', in which he appeared alternately in black- and whiteface. This had some success, but a real change came in 1887 when he deserted the name of Will Conray for Harry Champion: 'Somebody gave it to me. It was all through a dislike the manager of the Marylebone took to me. I went on tour for a bit. When I came back, he told my agent he'd have nothing to do with me. 'Right', said the agent, 'but you might give a new man his chance.' 'Who is he?' asked the manager, and then and there my agent baptised me 'Harry Champion' and came and told me afterwards. (Disher, 64-5)' Real success came in 1889 when Champion gave up the blackface part of his act and found the first song which came to be associated with his name: 'I'm Selling up the 'Appy 'Ome'. His network of engagements in the country widened and he made his West End debut at the Tivoli in September 1890. Encores of his now famous song were often accompanied with a hornpipe dance. His renown throughout his career centred on his singing with verve and gusto songs which became closely associated with his name, one of the most notable being 'When the Old Dun Cow caught Fire', introduced in 1893. 
On 30 November 1889, at St Peter's Church, Hackney, Champion married Sarah Potteweld (1869-1928), who accompanied him on many of his tours. They had three sons and a daughter, all of whom were alive at the time of their father's death. In 1914 Champion moved his home from the East End to 520 West Green Road, South Tottenham, and he lived in the Downhills area of Tottenham for the rest of his life. 
His songs were in demand: 'Champion is a comic singer who is endowed with genuine humour, which is revealed in his several songs, of which the audience never seems to get enough' ('Entr'Acte', 13 Jan 1894). He now had many songs in his repertory, a fact which may have prompted him early in 1898 to adopt the quickfire style of delivery which he retained for the remainder of his career: 'At one time I used to sing songs with plenty of patter but I changed the style for a new idea of my own, and started 'quick singing'. I think I am the only comedian who sings songs all in a lump, as you may say' (Barker, 35). With his eccentric make-up and outlandish clothes, he became known as the 'Quick-Fire Comedian'; he also tap-danced. 
The titles of many of Champion's songs, supplied mainly by professional writers from his ideas, have become part of the British vocabulary. Those about food were an essential part of his repertory, so much so that about the time of the First World War it was possible to go into a cheap London restaurant and ask for 'a Harry Champion'; and be given a plate of boiled beef and carrots, echoing the title of one of his most famous songs. Other ditties praised cucumbers, pickled onions, piccalilli, saveloys, trotters, cold pork, and baked sheep's heart, all basic elements in the cockney's diet. 
Champion's golden period was from 1910 to 1915, when he introduced successful new songs before an ever widening and appreciative audience ('Ginger you're Barmy' and 'I'm Henery the Eighth, I am', 1910; 'Any Old Iron', 1911; 'The End of my Old Cigar' and 'Wotcher, me Old Brown Son', 1914; 'Little Bit of Cucumber', 1915). He took part in the first royal variety performance at the Palace Theatre, London, in July 1912. 'Grow some Taters' (1915) was taken up by the government wartime publicity organization to encourage the home growing of vegetables. 
However, the First World War changed tastes, and traditional music-hall went into a decline in comparison with other forms of entertainment; by 1918 Champion and his fellow entertainers from the previous century were no longer in demand. In 1920 he went into an enforced retirement and did not expect another engagement. He took this stoically, concentrating his interest on horses and on running livery stables and a taxi service. These he owned for decades, operated in conjunction with relatives, at Dalston, London. 
The public mood had changed again by 1930 and the old-timers of music-hall once again became popular. Troupes of veterans were much in demand in the 1930s, and Lew Lake's 'Variety, 1906-1931 -- Stars who Never Failed to Shine' went on tour throughout the country early in the decade with Champion a leading member. 'He almost brought the house down with three of his typical ditties', reported 'The Performer' on 6 May 1931. 
Champion appeared at the royal variety performance in 1932 with other representatives of old-style music-hall, including Vesta Victoria, Fred Russell, and Marie Kendall. That same year he returned to the London Palladium, where he always sang 'Any Old Iron' to rapturous applause. Further royal variety performance appearances took place in 1935 and 1938, and he was seen in the successful 'London Rhapsody' with the Crazy Gang at the Palladium in 1937-8. 
Champion did not try anything new because that was not required by audiences in the 1930s. On stage the words shot out of him like bullets from a gun. He rattled off several songs in a monotonous voice, whirling his arms about with his foot tapping at the same time; he was always audible. He appeared grotesque, but was the embodiment of the spirit of the poorer parts of London; there was no refinement or sophistication in his performance, which was above all a vibrant evocation of working-class life. 'Like music hall itself, Harry Champion was of the people, he expressed the tastes of practically all his listeners, even those who would not openly admit it, and in World War 2 he sang to troops who found him a splendid tonic' (Pope, 406). 
In the late 1930s Champion became a regular performer on the radio, and seemed indestructible. By late 1941, however, he had overtaxed his physical resources, and exhaustion forced him into a London nursing home, at 20 Devonshire Place, St Marylebone. He died there on 14 January 1942, having in a career of sixty years added several catchphrases to the English language. His most famous song, 'Any Old Iron', returned to popularity in the late 1950s, sung by Peter Sellers, to engage the attention of yet another generation. He was buried with his wife (who had predeceased him on 24 January 1928) in St Marylebone cemetery, East Finchley, on 24 January 1942. 


@@@@@


doc= 41081


Grainger, Percy Aldridge (1882-1961), composer, was born George Percy Grainger at Brighton, Victoria, Australia, on 8 July 1882, the son of John Harry Grainger (1855-1917), architect and engineer, and his wife, Rosa Annie (Rose) Aldridge (1861-1922). He spent his childhood in Melbourne, Victoria, where he was privately educated under the guidance of his musically gifted mother. He received supplementary lessons in languages, art (with Frederick McCubbin), elocution and drama (with Thomas A. Sisley), and the piano (with Louis Pabst and Adelaide Burkitt). His early readings of classical legends and Icelandic sagas influenced him towards a muscular, even drastic approach to life. 
By 1895 Grainger's pianistic accomplishments led him to pursue studies at the Hoch Conservatorium in Frankfurt am Main, where he learned from James Kwast and took theory and composition classes with Iwan Knorr. At the Hoch Conservatorium he fell in with several older British students -- Cyril Scott, Henry Balfour Gardiner, Roger Quilter -- who, with Norman O'Neill, were later dubbed the Frankfurt group. While in Frankfurt, Grainger fell under the spell of Rudyard Kipling, settings of whose verses he worked on between 1898 and 1956, and Walt Whitman, who inspired his 'Marching Song of Democracy' (1901-15) and many aspects of his life philosophy. 
From 1901 to 1914 Grainger based his career as a concert pianist and private teacher in London, whence he undertook frequent tours of northern Europe and two lengthy Antipodean visits in the touring party of the Australian contralto Ada Crossley (1903-4, 1908-9). During the first half of his residence in London, when often fulfilling subsidiary musical roles, Grainger depended upon sponsorship by such leading musicians as Hans Richter, Sir Charles Villiers Stanford, and Sir Henry Wood. He also benefited from the patronage of such society figures as Sir Edgard and Lady Speyer, through whom he first met Edvard Grieg, and Lilith Lowrey, at whose 'at homes' in Chelsea Grainger was a particular favourite. Lowrey was so taken with the golden-haired Grainger that, in return for sexual favours and music lessons, she vigorously helped to promote his performing career. This 'love-serve-job', as Grainger termed it, ceased about 1904, when his mother felt it was no longer to his professional advantage. From 1910 onwards Grainger established himself more solidly in the virtuoso recitalist class and as performer of landmark Romantic concertos. He particularly promoted the piano concerto of Grieg, with whom he had studied the work in Norway during the composer's final months. Building on this new regard, Grainger finally relented in allowing his major compositions to be published, through Schott & Co., and in 1912 arranged the first London concert dedicated entirely to his compositions. Many of these early released and well-received works, such as 'Shepherd's Hey' and 'Molly on the Shore', were based on English folk-songs, some of which Grainger himself had collected and edited in 1905-8. Others, such as 'Mock Morris' and 'Handel in the Strand', were in a similarly jaunty style but were not direct settings of folk-songs. In 1911 he changed his name to Percy Aldridge Grainger. 
With the outbreak of war in 1914 Grainger and his mother moved to New York. He took American citizenship in 1918, while serving in a US army band, and in 1921 settled in White Plains, New York, where he saw out his days. The years 1914-22 constituted the peak of Grainger's musical career. As a pianist he entered into lucrative piano-roll and gramophone recording contracts, and performed as a Steinway artist across the country with leading orchestras and conductors. In his concerts and recordings he played a wide variety of works from Bach to contemporary music, including lesser-known works by Stanford, Cyril Scott, Nathaniel Dett, and David Guion. In 1916 he undertook concerts with the soprano Nellie Melba, a compatriot, in aid of field ambulances, but did not avoid the accusation of his British friends that he was lurking in America to avoid his patriotic duty. Robin Legge, music critic of London's 'Daily Telegraph', charged Grainger with cowardice, and warned him that 'England is no place for you after the war I fear'. During the war years his compositions, such as the 'In a Nutshell' suite, the 'Marching Song of Democracy', and his 'music to an imaginary ballet' 'The Warriors', gained notable premieres. His setting of a morris dance tune, 'Country Gardens', became an instant hit on its publication in 1919. Through dozens of arrangements, it remains his best-known work. 
The suicide of his beloved mother in 1922, by leaping from a New York skyscraper, proved a watershed in Grainger's career. He became shy of the more challenging musical platforms and nostalgic for the simple enthusiasms of his youth. During 1922-8 he renewed his folk-song collecting expeditions; his work in Jutland with the Danish ethnologist Evald Tang Kristensen led to the composition of his 'Danish Folk-Music Suite'. He undertook several visits to Europe, where he resuscitated his friendship with Frederick Delius, and to Australia, where he sought solace among his mother's relatives. During his return from one Australian trip, in 1926, he met the Swedish artist Ella Viola Strom-Brandelius (1889-1979), who on 9 August 1928, to the strains of his musical 'ramble' 'To a Nordic Princess', became his wife during one of his Hollywood Bowl appearances. 
Although Grainger continued to perform for several decades after his marriage, he did so increasingly in an educational rather than fully professional role, preferring to trade appearances as a concerto soloist for performances of his own or his friends' new works. He relished the chance to perform in high-school auditoria, and during the Second World War saw his career as a solo pianist partially resurrected through numerous concerts at army and air force camps. Between 1919 and 1930 he taught in the summer school of the Chicago Musical College, and during 1937-44 at the National Music Camp, Interlochen. He gave his last official American concert tour in 1948, but continued, despite worsening health from 1952, to give occasional lectures and educational concerts until he was in his late seventies. Grainger died in White Plains Hospital, New York, on 20 February 1961. He was buried alongside his mother in the West Terrace cemetery, Adelaide, on 2 March 1961. 
In 1911 Grainger concisely defined his enthusiasms in life as sex, race, athletics, speech, and art. In others' opinions, he was variously avant-garde, eccentric, or merely a poseur in these fields. He early realized the social utility of sex and over five decades enthusiastically practised flagellation with his wife, several earlier lovers, and by himself. 'He was one of the century's more practised flagellants, equally at home in giving or receiving the lash', having with the onset of puberty 'started to associate the whipping with sexual pleasure, consequent upon acts of cruelty to women' ('All-Round Man', 9). Grainger was also obsessed with the idea of incest, considering it the most efficient way of maintaining racial purity. 
On matters of race Grainger was an avowed proponent of Anglo-Saxonism and Nordicism, moving from a more racial intent in writings of the 1910s and 1920s to a more openly racist frame of mind in writings of the 1930s and early 1940s. He rejected all effete notions of the artist in favour of a muscular, open-air approach which he himself advertised through carrying of his own suitcases, long hikes, and vigorous on-stage antics. One of his most famed feats was to leap from the stage during the orchestral section of a concerto, run to the back of the hall, and return just in time to catch his next entry as soloist. His fascination with languages -- he knew half a dozen to a reasonable level of competence -- led to a quest to free the English language of Graeco-Latin contaminations supposedly introduced by the Normans in 1066. The resultant 'blue-eyed', or Nordic, English came to prominence from 1926 onwards in his voluminous autobiographical writings and his letters to friends. 'Education' became 'mind-tilth', 'music' became 'tone-art', and 'telephone' became 'thor-juice-talker'. 
It was, however, in Grainger's fifth field, that of art, that his ideas were most profound. Apart from keen promotion in his essays and musical editions of Nordic music, early music, percussion instruments, and the piano's more robust features, he lived his life in search of 'free music', desiring to float through musical space, unimpeded by 'this absurd goose-stepping' which he believed bedevilled music. Grainger likened music's contemporary condition to Egyptian bas-reliefs with their regularized shapes, while he yearned for the twists and curves of Greek sculptures. Early examples of Grainger's free experimentation include his 'Train Music' (1900-01) and his 'Sea-Song' (1907). His 'Random Round' (1912-14), inspired by Pacific islander improvisatory practice, experimented with 'concerted partial improvisation', while his two 'free music' pieces of 1935-7 introduced the first consistently gliding tones in his output, achieved firstly by string quartet and then by a quartet of theremins. 
In later life Grainger invented several 'free music' machines, with the intention of cutting out the role of the performer as interpreter of the composer's work. Rather, the composer would speak directly to the audience through the machine's exact reproduction of a work's features. The Estey-reed tone-tool (1950-51) was a form of giant harmonica, while the kangaroo-pouch tone-tool (1952) introduced a 'hills and dales' form of music which, to Grainger's mind, reflected Hogarth's 'curve of beauty'. A further machine, the electric-eye tone-tool, incorporated photocells into its design, but remained incomplete at the composer's death. 
As a composer Grainger was relatively prolific, producing over 400 works, either original compositions or folk-music settings. He was, however, most comfortable as a miniaturist: few of his works take more than seven or eight minutes to perform. Grainger's style was highly distinctive, almost baroque in its rhythm, with a 'half-horizontal, half-perpendicular' chordal sense, and an intertwining of parts owing much to Brahms. He considered himself a musical democrat, in both the way he wrote his music and the way he wanted it performed. In 1955 he professed to 'like each voice, at all times throughout my music, to enjoy equal importance and prominence' ('Grainger on Music', 375). So, too, he sought through the 'elastic scoring' of many of his later compositions to establish simple groupings of instruments which would allow as many players as possible to take an effective part in the musical performance of his music. When asked late in life what his most important and characteristic works were, he listed nine works or collections, all but one of which he had started to compose by his mid-twenties. Among them were some fifty British folk-music settings, the orchestral 'English Dance' (1901-9), and his two 'Hillsongs' (1901-7), inspired by a three-day hike in western Argyll (ibid., 374). 
Grainger's legacy has been colourful. Among his five professed enthusiasms, his views on race are now considered abhorrent, while his attempts to reform the English language are taken as cranky, if not just bizarre. His sexual gusto has been kept well alive by occasional exposes in the Australian tabloid press, and sometimes linked with his notable athleticism. Late in life Grainger deposited a package with his bank that was to be opened ten years after his death: it held an essay and 'a large collection of photographs giving full details of his sex life' in the hope that 'the world would be broadminded to accept such things without guilt or shame' (Bird, 245). However, Max Harris in 1983 claimed Grainger as 'one of the great embarrassments to the residual puritanism of the nation' ('The Unknown Great Australian', 1983, 58). 
Within the realm of art, Grainger was a significant influence upon the emergence in the 1960s of a distinctively Australian art music, but more so in concept and theme than in actual style. While his band music, in particular 'Lincolnshire Posy' (1937), was an important milestone in the development of American band repertory, his 'free music' experiments were rapidly overtaken by the development of electronic sound synthesis. Perhaps Grainger's most enduring legacy was in the setting of folk-music, where he was a popular model for following generations of British composers. Benjamin Britten, for instance, acknowledged Grainger as his 'master' in this regard. In 1934 Grainger established his own museum in the grounds of the University of Melbourne, where most of his papers, compositions, memorabilia, and recordings are housed. 


@@@@@


doc= 41084


Gokhale, Gopal Krishna (1866-1915), politician and Indian nationalist, was born on 9 May 1866 in Kotluk, a village in the Ratnagiri district of the Bombay presidency, the second son of Krishnarao Shridhar Gokhale (died 1879), a minor district official from a respected but poor Chitpavan Brahman family, and Valubai, otherwise Satyabhama (died 1881), the daughter of Bhaskar Pant Oka of the same district. He had four sisters and an elder brother, Govindrao, who supported him through his education after the early death of their father. Gokhale's first arranged marriage took place when he was fifteen but his wife, Savitribai (died 1891), suffered from 'white' leprosy and they did not live together or have children. As was not uncommon, he married a second wife, Radhabai, in 1887; with her he had two daughters, Kashibai and Godavari. Radhabai died in 1900, giving birth to a son who survived only a fortnight. 
Gokhale matriculated from a school in Kagal, near Kolhapur, in 1881 and studied successively at Rajaram College, Kolhapur, Deccan College, Poona, and Elphinstone College in the University of Bombay, from which he graduated in 1884 with a second-class BA in mathematics. While considering his future in the light of his financial constraints he undertook coaching and toyed with the idea of entering the Indian Civil Service, or of taking up engineering, and even began (but did not complete) the course for a law degree in Bombay. Finally, in 1885, he decided on teaching and joined the New English School and the Deccan Education Society, which had been founded in Poona by Vishnushastri Chiplunkar and B. G. Tilak. Later in 1885 the society established Fergusson College in Poona as an affiliate of the University of Bombay; there Gokhale taught mathematics, economics, and English literature. In 1886 he became a life member of the Deccan Education Society. In the last years of the 1880s personality differences among the members and division over political and social reform culminated in a split which led to Tilak's departure and to Gokhale's becoming secretary. He dominated the affairs of the society until political commitments led to his withdrawal in 1902 and retirement in 1904, having fulfilled his pledge to serve for twenty years. 
Gokhale became involved in the ferment of ideas and activities that distinguished Poona in the 1880s and 1890s. He came under the influence of M. G. Ranade in 1886 and thereafter followed the direction of his interests. Under Ranade's prompting Gokhale became secretary of the Poona Sarvajanik Sabha and editor of its 'Quarterly Journal' in 1887 and wrote extensive and detailed critiques of the economic issues of the day. For two years from 1886 he contributed to the 'Mahratta', an English-language newspaper of the Deccan Education Society, until Tilak took it with him when he left the society. Gokhale also edited from 1888 the English sections of the 'Sudharak', a Marathi weekly which promoted a mainly social and religious reformist position, which was opposed by Tilak and many of the city's conservative Brahman elite. In the same vein Gokhale delivered his first public speech, 'India under British rule', in Kolhapur in 1886, and first spoke at the Indian National Congress in 1889, where the following year he urged the reduction of salt duties. He was secretary of a regional Congress body, the Bombay provisional conference, in 1893-4, and a joint secretary of the Congress for its 1895 Poona session along with Tilak, whose base in the city enabled him to disrupt the holding of the social conference session immediately afterwards and to assume control of the Sarvajanik Sabha the following year. Gokhale was instrumental in setting up the alternative Deccan Sabha which ensured for him a regional political base, demonstrated by his election to the presidency of the municipality of Poona in 1902-3 and 1905-6. In 1905 he also established the Servants of India Society, an organization of people dedicated to working for the national good as 'national missionaries'. 
Gokhale moved into the national limelight in 1897 when he gave evidence on Indian administrative costs before the Welby commission in London. While there he denounced the administration's handling of the plague in Poona, but being unable to obtain corroborating evidence he later retracted his statements. The set-back was temporary: elected to the Bombay legislative council in 1899 for Tilak's former seat he moved in December 1901 to the imperial council, where he remained until his death. He quickly developed a reputation as a critic of the annual government budgets and became a focus of an opposition group within the council; his stance was reinforced by his hostility to Curzon's 'Universities Bill' in 1903-4 and to Minto's measures banning seditious meetings and restricting press freedoms in 1908 and 1910. As a member of the council he accepted nomination as a CIE in 1904, though in 1914 he declined promotion to KCIE. Following the moderate Congress strategy of attempting to influence decision making about India by lobbying in Britain, he toured Britain before the general election in 1905 to promote Indian issues. When the Liberals came into government he visited Britain in 1906 and 1908 to seek to influence the approach of the secretary of state, John Morley, to constitutional reforms. After the implementation of the Morley-Minto reforms in 1909 Gokhale used the new powers available to Indian members in the imperial council to continue his criticism of the budgets and unsuccessfully to introduce measures for compulsory and free elementary education in 1910, 1911, and 1912. In 1912 he was appointed a member of the public services commission, but he died before its report was submitted. 
In the early years of the new century Gokhale, Pherozeshah Mehta, and others coalesced as a 'moderate' group within Congress, opposed to the 'new party' or 'extremists' led by Tilak. Differences surfaced over strategies of opposition to Curzon's partition of Bengal. While Gokhale's presidential address to the 1905 Benares Congress accepted boycott as a tactic in extreme situations, others wanted a more general application. The division over this and other issues led to the Congress splitting at the 1907 session at Surat and to the retention of organizational control of Congress by Gokhale, Mehta, and other moderates. By this stage Gokhale's political objectives were clear: accepting the role of providence in ensuring the good of India, he wanted India to be governed on the model of the self-governing colonies of the British empire. He advocated the spiritualization of political life, by which he seems to have meant, since he was initially a rationalist and an agnostic, the application of moral and ethical codes to public work: 'Love of country', he wrote in setting up the Servants of India Society, 'must so fill the heart that all else shall appear as of little moment' (Mathur, 360). His dedication to the national good appealed to M. K. Gandhi, whose activities in South Africa he championed from their first meeting in 1896. Gokhale supported Gandhi's passive resistance in 1909. In 1912 he visited South Africa to reinforce Gandhi's activities, and when Gandhi decided to return to India permanently Gokhale advised him to undertake a year of travel and quiet observation before deciding on his course of action. For Gandhi, Gokhale was his 'political guru' and 'the most perfect man on the political field'. Gokhale's death in Poona from protracted diabetes-induced asthma on 19 February 1915 left Gandhi free to pursue his own direction. In his lifetime Gokhale's difficult nationalist project was to work within -- but certainly never for -- the structures of British governance. In the process he opposed government measures and developed a style of nationalist politics based upon a rational and dedicated patriotism whose desired end was secular self-government. 


@@@@@


doc= 41085


Tilak, Bal Gangadhar (1856-1920), Indian nationalist and journalist, was born on 23 July 1856 in Ratnagiri district, the last of the four children and only son of (Pandit) Gangadharpant Ramchandra Tilak (1820-1872), deputy inspector of primary schools, author, and small landowner, and his wife, Parvitabai. The family had been administrators under the peshwas in the Maratha confederation but had, like other Chitpavan Brahmans, retired to their ancestral village when Britain established its rule over the region in 1818. Although given the name Keshav at birth, Tilak was known throughout his life by his family petname of Bal or Balwant. While studying at the English School in Poona in 1871 he married ten-year-old Tapibai, renamed at marriage Satyabhamabai, of the Bal family of Dapoli district in Bombay presidency. They had three sons and three daughters. 
Tilak studied at the Deccan College in Poona from 1873, graduating with a BA in mathematics and Sanskrit in 1876 and an LLB in 1879. With other intellectuals concerned with promoting Western education among the city's elites, he established the New English School in Poona in 1880, the Deccan Education Society in 1884, and Fergusson College in 1885. The group set up two newspapers, the English-language 'Mahratta' and the Marathi-language 'Kesari' in 1881. The tone of the papers soon led the two editors, G. G. Agarkar and Tilak, into a defamation case, for which they were gaoled for four months in 1882. During the late 1880s serious differences emerged among the founding members over the issues of religious conservatism, orthodoxy, and reform. Tilak left the society in 1890, but took the two newspapers with him. As he chose not to practise law, he lived on a minute income from landed property inherited from his father and from the newspapers when they finally began to make a profit after 1899. Throughout much of his life, court litigation placed a heavy drain on his financial -- and indeed emotional -- resources. 
Tilak was courageous, strong-willed, and determined, and his life was full of controversy and conflict. In the early 1890s he engaged in a heated debate against the raising of the age of consent at marriage by attacking government legislation on the grounds that change should not be imposed by a foreign government outside Hindu society. Tilak's stand won him Brahman support, which was enhanced by his pro-Hindu position following serious Hindu-Muslim riots in Poona in 1894. Concurrently he built up his base in the leading regional political association, the Poona Sarvajanik Sabha, and finally captured it in 1896. In 1895 he had successfully campaigned against M. G. Ranade and other moderate politicians hitherto dominant in Poona politics by preventing them from holding the National Social Conference at the same time as the Indian National Congress, the major nationalist organization, founded in 1885, which met in session at the end of each year. In 1894, he inaugurated public celebration of the regional festival of the elephant-headed god, Ganapati, using it to spread patriotic sentiment. In fiery editorials and speeches he opposed British rule, and, through the use of the metaphor of Maratha resistance to the Mughals in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, seemed to imply ways of resisting the British. In 1897 he instituted the celebration of the birth of Shivaji, the seventeenth-century Maratha leader who had founded the Maratha state against the might of Aurangzeb's Mughal empire. During the 1896 famine in Maharashtra he organized relief works and cheap grain shops, and when plague broke out he set up hospitals for the relief of victims. The British imposition of sanitary measures against plague evoked widespread antagonism, speeded the establishment of revolutionary and terrorist groups, and led to the assassination of W. C. Rand, the official charged with plague operations in Poona. Tilak was suspected of complicity in the Rand assassination and in 1897 was gaoled for eighteen months for sedition. He had been elected to the Bombay legislative council in 1895, and re-elected in 1897, but resigned when he was tried. 
In 1898, released early as a result of lobbying from European Sanskrit scholars, Tilak became embroiled in a complicated and extended controversy over the posthumous adoption of a male heir to his recently deceased friend, Baba Maharaj. Involved as an executor, Tilak faced criminal charges in what became known as the Tai Maharaj adoption case. It dragged on from 1901 to 1904, when he was cleared of the charges, but was not finally settled, after references to the privy council in 1915 and the Bombay high court, until just before his death in 1920. Tilak moved to the forefront of all-India politics between 1903 and 1908, when he opposed the partition of Bengal and advocated the boycott of British goods, the use of swadeshi goods ('of one's own country'), national education, and Hindi as a national language. With Bipin Chandra Pal and Lala Lajpat Rai he became a central figure in a new, extremist party which opposed the more moderate and constitutional tactics of nationalists like G. K. Gokhale and P. M. Mehta. The triumvirate were behind the split of the Indian National Congress at Surat in 1907. The rise of extremist and radical politics brought a reaction from the government, and in 1908 Tilak was tried for inciting disaffection and transported to Mandalay, where he remained until 1914. 
On his release, Tilak set up a network of home-rule leagues in Maharashtra, working in alliance with similar leagues organized by Annie Besant. He and his followers were readmitted to Congress in 1916. After the war he urged that Indians meet the new constitutional offers under the Montagu-Chelmsford declaration with responsive co-operation, intending that they should enter the new councils and continue opposition from within. In 1919 he was in London, bringing a libel case against the writer Valentine Chirol, who had called him the 'father of Indian unrest', but he lost and returned to India in November of the same year. In April 1920 he established the Congress Democratic Party, but it was barely active before he died in Bombay of pneumonia related to malarial complications on 1 August 1920, the day on which M. K. Gandhi inaugurated his first non-co-operation campaign. Tilak's funeral procession of over a mile and a half was the longest in Bombay's history, a testament to his political popularity and the charisma which he enjoyed. 
Tilak coined the potent slogan 'Swaraj [self- or home rule] is my birthright and I will have it', and earned the title of Lokamanya ('the beloved of the people') for his passionate defence of Indian interests. In achieving mass popularity in and outside the presidency he had pointed out the tactical direction of nationalist politics thereafter; with his strong and forceful nationalist rhetoric he pointed the way for future nationalist objectives and ideology. In the process he restructured Marathi as a modern language of polemic and protest, and rethought classic Sanskrit texts in terms of the current situation, seeing in the 'Bhagavad Gita' (published as the 'Gita rahasya' in 1915) an exemplar of political action. Earlier, writing in the 1890s, he had sought to establish the antiquity of Vedic scriptures by combining textual analysis with astronomical calculations, and had won repute as a Sanskrit scholar. He was a formidable political figure who rewrote nationalist ideology and voiced it with unmistakable eclat, but his ideas were complex and subtle in handling traditional notions at a time of stress. Tilak used traditional elements as rallying points for modern political interventions and created a contemporary political polemic by utilizing rather than destroying past traditions. Although his style and approach were superseded by the different strategies and ideas championed by M. K. Gandhi in the following decades of nationalist agitation, he remains an icon of modern India. 


@@@@@


doc= 41086


Elliot, Sir Thomas Frederick (1808-1880), civil servant, was born in London in July 1808 and baptized on 29 January 1809 ('IGI'), the youngest son of the nine children of Hugh Elliot (1752-1830), diplomat, and his second wife, Margaret Jones (1770-1819). Elliot belonged to a titled Scottish family with extensive whig connections and a long tradition of public service. His father was the second son of Sir Gilbert Elliot, third baronet (1722-1777), and younger brother of Gilbert Elliot Murray Kynynmound, first earl of Minto (1751-1814). Sir Charles Elliot (1801-1875) was his own younger brother. Elliot spent six years in India following his father's appointment as governor of Madras in 1814, and considered himself fortunate to have experienced the contrasts of India and England at such a young age, believing it had taught him 'liberality'. He was educated at Harrow School (1821-5), where he found school life tedious and complained that he learned very little. 
On the strength of his family connections and traditions Elliot entered the Colonial Office as a junior clerk on 5 July 1825. His administrative ability was soon rewarded by promotion to the position of precis writer in July 1827. From June 1831 he served as secretary to the newly appointed emigration commissioners, whose brief was to assist and diffuse information to prospective emigrants to the Australian and British North American colonies. James Stephen, permanent counsel to the Colonial Office and later permanent under-secretary of state, drew attention to Elliot's aptitude and considered his advancement to be of 'national importance' (Grey MSS, GRE/B126/11). Upon the dismissal of the commissioners in August 1832 he was given sole responsibility for superintendence of emigration schemes to Australia. He worked closely with the London Emigration Committee, a philanthropic body which managed the practical arrangements of emigration on behalf of the Colonial Office. In April 1833 he achieved further promotion as senior clerk to the North American department. This relatively rapid progress displeased some of his longer-serving, less adept colleagues. On 16 May 1833 he married Jane Perry (1807-1861), daughter of James Perry (1756-1821), the former proprietor and editor of the 'Morning Chronicle'. They had no children. From 1835 to 1837 he served in Quebec as secretary to the earl of Gosford's commission of inquiry into Canadian affairs, where his contribution did not go unnoticed. Elliot's private correspondence to a colleague, Henry Taylor, discussing the state of affairs in Canada was forwarded to Viscount Howick, secretary at war, who, impressed by the quality of his analysis, circulated his letters to the cabinet. Despite the failure of the Gosford commission, Elliot's reputation was undoubtedly enhanced. He published a pamphlet, 'The Canadian Controversy: its Origin, Nature, and Merits' (1838), which was essentially a defence of the government's policy. 
Elliot returned to England in March 1837 to take up the new post of agent-general for emigration, created to manage the bureaucratic framework for government-assisted emigration to Australia. Working with only a small staff, he had to undertake many of the more mundane duties himself, but did so with enthusiasm and commitment. In January 1840 he was appointed one of three commissioners of the newly established colonial land and emigration commission, and subsequently became its chairman. Through these areas of responsibility he achieved significant and enduring influence over emigration policies for Australia. In his attempts to rationalize and organize the process of emigration, he demonstrated a keen awareness of the diverse problems and issues surrounding colonization. He took particular satisfaction in contributing to legislation for the health and safety of ship passengers, which culminated in the 'Passenger Act' of 1855. His paternalistic concern for the humanitarian aspects of emigration was evident, but he rarely allowed these considerations to preclude stringently applying the criteria for selecting assisted emigrants. He always acknowledged the importance of balancing British domestic needs against colonial preferences. Wherever possible he tried to adhere to free-trade doctrines, particularly in his dealings with shipowners, where he was reluctant to interfere too much in matters which might affect the cost of passages for emigrants. 
Criticism of Elliot's handling of emigration was unremitting and at times severe. Colonies complained about the quality of immigrants they received; shipowners worried about the increasingly restrictive passenger regulations, and some colonial reformers, such as Edward Gibbon Wakefield, condemned Elliot as being unfit for the business of colonization. Elliot patiently but firmly defended his actions and policies. In November 1847, following the retirement of James Stephen, Elliot became one of two assistant under-secretaries of state under Stephen's successor, Herman Merivale. This new appointment allowed him to maintain his interest and influence in Australian affairs such as emigration, transportation, and self-government, and also involved him in such diverse issues as colonial military expenditure and Canadian confederation. He was a major witness before the select committee of the House of Lords on emigration from Ireland in 1848. 
Family connections secured Elliot's acceptance into the exclusive circles of London society, where he met those with influence in colonial affairs. He moved within the circle of philosophical radicals, colonial reformers, celebrated writers, literati, and liberal politicians such as Lord John Russell, whose second wife, Frances, was Elliot's second cousin. His house at 13 Chesham Place, London, was described as where 'most of the persons who, in those days, were writing and reading and making speeches' met together ('Letters and Private Papers of... Thackeray', 1.cxxvii). His lively wit and personable qualities made him a popular figure. Elliot enjoyed long-standing friendships with John Stuart Mill and Thomas Carlyle, and helped to organize the latter's series of lectures in 1837. William Makepeace Thackeray declared the Elliot home to be one of his favourite places. Following his wife's death, on 9 January 1861, Elliot moved out of Chesham Place and was seen less frequently at social gatherings. 
Elliot's retirement, with a pension, from the Colonial Office on 8 December 1868 was prompted by his forthcoming second marriage, on 4 January 1869, to Elizabeth Howe Bromley (1824?-1880), daughter of Sir Robert Howe Bromley (1778-1857) and Anne Wilson (died 1873). There were no children from this marriage. On 14 August 1869 he was appointed KCMG for his long service in colonial affairs. After his retirement he indulged his love of travel and pursued his interest in science. Michael Faraday's work, both scientific and metaphysical, held a particular fascination for him. He published privately a satirical essay entitled 'A Discourse on Table Rapping' and circulated it among family and friends. He was elected vice-president of the Royal Institution of Great Britain in July 1876. He died at Shepheard's Hotel, Cairo, Egypt, on 12 February 1880, four days after the death of his second wife. Both were victims of an acute infection, diagnosed as typhoid fever, and were buried in Cairo. Elliot is representative of the 'powerful' nineteenth-century civil servant (others include Edwin Chadwick, Sir James Kay-Shuttleworth, and Sir Charles Trevelyan) who lived through the transition from a civil service characterized by jobbery and family connection to one whose progress was based on merit and ability. 


@@@@@


doc= 41087


Hewer, William (1642-1715), naval administrator, was born in the parish of St Sepulchre, Holborn, on 17 November 1642, the eldest son of Thomas Hewer (died 1665), stationer, and Anne Blackborne (died after 1679), sister of Robert Blackborne, navy and admiralty secretary during the Commonwealth and subsequently secretary of the East India Company. It was at Blackborne's prompting that on 18 July 1660 the new clerk of the acts, Samuel Pepys, took on Hewer as his clerk in the Navy Office and as a domestic employee. The relationship with Pepys would mature into professional collaboration and lifelong friendship. In the early days Hewer was occasionally rebuked for small failings in dress and drink, but was soon the trusted aide and favoured companion of Pepys and his wife, Elizabeth. His private resources -- derived at first from his uncle but greatly augmented by his own efforts -- ensured his independence and from 1663 he set up in his own lodgings. He later gave Elizabeth an ornament worth $40 when his official salary was only $30 p.a. Pepys defended him against accusations of leaking office secrets and incivility to a bishop. In 1668 there was an awkward but inconclusive charge of corrupt dealing in naval supplies. In the same year Hewer competently mediated between Pepys and Elizabeth when their marriage was troubled. Hewer himself claimed preference for bachelorhood when Pepys offered him the hand of his sister Paulina; he remained true to his profession. 
When Pepys moved to the Admiralty at midsummer 1673 he took Hewer with him as clerk; he became chief clerk in the following year. Hewer's private trading with the East India Company is recorded from 1669. By 1674 he was advancing finance for naval shipbuilding and by 1675 his fortune was reckoned at $16,500. In August that year he accompanied Sir Anthony Deane to deliver yachts to the French court; during the Popish Plot it was alleged that on this visit he had passed naval secrets to his hosts. Hewer made a counter-accusation against the informant John Scott for betraying military information. Since 1677 Hewer had been deputy judge-advocate of the fleet and a member of the Royal Fishery Company. In 1680 he succeeded Pepys as treasurer of Tangier and in 1683-4 took part in the mission to disband the colony. He and Pepys also paid a private visit to Spain. In 1684 Hewer became an assistant of the Clothworkers' Company, serving as master in 1686-7. In 1685 he was elected MP for Yarmouth, Isle of Wight; his parliamentary activities (including membership of a dozen committees) earned him the recommendation of James II for return in 1688 for the parliament that never met. On 31 January 1686 he was named an inaugural member of the Shipwrights' Company of Rotherhithe. On 17 April he was appointed a special commissioner of the navy with responsibility for accounts. From 12 October 1688 he and Deane were retained to wind up the affairs of the 1686 Admiralty commission. He declined the king's suggestion, underwritten by Pepys, that he and Deane should continue the same work indefinitely as 'inspectors' on the French model. The administrative framework was, he believed, already adequately in place. All that was needed was 'industry and knowledge' in its operation (Magd. Cam., Pepys Library, MS 1490, p. 384); Hewer had demonstrated his qualifications in both these respects. In 1687-9 he sat on the commission of the peace for several counties. The revolution of 1688 ended his public career. He declined the oath to William and Mary, and was penally taxed. On 4 May 1689 he was arrested, together with Pepys and Deane, on suspicion of treason; he was released uncharged six weeks later. In November 1692 the public accounts committee exonerated him of mismanagement in the previous reign, and he continued to defend the work of the 1686 commission. He remained a successful businessman. In April 1689 his East India Company stock was $3500; by 1702 he was worth $24,000. He was deputy governor of the old company in 1704-6 and 1708-9, and a director of the successor body in 1709-13. In 1701 he received a public pension for past service. On 15 August 1702 he was named a deputy lieutenant of Surrey. 
In 1677 Hewer had moved to York Buildings, Westminster. Pepys came to live there in 1680 and from 1685 was householder, with Hewer his occasional guest. Hewer, meanwhile, had acquired an interest in a handsome house on the north side of Clapham Common, built in 1660 by Sir Denis Gauden, the navy victualler. Hewer secured the property in 1688 and filled it with 'Indys & Chineze curiositys' (Evelyn, 5.427). Here Pepys came to live in his old age and to die in 1703. From then until 1724 Pepys's library was housed there. Hewer was Pepys's executor, and Pepys's heir later married the sister of Hewer's heir, Hewer Edgley Hewer. William Hewer, who had lived 'very handsomly and friendly to every body' (ibid., 5.111) and who had in particular assisted Pepys's wayward in-laws, was a benefactor to the school, church, and parish of Clapham. He died at his house there on 3 December 1715 and was buried in the church, where a memorial was erected. 


@@@@@


doc= 41094


Wickham, Sir Henry Alexander (1846-1928), plant collector and planter, was born on 29 May 1846, the son of Henry Wickham, solicitor. His father died when he was four, and he was raised by his mother. He was talented at drawing and undertook some training as an artist. 
At twenty Wickham went to Central America, where for three years he engaged in the trade in bird plumage. He returned to England, but a year later was in Colombia and Venezuela dealing in rubber. He made a journey up the Orinoco and down the Rio Negro and Amazon that ended at Santarem in Para, where he was befriended by some English residents and American Confederate exiles. After returning to England again in 1871, on 29 May he married Violet Cave Carter, daughter of W. H. J. Carter, a Regent Street bookseller who published Wickham's account of his journey. With his wife, his mother, brother, sister, and brother-in-law he sailed out to Santarem to commence life as a sugar and tobacco planter, perhaps financed by his father-in-law. 
In 1872 Wickham wrote offering his services as a collector to Sir Joseph Hooker at the Royal Botanic Gardens at Kew. In May 1873 Hooker was approached by Clements Markham of the India Office for assistance in introducing the Para rubber tree 'Hevea Brasiliensis' into India, and thought of Wickham. Encouraged to obtain as many seeds as possible at $10 per 1000, Wickham seized the opportunity not only to gather but to accompany the seeds to England and escape a life that had become unsustainable. His mother and sister had died at Santarem; his plantation was a failure. In desperate straits it is likely that his and his wife's passages aboard the 'Amazonas' were obtained on a promissory note. The seeds had been collected probably in great haste from stands near Boim on the Rio Tapajos, not far from Santarem, in April and May 1876. 
To the Brazilian customs Wickham declared his baskets to contain 'exceedingly delicate botanical specimens specially designated for delivery to Her Britannic Majesty's own Royal Gardens'. Though the very size of the shipment might have caused the local Brazilian officials to pause or seek authorization, the deception was more of a precaution. No one on the Amazon at the time could have foreseen that the massive industry about them might one day be eclipsed, or that 'Hevea' could be successfully cultivated elsewhere. There was no Brazilian regulation to prevent the export of seed. Wickham later dramatized the deed as a tale of successful smuggling, making the arrival of the 'Amazonas' providential -- it was actually on a scheduled voyage to Liverpool -- and adding a threatening Brazilian gunboat. One thing is certain -- that speed had been essential to success, as the oily rubber seeds have brief viability. 
Wickham arrived in England with the cargo of 70,000 seeds on 14 June 1876. These were planted in specially prepared beds at Kew, and by August fewer than 4000 had germinated. He received $743 from the India Office and sought a further commission to take the plants to Ceylon. When a response was delayed he decided to take his fee and a quantity of coffee seedlings obtained at Kew and emigrate to Queensland. Acquiring land on the Herbert River north of Townsville he decided on tobacco cultivation. Dogged yet again by misfortune as well as mismanagement he was forced to abandon this venture with little more than the fare home remaining. 
In 1886 Wickham returned to Central America. In British Honduras he obtained work initially as an inspector of forests before proceeding to establish a plantation on the Temash River with bananas and local 'Castilloa' rubber. A dispute over his lease ended in another debacle. 
In 1895 Wickham turned again to the South Seas in British New Guinea and began by searching for latex-bearing trees and vines offered by its forests. In 1896 he took out a lease in the Conflict Islands, a small atoll of under 1800 acres, 80 miles east of Samarai, and over the next decade developed a coconut plantation. 
Wickham had continued to correspond widely, to interest himself in plants that might prove of economic value, and to follow closely developments in the rubber industry and its technology. From 1906, when the success attending the development of rubber plantations in the Far East began to exceed all expectations, his occasional appearances in London received increasing attention from journalists. He was an adept self-publicist. In 1908 he published the embellished account of the 1876 exploit in a book on rubber cultivation and production that contained little that was essentially new. In 1911 he was feted at an international rubber banquet, presented with 1000 guineas, and provided with an annuity for life by the Rubber Growers' Association and the Planters' Associations of Ceylon and Malaya. His receipts from gifts of money, shares, and other benefactions over subsequent years were substantial. He was able to reside permanently in London in Albion Street, Hyde Park, a frequent attender at meetings of the Royal Colonial Institute, lionized by the rubber companies and demonized by Brazilians. He received a knighthood in 1920. His fame had become international and his name everywhere associated with the rubber industry and the snatch of 1876. 
That Wickham had played a crucial role cannot be disputed. It has been established that it was from Wickham's seeds alone that the entire south-east Asian rubber industry was built -- though the brilliant work of Henry Ridley in Singapore in the development of the industry was in many ways much more significant. The escapade of 1876 was indeed decisive, but while it may have been undertaken furtively, it was neither illegal nor as remarkable at the time as subsequent events and Wickham's reconstructions were to make of it. 
Wickham died on 27 September 1928 at 32 Newton Road, London. His eulogist in 'The Times' described him as 'every inch a pioneer, broad-shouldered and heavily built with an extraordinary long wavy moustache, his physical strength... as great as his resolution'. His shortcomings aside, he remains a paradigm of the nineteenth-century British adventurer and individualist. 


@@@@@


doc= 41096


Colt, Henry Shapland (1869-1951), golf course architect, was born on 4 August 1869, in Bishopwood House, Highgate, when his first name was given as Henry (though he was always known as Harry), the son of George Nathaniel Colt, a barrister, and his wife Georgiana Ellen Bruce. He was educated at Monkton Combe School and at Clare College, Cambridge (1887-90), where he read law and graduated BA in 1890. He first began to play golf during the summer holiday of 1880 when, as 'a tall red-haired schoolboy', he hit a ball among the lamp-posts, ditches, and washing lines of the common at Malvern Wells, the original course of the Worcestershire Golf Club (Colt and Alison, ix). He played for Cambridge against Oxford in 1889 and captained the team the following year. With his great friend John Low he helped found the Oxford and Cambridge Golfing Society, and was a member of its convivial early touring sides. After leaving Cambridge he joined the Royal and Ancient club: he won the jubilee vase in 1891 and 1893, played four times in the amateur championships (he reached the semi-final at Hoylake in 1906), and made a single international appearance, for England against Scotland in 1908. From 1897 he was a member of the Royal and Ancient rules of golf committee. 
Colt began his working life as a solicitor and in 1893 moved to Hastings, where he practised with the firm Sayer and Colt. In April 1894 he married Charlotte Laura Dewar (1864-1948), younger daughter of the Revd David E. Dewar. They afterwards lived at The Priory, St Margaret's Road, St Leonards. Colt began his architectural career as an amateur at Rye Golf Club, where, as captain, he laid out the course. He was honorary secretary at Rye (1896-9) and was still overseeing tee construction there when, in 1901, the Sunningdale club advertised for its first secretary. Colt was impressively qualified for the post, to which he was appointed in July, and he moved to Ascot. He proved a popular secretary at Sunningdale, though he was a hard taskmaster with an 'austere, authoritarian front': his maxim was 'the member is always right' (Hawtree, 37). 
It was at Sunningdale that Colt began the transition to professional golf course designer. The burgeoning of golf clubs on the sandy heath lands around London at the end of the nineteenth century led to a corresponding growth in golf course design and, alongside Herbert Fowler and J. F. Abercromby, Colt became one of the leading architects of the day. He was painstaking in his approach to detail and saw his commissions through from pegging out to the opening day. He had a special reverence for the old course at St Andrews, the layout of which influenced his work. Without destroying the natural beauty of a site he aimed to create courses that were challenging and exciting to golfers of differing levels of skill. He gave advice about the maintenance of the old and new courses at St Andrews, where he built the Eden course (1914); he also created Stoke Poges (1908), Swinley Forest (1910), and St George's Hill (1913). Before the First World War he made two extended trips to North America, where he built the Toronto golf course (1912) and assisted George Crump in the construction of the famous Pine valley course at Clementon, New Jersey. 
As a designer Colt was aware of the social tensions arising in England from the great expansion of golf as a middle-class game. In cases where objections from local residents were likely, he saw 'an instrumental value in encouraging some key artisans to play', and in some places working men's clubs were established under the auspices of parent bodies (Lowerson, 142). But this arrangement did nothing to challenge the social distinctions that were already entrenched in the game. And Colt's own paternalistic attitude was apparent in a series of articles that he contributed to 'Golf Illustrated', in July and August 1909, on the subject of 'The caddie evil'. The proliferation of middle-class golfers had met with a proliferation of working-class caddies, and Colt shared a general concern that the game was creating 'a rotten class of loafer unfit for any sort of occupation other than that of carrying a few golf clubs round a course for a few hours a day' ('Golf Illustrated', 30 July 1909, 149). He wanted the work of caddies restricted to boys, since he believed that it was unsuitable for able-bodied men; in other respects he was advanced in his thinking, and advocated, for example, the proper regulation of caddies as a profession. At Sunningdale he even introduced evening classes of a vocational nature to help prepare them for future employment. 
Colt's external activities multiplied after 1906, while his value to the Sunningdale committee in no way lessened, and a compromise was reached whereby he was given increasing time to pursue his own work. But the inevitable could not long be delayed and in 1913 he resigned as secretary. He entered into partnership with C. H. Alison and Alister MacKenzie, both of whom undertook substantial work in North America. Business inevitably stagnated during the First World War and Colt, who was not wanted for military service, moved from Ascot to St Amand's House, East Hendred. There he bought an apple orchard, and became a justice of the peace and a deputy commissioner for the south-west area of the Ministry of Food. After the war he re-emerged at the height of his powers, initially in partnership with Alison and MacKenzie, but from 1928 with the more enduring combination of Alison and John S. F. Morrison. The firm of Colt, Alison, and Morrison Ltd remained a prominent force in British golf design for a decade after Colt's death. 
Colt's list of courses after 1918 is an impressive one. He designed the new course at Sunningdale (1922), Moor Park West (1923), Burning Tree, Bethesda, Maryland (1924), Wentworth (1924), Milwaukee country club, Wisconsin (1929), and the sea course at Le Touquet (1930). He also created 'scores of others, not all so well-known, but every one attractive to the eye and to the golfer' (Colt and Alison, xi). His remodelling guaranteed the future pre-eminence of courses such as Muirfield, Lytham St Annes, Ganton, Porth-cawl, and Formby. Many would perhaps agree that 'his masterpiece' was Royal Portrush, co. Antrim, 'a magnificent natural course which he almost entirely reconstituted and lived to see chosen for the open championship' ('The Times', 24 Nov 1951). Colt remained active after the Second World War but his powers waned as he grew increasingly deaf and concerned about his wife's health. He died at St Amand's House on 21 November 1951. Colt had an important influence on the post-war generation of golf course designers, having 'spanned the whole popular development of golf from rugged beginnings to modern refinement both in layout and construction' (Colt and Alison, xiii). 


@@@@@


doc= 41097


Church, Charles James Gregory (1942-1989), builder, was born on 29 October 1942 in Windlesham, Surrey, the only son and younger child of Charles Church, farm labourer, of Windlesham, and his wife, Fuensanta Guisantes. He was educated at Strodes School, Egham, and studied civil engineering at the Regent Street Polytechnic in London. His interest in construction and house building became apparent very early, and by the age of eleven he had become a competent electrician and was able to wire his parents' cottage for electric light. Five years later he single-handedly built a tennis court for a neighbour. During his college vacations he worked for the Turriff construction group as a junior engineer. His construction manager, Jack Hamer, was so impressed by the house builder in the making that he lent Church the deposit money for the purchase of his first site. 
In 1964 Church graduated and worked full-time for Turriff. A year later he moved to Laing as a junior engineer, as part of the team involved in the construction of the Wraysbury Reservoir project. Laing moved him to Doncaster in 1966 to work on a new gas pipeline. Church felt that his determination and enterprise were going both unnoticed and unrewarded, and after only six months in his new job he decided to establish his own company. In partnership with Con Burke he established the civil engineering company Burke and Church Ltd in 1967 and quickly sold his first house, at Prior Road, Camberley, Surrey. The proceeds of the sale were ploughed back into the business and used to acquire more land, including a two-acre site in Wokingham, on which sat a tumbledown cottage, in which he lived. 
In 1967 Church married a former air hostess, Susanna Bridgette, daughter of William Simms, dairy shop manager. They had two daughters and a son. At this time Church learned a valuable business lesson. He realized that trying to establish a land bank and develop houses was tying up his dwindling cash resources. The only way forward for a small house builder was to develop an option system on difficult sites, rather than buying them outright. Church was already adept at buying sites, but he knew he could not compete with cash-rich, large house builders for land which could be easily developed. Instead he turned to tracts of land which other builders would avoid. Sites without planning consent or those which would be difficult to develop because of drainage or construction problems began to attract him, not only because they were cheap but because he could secure an option to buy at a future date for very little money. During the 1970s he not only honed these land-buying skills, but also developed his own 'just-in-time' construction techniques more than a decade ahead of Japanese and American building companies. This entailed extremely efficient management of each construction site, to ensure that materials arrived only when they were needed and when they could be paid for. Simultaneously he recognized the need for a highly skilled, highly motivated, and loyal workforce. Although he demanded a lot from his workers, they were among the best paid in the industry. Church could also lead by example, as there was hardly a job on the site he could not do himself, and he imbued his workers with a sense of achievement and of fun. While he was developing his reputation as a consummate house builder, who provided quality, up-market homes, mainly designed in Tudor or Georgian style, Church continued to be hamstrung by a lack of cash. He solved this problem in the mid-1970s by forming a partnership with Martin Grant, another Surrey-based house builder. Grant's cash injection allowed Church to start acquiring larger sites. This enabled the company to lay the solid foundations of growth, which ultimately resulted in a stock market flotation in 1988, when 750 houses a year were being built. The stock market had not fully recovered from its crash the previous autumn and house builders were out of favour with the City. Church became frustrated by investors' lack of confidence and a year later bought back all the shares. Once more Charles Church became a private company, whose posters, prominently displayed on London underground stations, gave it a high profile. 
In the male-dominated world of building and construction Church was unusual in that he employed a relatively high number of women in key positions. This was never a token gesture. He wanted to help people develop their intrinsic skills while at the same time encouraging them to widen their experience. He included his wife in this policy, for in the early days she was expected to do her share of the physical work, and later was encouraged to become involved in all aspects of managing a house-building company. Ultimately she became a main board director in charge of architecture, and was expected to take control of the business if anything happened to him. 
Church was just over 6 feet tall, with long legs, broad shoulders, large eyes, and thick, brownish-red hair. He seemed to be a workaholic who believed his business was his life, but he found time to indulge his great passion for vintage aircraft. He bought a 1000 acre farm and sporting estate in Hampshire, at which he based his company for refurbishing Second World War aircraft and established his own vintage plane collection, which included various Spitfires, a Hurricane, a Mustang, an ME109, and a Lancaster bomber. He died at the controls of his beloved Mark V Spitfire, which developed engine failure and crashed near Hartley Wintney in Hampshire, on 1 July 1989. He was buried in the parish church at Windlesham, Surrey. 
John Duggan', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 41098


Ross, (John) Carl (1901-1986), fishery entrepreneur, was born in Cleethorpes, Lincolnshire, on 29 July 1901, the second of three sons and fourth of six children of Thomas Ross, Grimsby fish merchant, and his wife Marie, daughter of Herbert Bannister, trawler owner. He was educated at the East Anglian School at Culford, Suffolk, and served for a brief time in the Royal Navy, which he had joined shortly before armistice day in 1918. Upon demobilization, he entered the family fish merchanting firm of Thomas Ross Ltd, from which his father retired early, through illness, in 1928. In that year he married Elsie, daughter of Samuel Hartley, a cotton salesman based in Blackburn. They had two sons and two daughters. From that time Ross initiated a steady decade of expansion, which included the import of frozen halibut and salmon from North America, a very innovative activity, which was to continue well into the years following the end of the Second World War in 1945. 
While Carl Ross was developing his fish merchanting activities, he had the foresight to recognize that the future of the fishing industry might lie in integrating fish catching, processing, and merchanting, and he built the first diesel trawlers in the mid-1930s. However, his first major incursion into trawler owning was when he purchased the nine vessels of the late Sir Alec Black, first baronet, in 1943. In 1944 he acquired a majority shareholding in Trawlers Grimsby Ltd, a publicly quoted company into which Thomas Ross Ltd was injected. This was the foundation-stone of what became the Ross Group. 
It was at this stage that Ross demonstrated a remarkable ability to deal with financial and accountancy matters, although he had no formal training. He had a formidable talent for reading and understanding figures and gained great respect in City financial circles. This ability triggered off an extensive series of take-overs of companies engaged in all aspects of the fishing industry, including major catching and processing companies in Hull, which gave the Ross Group a dominant situation on the Humber. In 1956 the Ross Group acquired G. F. Sleight Ltd, owners of a substantial but ageing fleet, and thus, in one swoop, Carl Ross secured the services of twenty of the best North Sea skippers. It was a move that allowed him to announce a major North Sea and Middle Water trawler-building programme to accommodate these skippers. The programme was a resounding success and the subsequent profitable record of the Bird and Cat class of Ross vessels became a legend. The Ross Group built many more vessels, including deep-sea freezer trawlers, most of which were constructed at the Cochrane yards at Selby, which it acquired. At its peak, the Ross Group owned the largest fishing fleet in Europe. 
In the very rapid growth of the Ross Group, the only set-back Carl Ross encountered was in 1966, when the Monopolies Commission refused to allow the Ross bid for Associated Fisheries Ltd, the other major publicly quoted company in the fishing industry, although the financial and business logic was irrefutable. Ironically, only two years later, the government itself was instrumental in bringing the fleets of the Ross Group and Associated Fisheries together to form British United Trawlers. In the early 1950s, when Carl Ross recognized that the fish industry was but part of the food industry, he extended the Ross frozen fish business to become Ross Foods. An added dimension to the Ross Foods business was the acquisition of the Youngs shellfish company. Carl Ross established Ross Poultry (1961), which played a major role in the integration and rationalization of the British poultry industry; created Ross Vegetable (1960), the biggest single UK potato distributor; and developed a series of peripheral activities including the chain of Ross Motorway Services (1965). 
Carl Ross parted company with the Ross Group after a somewhat acrimonious boardroom struggle in the late 1960s, which culminated in the take-over of the company by Imperial Group Ltd in 1970. Although almost seventy, he then played a major role as chairman in developing Cosalt plc. He maintained an active interest in the affairs of that company until he died. 
In his youth Ross was a distinguished county hockey player. Almost until his death he also enjoyed golf and shooting and for a period owned several racehorses. He obtained a pilot's licence in 1930 and played an active role in the Royal Air Force Volunteer Reserve cadet force during the Second World War. He was a high steward of Grimsby (1970-86) and a member of the companies of Poulterers and Fruiterers. He was a past president and leading member of the Fishing Industry Sports Association and a generous contributor to many charities. He was president of the Grimsby Conservative Association for some twenty-five years from 1954. 
Ross was 5 feet 9 inches tall, of medium build, with a strong face and distinguished appearance. Ross died in Grimsby on 9 January 1986. 
W. P. Appleyard', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 41099


Sosnow, Eric Charles (1910-1987), journalist and businessman, was born on 18 August 1910 in Kolno, eastern Poland, the second son in the family of three boys and two girls of David Sosnow, a Jewish produce merchant, and his wife, Libby Markewitz. He spent his early years in Poland and was educated at Lomza secondary school, Vilna University, and law chambers in Warsaw. In 1934 he left Poland for England and was employed as a foreign correspondent for Polish newspapers. 
Sosnow worked briefly for Nahum Sokolov as his private secretary. In 1936 he became a graduate research student at the London School of Economics. As a foreign journalist he joined the Foreign Press Association and with his knowledge of politics and command of languages (he spoke eight) he specialized in articles on eastern Europe. In 1938 he started writing for 'The Economist' under Donald Tyerman and in 1940 became an overseas correspondent for the 'Sunday Times' and 'Sunday Chronicle'. He was to continue writing for these papers for a further twenty years. His reputation grew and in 1944 he was asked to interview the Polish prime minister and, later, the president of Czechoslovakia before the latter's ill-fated journey to Moscow. He mixed easily with foreign journalists of every nationality and political persuasion. He loved journalism for the contact it gave him with people and the outlet it provided for his writing. He was naturalized in October 1947. 
While travelling and reporting Sosnow built a network of contacts around the world. Although his first love was journalism, the most obvious outlet for his talents and energy was international trade. On his arrival in England he worked with his uncle in the importation of fruit juices. In 1945 he took over a redundant orange juice factory and started, together with his wife, the manufacture of inexpensive fashion clothing under the name Estrava. 
In 1955 Sosnow was asked by Joe Bradley, with whom he had developed a very close association, to take over the management of Carters Merchants, an import-export company. In 1961 Estrava and Carters Merchants were combined into Whiteley Stevens, a textile company quoted on the London stock exchange. In the same year the group bought Gordon Woodrofe, with its trading interests in India, China, Japan, and Africa. In 1962 Sosnow changed the name of the group to United City Merchants. He now had an international trading group, which was to continue to grow and keep him travelling. 
Gaining a reputation for barter, Sosnow became a central figure in international trade, and particularly trade behind the iron curtain. When he retired as chairman in 1981, United City Merchants was an international trading company, with offices worldwide, involved in banking, shipping, leather, raw materials, industrial machinery, cars, and turnkey projects. He had hoped that his very talented son, Norman, would take over from him, but he was killed in an air crash in 1967, at the age of twenty-three, while working for the company. 
From 1981 onwards Sosnow devoted more of his time to predominantly educational charities. He became a governor and honorary fellow of the London School of Economics and was elected a fellow-commoner of Christ's College, Cambridge. He endowed chairs and travelling scholarships in both universities in his son's name; he had a great affection for and understanding of young people. He was very much involved in the Hebrew University of Jerusalem and the Weizmann Institute in Israel, and was closely associated with the Oxford Centre for Postgraduate Hebrew Studies and with the Institute of Jewish Affairs in London. Among his decorations were the Polish order of merit (1985) and the rank of comendador of the republic of Portugal (1973). He became a freeman of the City of London in 1960. 
Sosnow was a short, affable, and energetic man, always immaculately dressed, and with a great sense of humour. He was never prepared to take 'no' for an answer. As a journalist he searched for the scoop. As a businessman he expanded his company, which grew, not only in spite of the controls in the 1960s and 1970s, but because of them. He was never prepared to contest take-over bids but was willing to fight the system. When dividend controls were instituted he used them as an opportunity to conserve cash with which he bought businesses. He developed a technique for issuing tax-free bonus shares to his shareholders which was widely copied. He enjoyed the pomp and ceremony of the City and was happy when he was made a freeman of the City of London. He believed the basic tools necessary for success in international trade were a knowledge of and aptitude for languages, training in economics and international law, a love of travel, and an interest in modern history and people. 
Sosnow was a voracious reader and an excellent academic lawyer, from whom solicitors and counsel learned many lessons. As a lawyer he derived immense satisfaction from his successful appeal to the House of Lords in 1982, 'United City Merchants Investments Ltd v. Royal Bank of Canada', which decided that where a letter of credit was in order on its face, refusal by a banker to pay on presentation did not extend to fraud to which the seller was not party. 
In 1943 Sosnow married Sylvia, daughter of Mark Tafler, an authority on late nineteenth-century English engraved glass. As well as their son they had a daughter. They were a remarkable couple, Sylvia being an active partner in the business and contributing greatly to its success. Sosnow died at the Hospital of St John and St Elizabeth, London, on 20 February 1987, and his wife died in 1988. A memorial service for Sosnow was held in July 1987 at the New West End Synagogue, London. 
E. S. Birk', rev. ' 


