@@@@@


doc= 5779


Cocker, Edward (1631/2-1676), calligrapher and arithmetician, is sometimes said to have come from Northamptonshire but this is unsubstantiated. Nothing is known of his parentage and early life. He published five copybooks in 1657; one, 'The Pen's Triumph', mentions an earlier 'Pen's Experience', now untraced, as his first work. By 1657 he was married, and teaching writing and arithmetic in St Paul's Churchyard, London. He and his wife, Joanna (or Joane), had two sons -- Edward (1658-1723), also a penman, and Charles (1661-1674). 
Further books followed thick and fast, much to the consternation of rivals; in all, Cocker engraved more than two dozen. This proliferation was the output of a virtuoso performer with pen and burin. He 'delighted to embroider his copy-books with fantastic creatures, exotic birds... his knots and flourishes are wonderful pieces of exuberant penmanship' (Heal, 36). His originality extended to interspersing his instruction with rhyming couplets. Samuel Pepys, describing him as 'the famous writing-master' (10 Aug 1664), employed him to engrave his slide-rule, and admired his skill in executing such fine work. 
Cocker engraved plates for other authors -- about 1660 for his friend, James Hodder, and in 1664 at least sixty-seven plates for Richard Daniel, and four plates in 'The Young Clerk's Tutor' by J. H. of Staple-Inne. His own 'Tutor to Writing and Arithmetic' (1664) was part letterpress, part engraved, with arithmetic outlined as far as the rule of three. 
In the autumn of 1664 Cocker removed about 100 yards from St Paul's Churchyard to start a school in Gutter Lane; in 1667 he was teaching in Northampton, perhaps as a consequence of the great fire of 1666. By 1674 he was back in the City, and shortly set up school again by the church of St George the Martyr, Southwark, a move probably forced on him by committal for debt to the king's bench prison; he could have purchased the privilege of living outside but near the prison. He died in the poverty which seems to have dogged him all his life, due to the turbulent times, and possible losses in the fire. It may be assumed that he died at his schoolhouse, as he was buried at the church on 26 August 1676. The verse broadside of 1675, 'Cocker's Farewel to Brandy', ending in the death of a drunkard, must have been written by him, not about him, as sometimes suggested. 
Although famous as writing-master and engraver during his lifetime, Cocker became more so in death. In 1678 his friend and successor in the Southwark school, John Hawkins ('fl'. 1676-1692), published 'Cockers Arithmetick, being a Plain and Familiar Method', which he claimed to have taken from Cocker's manuscripts. This textbook, originally of 334 pages, had reached its twentieth edition by 1700 and its fifty-fifth by 1758; there were others with repeat numbering or none, besides at least eight Dublin editions and some at Edinburgh and Glasgow up to 1787. Its popularity might have derived from its being adapted to the requirements of trade rather than those of the gentry and their tutors. In a popular play of 1756 Cocker's 'Arithmetick' was dubbed 'best Book that ever was wrote' (Murphy, 10), with four more mentions, spawning the phrase (not Murphy's) 'according to Cocker'; both book and man became bywords for authority. It is for his arithmetic rather than his calligraphy that Cocker is remembered. 
In 1685 Hawkins published 'Cocker's Decimal Arithmetick', including logarithms and algebra, with a sixth and final edition in 1729. Then J. Back, a bookseller involved with the 'Arithmetick', issued in 1696 'Cockers Accomplish'd School-Master', 'The like never published', without explaining its origin, and A. Back in 1704 produced 'Cocker's English Dictionary' 'from the Authors Correct copy, by John Hawkins'. Strange to say, Hawkins had died in 1692; the Backs were probably fraudulently capitalizing on Cocker's name. 
In the nineteenth century Augustus De Morgan, who considered Hodder's 'Arithmetick' superior to Cocker's, also cast doubt on the authenticity of the latter, claiming that it was largely, if not wholly, a forgery by Hawkins. His 'proofs' are, however, extremely weak. The style of the preface and typical concluding couplet appear to proclaim it as genuine Cocker. De Morgan himself rather undermined his own thesis in a textual analysis intended to ridicule the writer's verbosity, by not recognizing that this completely accorded with Cocker's character. 
Equally, there is no doubt that Cocker in his lifetime intended to publish on arithmetic. Two publishers' advertisements, in 1661 and 1669, attest to this. The presumption therefore remains that 'Cockers Arithmetick' and 'Cocker's Decimal Arithmetick', both undoubtedly edited by Hawkins, are the 'Compleat Arithmetician' described in the advertisements, and are indeed 'according to Cocker'. 


@@@@@


doc= 5780


Cockeram, Henry (fl. 1623-1658), lexicographer, is known only as the author of 'The English Dictionarie, or, An Interpreter of Hard English Words' (1623). This was the third dictionary of English, and the first to bear the title of 'dictionary', following Robert Cawdrey's 'A Table Alphabeticall' (1604) and John Bullokar's 'An English Expositor' (1616). 
In the dedication to Richard Boyle, earl of Cork, Cockeram claims to be 'tied in double bonds of bloud and friendship' to a Sir William Hull. That Cockeram had some connection with Ireland is also suggested by the existence of an issue of the fifth edition of his 'English Dictionarie' (1637), for Andrew Crooke and Thomas Allot, 'to be sold at their shop neere the Castle-Bridge in Dublin'. The first edition is prefaced by dedicatory verses from six of Cockeram's friends, one of whom is the playwright John Webster. We also learn from these dedicatory verses that Cockeram was a citizen of Exeter. He may have been the Henrye Cockram who married Elizabethe Strashley at Holy Trinity, Exeter, on 2 February 1613. 

'The English Dictionarie' is a small octavo volume, divided into three 'Bookes': the first contains 'the choicest words themselves now in use'; the second a list of 'vulgar' words with their more 'refined' synonyms; and the third an encyclopaedic section containing information about 'Gods and Goddesses, Giants and Devils, Monsters and Serpents, Birds and Beasts, Rivers, Fishes, Herbs, Stones, Trees, and the like'. It was a commercial success, going into eleven editions printed in 1623, 1626, 1631, 1632, 1637, 1639, 1642, 1647, 1650, 1651, and 1658, with a twelfth edition 'enlarged by SC' appearing in 1670. Until the publication of Thomas Blount's 'Glossographia' in 1656, the only rival to Cockeram's dictionary was Bullokar's 'English Expositor'. 

'The English Dictionarie' is in the same 'hard words' tradition as the dictionaries of Cawdrey and Bullokar, intended not to provide a full account of the vocabulary of English, but, as Cockeram states on the title-page, to enable 'Ladies and Gentlewomen, young Schollers, Clarkes, Merchants, as also Strangers of any Nation, to the understanding of the more difficult Authors already printed in our Language'. The issue of 'The English Dictionarie' printed and sold by Edmund Weaver in 1623 includes on the title-page an acknowledgement that it is 'a Collection of the choicest words contained in the 'Table Alphabeticall' and the 'English Expositor', and of some thousand of words never published by any heretofore'. The issue printed in the same year for Nathaniel Butter, and all subsequent editions, omits the reference to Cockeram's predecessors. Starnes and Noyes suggest that 'Weaver, as printer of the 'Table Alphabeticall', may have insisted on Cockeram's acknowledgment of his debt to Cawdrey' (Starnes and Noyes, 26). 
The only contemporary criticism of 'The English Dictionarie' comes from the anonymous author of the 'Vindex Anglicus' (1644), who, while not mentioning Cockeram by name, 'chose his forty-nine examples of kinds of words to be expunged from the English language almost entirely from Henry Cockeram's 'English Dictionarie'' (Riddell, 'Beginning', 117). Starnes and Noyes acknowledge that Cockeram extended the scope of the dictionary by including encyclopaedic information and anticipated 'the idea of a standard of good usage' in his section devoted to 'vulgar' words and their 'refined' equivalents (Starnes and Noyes, 35). However, they suggest that the majority of Cockeram's words and definitions were taken from either Cawdrey or Bullokar or from contemporary Latin-English dictionaries such as Thomas Thomas's 'Dictionarium linguae Latinae et Anglicanae' (1st edn, 1587), and that the second part is essentially a plagiarism of Francis Holyoke's revisions (1606, 1612, 1617) of John Rider's 'Bibliotheca scholastica'. They imply that Cockeram, by Anglicizing the Latin entries in Rider-Holyoke, invented words that had never been used in English. This impression is reinforced by the presence in the 'Oxford English Dictionary' of some 600 words cited first from Cockeram and only from Cockeram and later dictionaries (Riddell, 'Reliability', 4). However, both Riddell ('Beginning') and Schafer ('Early Modern' and 'Hard-word dictionaries') point out that Cockeram was a more careful compiler than Starnes and Noyes acknowledge: he took neologisms from contemporary texts, such as Thomas Nashe's 'Christs Teares Over Jerusalem' (1593), and used Latin-English dictionaries to check the definition of a word found elsewhere rather than to augment the vocabulary artificially. 


@@@@@


doc= 5781


Cockerell, Charles Robert (1788-1863), architect, was born in London on 28 April 1788, the third of the eleven children of Samuel Pepys Cockerell (1753-1827), architect and surveyor, and his wife, Anne, 'nee' Whetham. He was educated at a private school near the City Road, Finsbury, and afterwards at Westminster School, where he remained from 1802 until the age of sixteen. He began his architectural training in his father's office, from which he moved after four or five years to the office of his father's friend Robert Smirke, then engaged in building the new Covent Garden Theatre (1808-9), a pioneering work in the Greek revival manner. 
In the summer of 1808 Cockerell's father arranged for him to make a picturesque tour of the west country and Wales in the company of the distinguished watercolour painters Thomas and William Daniell. His perceptive journal of this tour, called 'Memorandum', survives. Two years later his father sent him on a continental grand tour from which he did not return until 1817, four years later than originally planned, having made many startling discoveries in the field of ancient Greek architecture and sculpture. 
With Italy and France inaccessible to the British during the Napoleonic wars, it was in the improbable role of a king's messenger, with dispatches for the fleet at Constantinople, that Cockerell set sail for Constantinople in April 1810. This plan had been arranged by his father's friend William Hamilton FRS, under-secretary of state for foreign affairs, and previously private secretary to Lord Elgin. A note of Byronic romance entered Cockerell's dramatic sea voyage, which involved passing within sight of Cadiz during its bombardment. It was therefore appropriate that in both Constantinople and Athens, where he arrived in June 1810, he moved in the circle of Byron. He also made friends with a group of international scholars, travellers, and architects, including Karl Haller von Hallerstein (with whom, so Cockerell wrote to his sister, he swore eternal friendship), the Liverpool architect John Foster, John Cam Hobhouse, later Lord Broughton (an old schoolfriend from Westminster), the landscape painter Jakob Linckh from Wurttemberg, the Hon. Frederick North (later Lord Guilford), Baron Otto von Stackelberg, and the Danish archaeologist Peter Brondsted. 
In April 1811 Cockerell, Hallerstein, Linckh, and Foster travelled to the island of Aegina, near Athens, after an evening drinking with Byron, to study the late Archaic temple of Aphaia, then known as the temple of Jupiter Panhellenius. In April 1811 Cockerell and his companions made the revolutionary discovery that the temple, of local limestone faced with cream-painted stucco, was richly painted in bright colours. Cockerell published his discovery that, contrary to the views of Winckelmann, polychromy was integral to Greek architecture from the start. They also excavated the pedimental sculpture, stylistically important as transitional between archaic and classical. Cockerell's hope that it might be purchased by the British government was thwarted when it was acquired for the Glyptothek in Munich by the crown prince of Bavaria (later Ludwig I). 
In August 1811 Cockerell and his companions moved on to the temple of Apollo Epicurius at Bassae in the Peloponnese, a building ascribed by Pausanias to the architect of the Parthenon, Ictinus. Regarded today as one of the first Greek works with an aesthetically designed interior, this unique monument exhibited numerous divergencies from the supposedly rational Greek ideals: engaged columns, the first Corinthian capital, Ionic columns with uniquely flared bases and capitals, and a figured frieze in the interior, not on the exterior. In 1813, Cockerell arranged for the purchase of this 102 foot frieze by the British government for display in the British Museum. In his account of the temple, which he dedicated to the memory of William Hamilton, Cockerell evoked its almost proto-baroque quality by claiming that 'considerations of optics and perspective' were paramount in its design, and that its 'peculiarities... exhibit the perspective science of the architect, and show how freely and confidently he could deal with his material, regardless of the reproach of anomaly and caprice' ('The Temples of Jupiter Panhellenius at Aegina, and of Apollo Epicurius at Bassae', 1860, 57, 48). 
In November 1811 Cockerell and his friends founded a private club called the 'Xeineion' ('token of friendship'), giving each other bronze rings which were inscribed 'Xeineion' and bore images of the owl of Minerva. In 1811-12, together with Foster and Frederick North, Cockerell made a tour of Hellenistic sites in Asia Minor, meeting, in Smyrna, Captain Frederick Beaufort, who was in command of HMS 'Fredericksteen'. Beaufort invited Cockerell to accompany him on a tour of investigation of the southern shores of Asia Minor. Cockerell left Beaufort in Malta to travel to Sicily, where he spent three months in 1812 measuring the problematical temple of Jupiter Olympius at Agrigento, the largest of all Greek Doric temples. The outer columns were, unusually, not free-standing, but were half-columns engaged against a continuous solid wall. The temple was also vigorously sculptural, incorporating male figures, or telamons, 25 feet high. Cockerell published his discoveries at this temple, which had a profound influence on his own buildings, in the supplementary volume of 'The Antiquities of Athens' (1830) by J. Stuart and N. Revett. 
In the summer of 1813 Cockerell fell seriously ill in Athens with a fever, but on recovery he returned via Albania to make a tour of the Peloponnese and the archipelago. With the abdication of Napoleon in April 1814, he was able to visit Italy, and spent the winter of 1815-16 in Rome. In the spring of 1816 he was in Florence, where he won further fame with a proposed restoration of the group of 'Niobe and her Children' in the Uffizi as a pedimental sculpture. In the same year he made one of the first of his independent designs for a building, a palace for the duke of Wellington, an idea suggested by his father. He found the task so uncongenial that he wrote to his father from Milan in 1816 that: 'I am an artist & nothing but an artist. I am a good painter spoilt. The more I have seen of Italy the more persuaded I am that I was born to be a painter. If I must adopt architecture I must appear in this and this only, as professor of the beautiful in architecture. (Watkin, 'Life and Work', xxi-xxii)' 

After returning to London in June 1817, Cockerell dutifully followed his father's advice, setting up as an architect in elegant premises in Old Burlington Street, Mayfair, provided for him by his ever generous father. In 1819 he was one of the founder members of the Travellers' Club, intended as a place where the British might entertain foreigners who had given them hospitality while on their grand tours. The Travellers' Club was an extension of Cockerell's 'Xeineion' in that it was a late expression of the ideals of international fraternity, both social and intellectual, which were associated with the eighteenth-century Enlightenment. From 1819 Cockerell was a member of the committee of the Travellers' Club, together with Lord Auckland, Lord Lansdowne, Lord Palmerston, the Hon. Robert Clive, the diplomat and oriental scholar Sir Gore Ouseley, the classical topographer and numismatist Lieutenant-Colonel W. M. Leake, and the diplomat, antiquary, and Egyptologist W. R. Hamilton. The Travellers' Club was valuable to Cockerell as a source of patronage, for three of his fellow committee members, Lansdowne, Clive, and Ouseley, employed him to remodel their country seats, Bowood, Oakly, and Woolmers, respectively. 
Cockerell's awareness of the richness and freedom of Greek architecture, and especially of its sculptural basis, made him recognize that the architecture of later periods from ancient Rome to baroque Italy retained many Grecian qualities. In this generosity and lack of pedantry he was very different from more pedestrian Greek revival architects such as William Wilkins and Sir Robert Smirke. He had been the first to note, and measure, the entasis on the columns of the Parthenon, sending the details in a letter to Smirke of 23 December 1814. In his early works he attempted to incorporate souvenirs of his Grecian discoveries, as in the dining-room at Grange Park, Hampshire (1823), a sumptuous interior inspired by the cella of the temple at Bassae, and in his dramatic staircase hall of the same year at Oakly Park, Shropshire, where he incorporated a top-lit cast of the Bassae frieze. In 1822 he was chosen by a Scottish committee to design the national monument on Calton Hill, Edinburgh, intended by its sponsors to be a full-scale replica of the Parthenon. Between 1824 and 1829 twelve columns were erected, after which work ceased. 
Cockerell's most important early work was the Hanover Chapel (1823-5; dem. 1896), a twin-towered Grecian edifice with an iron and glass dome which was a striking feature of Nash's new Regent Street. We can follow the painstaking process by which his designs evolved in these years from his diaries which survive for the years 1821-30 and 1832. They reveal him as a fastidious perfectionist, concerned with self-improvement, both architectural and moral. Full of self-criticism, he was vigorously opposed to the dry manner of the Greek revival in which he had been trained by Smirke. In these years, too, he compiled a manuscript album, 'Ichnographica domestica', a fascinating illustrated record of his visits to English houses which reveals him as a remarkably early pioneer in the appreciation of the powerful and inventive work of Vanbrugh and Hawksmoor. 
On 4 June 1828 Cockerell married Anna Rennie (1803-1872), daughter of the civil engineer John Rennie; they had ten children, of whom one, Frederick Pepys Cockerell, followed him as an architect. Despite his early wish to be an artist, Cockerell became associated at the start of his career with the expanding world of banking and of life insurance. His first commercial building in London, the Westminster, Life and British Fire office, Strand (1831-2; dem. 1907), had a Greek Doric portico in antis combined with a rich surface texture embellished with figure sculpture, a form inspired by Palladio's Loggia del Capitaniato in Vicenza. He adopted this Grecian mannerism for his subsequent commercial buildings in London, notably the London and Westminster Bank, Lothbury (1837-9; dem. 1928), and the Sun Fire office, Threadneedle Street (1841-2; dem. 1971). 
Cockerell created a more heroic language for his three major projects of the late 1830s, the University Library, Cambridge, the Ashmolean Museum and Taylor Institution, Oxford, and the unexecuted Royal Exchange. Of his Cambridge library, planned as a monumental courtyard, only the north range was executed, in 1837-40. Though with details of a Greek austerity of line, the entrance front is dominated by a Roman triumphal arch theme, developed from Alberti's S. Andrea, Mantua, where the arch similarly breaks through the entablature. Cockerell's library achieves much of its commanding visual effect by the contrasting colours of the two stones of which it is constructed, white Portland stone and a brownish Whitby stone from Yorkshire. 
At the Ashmolean Museum and Taylor Institution, Oxford (1841-5), Cockerell similarly rejected the traditional local building stone, a brownish Oxford limestone, in favour of an inventive polychromy of three stones: a yellow Bath stone for the main walls, Portland stone for the columns and ornamental details, and Whitby stone for the basement. Conceived by Cockerell as a way of introducing Greek polychromy in a northern climate where external paint would not survive, this combination of materials had already been employed by one of his heroes, Inigo Jones, at the Banqueting House. At the Ashmolean Museum, Cockerell combined Greek elements with features derived from Vignola's Palazzo Farnese at Caprarola, a combination appropriate for a building intended to house the university's collection of antique sculpture, and of European paintings, mainly Italian. 
The commission for the Ashmolean Museum also involved the provision of premises for the Taylor Institution, the university department of modern languages. Cockerell insisted that the columns of the Bassae Ionic order on the facade of his Taylor Institution should be crowned by four female figures, representing France, Italy, Spain, and Germany. The university authorities had wanted them to be statues of famous male authors, but Cockerell was an upholder of eighteenth-century generalization, not of Victorian nationalism. He was also aware that to surmount Ionic columns with female figures was an appropriate reflection of Vitruvius's claim that the Ionic order originated in the female form and dress. 
Cockerell entered unsuccessfully a vast number of important competitions, including those for University College, London (1826), the Duke of York's column (1832), the National Gallery (1833), the Houses of Parliament (1835), the Reform Club (1837), the Royal Exchange (1839), and the Carlton Club (1844). In his highly individual design for the Houses of Parliament he largely ignored the requirement that the new building should be in either the 'Gothic or Elizabethan' style, producing a domed Renaissance building, incorporating echoes of Longleat and Hatfield. He also sensitively proposed preserving far more of the important remains of the medieval Palace of Westminster than his fellow competitors. 
Cockerell's elliptical concert hall of 1851-6 at St George's Hall, Liverpool, where he took over from Harvey Lonsdale Elmes on his death in 1847, has a sensuous beauty which owes much to the undulating balcony of delicate cast-iron lattice-work carried on beautiful caryatids, inspired by those of the Erechtheion. With its golden-brown colouring, its richly decorated pilasters and friezes of papier mache, its grained and varnished wooden surfaces, and its dramatic use of mirrors, it is one of the loveliest interiors of nineteenth-century England. 
In his lectures as professor of architecture at the Royal Academy from 1841 to 1856, extensively reported in 'The Athenaeum' and 'The Builder', Cockerell upheld a humanist view of classical architecture as an image of ideal beauty which would reprimand the modern world for its commercialism and lack of high ambitions. This was ultimately dependent on a Vitruvian view of architecture as a representation of the human body seen as an ideal type of beauty. Like his late eighteenth-century French predecessors such as Boullee and Ledoux, he believed that 'The universality of certain primordial forms in all styles favours the notion of innate ideas, the cube, the sphere, the ellypsoid... common to the art of all time and people' ('Lecture V', 'The Athenaeum', 18 Feb 1843, 159). He lectured in front of a large watercolour called ''The professor's dream': a symposium of the principal architectural monuments of modern and ancient times, drawn to the same scale', which he first exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1849. Its format echoed that of another painting for which he was also well known, 'Tribute to the Memory of Sir Christopher Wren' (1838), in which he imaginatively assembled all of Wren's works in a single composition. He was one of the finest of all British architectural draughtsmen. Numerous drawings by him survive at the Victoria and Albert Museum, the British Architectural Library Drawings Collection, and Cambridge University Library. 
Cockerell's numerous public offices included that of surveyor of St Paul's Cathedral, where he succeeded his father in 1819, and architect to the Bank of England, in succession to Soane in 1833; he was elected ARA in 1829, RA in 1836, and professor of architecture in 1840. In 1848 he was the first recipient of the royal gold medal of the Royal Institute of British Architects (RIBA), succeeding Earl de Grey in 1860 as the institute's first professional president. He was an honorary DCL of Oxford University, and a member of the Society of Dilettanti. 
Cockerell's essentially European outlook was underlined by the numerous foreign honours lavished on him: in France, he was one of the eight 'associes etrangers' of the Academie des Beaux-Arts, an associate member of the Institut de France, and a chevalier of the Legion d'honneur. He was one of the ten members of merit of the Accademia di San Luca in Rome, and a member of the royal academies of Bavaria, Belgium, and Denmark. He was also a member of the academies of Geneva and Genoa, of the Archaeological Society of Athens, and of the American Institute of Architects. 
After retiring from his professorship at the Royal Academy in 1857 and from practice in 1859, Cockerell died on 17 September 1863 at home at 13 Chester Terrace, Regent's Park. A week later, following his funeral in St Paul's Cathedral, he was buried in the crypt of the cathedral, where a monument was later erected to him and his wife from designs by their son Frederick Pepys Cockerell. Richly carved in low-relief sculpture, this tablet incorporates, appropriately, a capital of the Bassae Ionic order. 
Cockerell was widely revered for his scholarship, his high professional and artistic ideals, and his dignified, even noble, bearing. Of strikingly handsome appearance, he was a perfect example of the Victorian Christian gentleman; his son claimed of him that 'Meanness, coarseness, or wrong-doing were abhorrent to him' ('Architectural Review', 12, 1902, 146), and George Aitchison noted that he had 'the dignified and refined manner of the high-bred English gentleman' ('RIBA Transactions', new ser., 6, 1890, 261). 
Cockerell's subtle, learned, and allusive architectural language found no imitators in England, but it is in France that analogies can be found, in the neo-Grec work of Beaux-Arts architects such as Hittorff, Caristie, Labrouste, Duc, Nenot, Ginain, and Pascal. Cockerell's isolation from contemporary English trends is suggested by his portrayal in the carved frieze on the Albert Memorial in improbable association with A. W. N. Pugin and Sir Charles Barry. None the less, the merit of his work has been recognized from his own day to the present, with the exception of the fanatical Goth A. W. N. Pugin, for whom the Ashmolean Museum was an 'unsightly pile of pagan details... [which] if it pleases the admirers of gin-palace design... will draw down the indignation of every true disciple of Catholic and consistent architecture' ('An Apology for the Revival of Christian Architecture in England', 1843, 3). 
A more typical reaction to the Ashmolean was that of the influential architectural historian James Fergusson, who wrote of it, just thirty years later, that 'there is perhaps no building in England on which the refined student of architecture can dwell with so much pleasure' ('History of the Modern Styles of Architecture', 2nd edn, 1873, 349). Of Cockerell's branch Bank of England, Liverpool, the critic Heathcote Statham wrote in 1912 that Cockerell 'produced two or three facades for the branch Banks of England -- one especially in Liverpool -- the study of the details of which is a liberal education' ('A Short Critical History of Architecture', 1912, 527), while the architect H. S. Goodhart-Rendel went so far as to claim that, 'Never has there been a more accomplished English architect than he, nor one more originally creative' ('English Architecture since the Regency', 1953, 74). 


@@@@@


doc= 5782


Cockerell, Frederick Pepys (1833-1878), architect, was born in March 1833 at 87 Eaton Square, London, the second son of Charles Robert Cockerell (1788-1863), architect, and his wife, Anna Rennie (1803-1872). He was educated at Winchester College from 1845 to 1848, and at King's College, London, where he remained for nearly two years from 1848 in the department of applied science. He was taught architecture and drawing by his father and by John E. Goodchild, his father's chief clerk and close friend. Powerfully influenced by his father's admiration for French architecture, he became, in an age of increasing nationalism, an essentially European figure in the cultural tradition of the eighteenth-century grand tour. 
After a sketching tour in northern France in 1850, Cockerell travelled in France in 1851, spending two formative months in Paris in 1853 as a pupil of Caristie, who introduced him to Viollet-le-Duc, Visconti, and Douillard. In 1854 he became a pupil of Philip C. Hardwick RA, before leaving his office in 1855 for an extensive study tour of the chief cities of Italy. On returning in 1856, he began to work in his father's office on the Liverpool and London Insurance Office and on decorative details for St George's Hall, Liverpool. In 1856 he entered the competition for the government offices, in 1863 for the Albert memorial, and in 1866 for the National Gallery. 
His father's belief that sculpture was the voice of architecture was reflected in Cockerell's own works, such as the memorial column at Castle Howard, surmounted by an inventive Ionic capital bearing a tripod of terracotta and wrought iron by Charles Kelsey, who also worked on St George's Hall, Liverpool. Of his London buildings, Cockerell's Freemasons' Hall (1861) had a heavy classical facade rich with symbolic sculpture by W. G. Nicholl, who carved the pedimental sculpture at St George's Hall, Liverpool. His gallery of the Society of Painters in Water Colours boasted much figure sculpture by Signor Fabbrucci, a Florentine sculptor settled in Chelsea. 
After beginning his career as a country-house architect with houses such as Lythe Hill, Surrey (1868), in the still fashionable neo-Tudor style, Cockerell became in the 1870s a pioneer of the Queen Anne movement. This combined Gothic revival asymmetry in planning and composition with details from English and Dutch architecture of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. Examples of his work in this style include Crawley Court, Hampshire (1877; dem.), for A. S. Kennard, a London banker, and Woodcote Hall, Shropshire (1876), for C. C. Cotes MP. These houses were well related to their sites, as was Blessingbourne, Fivemiletown, co. Tyrone (1870-74), for Hugh de Fellenberg Montgomery, built of hard sandstone quarried on the hills of the estate, laid in random courses. With its Jacobean flavour, turrets, and symmetrical garden front, it was furnished with wallpaper by William Morris and tiles by William De Morgan. Cockerell's most remarkable country house was the concrete-built Down Hall, Essex (1871-3), with Charles Drake, a pioneer in concrete construction, as his consultant. The decorative panels and friezes were ornamented with sgraffito by J. Wormleighton of South Kensington from cartoons by Cockerell. Inside, the 40-foot-square hall was inspired by a Pompeiian atrium. 
In 1867 Cockerell married Mary Mulock, daughter of Thomas Homan Mulock of Bellair, King's county, with whom he had six children. He was elected an associate of the Royal Institute of British Architects (RIBA) in 1860, a fellow in 1864, and honorary secretary in 1871, and was a member of the Foreign Architectural Book Society, an exclusive private club within the RIBA. He was a trustee of Sir John Soane's Museum and a member of the Athenaeum. On the day of his sudden death, at 66 rue Francois, Paris, on 4 November 1878, he was due to attend a dinner party at the home of Duc, architect of the Palais de Justice. His funeral procession in Paris was followed by the distinguished French architects Duc, Lefuel, Hardy, Pelechet, Daumet, and Vaudremer. He was buried at Auteuil cemetery, Paris. At the time of his death he was living at 18 Manchester Square, London. A genial, charming, and handsome man, knowledgeable in literature and the arts, his premature death was widely regretted. 


@@@@@


doc= 5783


Cockerell, Samuel Pepys (1753-1827), architect, was born (according to the diary of his son C. R. Cockerell), on 6 January 1753, at Bishop's Hull, Somerset, the son of John Cockerell (1714-1767) and his wife, Frances Jackson (died 1769). His mother was the daughter of John Jackson of Clapham, nephew and heir of Samuel Pepys, and from her Cockerell inherited many interesting relics of the great diarist. His brother was Charles Cockerell MP (1755-1837) of Sezincote, Gloucestershire, who was created a baronet in 1809. Samuel Cockerell received his architectural training from Sir Robert Taylor, whom he later remembered in his will as 'the affectionate prop and support of my early steps and to whom... I was chiefly indebted for my first advancement in life'. 
Cockerell, whose practice was in London, held a succession of public appointments through his career. In 1774 he was appointed district surveyor for the parish of St George's, Hanover Square. In 1775 he obtained the post of clerk of works at the Tower of London in the office of works, and in 1780 he was made clerk of works at Newmarket; both these office of works posts were lost when the department was reorganized in 1782. In 1785 he was appointed inspector of repairs to the Admiralty, and when Sir Robert Taylor died in 1788 Cockerell succeeded him as surveyor of the Foundling and Pulteney estates in London. In 1791 he became surveyor to the victualling office. He was diocesan surveyor for Canterbury and London, and surveyor of St Paul's Cathedral (1811-19). For the Foundling Hospital, Cockerell prepared plans for the development of their Bloomsbury estate; building went on from 1790 to 1805. Some of the governors of the hospital were dissatisfied with Cockerell's supervision of the project and tried to have him dismissed. Though ultimately not held responsible, he resigned in 1808. Cockerell also prepared plans for the development of the bishop of London's Paddington estate, which were only partly implemented when he died in 1827; the scheme was eventually completed to a new design by his successor as surveyor, George Gutch. In addition, Cockerell had a fairly extensive private practice. 
In his architecture Cockerell showed no consistent approach to design but produced work in several styles. Although it is not known whether he ever visited the continent, some of his designs give hints of French influence: his church at St Martin Outwich, London (1796-8; dem. 1874), the facade of Gore Court, Kent, for G. Harper (1792-5; dem. 'c'.1925), and the unusual tower of St Anne's, Soho (1802-3), were examples. Banbury church, Oxfordshire (rebuilt 1792-7), had an interior inspired by Sir Christopher Wren's St Stephen Walbrook and Sir Robert Taylor's Bank of England transfer office. At Tickencote in Rutland he made a 'serious if not very scholarly attempt' (Colvin, 'Archs'., 262) to restore the twelfth-century church in Romanesque style. At Sezincote and Daylesford, both in Gloucestershire, he famously incorporated oriental architectural forms in English houses for patrons who had made their fortunes in East Indian trade. The Indian style was popularized through the drawings of Thomas and William Daniell, whose volume 'Oriental Scenery' was collected together and published in 1808. It provided useful source material for 'nabobs' and for Cockerell himself, who was surveyor to the East India Company from 1806 to 1824. Daylesford House, remodelled for Warren Hastings, from 1789 to 1793, had oriental hints only in the top of its dome; but Sezincote House, which he designed ('c'.1805-20) for his brother Sir Charles Cockerell, was in full-blown Indian style, and it is thought to have influenced the prince regent (later George IV), who visited it about 1807, in his remodelling of the Royal Pavilion, Brighton. 
Cockerell first exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1785, sending some designs for ornamental structures in the park of White Knights in Berkshire. He did not exhibit again until 1792, from which year up to 1803 he was a frequent contributor, chiefly of designs for mansions and churches. Among other houses designed by him were Middleton Hall, Carmarthenshire, for Sir William Paxton (1793-5; dem. 1951), the austerely neo-classical Nutwell Court, near Exeter, for the second Baron Heathfield (1802), and Toft Hall, Cheshire, where in 1810-13 he added a dining-room, library, and twin towers for Ralph Leycester. 
Cockerell lived at the house at the corner of Savile Row and Burlington Street; he designed a house for himself at 29 North Side, Clapham Common, but in 1800 he moved to Westbourne Lodge, Paddington (once the home of the architect Isaac Ware). He married Anne, daughter and coheir of John Whetham of St Ives, Huntingdonshire; they had six sons and five daughters; his second son was Charles Robert Cockerell (1788-1863), also an architect. Cockerell's pupils, apart from his son Charles, were many, and included Joseph Kay, Benjamin Latrobe, Thomas Martyr, James Noble, William Porden, Robert Sibley, and C. H. Tatham. He died at Westbourne Lodge on 12 July 1827. 


@@@@@


doc= 5784


John Cockerill (1790-1840), woollen manufacturer, born on 30 April 1790 at Haslingden, Lancashire, was consigned to the care of a relative in England until 1802, when he was apprenticed to his father in Verviers. In 1807, when only seventeen, he shared with his brother Charles James the management of the factory at Liege. Soon after the battle of Waterloo the brothers were permitted, through the kind offices of M. Beuth, the Prussian minister of finance, to set up a woollen factory at Berlin. Their success tempted John Cockerill to propose a still greater enterprise. On 25 January 1817 the brothers established at Seraing on the River Meuse what was to prove the most extensive iron foundry and machine manufactory on the continent. John Cockerill married Jannette Federique Pastor of Aix-la-Chapelle on the same day that his brother Charles married her sister. There were no children of the marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 5785


Cockerill, William (1759-1832), inventor, was born in Lancashire, of unknown parentage, and began life by making 'roving billies', and flying shuttles. He was gifted, however, with an extraordinary mechanical genius, and could make with his own hands models of almost any machine. Although the identity of his wife remains unknown, he was probably married by the time he went to Russia in 1794, having been recommended as a skilful artisan to the Empress Catherine II. At St Petersburg he received every encouragement, but the death of the empress only two years later totally ruined his prospects. Her successor, the madman Paul, sent Cockerill to prison, merely because he failed to finish a model within a certain time. Cockerill, however, escaped to Sweden, where, joined by his sons Charles James and William, he was commissioned by the government to construct the locks of a public canal; but his attempts to introduce spinning and other machines of his own invention were not appreciated. He therefore proceeded in 1799 to Verviers in Belgium, where he entered into a contract with the firm of Simonis et Biolley, which enabled him to supply his machines. He was joined by a third son, John ['see below'], in 1802. On the expiry of the contract in 1807 Cockerill settled at Liege with his sons, and there established factories for the construction of spinning and weaving machines. His business increased rapidly. He had thus secured to Verviers supremacy in the woollen trade, and had introduced at Liege an industry of which England had hitherto possessed the monopoly. The merits of his inventions and workmanship were acknowledged by an industrial commission of 1810 and in the same year he took French nationality. Two years later Cockerill retired from business in favour of his two younger sons, Charles James and John. Of his eldest son, William, little is known. His daughter, Nancy, married James Hodson, a skilful mechanic, of Nottingham, who settled at Verviers in 1802, and realized a princely fortune. Cockerill died at the Chateau de Behrensberg, near Aix-la-Chapelle, the residence of his son Charles James, in 1832, aged seventy-three. 
Cockerill's son 
The king of the Netherlands, William I, supported the Cockerill brothers' endeavours and was until 1835 a partner in the business, having invested in it the sum of $100,000. In that year (1835) John Cockerill became the sole proprietor. In February 1839 the firm was in liquidation, but the reverse proved only temporary. Shortly afterwards John Cockerill went to St Petersburg to submit to the tsar his plans for the construction of railways in Russia. On his return, he contracted typhoid fever in Warsaw, and after ten days' suffering he died in his wife's arms on 19 June 1840. In 1867 his remains were taken back to Seraing by his family, where their arrival was greeted by a popular demonstration on 9 June 1867. His statue was unveiled at Seraing on 29 October 1871. 


@@@@@


doc= 5786


Cockin, William (bap. 1736, d. 1801), schoolmaster and writer, was the son of Marmaduke Cockin (1712-1754), a schoolmaster, and his wife, Elizabeth (1716-1770), and was baptized at Burton in Kendal, Westmorland, on 6 September 1736. His father died when he was eighteen so he supported his family for several years. In 1764, following an unhappy period teaching in London boarding-schools, Cockin was appointed writing master and accountant at Lancaster grammar school. Here he influenced the broadening of the curriculum and originated a poetic tradition. 
From 1784 Cockin taught at the Revd John Blanchard's Nottingham Academy, where one of his pupils was George Pryme, the economist. Cockin retired to Burton in 1792 to devote himself to literary pursuits. His friends included the artist George Romney, the physician John Dawson, Dr Thomas Wilson, of Clitheroe, and Dr John James, of Arthuret. Cockin successively became Romney's companion at Hampstead and his amanuensis at Kendal. 
In the belief that no systematic school mathematical book existed, Cockin published 'A Rational and Practical Treatise of Arithmetic' (1766). His important work on elocution dedicated to David Garrick, 'The Art of Delivering Written Language' (1775), reflected his own 'mild and impressive' elocution and the 'fluency and judgement' of his wide-ranging conversation (Romney, 276). 
Having assisted Thomas West in the compilation of his ground-breaking 'Guide to the Lakes' (1778), Cockin enlarged two editions of this work which influenced Wordsworth's guide of 1810. Cockin's pride in great men of Lakeland led to his 'Ode to the Genius of the Lakes' (1780) which was accompanied by short local biographies. Extraordinarily, he proposed here that inscribed pillars should be erected at Lakeland viewpoints in commemoration of significant visitors. 
In 1777 Cockin corresponded with Joseph Banks regarding 'An extraordinary appearance in a mist', a description of a type of muted rainbow, which was published in the 'Philosophical Transactions' ('PTRS', 70, 1780, 157-62) and was considered important by Joseph Priestley. His only independent scientific publication, 'The Theory of the Syphon' (1781), refers to an invention known by the ancient Egyptians. Cockin's philosophical and religious writing includes 'The Freedom of Human Action Explained and Indicated' (1775), which considers the opinions of Joseph Priestley, and 'The Fall of Scepticism and Infidelity Predicted' (1788), written as an epistle to James Beattie. 'Occasional Attempts in Verse' (1776), demonstrating Cockin's wit and capacity for self-mockery, collects verses to both Romney and Sir Isaac Newton while the posthumous collection of verse entitled 'The Rural Sabbath' (1805) includes his 'Stanzas on the Death of Dr Johnson', which praises that critic's possession of 'Albion's gift' (stanza 3). Cockin was not a brilliant poet himself but his verse is replete with mythological and spiritual references and hints at his disapproval of both industry and Sunday labour. He died at Romney's house at Milnthorpe Road, Kendal, on 30 May 1801 and was buried in the churchyard at Burton in Kendal on 2 June. Cockin's versatility militated against his prosperity but he was remembered for his generosity to the poor and for his shyness, modesty, and integrity. 


@@@@@


doc= 5787


Cockings, George (d. 1802), writer, had a small place under the British government at Boston, Massachusetts, but little else is known of his origins or early life. On his return to England he obtained the post of registrar of the Society of Arts, Manufactures, and Commerce in the Adelphi, a post which he held for thirty years. His experiences in North America led him to write poems and dramas, which his contemporaries generally judged as of the feeblest order, particularly in respect of construction and literary style. Some of these, however, nevertheless obtained a measure of success, and went through three or four editions in America and England. 
Cockings's writings include 'The Conquest of Canada, or, The Siege of Quebec' (1766), a historical tragedy in five acts, which was harshly judged as a contemptible production with neither form nor significance. A twentieth-century assessment has been kinder, making allowances for the adherence of Cockings's play to the demands of 'the form of heroic tragedy' (Thomas, 129), and finding a kind of epic sweep to Cockings's drama, a play that found a model and template in some of the dramatic works and poetry of John Dryden. 'Admittedly its versification is frequently slovenly, and its expression is riddled with cliches; but, once the genre is recognized -- and the conventions that were expected to operate within it -- then one can see that the concept is worthy, the structural design usually excellent, the characterization (necessarily typical) as good as that in most heroic tragedies being played then, the staging at times imaginative, and even the diction possessed of an occasional moment of felicity. (ibid., 158)' Cockings's other works included: 'Benevolence and Gratitude' (1772); 'War, an Heroic Poem, from the Taking of Minorca by the French to the Reduction of the Havannah' (1760); 'Poems on Several Subjects' (1772); and 'Arts, Manufactures, and Commerce', a poem (1766). Cockings died on 6 February 1802. 


@@@@@


doc= 5788


Cockle, Sir James (1819-1895), lawyer in Australia and mathematician, was born on 14 January 1819, the second son of 
After inventing his 'family antibilious pills', in the early 1820s Cockle moved to the capital and worked as an apothecary in Hackney. By 1829 he had moved to New Ormond Street, which was fashionable enough for him to begin cultivating custom on a heroic scale, both as an apothecary and as a vendor of pills. By 1837 a list of 200 of the 'nobility, MPs and families of high distinction' who had 'experienced the most beneficial effects from the use of his medicine' was enclosed in each of the pillboxes. More startlingly, in 1838 Cockle revealed that among the seven dukes, fifty-six lesser peers, one archbishop, and fourteen bishops in the list of his patrons were five current cabinet ministers, including the prime minister, William Lamb, second Viscount Melbourne, and the foreign secretary, Henry John Temple, third Viscount Palmerston. In an era of excessive guzzling by the affluent classes, he proclaimed the merits of his vegetable and mercury-free nostrums for relieving derangements of the stomach's functions and 'a torpid state of the liver and bowels'. He publicized the recommendation of the surgeon John Abernethy (1764-1831). Charles Dickens occasionally took the pills, which were mentioned several times in his letters. 
Cockle was able to educate his sons well, and sent at least four to university. His eldest son, John (1814-1900), also became a doctor and took over the business; another son, Charles Moss-Cockle (died 1904), made a fortune as a solicitor. James Cockle died at 18 New Ormond Street, Queen Square, London, on 8 December 1854, leaving $37,085. By 1917, when the business became a limited company, its customers were principally elderly and expatriate, and it closed about 1960. 
The younger James Cockle was educated at Stormond House, Kensington, from 1825 to 1829, as a day pupil at Charterhouse from 1829 until 1831, then privately at Ramsgate by Christian Lenny, a 'ten-year man' of St John's College, Cambridge, who discovered his mathematical talent. After a year's sojourn in the West Indies, Cuba, and America, he entered Trinity College, Cambridge, on 18 October 1837 as a pensioner with Thomas Thorp as his tutor. He enrolled at the Middle Temple on 12 April 1838. In the mathematical tripos of 1841 Cockle was placed thirty-third in the order of merit, though he published a paper in the 'Cambridge Mathematical Journal' in the same year. He proceeded BA in 1842 and MA in 1845. In 1845 he began practice as a special pleader and was called to the bar on 6 November 1846. In 1848 he joined the midland circuit, but maintained his enthusiasm for mathematics. 
As a young barrister Cockle gained a solid reputation for hard work, yet his manner was that of a retiring scholar. On a suggestion he stand for a parliament, he replied: 'My address to the electors shall run thus -- Gentlemen, I am in favour of making things agreeable all round -- all round!' (Harley, 1895, 225). He joined the Royal Astronomical Society (1854), the Cambridge Philosophical Society (1856), and the London Mathematical Society (1870), and was a corresponding member of the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society on 1 June 1865. 
Cockle possessed wide intellectual interests. He was well versed in classical philosophy, wrote on Indian astronomical literature (on the Indian cycles and lunar calendar, on the date of the 'Vedas' and 'Jyotish Sastra', and on the ages of 'Garga' and 'Parasara'), and valued the study of the history of science generally. He published four elaborate memoirs on the motion of fluids and some notes on light under the action of magnetism. It was in pure mathematics, however, that he was held in especially high regard. In the flood of work following the discovery of quaternions by Sir William Rowan Hamilton, Cockle investigated 'tessarines'. A more constant field of enquiry was the theory of equations. In later years his research was confined almost entirely to algebra and differential equations and their interconnection. He pioneered differential invariants (his 'criticoids'), thus contributing to invariant theory, the modern algebra of the day. Initially he distrusted Abel's proof (1824) of the insolubility of the quintic equation, though he came to appreciate it. He determined the explicit form of the sextic 'resolvent' equation on which a specialized quintic depended, and his result was confirmed by the Congregationalist minister and his close collaborator Robert Harley. This work attracted the attention of Arthur Cayley, who was able to place it in a broader context, complete the work for the general quintic equation, and discover its historical antecedents. 
On 22 August 1855 Cockle married Adelaide Catharine Wilkin (died 1916), the eldest surviving daughter of Henry Wilkin of Walton, Suffolk. In his legal career, Cockle's chance came in 1863. He was instrumental in drafting the 'Jurisdiction in Homicides Act' (1862), and his ability attracted the attention of Sir William Erle, then chief justice of the court of common pleas. Erle named Cockle as chief justice for Queensland. It was a critical time for Queensland, which had separated from New South Wales only in 1859. 
On arrival in the colony, Cockle defused an awkward situation with the outspoken maverick judge A. J. P. Lutwyche, who had hoped to be appointed to the senior position. As senior commissioner (1866-7), Cockle consolidated no fewer than 130 colonial statutes and prepared thirty draft bills. Erle remarked: 'I have had much knowledge of judicial men, and I am sure the Queen has never had a servant who more thoroughly earned every farthing of the wages he hoped to receive' (Harley, 1985, 217). Cockle was knighted on 29 July 1869. 
Cockle was every inch the colonial administrator. He was above local politics yet willing to fulfil civic duty. He was chairman of the trustees of Brisbane grammar school (1874-7) -- which he endowed with a mathematics prize -- and his wife gave an annual picnic for local schoolchildren. He was president of the Queensland Philosophical Society (1863-77), to which he initially gave leadership, though he rarely attended meetings in later years. His administration of the law was scrupulous and in court only two of his judgments were reversed on appeal. His impartiality and tolerance were influenced by his strong Christian principles. 
Cockle left Brisbane on 26 June 1878 on a year's paid leave. The colonists regarded their chief justice 'in every way fitted to this high position' and wished him a speedy return ('Brisbane Courier' 26 June 1878). But from England, one year later, Cockle tendered his resignation. He began an active retirement within the social and scientific life of London, though the transition from an equatorial climate impaired his health. He was a member of the Garrick and Savile clubs, though his favourite was the Savage, for which he was treasurer from 1884 to 1889. He was commissioner for the Queensland section of the Indian and Colonial Exhibition held in London in 1886. His ambition to serve as president of the London Mathematical Society was fulfilled (1886-8) and he was a member of the council of the Royal Astronomical Society (1888-92). He became a freemason and was inducted as worshipful master of the Nine Muses lodge on 12 February 1889. 
In early 1895 Cockle caught a chill, and two days later, on 27 January 1895, he died at his residence, 12 St Stephen's Road, Bayswater. He was survived by his wife and eight of his nine children. He was buried at Paddington cemetery on 2 February 1895. 
Cockle contributed to English and Australian scientific journals more than one hundred papers, many in the form of notes with suggestions for future work, but his reputation has not survived. In the second half of the nineteenth century it was not possible to make an indelible mark in both law and mathematics. 


@@@@@


doc= 5789


Cocks, Arthur Herbert (1819-1881), administrator in India, third son of the Hon. Lieutenant-Colonel Philip James Cocks MP (1774-1857), of the Grenadier Guards, and Frances (died 1870), daughter of Arthur Herbert of Brewsterfield, Killarney, was born on 18 April 1819, probably in the parish of Colwall, Herefordshire. His father was the third son of Charles Somers-Cocks, first Baron Somers. Arthur was educated at the Revd Mortlock's school in Brighton and, following his nomination in 1836 to the Bengal civil service, at the East India Company's college at Haileybury. 
Cocks arrived in Bengal in 1837 and initially filled a variety of subordinate revenue and judicial posts in the North-Western Provinces. In 1847, after the First Anglo-Sikh War, Cocks was appointed Henry Lawrence's chief assistant in the Lahore residency. Although technically a political posting, the job required Cocks to advise the Sikh durbar on internal revenue and judicial reforms, and he enthusiastically toured the countryside around Lahore, settling legal disputes, adjusting revenue settlements, and abolishing iniquitous taxes. Like many of his colleagues he saw himself bringing justice and order to a grievously oppressed peasantry. In October 1847 he wrote in his tour diary: 'My present is a delightful occupation. I feel I am doing some tangible good in every order I give' (Rayner, 433). In the same year he married Anna Marion Jessie (died 1914), daughter of Lieutenant-General John Eckford. They had four sons and three daughters. 
During the Second Anglo-Sikh War in 1848 Cocks was political officer to the commander-in-chief, Lord Gough, and was present at the battles of Chilianwala and Gujrat, on which latter occasion he was wounded in close combat with a Sikh trooper. He received the Punjab war medal for his services during the campaign. 
In 1850 Cocks was briefly a deputy commissioner of the Punjab before taking furlough. In 1854 he was appointed magistrate and collector of Mainpuri and in 1858 judge of Mainpuri. District-level work seems to have best accommodated his desire to do 'tangible good' and, but for short postings to Aligarh and the Central Provinces, he remained as judge of Mainpuri until his retirement. During the rebellion of 1857 he joined with a small force of mounted volunteers and engaged in some sturdy but insignificant fighting around Aligarh. 
In 1860 Cocks was made a CB, and in 1863 he resigned the service and returned to England. In retirement he became a JP for Worcestershire and from 1865 to 1872 was a captain in the Worcestershire militia. He died at his home, 8 Ashburn Place, Cromwell Road, South Kensington, London, on 29 August 1881. The second of his four sons was father of the sixth Baron Somers. 


@@@@@


doc= 5790


Cocks, Roger (fl. 1611-1642), Church of England clergyman and poet, was a scholar of Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1611 and graduated BA in 1611/12. He contributed a set of Latin hexameter verses to the university's memorial volume for the death of Prince Henry in 1612. He later became a curate and lecturer at Acton in Middlesex, and in 1630 published 'Hebdomada sacra: a weeke's devotion'. Cocks's text is a set of seven meditations, in rhyming couplets, on 'Matthew' 2, the birth of Christ, and is dedicated to James, Lord Strange. Although the prefatory verse declares 'No profest Poet, but a Preacher wrote it' the work is not without merit. Cocks sets the story firmly in its political context, opening with a brief history of the Roman empire; the description of Herod's court in Tuesday's meditation, when news reaches it of the birth, is a lively portrait of political intrigue and paranoia. A poem 'Written in commendation of Mr Coxe [the lecturer of Acton] his booke of the birth of Christ' survives in the commonplace book of Anne Southwell (1573-1636). 
In 1642 Cocks published 'An Answer to a Book Set Forth by Sir Edward Peyton'. Peyton, a baronet who was MP for Cambridgeshire from 1620 to 1627, had been refused the sacrament by Cocks because he insisted on receiving it standing up, and had published a vindication of his refusal to kneel at communion, based chiefly on scriptural grounds. Cocks's answer to this was a closely argued little pamphlet on the importance of kneeling. 


@@@@@


doc= 5791


Cockson, Thomas (bap. 1569, d. before 1641?), engraver, the son of Ninian Cockson, was baptized on 3 April 1569 at Christ Church Greyfriars, London. He was apprenticed in the Worshipful Company of Goldsmiths to the celebrated William Rogers on 29 September 1584, and became a freeman of his father's livery company, the Merchant Taylors, on 21 February 1598. 
Cockson's known work, comprising fewer than forty extant examples dated between 1591 and 1630, consists mainly of engraved portraits, the most impressive of which are equestrian studies of the earls of Cumberland, Essex, Nottingham, and Devonshire, dating from around 1600 and with cartographic backgrounds showing details of naval actions. Also of note are a 1596 chart of the operations at Cadiz, a satirical plate, 'The Revells of Christendome' (1609), a large plate exhibiting the drill postures of musketeers and pikemen (1619), and a number of engraved title-pages. Cockson's work is justly characterized by Joseph Strutt as being executed 'entirely with the graver, in a neat, stiff style, which seem to prove, that he had much more industry than genius' (Strutt, 1.208). He was none the less an important figure in establishing a London-based school of engraving, and numbered both Robert Vaughan and Thomas Fullwood among his apprentices. His premises in Foster Lane were in the heart of the gold-working district, and it is likely that, as with other engravers at this early period, he had a parallel career in the decorative engraving of gold and silver plate. His name, which appears in several variant forms, was often appended to his prints in the form of a monogram of his initials, a device apt to cause confusion with Thomas Cecill and Thomas Cross. The record of a 'Widow Cockson' on a poll-tax return of 1641 for the parish of St Sepulchre almost certainly indicates his death before that date. 


@@@@@


doc= 5792


Cockton, Henry (1807-1853), novelist, was born in George Yard, Shoreditch, London, on 7 December 1807, one of the eight children of William Cockton, a weaver, and his wife, Mary. Nothing is known of his life before 9 May 1837 when Cockton married Ann, daughter of Abraham and Eleanor Howes, in St James's Church, Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk. Her family owned the Seven Stars inn in Long Brackland in that town. Henry Cockton and his wife rented accommodation at 165 Blackfriars Road, Southwark, London. They had two children, Eleanor and Edward, born in 1839 and 1841 respectively. 
Cockton's fame rests on his first novel, 'Valentine Vox the Ventriloquist', which he wrote in monthly numbers over 1839 and 1840, under the pseudonym Sherry. This was a comic story about a gifted ventriloquist who used his skills to play practical jokes. A sub-plot describing how Valentine's uncle, Grimwood Goodman, was confined in a private lunatic asylum by unscrupulous relatives was an important literary study of a person unjustly classified insane. Illustrations by Thomas Onwhyn were a feature of this and most of Henry Cockton's later works. 'The Age' described 'Valentine Vox' as the best novel of the day and predicted fame for the author. Thomas Prest, a hack writer, produced a plagiarized serial, 'Valentine Vaux', under the pseudonym Timothy Portwine. Yet Henry Cockton made little money from 'Valentine Vox', and his other works failed to equal his first success. 
The popularity of 'Valentine Vox' prompted Richard Bentley to commission Henry Cockton to write 'Stanley Thorn'. This story about upper-class society (based on an unpublished novel started by Richard Harris Barham) appeared in 'Bentley's Miscellany' between 1840 and 1841. A third serial, 'George St George Julian', appeared during 1841 and dealt with frauds and swindles (including Gregor MacGregor's Poyais emigration scheme of 1821). But the publishers went bankrupt, causing Henry Cockton to be declared an insolvent debtor. 
Between 1843 and 1845 Cockton wrote three more novels. The second of these, 'Sylvester Sound the Somnambulist' (1844), the broadly comic story of a sleepwalker, enjoyed some popularity. These works seem to have brought him little financial profit. He then abandoned writing to run the Seven Stars inn at Bury St Edmunds for his wife's family, but was ruined by an unsuccessful malting speculation. This, combined with the debt which he incurred when his brother Edward, for whom he had provided surety, fled to Australia, caused Cockton to resume writing in 1850. He produced a further three novels before dying of consumption at his mother-in-law's house, adjoining the Seven Stars inn, on 26 June 1853. He was buried in the town churchyard in Bury St Edmunds. Tradition held that he died poor and friendless. In 1854 the Royal Literary Fund granted Ann Cockton $25. In 1856 a public appeal was made for his wife and family. Cockton was commemorated in Bury St Edmunds by a memorial erected in the town churchyard in 1884, and a plaque placed on his house in Long Brackland in 1907. 

'Valentine Vox' and 'Sylvester Sound' remained in print until 1920. (Routledge published 400,000 and 80,000 copies of these, respectively, between 1860 and 1902). Some of his other works were re-issued in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. 


@@@@@


doc= 5793


Coddington, Henry (1798/9-1845), natural philosopher and Church of England clergyman, was born at Oldbridge, co. Meath, Ireland, the son of the Revd Latham Coddington, rector of Tinolin, co. Kildare, and his wife, Anne Bellingham. He matriculated at Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1816 and graduated in 1820 as senior wrangler and first Smith's prizeman, being elected a fellow of his college the same year. He proceeded MA in 1823 and was tutor from 1822 to 1833. He was ordained priest in 1826 and he retired to the college living of Ware in Hertfordshire in 1832. Before 1839 he married a daughter of Joseph Hallet Batten, principal of East India College, Haileybury; they had a son, Henry Hallet Coddington (1839-1883), a clergyman. 
Coddington was regarded as a good modern linguist, an excellent musician and draughtsman, and a skilled botanist. His scientific works, with the exception of an anonymous tract, 'The Principles of the Differential Calculus', were devoted to optics. 'An Elementary Treatise on Optics' (1823; 2nd edn, 1825) was based on Whewell's lectures and displayed the prevailing Cambridge interest in 'geometrical' optics, de-emphasizing 'physical' questions about the nature of light itself. The book nevertheless hinted at an early acceptance of the new wave theory of light at Cambridge. 'A System of Optics', published in two parts, raised higher his claims as an independent enquirer in geometrical optics. The first part, 'A Treatise on the Reflexion and Refraction of Light' (1829), contained a very complete investigation of the paths of reflected and refracted rays, while in the second, 'A Treatise on the Eye and on Optical Instruments' (1830), were explained the theory and construction of the various kinds of telescope and microscope. His texts became standard material for Cambridge undergraduate studies. On 22 March 1830 he read a paper on the improvement of the microscope before the Cambridge Philosophical Society; his strong recommendation of the grooved sphere lens, first described by David Brewster in 1820, brought it into general use under the designation of the 'Coddington lens'. He also wrote 'A Few Remarks on the New Library Question, by a Member of neither Syndicate' (1831) and 'The Church Catechism Explained, Enlarged, and Confirmed by Quotations from Holy Scripture' (1840). 
Coddington was elected fellow of the Royal Society of London in 1829 and was in the first published list of members of the British Association for the Advancement of Science in 1832. He was a founding member of the Royal Astronomical Society and was a fellow of the Geological and Cambridge Philosophical societies. The stress of dealing with dissension within his parish evidently led to a burst blood vessel, and while travelling abroad for his health he died at Rome on 3 March 1845, leaving seven children. 


@@@@@


doc= 5794


Coddington, William (1601?-1678), merchant and official in America, was born in Lincolnshire and may have been the son of Robert Coddington (died 1615) of Marston, Lincolnshire. At the tender age of twenty-nine, while still in England, he was elected an assistant or magistrate of Massachusetts Bay Colony. He arrived in Salem in June 1630 with Governor John Winthrop and the first company of settlers, including his first wife, Mary, who died that winter. He married Mary Moseley (died 1647) on 2 September 1631. During the next six years he was elected to numerous town and colony offices, including colony treasurer (1634-6). The upward trajectory of his Massachusetts political career was halted in 1637 when he supported Anne Hutchinson during the antinomian controversy. After her trial and banishment he moved in 1638, along with other religious dissenters, to Rhode Island, where, with Roger Williams's help, he purchased the island of Aquidneck from the Narragansett Indians. Accustomed to exercising political authority, he expected once again to occupy high office. Rhode Islanders, however, were far more fractious than Massachusetts settlers, and his path to power was not smooth. At Portsmouth, a town he founded on the northern end of Aquidneck, inhabitants organized the community according to a biblical model and selected him as judge, a powerful position based on an ancient Hebrew office. But just a year later, in 1639, he was ousted because of political and theological disputes with a faction led by Anne and William Hutchinson. Fed up with such contentiousness, he moved in 1640 with his supporters to the southern end of the island, where he established Newport. That same year, after Portsmouth and Newport united under a common administration, he served as governor. When those towns joined with Warwick and Providence in 1647, he was chosen the second president of the new political entity, serving from May 1648 to May 1649. While in office he attempted, unsuccessfully, to have Rhode Island included in the New England confederation, created by the other New England colonies for defence against the American Indians. He also evidently failed to establish his authority within Rhode Island with as much force as he would have liked. In January 1649 he departed for England; he returned two years later with a new spouse, Ann Brinley ('c'.1628-1708), an infant son, and a commission from the council of state naming him governor of Aquidneck for life, with complete judicial power. Other officials in Rhode Island were scarcely pleased, and years of political turmoil ensued. Finally, in 1654, Roger Williams negotiated an uneasy peace among the various factions, and Coddington abandoned his independent rule of Aquidneck, agreeing to serve as Newport's representative in the court of commissioners. His political career subsequently waned, in part perhaps because of his growing interest in spiritual matters. He eventually embraced Quakerism, and even entertained George Fox in his home in 1672. Towards the end of his life he was called again to public service, elected deputy governor in 1674 and governor in 1678. 
Politics and government dominated Coddington's life, but family matters and economic interests likewise engaged him. He had thirteen children, six of whom survived to adulthood. A wealthy merchant and self-styled gentleman, he prospered in Rhode Island, despite losing property worth $400 in a fire in 1644. He was one of Rhode Island's most prominent stockmen, raising sheep on offshore islands and horses for sale to West Indies sugar planters; he also experimented with tobacco production. He owned one of the grandest mansion houses in Newport. It was in that town that he died in November 1678, in the middle of his term as governor. He was buried in Newport on 6 November 1678. 


@@@@@


doc= 5795


Codrington, Christopher (1668-1710), colonial governor and benefactor, was born in the parish of St John, Barbados, the elder son of Christopher Codrington (1639/40-1698), member of the council and later deputy governor of Barbados and governor-general of the Leeward Islands, and his wife, Gertrude. The family's wealth derived principally from sugar plantations at Betty's Hope, Antigua, and Consett Bay, Barbados, and from the lease of the island of Barbuda, where both cattle and slaves were bred. From about 1680 Codrington was educated in England, where he attended Dr Wedale's school in Enfield until 1685; on 4 July that year, he matriculated as a gentleman commoner at Christ Church, Oxford. On 13 July 1687 he was admitted a member of the Middle Temple in London while keeping terms at Oxford. In 1690 he was elected a fellow of All Souls, Oxford; he graduated BA in 1691. 
Codrington was a friend of many of the most prominent Oxford wits, including Joseph Addison, Charles Boyle, and Thomas Creech. As a pupil of George Smalridge at Christ Church he took the part of the auctioneer, Edward Millington, in a satire on the book trade, 'Auctio Davisiana'. In January 1693, as a volunteer soldier, he sailed for the West Indies and fought in the attack on Martinique. When he returned to Oxford that autumn he was promoted to a captaincy, and he proceeded MA on 29 January 1694. He soon joined William III's army in Flanders, taking part in the capture of Huy in September 1694. In the summer of 1695 Codrington distinguished himself at the siege of Namur, where on 1 August he was promoted lieutenant-colonel and captain of the guards. He was briefly a candidate for the university seat in the election of 1695 and delivered the oration when William III visited Oxford on 5 November, but rejoined his company in April 1696. With the conclusion of hostilities Codrington travelled to Paris in 1698, where he made the acquaintance of Nicolas Malebranche and cemented his friendship with Matthew Prior. 
Soon after his return to London in July 1698 Codrington learned of the death of his father. The ensuing two years were marked by frantic activity. Codrington secured his own appointment, confirmed in May 1699, as governor-general of the Leeward Islands and deployed his inheritance to purchase the family estate at Dodington, Gloucestershire, from his cousin Samuel in 1700. He composed laudatory verses for his friend Samuel Garth's poem 'The Dispensary' (1699) and organized the publication of 'Commendatory Verses' (1700), which defended Garth and others of his friends from the attacks of Sir Richard Blackmore. In 1700 he also wrote an epilogue for John Dennis's classical tragedy, 'Iphigenia'. His widening circle of acquaintance now included John Locke, who presented him with a copy of the fourth edition of 'An Essay Concerning Human Understanding' (1700). He also engaged the services of Alexander Cunningham to build a library which would eventually number more than 10,000 books, many purchased in continental Europe, but which its owner would never properly see. On 17 August 1700, having made a will, Codrington sailed for the West Indies, leaving Oxford gossips to speculate whether the Bodleian Library might be the intended beneficiary of his bibliomania. 
Under the shadow of war Codrington worked to strengthen gubernatorial authority, fortify the islands, enforce the 'Navigation Acts', and discipline corrupt officials. Exploiting his friendship with several members of the council for trade and plantations, he also sought appointment as governor of Barbados. His ambitions were frustrated, however, by the scandal that engulfed him following his personal intervention in the case between William Mead and Thomas Herbert at the Nevis court house in spring 1701. Mead and his associate William Freeman brought a suit against Codrington before the council and later before the House of Commons, alleging that he had abused his power as governor, mismanaged their appeals, and forcibly evicted them from their property. Codrington's friends, notably Charles Boyle, came to his defence and he was exonerated in October 1702, by which time war had broken out again. After initial successes, however, his reputation as a soldier was damaged by his inability to co-ordinate army and naval activities and by the failure of the attack on Guadeloupe in 1703. From April to August of that year Codrington was gravely ill with dysentery and he eventually applied for leave only to be removed from office by the commissioners for trade and plantations. 
After the death of his immediate successor, in December 1704, Codrington tried (unsuccessfully) to be reinstated as governor. His remaining political actions were devoted to preserving his reputation and his estates. He was never able to implement his plans for reform, in which officials were to be properly salaried and the law rigorously applied by one who knew the ways of the Caribbean colonies. Although he had claimed: 'I have acted with the sincerity of a majestrate in a Platonick Commonwealth' (TNA: PRO, CO/152/4, no. 36), Codrington himself recognized the extent of his failure in public life, remarking that 'the vote has sunk too deep in my heart ever to be removed, and I act now very uncomfortably without pleasure and without ambition -- If I live to see England, I will pass my life in my Library and be buryed in my garden' ('CSP col.', 21.125). Exhausted by political struggles, Codrington left Antigua in August 1707. In 1708 he mediated in a dispute between the governor, Mitford Crowe, and the Barbados council. He died in the house where he had been born on 7 April 1710 and was buried on the following day in St Michael's Church, Bridgetown. 
Codrington's death made public the charitable intentions set out in the will that he had written 'in his boots when he was going to Command the Expedition to Guardaloup' on 22 February 1703 (SPG Archives, A6, no. 111). He left $6000 to All Souls to pay for the building of a new library, with a further gift of $4000 to be laid out on books. His own collection was also bequeathed to the college. His Barbados plantations, valued at $30,000, and a share of the island of Barbuda, were to be given to the newly founded Society for the Propagation of the Gospel (SPG): 'My desier is to have the Plantations Continued Intire and three hundred negros at Least Kept always thereon, and A Convenient number of Professors and Scholars Maintained there, all of them to be under the vows of Poverty Chastity and obedience, who shall be oblidged to Studdy and Practice Physick and Chyrurgery as well as divinity. (MS Rawl. C. 983, fols. 157-8)' Codrington's will and the sentiments expressed in a sermon preached at his funeral by William Gordon revealed a deep and practical piety, tied to a desire to improve the moral and physical health of both the white and black inhabitants of the Caribbean colonies. Under the direction of the SPG, Codrington College opened in 1745, though its activities were initially limited to the schooling of white settlers. On 19 June 1716 Codrington's body was reinterred in the ante-chapel at All Souls, of which his generosity had made him a 'second founder' (Cotes and Young, 18). 


@@@@@


doc= 5796


Codrington, Sir Edward (1770-1851), naval officer, of the old family of Codrington of Dodington in Gloucestershire, third son of Edward Codrington (1732-1775) of London and his wife, Anne, 'nee' Sturgeon, and grandson of Sir Edward Codrington, first baronet, was born on 27 April 1770. He entered the navy in July 1783; after serving continuously on the Halifax, Mediterranean, and home stations, he was confirmed lieutenant on 28 May 1793 and, by Lord Howe's desire, appointed to the frigate 'Pegasus'. He was afterwards transferred to the 'Queen Charlotte', Howe's flagship, on board which he acted as signal officer during the anxious days preceding 1 June 1794. In the battle of that day he had command of the foremost lower-deck guns and, on the arrival of the fleet and prizes off the Isle of Wight, was sent up to London with Howe's dispatches. He was promoted on 7 October 1794 to be commander of the fireship 'Comet' from which, on 6 April 1795, he was posted captain of the frigate 'Babet' (22 guns). In her he was present in the action off Lorient on 23 June 1795; in July 1796 he was moved to the 'Druid' (32 guns) on the Lisbon station, which ship he brought home and paid off early in 1797. 
In May 1805 Codrington commissioned the 'Orion' (74 guns). In August he joined the fleet off Cadiz, and on 21 October took part in the battle of Trafalgar; he afterwards continued in command of the 'Orion', attached to the fleet under Lord Collingwood until December 1806. In November 1808 he was appointed to the 'Blake' (74 guns), which was employed during the next summer in the North Sea under Sir Richard Strachan, bore Lord Gardner's flag in the Walcheren expedition, and was hotly engaged in forcing the passage of the Scheldt on 14 August. In the early summer of 1810 Codrington, still in the 'Blake', was sent to co-operate with the Spaniards at Cadiz, and in August was charged with the difficult duty of convoying to Minorca four old Spanish line-of-battle ships, crowded with refugees, a task which was safely accomplished after a passage of thirty-eight days. During 1811 and 1812 he commanded a detached squadron on the east coast of Spain, co-operating with the Spaniards wherever opportunity offered and waging a harassing war against the French invaders. Early in 1813 he returned to England, and at the beginning of 1814 was sent out to the North American station with a broad pennant in the frigate 'Forth'. On 4 June 1814 he was advanced to flag rank and appointed captain of the fleet to Sir Alexander Cochrane, under whom he conducted operations in the Chesapeake, and afterwards at New Orleans, with his flag in the 'Havannah' (36 guns). On 2 January 1815 he was made a KCB, and in 1825 he became a vice-admiral. 
In December 1826 Codrington was appointed commander-in-chief in the Mediterranean, and sailed for his station on 1 February 1827, with his flag in the 'Asia' (84 guns). After some months at Malta he was induced by the great proliferation of piracy and the urgent appeals of Stratford Canning, the ambassador at Constantinople, to attempt to reduce the horrors of the war of Greek independence. He left Malta on 19 June and arrived on the coast of Greece in the early days of July. There the position was one of extreme difficulty, for, while a large section of the British public was enthusiastic in the cause of the Greeks, the British government was suspicious of the aims of the Russians. George Canning, the prime minister, was anxious that any interference with the war should be made in concert; and in July he succeeded in concluding a treaty between Britain, France, and Russia, by which it was provided that each of the three powers should instruct its admiral in the Mediterranean to 'obtain the immediate effect of the desired armistice, by preventing, as far as should be in his power, all collision between the contending parties'. Codrington was further ordered to receive directions from Stratford Canning, who on 19 August interpreted the instructions of the British government to mean that the allies intended 'to enforce, by cannon-shot if necessary, the armistice which was the object of the treaty; the object being to interpose the allied forces and to keep the peace by the speaking-trumpet if possible, but in case of necessity by force'. This interpretation he repeated in even stronger language on 1 September, and it must be held as a sufficient warrant to Codrington to employ force if he should deem it necessary. Codrington himself favoured the Greeks and maintained friendly relations with the British officers in the Greek service -- Thomas Cochrane, Frank Hastings, and Sir Richard Church -- and unofficially permitted and even encouraged them to continue the war though this was forbidden by the treaty. 
On 25 September, Codrington and the French admiral, De Rigny, had an interview at Navarino with Ibrahim Pasha, the commander-in-chief of the Turkish sea and land forces; they explained to him their instructions, and, through the interpreter, obtained from him a verbal assent to the proposed armistice. But a few days later, on receiving news of the attack on the Turkish ships and batteries in Salona Bay made on 29 September by Frank Hastings acting with the Greek forces, Ibrahim Pasha considered himself absolved from his engagement and sent a strong squadron from Navarino with orders to attack Hastings in the Gulf of Corinth. On 3 October this squadron was met off the mouth of the gulf by Codrington, and, yielding to his protests, returned to Navarino. Ibrahim, however, then landed in force in the Morea and devastated the country, committing various atrocities. Codrington gathered his whole available force, together with the French and Russian squadrons, numbering in all eleven ships of the line, eight large frigates, and eight smaller vessels; on 14 October they arrived off Navarino, where the Turkish fleet was still anchored. It consisted of three ships of the line, fifteen large frigates, and many smaller vessels, bringing up the total to eighty-nine -- a force strong in number, but in its composition far inferior to that of the combined fleet of which Codrington was the commander-in-chief. As the Turks had shown that they intended to leave Navarino, and hostilities had already resumed, the allied admirals were of the opinion that the blockade of the bay was a necessary precaution. A very few days were sufficient to convince Codrington of the difficulty and danger of blockading Navarino so late in the autumn; he therefore determined to go inside and anchor. The dangers of doing so in the middle of the bay, exposed to the fire of the entire Turkish fleet, led him to order the ships under his command to anchor close in and alongside of the Turks. 
Accordingly, on 20 October, with a fair wind, they stood into the bay, the guns loaded and the men at quarters. The Turks were equally prepared. It is impossible to suppose that Codrington had any real expectation of peace being preserved between two fleets so situated. The frigate 'Dartmouth' found herself anchored dead to leeward of a Turkish fireship, and sent a boat to move her, or order her to move; and the Turk, assuming that the boat was coming on a hostile mission, fired a volley of musketry into it. The 'Dartmouth' replied, other ships took it up, and within a few minutes the action became general. Although the real disparity of force was very great, the battle lasted nearly four hours; the Turks' loss in killed and wounded, never accurately known, was said to amount to 4000, while that of the allies was 650. The victory assured Greece's survival. 
The news of the bloody battle and the destruction of the Turkish fleet was variously received in England. At the urgent request of the duke of Clarence, then lord high admiral, rewards were bestowed with unprecedented liberality; Codrington received the GCB, as well as the grand cross of St Louis from France, the second class of the order of St George from Russia, and, later, the gold cross of the Redeemer of Greece. As a matter of policy, however, the battle was very differently considered. Canning, the prime minister, had died the previous August, and his successors were as aware of the danger of Russian aggression as of the advantage of Greek liberation. On the opening of parliament on 29 January 1828, the king accordingly lamented the conflict as an 'untoward event', an expression which conflicted with the strong philhellenic feeling in Britain, leading the ministry to state that 'they did not make the slightest charge, nor cast the least imputation upon the gallant officer who commanded at Navarino'. Nevertheless controversy ensued, the difficulty of resolving which contributed to Codrington's somewhat summary recall, the news of which reached him at Corfu on 21 June 1828. He arrived in England on 7 October and spent the winter in London, endeavouring in vain to arrive at some understanding of his recall. The duke of Wellington in a personal interview assured him of his esteem, but would give no explicit statement or explanation. Codrington consequently drew up and printed for private circulation a narrative of his proceedings in the Mediterranean, which was later published in the 'Memoir' of his life. 
In June 1831 Codrington was appointed to the command of the channel squadron for the summer experimental cruise, and hoisted his flag in the 'Caledonia' until the end of the season, on 24 October. He was made GCMG in April 1827, and was Liberal MP for Devonport from 1832 to 1839. On 10 January 1837 he became admiral of the blue, and on 22 November 1839 commander-in-chief at Portsmouth. His active career ended with the termination of that command on 31 December 1842. He died at 110 Eaton Square, London, on 28 April 1851, after a few months' illness, and was buried on 2 May in the family vault at St Peter's Church, Eaton Square, London, where a tablet was erected to his memory. 
On 27 December 1802 Codrington married Jane (died 22 Jan 1837), daughter of Jasper Hall of Kingston, Jamaica; they had three sons and two daughters. One of the sons died young, drowned in a boating accident; the other two, William John Codrington and Henry John Codrington, both had distinguished careers. The eldest daughter, Jane Barbara, married Captain Sir Thomas Bourchier (who died superintendent of Chatham Dockyard in 1849) and in 1873 published a two-volume biography of her father. 


@@@@@


doc= 5797


Codrington, Sir Henry John (1808-1877), naval officer, third son of Admiral Sir Edward Codrington (1770-1851), and his wife, Jane, 'nee' Hall (died 1837), was born in October 1808 and entered the navy in 1823 on board the frigate 'Naiad', Captain the Hon. Robert Cavendish Spencer, to whose early training he owed much. During 1824 the 'Naiad' was active during the Algerian war, blockading the coast and burning corsairs. She was then nearly two years on the Greek coast observing the war of independence, and returned to England towards the end of 1826. Codrington then joined the 'Asia', flagship of Sir Edward Codrington, in the Mediterranean. He remained in the 'Asia' during his father's command, and acted as signal midshipman at the battle of Navarino, where he was wounded in the leg. As a compliment to his father, he was decorated by the tsar and the kings of France and Greece. 
On 12 June 1829 Codrington was made lieutenant, and, after serving through the summer of 1831 as his father's flag-lieutenant with the Squadron of Evolution, he was promoted commander on 20 October. Three years later he was appointed to command the sloop 'Orestes' in the Mediterranean, and was promoted captain on 20 January 1836. During the following two years he was on half pay, and devoted himself to scientific study. In March 1838 he was appointed to command the 'Talbot', a small, old-fashioned sloop armed mostly with outdated short-range carronades, yet she was so handled by Codrington as to be an effective addition to the Mediterranean fleet, and to take a useful part in the bombardment of Acre on 4 November 1840, for which he received the CB. The preliminary survey of Acre was made by Codrington himself, taking the soundings by night close in under the walls of the town. In private letters afterwards he criticized Commodore Sir Charles Napier, since he was entirely ignorant of Napier's political correspondence with Lord Palmerston, and his central role in the rapid prosecution of the campaign. His complaint had more to do with Napier's manners than his abilities, which better men than Codrington never doubted. It was a mark of Codrington's limited intellect that he never appreciated Napier's leadership, decision, and energy, for these were the very qualities that he himself so signally lacked. Codrington described Napier as 'excellent at irregular shore work, and a most enterprising partisan warrior, but not what I call a good officer'. 
Early in 1841 Codrington was recalled to England to command the 'St Vincent' as flag-captain to his father, then commander-in-chief at Portsmouth. He held this appointment only until the end of 1842. Four years later, having quarrelled with Captain Sir Thomas Hastings of HMS 'Excellent', he was appointed to the frigate 'Thetis', which went to the Mediterranean in September 1847. In the following years the 'Thetis' was employed on the coast of Italy, protecting British interests and British subjects, and acting as a refuge for displaced native rulers. Thanks to the first lieutenant, John McNeill Boyd, the 'Thetis' was kept fully up to the mark, and was praised by the commander-in-chief at Plymouth when she was paid off in May 1850. However, she gained a bad reputation, and Codrington and Boyd became unpopular in the service, because of the strict discipline over the midshipmen: possibly tact was occasionally wanting. While on station, in 1849, Codrington married Helen Jane Webb Smith of Lyndhurst. They had several children. 
In October 1853, in anticipation of the war with Russia, Codrington was appointed to command the 'Royal George', an old three-decker with an auxiliary screw. She formed part of the Baltic fleet during the two seasons of 1854 and 1855. Controversy afterwards arose as to the conduct of the fleet in 1854. Between Sir Charles Napier, the commander-in-chief, and Codrington, the senior captain in the fleet, there was little love lost. There were faults on both sides; but Codrington's conduct bordered on mutiny, and could not be excused by any provocation. Codrington had an interest in steam tactics, but his views were impractical and over-complex, and in consequence were ignored by Napier, a far more experienced and practical officer. In February 1856 Codrington moved to the 'Algiers' (90 guns), as commodore of a flotilla of gunboats; but the peace deprived him of any opportunity of using them, and his sea service ended with the St George's day review and a passage to the Crimea, where he embarked elements of the army, then commanded by his elder brother William John Codrington (1804-1884). 
On 19 March 1857 Codrington became a rear-admiral, and from 1858 to 1863 he was admiral superintendent at Malta. On 24 September 1863 he was advanced to be vice-admiral, on 18 October 1867 to be admiral, and on 22 January 1877 to be admiral of the fleet. He was appointed KCB on 13 March 1867 and, following the death of his first wife, married Catherine Compton of Lyndhurst in 1869. He was commander-in-chief at Plymouth 1869-72, but his flag was never hoisted on board a seagoing ship; he never had command of a squadron at sea or took a seat at the Board of Admiralty. This was a reflection of his abilities for, although a fine seaman and a strict disciplinarian, Codrington lacked the leadership and intellect required for a senior command, or the collaboration of the board. His career was made by his father, whom he hero-worshipped. His quarrels with senior officers suggest that he was an arrogant and fastidious snob. In 1854 Napier, a far greater man, was so incensed by Codrington's conduct that he wished to court-martial him, along with captains George Elliot and Alfred Ryder. All three deserved censure, but the board and the government would not back him, undermining his authority and his faith in the Admiralty. Codrington died at his home, 112 Eaton Square, London, on 4 August 1877. 


@@@@@


doc= 5798


Codrington, Robert (1601/2-1665?), translator and writer, was the second son of Robert Codrington ('b'. 1573/4?) of Coddrington, Gloucestershire. Elected a demy or scholar of Magdalen College, Oxford, on 29 July 1619, he matriculated on 26 June 1621, aged nineteen, graduated BA on 18 February 1623, and proceeded MA on 27 June 1626. According to Anthony Wood he then travelled before settling in Norfolk, where he lived as a gentleman for several years and married; his wife's name is unknown. Later he moved to London, and may have been the Robert Coddrington who, with his wife, 'Haveningam' ('nee' Heveningham?), presented their son Robert for baptism at St Andrew's, Holborn, on 9 November 1635. 
The previous year Codrington began what was to be a thirty-year career of publishing translations from French, Latin, and Spanish, and occasional works of his own. Historical biography was a notable feature, but the context of and motivation for publication is unclear: all his works contained hopeful dedications, but usually to people with whom he claimed no prior acquaintance, and in which he revealed no personal details. The anti-Catholic 'The Elegant Combat' (1634), describing the confrontation between leading Huguenot minister and Anglophile Pierre du Moulin and Jean-Louis Guez de Balzac, and dedicated to Sir Anthony Mildmay, was complemented by a translation from du Moulin, 'A Treatise of the Knowledge of God' (1634), addressed to the countess of Derby, as a well-known patron of learning. The following year he issued 'L. A. Seneca the Philosopher, his Booke of Consolation to Marcia... in an English Poem'. He seems to have had at least a tenuous connection with the royal court, for the subject of his 'An Elegie to the Immortall Memory... of Margaret Lady Smith' (1637) was one of the queen's gentlewomen; the dedicatee, her last husband, Edward Savage, was a gentleman of the king's privy chamber. By 1641 Codrington claimed to have written 'many hundred' poems. That spring he was imprisoned by parliament because of one interpreted as overly sympathetic to the earl of Strafford. Writing on 24 May to Sir Edward Dering, MP for Kent, with a plea for mercy for the unintentional offence, Codrington, lame and consumptive, made much of the suffering of his wife and children and of the 'many noble familyes, to whom I neerely am allyed' who 'bleed in my wounds', and protested that 'there was never a more hopefull parliament than this, never an assembly of more able and more excellent men in a more needfull time, for establishing of the kingdome' (Larking, 50-51). His release seems to have soon followed. 
Wood thought Codrington a puritan and a parliamentarian. His writings reveal a commitment to protestantism, but it is difficult to discern a more precise religious or political stance. His 'The Memorialls of Margaret de Valoys', the first edition of which was published in 1641 with a dedication to Surrey gentleman Sir Anthony Vincent, was presented as the queen of Navarre's own account of courtly intrigue during the French wars of religion; new editions with almost identically worded dedications to (respectively) John Cecil, earl of Exeter, and George Meryfield appeared in 1647 and 1650. However, 'The History of the most Illustrious Lady Queen Margaret' (1649), based on the same text and dedicated to Sir Horatio Townshend of Raynham, Norfolk, pointedly referred in the subtitle to its representation of 'the Bloody Massacre [of St Bartholomew's day] and the growth and fury of the Civill War in that Kingdome, occasioned by the policy and ambition of the Catholic Nobility, and by the pernicious Counsell of some Bishops'. If this had been his conscious theme all along then his translation of a manifesto published in Paris on 24 April 1642, issued as 'A Declaration Sent to the King of France and Spayne from the Catholiques or Rebells in Ireland' (1642), was clearly meant to draw parallels between the conflicts in late sixteenth-century France and contemporary Britain: in this work the Irish Catholics who sought to subvert and convert susceptible protestants and to obtain foreign support emerged as latter-day equivalents of the Guise-led leaguers. 'The Life and Death of the Illustrious Robert, Earl of Essex' (1646), a derivative work dedicated to Walter Devereux, Viscount Hereford, portrayed a protestant general (and son of another), following his death on 24 September 1646. 
Codrington's subsequent output was more varied. 'The Troublesome and Hard Adventures in Love' (1652), derived from Miguel de Cervantes and dedicated to James Compton, earl of Northampton, himself a translator, was followed by 'The Ten Books of Quintus Curtius Rufus: Containing, the Life and Death of Alexander the Great' (1652), dedicated to Baptist Hicks, Viscount Campden; verses, 'The Dimension of the Hollow Tree on Hampstead' (1653) and a 'corrected and revived' edition of Ludovick Lloyd's 'The Marrow of History, or, The Pilgrimage of Kings and Princes' (1653), were dedicated to Charles Dimmock. There were further translations: from Marguerite de Valois, 'Heptameron, or, The History of the Fortunate Lovers' (1654, dedicated to Thomas Stanley) and 'The Grand Cabinet-Counsels Unlocked' (1658, dedicated to William Basset of Claverton, Somerset); from Justinus's Roman history, dedicated fulsomely to Oliver Cromwell (1654); and from Savoy Chapel minister Jean d'Espagne, 'Shibboleth, Observations of Severall Errors in the Last Translations of the English & French Bibles' (1655). 
After the Restoration, Codrington published 'Ten Sermons' (1660), originally delivered in Latin at Oxford in 1647 by Robert Sanderson, one of the few Calvinists among the newly appointed bishops. In contrast was his 1662 English version of George Ruggles's Latin play, 'Ignoramus'. In 'The Prophecies of Christopher Kotterus' (1664), dedicated to Prince Rupert, Codrington revived predictions of 'the sudden destruction of the Popish Religion in the year 1666, presaging the uniting of all Religions into one visible Church, and how that Church shall be Governed by Bishops', while in 'His Majesties Propriety and Dominion on the Brittish Seas Asserted' (1665), dedicated to the earl of Albemarle, he made a timely patriotic attack on the 'insupportable insolencies' of the Dutch. He also contributed the French and Latin sections of Francis Barlow's 'Aesops Fables with his Life' (1666), collaborated on an edition of Thomas Hawkins's 'The Holy Court', and added to some editions of Francis Hawkins's 'Youths Behaviour' a complementary 'Youths Behaviour, or, Decency in Conversation amongst Women' (1664), which dealt with issues as diverse as preserving, obedience to parents, and sleep, and 'A Collection of Select Proverbs... out of Several Languages' (1664). 
According to Wood, Codrington died of the plague in London in 1665. That is the year of first appearance of his final publication, although many of his works were reissued. The 'second addition' of 'Youths Behaviour... amongst Women', with a title-page dated 1672 but with the imprimatur of 12 November 1663 and reference to addition 'this Year 1663', has a dedication by Codrington to Ellinor Pargiter and her daughter Elizabeth Washington dated 'Feb. 10. 66', but this may be a misprint. 


@@@@@


doc= 5799


Codrington, Thomas (c.1640-1694), Roman Catholic priest, was the son of Edward Codrington of Sutton Mandeville, Wiltshire, and his wife, Frances, daughter of Francis Perkins of Ufton Court, Berkshire. He had several siblings, among whom his brother Bonaventure was also a priest. He was educated at the English College at Douai, where he used the alias Mainwaring. He was ordained priest in 1676, after only two years' study of theology, because he had been invited to Rome by Cardinal Howard; there he acted for some time as his chaplain and secretary. In July 1684 he returned to England, and was in 1686 appointed one of the chaplains and preachers-in-ordinary to James II. While at Rome he had joined the Institute of Secular Priests living in community (founded in Bavaria by Bartolomaus Holzhauser), and on his return to England he and his companion, John Morgan, were appointed procurators with a view to the introduction of the institute there. This design was cordially approved by Cardinal Howard. The rule of the institute was for two or more priests to live in common in the same house, without female attendance, and in subjection to the ordinary of the diocese. In 1697 the rules of the institute were published in England, under the title of 'Constitutiones clericorum saecularium in communi viventium'. But the scheme encountered much opposition, especially from the secular clergy chapter, on whose behalf John Sergeant wrote 'A letter to our worthy brethren of the new institute'. This letter gave the death blow to the institute, which was subsequently, in 1703, suppressed by Bishop Giffard, vicar apostolic of the London district. Its funds were incorporated into the Secular Clergy Common Fund. 
Codrington made his will in 1688, which he left with his sister on following James II into exile at St Germain-en-Laye. There he continued to officiate as his chaplain. He made another will in 1693, which was contested by his sister on the grounds that he was blind and 'non compos mentis' as a result of smallpox, from which he died, at St Germain, on 4 or 14 February 1694. His only publications were two sermons preached at court in 1686 and 1687. 


@@@@@


doc= 5800


Codrington, Sir William John (1804-1884), army officer, second son of Admiral Sir Edward Codrington (1770-1851), commander of the British fleet at the battle of Navarino Bay in 1827, and his wife, Jane (died 22 Jan 1837), daughter of Jasper Hall of Kingston, Jamaica, and Otterburn, Hexham, was born on 26 November 1804. He had two brothers, both of whom joined the Royal Navy -- Edward (1803-1819), a midshipman, and admiral of the fleet Sir Henry John Codrington (1808-1877) -- and three sisters, Jane-Barbara (died 1884), Maria-Elizabeth (died 1865), and Emma-Charlotte (died 1863). Codrington purchased an ensigncy in the 88th foot on 22 February 1821, going on half pay on 25 October. Again by purchase, he became successively an ensign in the 43rd foot on 24 October 1822 and ensign and lieutenant in the Coldstream Guards on 24 April 1823. Similarly, he advanced in the Coldstreams to lieutenant and captain on 20 June 1826, and to captain and lieutenant-colonel on 8 July 1836. Codrington married Mary (1814/15-1898), second daughter of Levi Ames of Hyde, Hertfordshire, on 7 May 1836. In 1856 she was appointed woman of the bedchamber to Queen Victoria. They had two sons and two daughters: Edward Bethell (1845-1853), Lieutenant-General Sir Alfred Edward (1854-1945), Jane-Emily, and Mary. 
Codrington served with the 2nd battalion in Canada from 1838 to 1842, arriving back at Spithead on 31 October. Having become a brevet colonel on 9 November 1846, Codrington embarked with the 1st battalion Coldstream Guards at Southampton for Malta on 22 February 1854 as part of the British expeditionary force under Lord Raglan. After a brief stay on Malta the battalion reached Scutari on 29 April, and, as an acting regimental major, Codrington subsequently landed with it at Varna on 13 June. Seven days later, promoted major-general, he left the Coldstreams but remained in Bulgaria. When Brigadier-General Richard Airey succeeded Lord de Ros as Raglan's quartermaster-general, on 1 September Codrington took over the 1st brigade of the light division, comprising the 7th, 23rd, and 33rd regiments. 
The combined British, French, and Turkish force landed on the Crimean peninsula on 14 September. Short-sighted, but not too vain to wear glasses, six days later Codrington led his brigade into battle at the Alma, where the Russians occupied high ground on the far bank astride the post road to Sevastopol. On the left of the allied line, the light division faced the dominant Kurgan Hill with two prominent redoubts, supported by infantry and field artillery. Having forded the river under heavy fire, on Codrington's order, 'Fix bayonets! Get up the bank and attack' (Glover, 71), the brigade advanced uphill to capture the Great Redoubt and two of its fourteen guns left by the defeated enemy. A Russian counter-attack was then wrongly identified as French by an unknown staff officer and, overwhelmed, Codrington's three battalions fell back towards the river to reform and advance once more, as the brigade of guards from the 1st division passed through them to retake the redoubt. 'The Times''s correspondent William Howard Russell wrote: 'The brunt of the action was borne by a brigade of the Light Division... they advanced against the strongest point of the enemy's works and over the most difficult ground' (Thomas, 164). 
Raglan commended Codrington's initiative and courage at the Alma and noted, too, his 'admirable behaviour' (Cary and McCance, 84) during the battle of Inkerman on 5 November. Visiting outlying pickets in the pre-dawn mist, Codrington realized that an enemy attack was developing and spurred back to warn divisional headquarters. He remained with his brigade on Victoria Ridge throughout the ensuing action, engaging Russian troops in and across the critical Careenage Ravine. When Lieutenant-General Sir George Brown was wounded, as senior brigade commander Codrington took over the light division and retained its command until Brown returned to duty on 22 February 1855. He received a vote of thanks from both houses of parliament and, on 19 January 1855, an award of $100 per annum 'for distinguished service', backdated to 15 September 1854. Codrington attended the St David's day dinner of the 23rd (Royal Welch Fusiliers) on 1 March 1855, during which Lieutenant-Colonel David Lysons toasted his health: 'There was a grey horse... at the Battle of Alma... [which] carried an officer [Codrington] who, by his example and cheery voice, encouraged the men of the regiment in the moment of extreme danger' (ibid., 90). On 5 July 1855 Codrington was made KCB, being presented with the award in the field by Lord Stratford de Redcliffe. On 30 July he became local lieutenant-general. 
Preceded by a three-day bombardment, on 8 September a major assault was launched against Sevastopol, with the French attacking the Malakhov on the far right and the British the Redan to their immediate left, which meant crossing almost 300 yards of open ground. The plan, drawn up by Codrington and Major-General Frederick Markham commanding the 2nd division, envisaged the first columns being quickly supported, but cross-fire from undamaged enemy batteries prevented this, and the attack failed. However, as the French decisively took the Malakhov, that night the Russians evacuated the southern part of Sevastopol in front of the allied lines. After Raglan's death in June, General Sir James Simpson assumed command of the army, but resigned four months later. Codrington took his place as commander-in-chief on 11 November 1855, still only a substantive major-general but promoted local general on 29 October 1855. Captain Temple Godman of the 5th dragoon guards wrote: 'Most people speak well of him, I have heard he is very active' and that he had been 'not to blame... for the unfortunate affair at the Redan' (Warner, 189). Shortly after taking command, Codrington ruled that all war correspondents thought likely to aid the enemy by publishing sensitive military information should leave the Crimea. An armistice at the end of February effectively ended the fighting, and on 24 March Codrington invited Russian officers to a celebratory race meeting near the Chernaya River. He left the Peninsula on 12 July 1856, having received another parliamentary vote of thanks and been promoted lieutenant-general on 6 June 1856. Before he sailed, he also received the thanks of the Tartars of the Baidar valley for the protection given to them by the British troops. Despite serving throughout the war and being frequently in action, Codrington had neither been wounded nor suffered serious illness. 
On his return to England, Codrington became colonel of the 54th foot on 11 August 1856 and Liberal MP for Greenwich in 1857. He supported Palmerston's foreign policy, moderate reform, and civil and religious liberty, but opposed the secret ballot. He was governor and commander-in-chief at Gibraltar from May 1859 until November 1865, promoted general on 27 July 1863, and made GCB on 28 March 1865. He became colonel of the 23rd foot on 27 December 1860 and of the Coldstream Guards on 16 March 1875. He reputedly twice refused the rank of field marshal. 
Codrington unsuccessfully contested parliamentary elections at Westminster in 1874 and Lewes in 1880, and for many years he was an active member of the Metropolitan Board of Works. He was a commander (third class) of the Legion d'honneur, knight grand cross of the military order of Savoy, and a member of the order (first class) of the Mejidiye. As a former governor of Gibraltar, he was twice drawn into controversy over its future. Writing to 'The Times' on 3 February 1869, he deplored a proposal to exchange Gibraltar for Spanish-held Ceuta. To surrender it in this way would imperil other isolated parts of the empire such as Malta, Singapore, and Hong Kong, as well as the Channel Islands. Resurrection of the idea in 1882 caused re-publication of the letter, with a covering note from Codrington, as the article 'Gibraltar and Ceuta' in an anonymously edited collection of papers, 'Egypt, Tunis etc, 1881-1883'. He died at Danmore Cottage, Heckfield, near Winchfield, in Hampshire, during the afternoon of 6 August 1884. Of his children, only Arthur Edward, then a brevet major in the Coldstream Guards, and Mary, widow of Major-General William Earle, survived him. Codrington was buried with full military honours at Woking on 9 August. 


@@@@@


doc= 5801


Coemgen (fl. 7th cent.), whose feast day is 3 June, is recorded as the founder of Glenn-da-locha (Glendalough, co. Wicklow). His death is recorded in the annals of Ulster under the year 618, but the entry is an addition made by Cathal Mac Maghnusa, for whom these annals were written in the late fifteenth century. It is recorded again at 622 'according to others'. In the 'Chronicum Scotorum' and the annals of Tigernach he is said to have been the biblical age of 120 years at this death. There is, therefore, no certainty of the date of his death. In the ninth-century Stowe missal he is counted among the priests, but because of his ascetic reputation, he was twinned with Paul the Hermit. The uncertain pedigrees of the saint trace his ancestry to the Dal Messin Corb, an early Leinster dynastic group that held sway in the fifth and sixth centuries. 


@@@@@


doc= 5802


Coenred (d. after 709), king of the Mercians, succeeded his uncle AEthelred as king in 704, when the latter retired to the monastery at Bardney. He was the son of the previous Mercian king, Wulfhere (d. 675), but may have been too young to have been his father's immediate successor. AEthelred seems to have remained an influential figure in the life of the new king: in 705 he summoned Coenred to Bardney and persuaded him to support and protect the exiled Bishop Wilfrid. According to the life of St Guthlac, there were serious Welsh raids into Mercia during Coenred's reign and he may have been recognized as overlord by the rulers of the kingdom of the Hwicce, for he attests the record of a grant of land in Warwickshire by AEthelheard and AEthelweard to an Abbess Cuthswith ('AS chart.', S 1177). 
At some point in 704 or afterwards Coenred confirmed a grant of land at Twickenham to Waldhere, bishop of London, which shows that his power, like that of his predecessor AEthelred, extended into Middlesex. In a letter which Bishop Waldhere wrote to Berhtwald, archbishop of Canterbury, in 704 or 705, he mentions that he had been summoned by Coenred to a meeting of bishops and noblemen who were to address the 'reconciliation' of a certain woman named AElfthryth; he had declined to go, because he was uncertain of the archbishop's views on the issue (which was evidently a major controversy, although its details are now entirely unknown). St Paul's Church in London claimed that it had received a grant of privileges from Coenred, confirming an earlier grant by AEthelberht of Kent; but the charter preserved in the archive ('AS chart.', S 1786) is clearly spurious, as are a series of diplomas in Coenred's name in favour of the abbey at Evesham ('AS chart.', S 78, 79, 80). More convincing is a fragmentary record of a grant by Coenred to a nun named Feleburg of land in Herefordshire, which apparently passed into the possession of the minster at Much Wenlock in Shropshire ('AS chart.', S 1801). 
Coenred is likely to have been a significant patron of the church, for he would appear to have been a deeply religious man; Bede tells the story of his fervent attempts to reform one of his noble companions, who fell ill and died after experiencing a vision of hell. William of Malmesbury claims that it was this episode which prompted Coenred in 709 to resign his kingdom and travel to Rome, but that is probably no more than an inference from Bede's narrative. Coenred had before him the example of his uncle AEthelred, and that of an earlier West Saxon ruler, Caedwalla, who had abdicated in order to go as a pilgrim to Rome; moreover, other Anglo-Saxon rulers had been, and were to be, attracted by the idea of such pious rejection of their worldly status. Coenred was accompanied on his pilgrimage by Offa, the son of Sigeberht, king of the East Saxons; their arrival in Rome with a large following was significant enough to be recorded in the 'Liber pontificalis'. Coenred was tonsured by Pope Constantine and spent the remainder of his life as a monk in Rome. The date of his death is unknown. He was succeeded as king by his cousin Ceolred. 


@@@@@


doc= 5803


Coetlogon, Charles Edward de (bap. 1747, d. 1820), Church of England clergyman, was the son of Dennis de Coetlogon, physician, and author of 'An Universal Dictionary of Arts and Sciences' (1740). As his father died when his son was still very young, Coetlogon was admitted to Christ's Hospital in April 1755, where the entry records his date of baptism as 13 March 1747. He proceeded on a university exhibition to Pembroke College, Cambridge, where he was registered as a sizar on 28 June 1766 and thereafter graduated BA in 1770, proceeding MA in 1773. At university he was a member of a small religious club which was led by Rowland Hill and included among its other members David Simpson (later of Macclesfield), like Hill a student at St John's College, and Coetlogon's former school contemporary Thomas Pentycross (later of Wallingford). They engaged in the study of the Greek 'New Testament', prison visiting, and preaching in the town in Cambridge. 
On graduation Coetlogon was briefly curate of Marden, Kent, in 1770, but he quickly came to the notice and secured the patronage of the influential evangelical earl of Dartmouth, as a result of which he was appointed assistant chaplain to Martin Madan at the Lock Hospital for reformed prostitutes in London. It was here that he established his considerable reputation as a popular and eloquent preacher, thereby securing further patronage in the person of Sir Sidney Stafford Smythe, lord chief baron of the exchequer, whose funeral sermon, 'The Death of the Righteous a Public Loss', he delivered in 1778 (it was published in the same year). He acted as chaplain to Alderman Pickett during his mayoralty in 1789-90, at the conclusion of which he published 'Ten Discourses Delivered in the Mayoralty of 1790'. He also preached on the deaths of the evangelicals William Romaine ('The Life of the Just', 1795) and William Bromley Cadogan ('The True Greatness and Excellency of the Ministerial Character', 1797). Coetlogon's protestantism and patriotism were celebrated in other sermons such as 'A Seasonable Caution Against the Abominations of the Church of Rome' (1779), 'The Protestant Reformation of the Sixteenth Century' (1818), and 'The king, or, Faint sketches for a true portrait of the venerable sovereign of the British empire' (1820), while his Calvinistic predilections no doubt inspired his decision to edit Jonathan Edwards's 'The Justice of God in the Damnation of Sinners' (1774) and 'The Eternity of Hell Torments' (1788). He also published an edition of Edward Young's 'Night Thoughts' (1793), wrote a preface to Francis Quarles's 'Emblems' (1788), and edited the 'Theological Miscellany' which ran from January 1784 to December 1789. His 'Miscellaneous Works' appeared in three volumes in 1807. He is there described as vicar of Godalming, Surrey, a mistake for Godstone, Surrey, to which he had been preferred in 1794. 
Coetlogon enjoyed a considerable reputation as an extempore preacher. His imposing presence was reinforced by an impressive manner and use of gestures. These qualities of delivery were matched, in the eyes of the veteran evangelical Henry Venn, by the quality of content. He wrote of the young Coetlogon in February 1775, 'His discourses are all I want to hear -- judicious, doctrinal in a proper degree, very experimental, and faithfully applied' (Venn, 'Life... of the... Rev. H. Venn', 224). A different view, however, was expressed by William Wilberforce, who was a regular attender at the Lock Hospital chapel. On Christmas day 1790, for example, he declared that he 'much disliked De Coetlogon' (Wilberforce, 1.286). In his last years Coetlogon became too ill to carry out his pastoral duties. He died at Stamford Street, Blackfriars Road, London, on 16 September 1820 and was buried nine days later in Godstone churchyard, where there is a memorial inscription to him. Charles Frederick de Coetlogon (died 1836), who also has a memorial inscription there, was probably his son. 


@@@@@


doc= 5804


Coffey, Charles (d. 1745), writer, was born and educated in Ireland but no more details of his early years are known. His play 'A Wife and No Wife', published in London in 1732, but never acted there, appears in a Dublin imprint of 1724 entitled 'Poems and songs upon several occasions, with love letters, and a novel, nam'd Loviso, to which is added a diverting farce, call'd 'Wife and No Wife''. If all of these works are Coffey's, he was active for the greater part of a decade as a writer in Ireland before moving to England in 1729. Foxon attributes to him several poems on new spa- and pleasure-garden constructions from as early as 1723. 
By October 1728, picking up on the success in London of 'The Beggar's Opera' the previous season, Coffey created his own ballad opera, 'The Beggar's Wedding'. However, the Smock Alley management's indifference in producing it, as shown by the delay to a bad Lenten date for audiences (24 March 1729), and poor acting, caused it to fail. Coffey must then have moved to London, for 'The Beggar's Wedding' opened at the Haymarket on 29 May. There it became the hit of the season and a continuing repertory standard, especially as a one-act afterpiece (sometimes entitled 'Phebe'). That same summer Coffey had a further short ballad opera, 'Southwark Fair, or, The Sheep-Shearing', at Reynold's Booth at the fair. His next ballad opera, the full-length 'Female Parson, or, Beau in the Sudds' (Haymarket, 27 April 1730), failed. 
In 1731 Coffey joined with John Mottley to transform into another ballad opera Jevon's old play 'The Devil of a Wife'; this became 'The Devil to Pay, or, The Wives Metamorphos'd' (Drury Lane, 6 August 1731). After it had been cut down to one act by Theophilus Cibber its success was sensational, becoming the most performed afterpiece of the century -- in 1731-2 alone there were more than ninety-five performances in London. Kitty Clive rose to stardom as the original Nell. It was popular also on the continent. Translated into German by a recent ambassador, Count Caspar Wilhelm von Borcke, and subsequently retranslated and set to a composed score, it became the ancestor of the German 'Singspiel'. Mottley and others allowed Coffey to have the public credit for 'The Devil to Pay', but as well as those who have been mentioned, words and ideas came from Rochester and Colley Cibber, and perhaps also Sidney and Shadwell. The writer of Coffey's entry in 'A Compleat List of All the English Dramatic Poets' (1747), almost certainly Mottley himself, says that because it was an adaptation the two were not allowed the usual third-night author's benefit, but were none the less richly rewarded with $70 after waiting until the thirty-third. 
After this came two more ballad opera disappointments, 'The Boarding-School, or, The Sham Captain' (Drury Lane, 29 January 1733), based on D'Urfey's 'Love for Money, or, The Boarding-School', and Coffey's attempt to capitalize as full author on the previous success, 'The Merry Cobler, or, The Second Part of the Devil to Pay' (Drury Lane, 6 May 1735). Coffey now had the idea of financing himself by getting up a subscription for a folio edition of the poet Michael Drayton, but he died before it was published in 1748. Mottley, writing while it was in press, believed that the benefit would go to Coffey's widow, but Joseph Knight in the 'Dictionary of National Biography' says this was not the case. 
Coffey was a hunchback, who chose to cope with public mockery by joining in with it: he played the part of Aesop in Dublin for one of his own benefits. Baker's verdict is that 'he had no very great share of original genius; his turn was humour', and Charles Dibdin, a full half century after his death, is withering in his scorn for Coffey (D. E. Baker, 'The Companion to the Play House', 2, 1764; C. Dibdin, 'A Complete History of the English Stage', 1797-1800, 5.73), but it has been noticed that managers treated him with some consideration and often gave him a benefit. As can be seen, he was usually unsuccessful writing by himself, but gifted, or lucky, in collaboration; Allardyce Nicoll feels that the ballad opera genre was itself difficult to work in (A. Nicoll, 'Early Eighteenth-Century Drama', 3rd edn, 1961, vol. 2 of 'A History of English Drama', 244). Coffey died on 13 May 1745 and was buried in the parish of St Clement Danes, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 5805


Coffin, Edward (c.1570/71-1626), Jesuit, was the son of John Coffin (died 'c'.1583) of Cornwall, and was born in the diocese of Exeter, probably in Cornwall, about 1570-71. Educated at Liskeard, Cornwall, he travelled to London with Christopher Turner, a relative of his father, in 1584 after the second marriage of his mother. Concealed there for a month, he eventually crossed into France from Essex. Dangerously ill after the journey, Coffin remained in Rouen to recuperate and eventually followed Turner to Rheims, arriving on 19 July 1585. On 7 November 1586 he departed for Ingolstadt with Dr Robert Turner, who helped defray the cost of his education. Coffin received additional support from the bishop of Eichstatt first at a college in Eichstatt and then at Ingolstadt. He moved to the English College, Rome, on 26 July 1588 where he studied philosophy and theology. He was ordained on 13 March 1593 in either Ingolstadt or Eichstatt contrary to Anstruther's claim that Coffin was ordained in the Lateran. Upon his capture in 1598 Coffin admitted that he left Rome before ordination: 'butt before I ended my studyes, falling sicke, my bodye nott agreeing with the heats, I retourned into Germany, where by the successor of the other Bishop [of Eichstatt] I was made priest' ('De L'Isle and Dudley MSS', 2.352). In March of 1594 he was sent to England. Entering the Jesuits on 13 January 1598 he and Thomas Lister were seized by Dutch soldiers at Lillo near Antwerp as Coffin was travelling to the noviciate. Sent back to England, Coffin was imprisoned in Newgate and Framlingham. There he remained until he was exiled in 1603 upon the accession of James I. After a year at the English College in St Omer, Coffin moved to Rome in 1604. Between 1604 and the spring of 1625 he worked at the English College, Rome, as consultor, confessor, spiritual prefect, and prefect of the church. He was professed of the four vows in Rome on 1 January 1615. 
From Rome, Coffin's long preface to Robert Parsons's 'A Discussion of the Answere of M. William Barlow' (1612 -- completed by Thomas Fitzherbert upon the author's death in 1610) contributed to the controversy surrounding the Jacobean oath of allegiance. Coffin interwove defences both of the Society of Jesus and of Robert Parsons in his explanation why 'so idle a worke as M. Barlowes Answere is knowne, and taken to be, should be answered at all by so grave and learned a man as F. Persons was' (preface, b). In his other major controversial work, 'A refutation of M. Ioseph Hall his apologeticall discourse, for the marriage of ecclesiasticall persons' (1619), he defended clerical celibacy against protestant attacks. A translation under the title of 'M. Antonius de Dominis archbishop of Spalato, declares the cause of his returne, out of England' (1623) publicized the return of the controversial archbishop to the Roman Catholic church. More important perhaps were his translation of Robert Bellarmine's work into English as 'The Art of Dying Well' (1621) and his own account of the cardinal's final days, 'A True Relation of the Last Sicknes and Death of Cardinall Bellarmine' (1622). Coffin petitioned to work once more on the English mission and returned to St Omer in May 1625. Illness prevented his crossing and he died in St Omer on 17 April 1626. Philip Alegambe described Coffin as 'a pious and learned man, of primitive simplicity' (P. Alegambe, 'Bibliotheca scriptorum Societatis Iesu', 1643, 98). 


@@@@@


doc= 5806


Coffin, Sir Edward Pine (1784-1862), commissary officer, youngest son of the Revd John Pine (1736-1824) ['see 'Coffin, John Pine], was born at Eastdown, Devon, on 20 October 1784. He entered the commissariat as clerk on 25 July 1805, and was made acting assistant in 1806, assistant commissary-general in 1809, deputy commissary-general in 1814, and commissary-general on 1 July 1840. He served at the Cape from 1805 to October 1808, in Spain in 1808-9 (including the Corunna retreat), and in the Peninsula from April 1809 to August 1810, from October 1810 to June 1811, and from July 1812 to September 1814. He was also in the Netherlands and France in 1815-16, on special service at Brussels in 1819, and in Canada from June 1819 to December 1822. 
During the next ten years Coffin was on half pay in China, and afterwards on service in Canada from September 1833 to August 1835. From then until April 1841 he was in Mexico procuring silver dollars for the commissariat chests, after which he served from April 1843 to July 1845 in China. From January 1846 to March 1848 he was in Ireland and Scotland, and had charge of the relief operations at Limerick and in the west of Ireland during the famine up to August 1846, at the end of which he was knighted by patent. He was employed and paid from 1 April 1848 as one of the commissioners of inquiry into the working of the Royal Mint; their report was published in 1849 ('Parl. papers', 1849, 28). Coffin, who was unmarried, died at his residence, 13 Gay Street, Bath, on 31 July 1862. 


@@@@@


doc= 5807


Coffin, Sir Isaac, baronet (1759-1839), naval officer and inventor of a mechanized oven, was the fourth son of Nathaniel Coffin, an officer of the customs at Boston, Massachusetts, where Isaac was born on 16 May 1759. His mother was Elizabeth, daughter of Henry Barnes, a Boston merchant. On his father's side he was a descendant of Tristram Coffin (1605-1681), one of the founders of Nantucket. He entered the navy as a volunteer in 1773 under the patronage of Rear-Admiral John Montagu, then commander-in-chief on the North American station, and was promoted lieutenant five years later. He was then appointed to the command of the schooner 'Placentia', and afterwards the armed ship 'Pinson', the latter being wrecked on the coast of Labrador in 1779. Two years later he was one of the lieutenants of the 'Royal Oak' with Vice-Admiral Marriot Arbuthnot, and acted as signal-lieutenant in the action off Cape Henry. On 3 July 1781 he was made commander, and towards the winter, when Sir Samuel Hood was returning to the West Indies, he obtained permission to serve as a volunteer on the 'Barfleur', Sir Samuel's flagship. He was thus present in the brilliant action at St Kitt's, and by Hood's interest was promoted captain of the 'Shrewsbury' (74 guns) on 13 June 1782. 
Coffin had scarcely taken up his commission before he was involved in a difficulty which an older officer might well have feared. Three youths of respectively five, four, and two years' service at sea were appointed by Sir George Rodney as lieutenants of the 'Shrewsbury'. Coffin, in the first instance, refused to receive them, judging them unfit to hold this rank. Afterwards, understanding that it was Rodney's positive order, he did receive them; he was nevertheless tried by court martial for disobedience and contempt. The trial was held at Port Royal on 29 July, when his own commission was scarcely more than six weeks old. He was acquitted of contempt and also of the charge of disobedience. However, the three lieutenants remained on the 'Shrewsbury' and it was not until Coffin wrote (20 September 1782), begging their lordships to have them suspended, that the Admiralty issued an order (14 December) cancelling their commissions. Before the order came out Coffin had been removed into the 'Hydra' (20 guns), which he took to England and paid off. 
Coffin then spent some time in France, and in 1786 was appointed to command the frigate 'Thisbe', which was ordered to carry Lord Dorchester and his family to Quebec. In 1787 he alerted the Quebec council to the New England exploitation of the fisheries in the Gulf of St Lawrence and to their illicit trade with the Magdalen Islands. In 1798 Coffin received letters patent to the seigneury of these islands. He failed to settle a single family there, and in 1806 he tried unsuccessfully to remove twenty-two families, who had relocated from St Pierre and Miquelon. While still on the North American station he was, in 1788, accused by the master of knowingly signing a false muster. When the case was brought before a court martial it was shown that four young gentlemen were borne on the ship's books as captain's servants, but had not been present on board. This was in fact a common custom and the charge was undoubtedly brought out of malice. The court was compelled to find Coffin guilty, and sentenced him to be dismissed his ship. When the sentence came home Lord Howe, then first lord of the Admiralty, at once saw that it was a blunder, and by way of correcting it ordered Coffin's name to be struck off the list (the punishment required by law). Coffin petitioned against Howe's decision, and by the king's command the case was submitted to the judges, who pronounced the court's sentence illegal, that it could not be enforced by another authority. Coffin was therefore reinstated in the service. The case continued to be quoted throughout the nineteenth century as a precedent, establishing the limits of Admiralty interference with the sentence of a court martial. 
Coffin, who had retired to the continent, now returned to England, and in 1790 he was appointed to the 'Alligator' (20 guns). In the following year the 'Alligator' was sent to America to bring back Lord Dorchester and was paid off. Coffin subsequently made a lengthy visit to Denmark, Sweden, and Russia, possibly with the idea of entering the service of one of those states. On the outbreak of the war with France he returned to England, and was appointed to the 'Melampus' (36 guns) in the channel. While serving in her towards the end of 1794 he suffered a recurrence of an injury he had sustained while in the 'Alligator'. Coffin was never again fit for active service. He was appointed regulating captain at Leith, but in October 1795 he was sent to Corsica as commissioner of the navy. When that island was evacuated in October 1796 he was sent to Lisbon in the same capacity. In 1798 he was removed to Minorca and in the following year he was appointed commissioner of Sheerness Dockyard. When instead this responsibility was given to Henry Duncan, then on leave in England, Coffin replaced Duncan at the Halifax yard. 
Coffin's six months in Halifax from mid-October 1799, before he was newly appointed to Sheerness, were memorable principally for a reign of terror he initiated. He was the only Halifax commissioner ever regularly to issue orders. He told his yard officers to ignore the naval captains' orders, which frequently strayed from Navy Board rules. He countermanded the vice-admiral's order to the naval storekeeper to issue fuel to yard lodges for officers, occupied when ships were refitting. He accused all ships' warrant officers of embezzlement (a charge which he never investigated) and captains of twice storing their ships without ever proceeding to sea, which 'unprecedented insult' they denied (TNA: PRO, ADM 1/2139). He forbade the yard officers to offer, as had been their habit, immediate assistance to merchant vessels in grave difficulty when entering harbour. He suspected everyone in the yard of fraud and embezzlement, and suspended the master shipwright and foreman of the yard, both of whom were reinstated when Coffin departed. That he was able to act with such brashness undoubtedly owed much to the protection he received from his patron, the earl of St Vincent, then first lord of the Admiralty. As commissioner at Sheerness (1801-5) Coffin 'imposed a vigorous reorganization', with 'little regard for artificers' interests' (Morriss, 123). In April 1801, when he impressed a yard worker for insolence and disobedience, a large number of artificers, riggers, and labourers threatened his life, forcing him to revoke his order (Coffin to Admiralty, 13 April 1801, TNA: PRO, ADM 106/1844). 
If often aggressive in his manner, Coffin was warmly praised by St Vincent for his skills of naval administration. Never losing the Admiralty's or Navy Board's support, he reached flag-rank in April 1804, and a month later was created a baronet. He became admiral-superintendent at Portsmouth, a post he held until promoted vice-admiral in April 1808. On 15 May 1810 Coffin patented a 'perpetual oven', so called 'because the operation of baking may be continued for any length of time' (Giedion, 176). The oven was designed to bake sea-biscuits for the navy, but its use of an endless belt made of loose wire mesh, perpetually running throughout the baking chamber with the help of cast-iron rollers, anticipated the industrial bread-baking ovens patented in the mid-nineteenth and early twentieth centuries and was a substantial technological contribution to the development of mechanized food production. 
Although pensioned and on half pay Coffin continued to be advanced in rank, and became admiral of the blue in June 1814. On 3 April 1811 he had married Elizabeth Browne (died 1839), daughter and heir of William Greenly of Titley Court, Herefordshire. In February of that year he took the name Greenly in anticipation of his marriage, but he dropped it after March 1813. Coffin had expressed interest in becoming an MP for a number of years before he was finally elected for Ilchester in 1818. He sat until 1826 and spoke often on naval issues. Coffin also maintained close personal and business links with New England. He claimed to have crossed the Atlantic on thirty occasions (his last visit coming in 1829) and was responsible for importing English racehorses, plants, and stocks of European turbot for commercial fishing. In 1827 he gave $2500 for the creation, on Nantucket, of Sir Isaac Coffin's Lancastrian School, for the general education of the island's children and for nautical training, which took place on a brig, 'Clio', which he purchased during his final visit to New England. The school, rebuilt after a fire in 1854, continued until the early twentieth century and is now home to the Egan Maritime Institute. In England he was a regular benefactor to the Royal Naval School, for the last time in June 1839 'fearful I may suddenly 'slip my wind'' ('The Times', 11 June 1839). Coffin died soon after, at Cheltenham, on 23 July 1839, six months after his wife's death. Because he died without an heir Coffin's baronetcy became extinct. 


@@@@@


doc= 5808


Coffin, Sir Isaac Campbell (bap. 1801, d. 1872), army officer in the East India Company, son of Admiral Francis Holmes Coffin RN, was baptized on 24 August 1801 at St Mary the Virgin, Dover, Kent. He was educated partly in France, and entered the military service of the East India Company on 3 June 1818. He arrived in India on 12 January 1819, and was posted as lieutenant to the 21st Madras pioneers in 1821. He was appointed adjutant to the 12th Madras native infantry from 4 June 1824, and served with them in Burma, being present in the attack on the enemy's lines before Rangoon on 9 and 15 December 1824. He was appointed quartermaster, interpreter, and paymaster to the 12th Madras native infantry on 27 October 1826, and then, successively, captain (26 July 1828), paymaster to the Nagpur subsidiary force (30 June 1829), paymaster in Mysore (7 January 1834), major (24 July 1840), and lieutenant-colonel (15 September 1845). He became lieutenant-colonel of the 3rd (Palamcottai) regiment, Madras native light infantry, on 7 October 1845, and attained the rank of colonel on 20 June 1854, of major-general on 29 May 1857, and of lieutenant-general on 18 July 1869. As colonel, with the rank of first-class brigadier, he commanded the Hyderabad subsidiary force from 6 November 1855, a post he held during the Indian mutiny. As major-general he commanded a division of the Madras army from 28 March 1859 to 28 March 1864. He was made a KCSI in 1866. 
Coffin was twice married: first, on 12 February 1824, to Marianne, daughter of Captain Thomas Harrington. She died at Ootacamund on 13 February 1864, and he married, second, Catharine Eliza, the eldest daughter of Major John Shepherd. Coffin left several children and died suddenly at his home, 9 St John's Park South, Blackheath, London, on 1 October 1872, survived by his second wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 5809


Coffin, John Pine (1778-1830), army officer and colonial governor, fourth son of the Revd John Pine (1736-1824), of East Down, Devon, who took the additional name of Coffin by royal licence in 1797, and his wife, Grace, the daughter of James Rowe of Alverdiscot, Devon, was born on 16 March 1778. In 1795 he obtained a cornetcy in the 4th dragoons, in which James Dalbiac and George Scovell were also subalterns, and became lieutenant therein in 1799. He was attached to the quartermaster-general's staff of the army in Egypt in 1801, and was present at the surrender of Cairo, and the attack on Alexandria from the westward. On the formation of the Royal Staff Corps (for engineer and other departmental duties under the quartermaster-general), he was appointed to a company, but the year after was promoted major, and removed to the permanent staff of the quartermaster-general's department, in which capacity he was in Dublin at the time of Emmet's insurrection, and continued to serve in Ireland until 1806, afterwards accompanying Lord Cathcart to the Isle of Rugen and in the expedition against Copenhagen in 1807. In 1808 he was sent to the Mediterranean as deputy quartermaster-general with the rank of lieutenant-colonel, and was employed with the expedition to the Bay of Naples, which ended in the capture of Ischia and Procida. 
In 1810 Coffin organized the flotilla of gunboats equipped for the defence of the Strait of Messina, when Murat's army was encamped on the opposite shore; and in 1813 he commanded the troops -- a battalion of the 10th foot -- on the 'Thames' (32 guns, Captain Charles Napier), and the 'Furieuse' (36 18-pounders, Captain William Mounsey), sent to attack the Isle of Ponza, which was captured by the frigates sailing right into the harbour, under a heavy cross-fire from the shore batteries, and landing the troops without losing a man. He was afterwards employed by Lord William Bentinck on staff duties at Tarragona, and at Genoa, and attained the rank of brevet colonel in 1814. After the renewal of hostilities in 1815, when the Austrian and Piedmontese armies of occupation, 100,000 strong, entered France, Coffin was attached, as British military commissioner with the rank of brigadier-general, to the Austro-Sardinians, who crossed Mont Cenis, and remained with them until they quitted French territory, in accordance with the treaty of Paris. 
In 1817 Coffin was appointed regimental major of the Royal Staff Corps, at headquarters, Hythe, Kent, and in 1819 was nominated lieutenant-governor and second in command under Sir Hudson Lowe at St Helena, replacing Sir George Bingham. When Lowe left in July 1821, after Bonaparte's death, Coffin succeeded to the command, which he held until, the last of the king's troops having been removed, he was replaced in March 1823 by Brigadier-General Walker of the East India Company when government of the island reverted to the company. The council of the island was at first disposed to question Coffin's authority. He was promoted major-general in 1825. 
Coffin married, on 13 April 1820, Maria, only daughter of George Monkland, late of Belmont, Bath; they had no children. He published 'Account of the Battle of Austerlitz' (1806), translated from the German of Stutterheim. He died at Bath on 10 February 1830. 


@@@@@


doc= 5810


Coffin, Robert Aston (1819-1885), Roman Catholic bishop of Southwark, was born at Brighton on 19 July 1819. He was the son of Robert and Elizabeth Coffin. His father was a gentleman of great wealth who followed no particular profession. Coffin was sent to Harrow School in 1834. In 1837 he matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, as a commoner, becoming a student in the following year. He read classics and graduated in 1840 with a third degree, graduating MA in 1843. In the same year he was ordained as an Anglican priest by Bishop Richard Bagot, and presented to the living of St Mary Magdalen, Oxford. The Tractarian movement had attracted him for some time, as he had been introduced to John Henry Newman on entering the university. He related later how, at that time, their relationship was like that of 'Father and Son' (Lubienski). 
In 1845 Coffin resigned his preferment and was received into the Roman Catholic church at Prior Park College, Bath, on 3 December. He then became tutor to the family of Ambrose Phillipps De Lisle at Grace Dieu Manor near Leicester in the summer of 1846, on a one-year contract, travelling with them to Boulogne. In February 1847 he accompanied John Henry Newman and five other converts to Rome, where he went through the novitiate of the Oratory of St Philip Neri. He was ordained priest on 31 October 1847. From 1848 until 1849 he was superior of St Wilfrid's House, Cotton Hall, in Staffordshire, but became increasingly drawn to the Congregation of the Most Holy Redeemer following a visit to St Wilfrid's by their superior, Father Lans. Coffin left St Wilfrid's in late 1849, much to the annoyance of Newman, and in 1850 entered the novitiate of the Redemptorists at Trond in Belgium. He was professed on 2 February 1852 and returned to England to the Redemptorist house at Clapham, Surrey. He became rector of this house in 1855 and provincial superior in 1865. He was almost constantly employed for more than twenty years in attending retreats and missions throughout England, Wales, and Scotland. 
In 1865 Coffin was in Rome and used his influence with Cardinal Reisach to secure the appointment of Henry Edward Manning as archbishop of Westminster in succession to Nicholas Wiseman. Following the death of Bishop James Danell in 1881 Coffin was chosen by Pius IX as the third bishop of Southwark. This appointment owed much to the influence of Manning, as Coffin was not one of the candidates chosen by the Southwark chapter. He tried to resist his appointment on grounds of age and infirmity, but was instructed to submit. He was consecrated bishop by Cardinal Henry Howard in Rome on 11 June 1882, and enthroned in Southwark Cathedral on 27 July of that year. However, his health was failing and after only two years he was forced to retire to the Redemptorist house of St Joseph at Teignmouth, Devon, where he died on 6 April 1885. 
Coffin did not produce any original work of note but provided excellent English translations of the works of St Alphonsus Liguori. He was well known for his grand voice and persuasive preaching. His main achievement was to found several houses of the Redemptorist order in England, Scotland, and Ireland. Many of his brethren found him autocratic and domineering in manner. He hardly shone as a bishop but the ill health which he suffered for much of his episcopate disarms the critic. 


@@@@@


doc= 5811


Cogan, Eliezer (1762-1855), Presbyterian minister, schoolmaster, and classical scholar, was born at Rothwell, Northamptonshire, the son of John Cogan (1698-1784), surgeon and author of 'An Essay on the Epistle to the Romans', and his second wife. There had been one son from his first marriage, Thomas Cogan, later one of the founders of the Royal Humane Society. Cogan mastered Latin grammar before he was six years old. For six months he went to Stephen Addington's school in Market Harborough, but after that he studied at home and taught himself elementary Greek. During 1780-83 he was at Daventry Academy, studying under Thomas Belsham, and he remained there as assistant tutor until 1786. Most of his fellow pupils went on to become distinguished Unitarians. In 1787 Cogan was elected as minister of the Presbyterian congregation at Cirencester, and remained there until 1789. On 21 September 1790 he married Mary, the daughter of David Atchison of Weedon, Northamptonshire. She died in 1850 at the age of eighty-one, after sixty years of marriage. They had at least one son and one daughter. 
In 1791 Cogan moved to Ware in Hertfordshire, but after a few months moved again to Enfield and then to Cheshunt, where he started a school in 1792. He was elected minister of the chapel in Crossbrook Street, Cheshunt, in 1800, and from 1801 to 1816 he was minister of the Old Presbyterian Chapel at Marsh Street, Walthamstow, Essex, where he taught the theology of Joseph Priestley. At the end of 1801 he moved his school from Cheshunt to Essex Hall, Higham Hill, Walthamstow. The school, which was open to pupils of all denominations, became very popular, and at one time he had seventy pupils, with a waiting list of twenty. His pupils included Samuel Sharpe, the Egyptologist and translator of the 'Bible'; Benjamin Disraeli, afterwards earl of Beaconsfield (of whom he used to say, 'I don't like Disraeli; I never could get him to understand the subjunctive'); Russell Gurney, the recorder of London; and W. E. Nightingale, father of Florence Nightingale. He preached his farewell sermon at Walthamstow at the end of 1816, and in 1828 gave up his school. On his retirement Cogan's pupils presented him with his portrait, painted by Thomas Phillips RA, and exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1828. In retirement he continued to study Greek, and to play the violin and sing: he was still singing at the age of ninety. 
Cogan was highly regarded as a Greek scholar, and had the reputation of having read more Greek than anyone else alive. His many publications included 'An Address to the Dissenters on Classical Literature' (1789), 'Moschi idyllia tria, Graece' (1795), and 'Sermons Chiefly on Practical Subjects' (1817). His son, Richard, collected and published some of his contributions to periodicals in 1856. Cogan died at Essex Hall, Higham Hill, Walthamstow, on 21 January 1855, and was buried on 27 January in the cemetery at the Gravel Pit Chapel, Hackney. 


@@@@@


doc= 5812


Cogan, Thomas (c.1545-1607), physician, was born at Chard, Somerset. He was educated at Oxford, and graduated BA in 1563, MA in 1566, and MB in 1574. He became a fellow of Oriel College in 1563. He resigned his fellowship in 1575, and was appointed chief master of the Manchester grammar school. He practised as a physician at Manchester, and was canon of Exeter in 1567. Before 1586 he married Ellen (died 1611), daughter of Sir Edmund Trafford, and widow of Thomas Willott, who had property in Manchester. Between 1591 and 1593 he was the family physician of Sir Richard Shuttleworth. In 1595 he presented Galen's works and other medical books to the library of Oriel, where they were preserved. He resigned the school mastership before 1602, died in June 1607, and was buried on 10 June at St Anne's Church in Manchester. His will mentions property in Somerset and Manchester, and bequeaths books to all the fellows and other officers of the college, and 4died to each boy in the school. 
Cogan wrote 'The well of wisedome, conteining chiefe and chosen sayinges... gathered out of the five bookes of the Olde Testament' (1577), and 'The Haven of Health, Made for the Comfort of Students' (1584). This was published with 'A preservative from the pestilence, with a short censure of the late sickness at Oxford', and 'Epistolarum familiarium M. T. Ciceronis epitome', which contains an 'Epistle to all schoolmasters'; the book was intended as an introduction to Latin. 


@@@@@


doc= 5813


Cogan, Thomas (1736-1818), physician, was born on 8 February 1736 at Rowell (Rothwell), Northamptonshire, the second of the four children of John Cogan, surgeon and apothecary (1698-1784), who came from a Somerset family, and his first wife, Martha Morrice, of Lukenham, Leicestershire. Thomas's half-brother, Eliezer Cogan, was the son of John Cogan and his second wife. Raised as a Congregationalist, Thomas attended John Aikin's dissenting school at Kibworth Beauchamp, Leicestershire, for two or three years, before returning home at fourteen. Two years later, intending to become a minister, he joined the dissenting academy at Mile End, Middlesex, where Dr John Conder was divinity tutor; dissatisfied with the conduct of the institution, he left for the dissenting academy at Hoxton. In 1759, while in Harwich, he visited Rotterdam, where he obtained a preacher's post at the Presbyterian church, deputizing for the Revd Benjamin Sowden, and acting in conjunction with his colleague, the Revd Thomas Pierson, until 1760. In 1762 and 1763 Cogan walked the hospitals in London and exercised his ministry in Southampton, but alienated his congregation by his open rejection of the strict Calvinist beliefs currently maintained by orthodox Congregationalists: predestination and eternal damnation were incompatible with his belief in a God whose leading attribute was love, not power. Cogan adopted doctrines associated with Unitarianism, but although for most of his life he passed, and wished to pass, as a Unitarian, his love of truth for its own sake prevented his total acceptance of any human doctrine. 
Cogan returned to the Netherlands as junior minister in the English church at The Hague. He married Johanna Maria Groen (died 1810), a wealthy Amsterdam merchant's beautiful young daughter, who brought him a fortune of $8000 or $10,000. It was a condition of the marriage that Cogan was to take up the profession of medicine, and after a short visit to England, where he delivered a few well-received sermons, he matriculated at the University of Leiden on 16 October 1765, graduating MD on 20 February 1767 with his thesis, 'Specimen medicum inaugurale de animi pathematum vi et modo agendi in inducendis vel curandis morbis'. His fundamentally optimistic view of the universe found congenial matter in his translation, from the French of John Bruckner, of 'A philosophical survey of the animal creation, an essay, wherein the general devastation and carnage that reign among the different classes of animals are considered in a new point of view; and the vast increase of life and enjoyment derived to the whole from this institution of nature is clearly demonstrated' (1768). 
In 1769 Cogan bought Cowleys and Sanders Down, Middlesex. He practised medicine successively at Amsterdam, Leiden, and Rotterdam, specializing in midwifery, before moving to Paternoster Row, London, where he had an extensive and lucrative midwifery practice. On 29 June 1772 he and his wife went through a marriage service at the church of St Laurence Pountney, London, presumably to conform with contemporary English law, which would not have recognized a marriage in a dissenting church. 
In 1773 Cogan published the 'Memoirs of the Society Instituted at Amsterdam in Favour of Drowned Persons', adapted from the original Dutch, in which he encouraged the English to follow Amsterdam's example. He supplemented this work with observations, drawn from his own experience, on the successful mouth-to-mouth resuscitation of stillborn babies. Just as it was ready for the press, a more wide-ranging work on resuscitation, making similar proposals, was published by Alexander Johnson (1716-1799). Cogan acknowledged Johnson's priority in a prefatory 'Advertisement', but justified his own publication on the grounds that 'the Memoirs of the Society, intermixed with the cases, will not only be amusing, but will excite us to imitate their example more effectually than the mere narration of facts, however extraordinary they may be'. 
In 1774 Cogan joined William Hawes to form the institution destined to become the Royal Humane Society. He wrote the first six years' reports, and relieved the solemnly sentimental atmosphere of the society's annual fund-raising festivals by singing a song of his own composition, with the old and popular chorus of '
And a begging we will go, will go, and a begging we will go. 

' His lighter literary talents also appeared in the anonymously published and underrated 'John Buncle, Junior, Gentleman' (1775-6), the purported memoir of the youngest son of the hero of Thomas Amory's eccentric Unitarian romance, 'The History of John Buncle' (1755). It contains telling parodies of the fashionable sentimental style, and Letter 18, 'An Invitation to Town, in Pastoral Verse', vividly describes the joys and inconveniences of London life. 
In 1780, satisfied with the wealth he had acquired, and suffering from a suspected liver complaint, Cogan returned to the Netherlands with his wife, resigning his practice to John Simms. Cogan was able to enjoy more than three years of philosophical study and pastoral tranquillity in the splendid mansion of Zuylestein, near Utrecht. He visited Germany, his tour forming the basis of 'The Rhine, or, A journey from Utrecht to Francfort, described in a series of letters in 1791 and 1792' (1793). He utilized his linguistic and medical knowledge in his translation, 'The works of the late Professor Camper, on the connexion between the science of anatomy and the arts of drawing, painting, statuary,...' (1794). 
The French revolutionary army's invasion of the Netherlands drove Cogan and his wife back to England in 1795; they landed at Harwich and spent some time in Colchester, ready to return to the Netherlands. Eventually, realizing that Dutch liberation was not imminent, they settled in Bath, accompanied by Mrs Cogan's niece, Mary Elizabeth Gurnault. They lived in Argyle Street, opposite William Jay's Independent chapel, which Cogan attended in the evening, after mornings at the Unitarian church. They subsequently moved to Widcombe Crescent. Cogan founded the Bath Humane Society in 1805. He devoted much energy to religious and philosophical writings, arguing that relationships between God, man, mind, body, the individual, and the universe were harmonious, beneficent, and susceptible to rational analysis. His most widely circulated work was 'Letters to William Wilberforce on the Doctrine of Hereditary Depravity, by a Layman' (1799), defending human virtue and divine benevolence. Characteristically, he retained his personal admiration for Wilberforce, who deemed Cogan a fair and able disputant. 
Cogan's main work was a series of treatises on the passions. These were 'A Philosophical Treatise on the Passions' (1800), 'An Ethical Treatise on the Passions' (part 1, 1807; part 2, 1810), and 'Theological Disquisitions on Religion as Affecting the Passions and on the Characteristic Excellencies of Christianity' (2 vols., 1812-13). All five treatises were published as a set entitled 'A Treatise on the Passions and Affections of the Mind' in 1813. Cogan's remorseless application of human reason to subjects often regarded as divine mysteries, his denial of the devil's existence, and his use of humour caused offence to more orthodox friends. To protect their sensibilities, Cogan restrained himself at first, but his expressions became more uncompromising, culminating in his assertion that, if any human being were condemned to eternal torment, 'then is the propagation of the human species to be placed among the most atrocious of crimes' (1813, 5.406). His last publication was 'Ethical Questions' (1817); he bequeathed his manuscripts, including unpublished works, to his half-brother, Eliezer. 
Cogan's lifelong interests were travel, literature, and agriculture. This last prompted him to take a farm at South Wraxall, Wiltshire; he joined the West of England Agricultural Society, winning several of its prizes for experimental farming. Cogan continued this pursuit in subsequent moves to Clapton, Somerset, and Woodford, Devon, and at his death held a small farm near Southampton. He said farming was 'never profitable, except the farmer drive the plough, his wife be dairy-maid and his children scarecrows'. Nevertheless, he took a continuing interest in the subject, bequeathing to John Dowley his 'large and small drill dibbling Machines', with advice to 'persevere in my plan of Husbandry until in the eyes of the judicious it shall be confuted or established'. In 1806 he was awarded a gold medal by the Society of Arts for his invention of a drag for raising bodies for persons who have sunk under water. Johanna Cogan died in 1810 and was buried at the church of St Thomas a Becket, Widcombe, Somerset, on 29 May. Cogan left for London with Miss Gurnault, who died shortly afterwards. He passed the rest of his life migrating between London, Bath, and Southampton. 
On 31 December 1817 Cogan walked out from his lodgings at Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London, into a very thick fog; this brought on an unusually troublesome cough, with complications. Believing he would not recover, he went to Eliezer's house at Higham Hill, Walthamstow, where he died on 2 February 1818. At his own request, he was buried on 9 February in the vault of the New Gravel Pit Unitarian Chapel burial-ground, Hackney, beside Miss Gurnault. 
Cogan's estate was worth $14,000; he left $100 to the Royal Humane Society, one of whose gold medals is inscribed to his memory. He was of short stature, and stout in middle age. Despite a lifelong tendency to pulmonary complaints, he was very strong; at eighty he could make children admire his agile backward skipping with a rope. Although habitually neat, he dressed less formally than was customary for English physicians, looking more like a gentleman, or a Dutchman. Though his vivacity and terse, epigrammatic conversation enlivened all who enjoyed his society, he invariably claimed that through life he had been grave for himself, and cheerful for his friends; to most contemporaries, his outstanding characteristic was benevolence. 


@@@@@


doc= 5814


Cogan, William (1676/7-1774), apothecary and philanthropist, was probably born in Kingston upon Hull, the son of John Cogan (died in or before 1694), a merchant, and his wife, Elizabeth, the daughter of John Battie, of Warmsworth, and Mary Pierrepoint, of Wadworth. His parents were married on 3 June 1662 at Wroot, Lincolnshire, where Cogan's paternal grandfather, John Coggan, was rector from 1641 to 1684. On 4 September 1694 he was bound as an apprentice to a London apothecary named either John or Isaac Garnier, and in December 1706 he was admitted to the freedom of Hull by right of patrimony. He quickly became involved in town politics and was elected chamberlain in 1712, sheriff in 1714, and alderman in March 1717. In July he sat for the first time on the bench, and on 30 September 1717 he was chosen mayor. 
Cogan did not make his mark in Hull until his second mayoralty, in 1736-7, when he addressed the problem of the poor. A governor of the town workhouse since 1726, he ordered inspections of the hospitals and invested corporation funds in apprenticeships. He also sought to improve the streets and reduce shipping congestion on the Humber. Cogan's most significant legacy to the town was his foundation, in July 1753, of a charity school for girls, to be administered by three trustees: aldermen William Wilberforce and Samuel Watson and the recorder Cornelius Cayley. He endowed the charity with $2000 stock in consols and his own house in Bowlalley to establish a school 'for teaching and cloathing twenty poor female children and fitting them for household servants' (Attwood, 319). Twenty girls of ten years and above would be admitted for three years and taught reading and the church catechism as well as domestic skills such as sewing, knitting, and washing. Uniforms of brown wool dresses, blue cloaks, and white straw bonnets, all with an orange trim, were provided for the girls. On leaving the school they would be given a 'Bible' and 20's'. to buy clothes to fit them out for service. Several years later Cogan invested a further $500 in a trust that would give $6 to each girl on her marriage; the interest would be used to buy religious books. The school opened in a newly built house in Salthouse Lane in 1755 under its first mistress, Anna Stevens, who was paid a salary of $14. Cogan's school flourished into the nineteenth century and moved to larger premises in Park Street in 1889. 
In his final years Cogan made provision for the town's boys: in a codicil to his will, dated 1 October 1772, he set aside $2000 as a trust to fund apprenticeships for boys at the age of twelve. Cogan was a widower when he drew up his will, but nothing is known of his wife or whether they had any children. He died in the town in 1774 and was buried in the Quire Yard of Holy Trinity Church on 22 July; the burial register records that he was ninety-seven. His lasting contribution to educational provision is commemorated in the name of one of the town's schools, the Alderman Cogan Church of England primary school. 


@@@@@


doc= 5815


Coggeshall, Henry (bap. 1623, d. 1691), mathematician, was the third son of John Coggeshall of Orford in Suffolk, where he was baptized on 23 November 1623. He married, and left one son, William Coggeshall of Diss, Norfolk. He invented a sliding rule which was named after him and was first described by him in 1677 in a pamphlet entitled 'Timber-measure by a line of more ease, dispatch, and exactness than any other way now in use, by a double scale. As also stone-measure and gauging of vessels by the same near and exact way. Likewise a diagonal scale of 100 parts in a quarter of an inch, very easie both to make and use'. He soon after improved the rule, and revised the little work in which the mode of using it was explained, republishing it in 1682, with the heading 'A Treatise of Measures by a Two-Foot Rule which Slides to a Foot'. A third, considerably modified, edition appeared in 1722. It was entitled 'The Art of Practical Measuring Easily Performed by a Two-Foot Rule which Slides to a Foot', and also contained 'Some useful instructions in decimal arithmetick', and 'Some useful directions in dialling not hitherto published'. 
The Coggeshall rule was most often used in measuring areas and solids of timber masonry, brickwork, and the like. There were several further editions of his book and the instrument itself was popular in England as late as the beginning of the nineteenth century, remaining in use until the 1870s. Coggeshall was buried in Orford on 19 February 1691. 


@@@@@


doc= 5816


Coggeshall, Ralph of (fl. 1207-1226), historian and abbot of Coggeshall, was a monk of the Cistercian abbey of Coggeshall, Essex. Abbot from 1207 until his resignation, because of illness, in 1218, he was the major contributor to, and may have been the sole author of, the Coggeshall chronicle known as the 'Chronicon Anglicanum'. The precise extent of Ralph of Coggeshall's role in compiling the 'Chronicon' is difficult to determine because the text's earliest surviving manuscript, BL, Cotton MS Vespasian D.x, contains several changes of hand and ink, which may indicate that Ralph of Coggeshall was only one of several annalists who worked on the 'Chronicon', but may alternatively be evidence that Ralph of Coggeshall merely employed a number of scribes to copy an autograph for which he was entirely responsible. 
Certain significant conclusions in relation to the nature of Coggeshall's contribution to the writing of the 'Chronicon' can, however, be reached despite such ambiguous indications. Pronounced stylistic parallels between the annals from 1187 to 1206 and those from 1213 to 1224, do, for instance, strongly suggest that these two sections of the text, which are, in fact, the major parts of the 'Chronicon', are the work of Ralph of Coggeshall who, as the text itself relates, 'wrote his chronicle from the capture of the Holy Cross' ('Chronicon Anglicanum', 162-3). The existence of such robust evidence more than compensates for the impossibility of determining the extent of Ralph of Coggeshall's involvement in the compilation of two other, more skeletal, sections of the 'Chronicon', of which the first covers the period from 1066 to 1186 with annals which have presumably been inserted, 'en bloc', in order to preface Ralph of Coggeshall's coverage of later events, while the second covers the period from 1206 to 1212 with annals which seem to have been added, shortly after 1212, in order to make up for the loss of an earlier text. In the thirty or forty years to 1226, therefore, Ralph of Coggeshall was responsible for at least two sets of highly detailed annals which were compiled more or less contemporaneously with the events that they describe, and which may, since there is some evidence of an earlier recension of the 'Chronicon''s annals to 1195, have been subject to subsequent revision by their author. 
Ralph of Coggeshall was not an innovative historian, since his 'Chronicon' is, in terms of its structure, no more than a traditional set of monastic annals, in which he is content to refer to a standard cyclical view of history to treat the unexpected demise of a king as God's punishment for uncorrected sins, and the death of an archbishop as an 'exemplum' of the transitory nature of earthly achievement. The annalist's writing is, however, remarkable because of the way in which he deploys his considerable narrative skills to enliven his 'Chronicon' with striking descriptions, based usually on oral rather than written evidence, of such exotic Suffolk phenomena as the two green children of Woolpit and the merman of Orford, and of such dramatic incidents as the capture of Richard I by Leopold, duke of Austria, in 1192, and the hurricane at Newark which marked the death of John on the night of 18 October 1216. 
Three early texts of the 'Chronicon' are extant. That in Cotton MS Vespasian D.x may be, in part, an autograph. The nearly contemporary copies in the Bibliotheque Nationale, Paris (MS Lat. 15076), and the College of Arms, London (MS 11), are closely related to this earliest surviving version of the text. Certain commentators have argued that Ralph of Coggeshall was the author not only of the 'Chronicon', but also of the 'Libellus de expugnatione Sanctae Terrae' and of a set of annals from 1162 to 1178 which were added to the work of Ralph Niger. It is evident, however, that neither text can be ascribed to him. 


@@@@@


doc= 5817


Coghlan, Jeremiah (1774/5-1844), naval officer, was in January 1796 mate of a merchant ship at Plymouth, and on the occasion of the wreck of the East Indiaman 'Dutton' displayed such energy and courage that Pellew offered to put him on the 'Indefatigable''s quarter-deck. He continued for three years in the 'Indefatigable' and in March 1799 followed Pellew to the 'Impetueux'. 
In June 1800 Coghlan was put by Pellew in command of the cutter 'Viper', and while watching Port Louis proposed to cut out a French gun-vessel at the entrance of the harbour. Pellew lent him a ten-oared cutter, and in this, with eighteen men and a midshipman -- Silas Hiscutt Paddon -- on the night of 29 July, he boarded the gun-brig 'Cerbere' and after a hard fight captured her 'within pistol-shot of three batteries, surrounded by several armed craft, and not a mile from a 74 bearing an admiral's flag, and two frigates' (E. Pellew, 'Despatch'). Both Coghlan and Paddon received several severe wounds, six of Coghlan's men were wounded, and one was killed; but the 'Cerbere' was taken and towed out under heavy fire from the batteries. The squadron, to mark their admiration, gave up the prize to the immediate captors; and Pellew, in his official letter to Lord St Vincent, emphasized the courage and skill 'which... effected so daring an enterprise' (ibid.). St Vincent, in forwarding Pellew's letter to the Admiralty, praised the achievement and in a letter to Pellew privately asked him to present to Coghlan a sword of 100 guineas' value. 
On St Vincent's representation, Coghlan, though he had served in the navy for only four and a half years, was promoted lieutenant on 22 September 1800 and continued in command of the 'Viper' until she was paid off in October 1801. In spring 1802 he was appointed to the cutter 'Nimble', and on 1 May 1804 was promoted to command the sloop 'Renard' on the Jamaica station. On 20 March 1805 he brought to action the French privateer 'General Ernouf', which, after an action of thirty-five minutes, was set on fire and blew up with the loss of upwards of a hundred men. In August 1807 Coghlan was moved into the brig 'Elk' on the same station, and for nearly four years was senior officer of a light squadron for the protection of the Bahamas. He was promoted captain on 27 November 1810 but continued in the 'Elk' until the following summer. 
In September 1812 Coghlan was appointed to the 'Caledonia' as flag captain of Pellew, then commander-in-chief in the Mediterranean. At the end of 1813 he exchanged into the frigate 'Alcmene' and continued in her until the end of the Napoleonic wars. On 4 June 1815 he was nominated a CB, and from 1826 to 1830 commanded the frigate 'Forte' on the South American station. 
Coghlan married, first, a daughter of Benjamin Whitaker of Leeds, with whom he had a son and a daughter. He married, second, a daughter of Charles Hay of Jamaica, widow of Captain John Marshall RN; they had no surviving children. He died at Ryde, Isle of Wight, on 4 March 1844, aged sixty-nine, and was buried in St Thomas's Church, Ryde. His son, Sir William Marcus Coghlan (1803-1885), was commissioned in the Bombay Artillery and was political resident in Aden (1854-63). 


@@@@@


doc= 5818


Cok, John (c.1393-c.1468), Augustinian canon and compiler of the cartulary of St Bartholomew's Hospital, London, came of unknown parentage. Autobiographical interjections in his writings provide most information on his life and work, the main source being the cartulary, in which he states that it was 'Compiled and written by brother John Cok... at Easter 1456 or 36 Henry VI [1457-8]... in the 37th year of the profession of John Cok aged 64' (cartulary, fol. 7'r'). Cok's reckonings are inconsistent but suggest he was born about 1393. The register of Richard Clifford, bishop of London (died 1421), records that John Cok became a subdeacon at St Bartholomew's Hospital on 8 March, and a deacon on 22 March 1421. His earliest reminiscence is inserted in an entry in the cartulary concerning property in Wood Street, London: '... inhabited by Thomas Lamporte, goldsmith, in whose tenement and in whose time I John Cok... was apprenticed there' (ibid., fol. 25'r'). He refers to his presence at the coronation of Henry V in 1413 on 'a very rainy day' (ibid., fol. 647'v'); and another marginal note adds 'Written by John Cok in the two years before his profession who was serving with Master Robert Newton [master of the hospital 1413-15] AD 1418' (ibid., fol. 382'r'). Cok's life in the hospital was contemporaneous with John Wakeryng, who was master from 1423 to 1466 and under whom Cok was for some time the renter. 
Entries in the cartulary draw attention to their effective estate management. Cok's association with other transcribers of books in the secular world is indicated by the request in the will of Sir John Shirley (died 1456), translator and transcriber of Chaucer: 'To my which wife Margrete Shirley... I beseche... Sir John Wakering... Sir John Cok, prest and his brother professed,... will vouchsafe to assist, comfort and counsell all ways and times...' (London, Guildhall Library, MS 9171/5, fol. 213). There is no evidence in the London bishops' registers to confirm the description of Cok as a priest. Other compositions by Cok included an account of the works of John Wakeryng, two volumes of copies of theological tracts, and 'the fairest bible that I have seen, written in large vellam by a brother named John Coke at the age of sixty-eight' (Stow, 1.232). The whereabouts of the 'Bible' and Wakeryng's biography are unknown but the treatises survive. In one volume (BL, Add. MS 10392) Cok used several styles of script, coloured initials and rubrics, and drew eight hands annotated with the names of virtues and vices. The second volume (Cambridge, Gonville and Caius College, MS 669*/646) is annotated on four pages with 'q.J Cok' or 'qd John Cok' as well as the cipher 'Qd ix and iii' on page 209. Ciphers interested Cok; Trinity College, Cambridge, holds an early fifteenth-century Flemish-made book of hours (MS B.11.14) containing on its flyleaf a Pentecostal hymn written in cipher, signed 'quod Johnes Cok', and a table of numbers in his handwriting. It has been suggested that the illuminated initial on folio 94'r' of the cartulary of St Bartholomew's Hospital was drawn by Cok himself, but it is now considered probable that it was the work of the limner William Abel (died 1474). A further suggestion that the unidentified arms beneath the cross in this illustration belonged to Cok does not seem capable of proof. Several times Cok makes reference in the cartulary to his encroaching old age and unsteady hand. The note to which he attached the latest personal date reads 'Written by brother John Cok in the evening of his life AD 1468' (Cartulary, fol. 73'v'), and from this it is assumed that he died shortly afterwards. He would have been about seventy-five. 


@@@@@


doc= 5819


Cokayne, Sir Aston, baronet (1608-1684), poet and playwright, was born at Elvaston in Derbyshire in December 1608 and baptized at Ashbourne on 20 December, the eldest of the seven children of Thomas Cokayne (1587-1638) and his wife, Anne Stanhope ('c'.1592-1664), daughter of Sir John Stanhope of Elvaston and half-sister of Philip Stanhope, first earl of Chesterfield. Cokayne's parents belonged to an extended network of interrelated midlands gentry and aristocracy, many of whose members -- Cokaynes, Stanhopes, Hastings, Knyvetons, Reppingtons, Trenthams -- are addressed or commemorated in his poems. Cokayne lived for much of his life on the family properties at Ashbourne in Derbyshire and at Pooley Hall at Polesworth in Warwickshire. 
Cokayne was educated at Chenies in Buckinghamshire under the rector there, Peter Allibond, before matriculating at Trinity College, Cambridge, about 1624. In 1628 he moved, without having taken a degree, to one of the inns of court, possibly the Inner Temple. He knew his fellow Trinity man Thomas Randolph well when ''Cambridge' (for his wit) extol'd him so' ('Small Poems', 'Epigrams', 2.89) and made many other literary contacts in London, claiming later that '

'Donne', 'Suckling', 'Randolph', 'Drayton', 'Massinger', 


'Habbington', 'Sandys', 'May', my acquaintance were. 
(ibid., 2.99)' (Some friendships, however, he owed to his family background: he met Drayton through Warwickshire connections and he was a cousin of the poet Charles Cotton.) He frequented the theatre and contributed commendatory verses for Massinger's 'The Emperor of the East' and 'The Maid of Honour' in 1632; he also wrote his own comedy, 'The Obstinate Lady', about 1629-31. (There is no record of a performance of this or Cokayne's other plays.) His detailed knowledge of the theatre of this time is attested to later by his 'Praeludium' to Brome's 'Five New Playes' of 1653 and by poems in which he complains that the editors of the Beaumont and Fletcher folio of 1647 have failed to give due credit to the shares of the different contributors, including his 'good friend Old 'Philip Massinger'' ('Small Poems', 'Letters to divers persons', 7; 'Epigrams', 2.53). 
On 9 July 1632 Cokayne took an oath of allegiance, presumably in order to remove suspicion of recusancy on the eve of his tour of Catholic Europe; he was a particular friend of the Catholics Andrew Knyveton and Francis Lenton and was probably a Catholic himself, although perhaps not openly so until the 1670s. Having set off on 16 July 1632 Cokayne proceeded via Paris, with only brief halts, to Venice. There he remained for about six months, during which time he enrolled as a student at the University of Padua on 11 October. In Venice he twice saw the company of the Affezionati improvise a production on the scenario 'Il creduto principe'; on this he based his play 'Trappolin creduto principe, or, Trappolin Supposed a Prince'. Although 'commedia dell'arte' elements are evident the playwright 'has accommodated the plot-lines and figures of the improvised piece to a distinctively English dramatic style' (Richards, 246) and it seems likely enough -- especially given his theatrical connections -- to have achieved performance. 

'Trappolin' was, according to its epilogue: '
at Rome begun, half made 

At Naples, at Paris the conclusion had. 

' Cokayne was in Rome for three weeks, including Easter 1633, in Naples for another three weeks, and in Paris for two months before returning to England in July 1633. After this, as far as is known, he lived mostly in Warwickshire (he inherited Pooley Hall from his father in 1639) and in Derbyshire. In 1634 he married Knyveton's sister Mary (died 1683), daughter of Sir Gilbert Knyveton of Mercaston in Derbyshire. Their three children were Thomas (1636-1679); Mary ('b'. 1640), who married first Thomas Henslow and then William Lacy; and Isabella ('b'. 1654), who married William Turville. It is likely that Cokayne paid a second visit to Venice since his translation (published, probably without his involvement, in 1654) of Giovanni Francesco Loredano's 'La Dianea' (1627) is dated 'from Venice, 25 Oct. 1635' ('The Author's Epistle'). Conceivably, however, the date is an error for 1632. 
On twelfth night 1639 Cokayne's 'A Masque' was performed at Bretby in Derbyshire, home of his uncle the earl of Chesterfield. Like many of the 'great Company' addressed by 'the 'Lar Familiaris' of the house', Cokayne was evidently loyal to the royalist cause. He was created a baronet, probably either in January 1641 or after the outbreak of civil war in August 1642. (Probably also in 1642 he received an Oxford MA.) Few details of his war service are known except that he was serving under his kinsman Henry Hastings, Lord Loughborough, when Ashby-de-la-Zouch capitulated on 28 February 1646. He compounded as a delinquent on 1 March and was listed in May among those allowed to leave the country on any ship departing from Dover or Rye. In May 1648 he was in the Marshalsea prison. His fines were paid by a relative, William Cokayne, but he appears to have remained in prison until 1651, when he returned to Pooley. 
Many of Cokayne's poems were written in the 1640s and early 1650s. They include references to puritan 'grumblings' about drinking and to the silencing of plays in London by 'the Presbyter', as well as epitaphs on such royalist kinsfolk as Colonel Michael Stanhope, who 'fought, and dy'd/When prosp'rous fortune left the Regal side' ('Small Poems', 'Epigrams', 2.24, 1.107, 1.89). He claims, however, that 'such troubles disagree/Both with my Genius as well as me' (ibid., 1.87), and the poems take up relatively little space in the extensive collection of epigrams, translations, funeral elegies, verse letters, encomia, and other pieces that became 'Small Poems of Divers Sorts' (1658; also issued, with cancel title-page, as 'A Chain of Golden Poems'). His elegy on Henry, Lord Hastings, was first published in the memorial collection 'Lachrymae musarum' (1649). 
Possibly Cokayne had always intended to publish his works but the immediate impetus to do so seems to have come from the unauthorized printing of 'The Obstinate Lady' in 1657. Much of the verse was set as prose and someone else's conclusion substituted for Cokayne's missing last leaf; fearing that 'my 'Trappolin', and other Poems should have run the like misfortune', he arranged publication of 'Small Poems', he explains in the 'Apology to the reader', including 'A Masque', 'Trappolin', and the corrected 'Obstinate Lady'. 'The Tragedy of Ovid', described as in progress in 1658, was added in 'Poems' of 1662 (reissued in 1669 as 'Choice Poems of Several Sorts'). 
Cokayne succeeded to the estate at Ashbourne on his mother's death in 1664 but debts forced its sale in 1671. Further fines were incurred for recusancy in November 1678, and Pooley Hall was sold in 1683. Cokayne died in lodgings at Derby 'upon the breaking of the great frost' in February 1684 (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 130) and was buried on 13 February in the chancel of Polesworth church. By his will of 6 February 1684 (proved at Lichfield) he left $79 to be divided between his daughters Mary and Isabella, and Mary's children. 
The only known representation of Cokayne -- a somewhat unflattering laurelled bust -- appears in the later editions of the poems; 'no genteel face', observes Wood (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 129). According to Wood, Cokayne 'was esteemed by many an ingenious gent. a good poet and a great lover of learning, yet by others a perfect boon fellow, by which means he wasted all he had' (ibid., 130). Subsequent readers have found the poetry less 'good' than of biographical and historical value. The plays, especially 'Trappolin', have attracted more interest. 'A Duke and No Duke', a farce based on 'Trappolin' by Nahum Tate, was first performed in 1684; in one version or another it remained popular throughout the eighteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 5820


Cokayn, George (bap. 1620, d. 1691), Independent minister, eldest son of John and Elizabeth Cokayn, was born at Cotton End, Bedfordshire, and baptized on 16 January 1620 at Cople, Bedfordshire. Bulstrode Whitelocke placed Cokayn's father firmly (and admiringly) in 'the mediocrity & middle estate & condition... of a smalle Estate, yett having sufficient to live comfortably & conveniently, not riotously, yett plentifully' (Spalding, 56). George was admitted pensioner, on 25 February 1636, at Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1640. On 2 December 1642 he was appointed lecturer at All Hallows Barking, London. During the civil war he served as chaplain to the regiment of Colonel Charles Fleetwood. In 1646 he wrote an epistle of commendation for Tobias Crisp's 'Christ Alone Exalted' (1643). In this he stated: 'You shall find the sum of this Work, to be the sole exaltation of the Lord Jesus in Saints and Duties.... Now, if the world shall baptize this Doctrine 'Antinomianism', the Lord grant that all the Doctrine preached throughout the world, may deservedly be called by that name.' This early piece of Cokayn's writing also reveals his radical views on ecclesiastical polity: 'I know nothing you have that is long-lived but Jesus Christ... even the Kingdom of Heaven, so far as it is made up of forms and administrations, shall wither and die, but the Kingdom of God within you shall never be shaken.' In 1647-8 he lectured at St Michael, Crooked Lane, London. Some time during these years he became pastor to an Independent church which had been gathered by Nicholas Lockyer, and in 1647 he married Abigail, 'nee' Plott (died 1697). In 1648 he obtained the ministry at St Pancras, Soper Lane. His Independent congregation followed him there. 
Cokayn's church comprised prominent civic leaders of London during the revolutionary era such as Alderman Robert Tichborne, Alderman John Ireton, and Colonel Rowland Wilson. It was probably upon the recommendation of Wilson (MP for Calne) that he was invited to preach before the House of Commons on 29 November 1648. The sermon, later published under the title 'Flesh Expiring, and Spirit Inspiring' (1649), was blatantly political in nature. Barely a week before the purge of the House of Commons by Colonel Thomas Pride, Cokayn boldly hinted what was soon to take place. 'God mingles with nothing', he told the Commons, and went on to quote 'Isaiah', 1: 25: ''And I will turn my hand upon thee, and purely purge away thy dross, and take away all thy Tin'' (Cokayn, 'Flesh Expiring', 4). He urged that 'you delay not to do Justice' and 'think not to save yourselves by an unrighteous saving of them, who are the Lords and the Peoples known Enemies' (ibid., 25). And he unmistakably enunciated his millenarian aspiration: 'The Saints that walk with God in Union with Holiness and Righteousness are the men by whom God at last will judg all the causes of the sons of men' (ibid., 17). 
In 1649-50 Cokayn was chaplain in the household of Wilson, then one of the sheriffs of London; and when Wilson died in early 1650 he was wholly trusted by Wilson's widow, and consequently played an important part in her marriage to Sir Bulstrode Whitelocke later in the year. On 15 August 1651 he was again appointed chaplain to Fleetwood in a northern campaign against Scottish forces. In 1652-3 he was involved in the millenarian agitation in London and publicly associated himself with Christopher Feake, John Simpson, and Vavasor Powell, all of whom were leading Fifth Monarchy Men. He was also said to have held meetings with dissatisfied republicans such as Colonel Edward Sexby and Major John Wildman after the proclamation of Cromwell as protector. In the meantime, however, on behalf of Whitelocke, now ambassador to Sweden, he frequently met the Cromwellian government, especially John Thurloe, secretary to the council of state. In later years he was to provide Thurloe with intelligence. In late December 1658 he was invited to preach before the City magistrates on a day of humiliation for the calling of Richard Cromwell's parliament. When the army took power and chose Fleetwood as commander-in-chief in October 1659, he was 'very great with Fleetwood and the officers of that party' ('Diary of Bulstrode Whitelocke', 536). 
Upon the Restoration, Cokayn either resigned or was ejected from the ministry of St Pancras. In 1661 he joined other Independent ministers in repudiating a Fifth Monarchist insurrection led by Thomas Venner. His activities, however, continued to give cause for suspicion on the part of the government. He co-authored with Henry Jessey 'Mirabilis annus' (1661) and was probably responsible for 'Mirabilis annus secundus' (2 vols., 1662). These collections of 'prodigies' were meant to show 'the more visibly', as it is clearly stated in the preface to 'Mirabilis annus secundus', that 'God doth from Heaven testifie against the Prophane, Superstitious, Apostatizing, and Persecuting Spirit of this day'. During the years 1661-4 he preached at various conventicles in London as well as in the country, sometimes joining his church with those of Nathaniel Holmes, Joseph Caryl, Matthew Barker, and George Griffith. It was also reported that his house in Soper Lane was frequented by Fifth Monarchy Men. He was arrested in 1664 but was released on bail. His house was searched in 1671. In spite of all these difficulties, he visited Whitelocke at Chilton Lodge in Wiltshire freely and frequently during the years 1666-75, and preached there in the hall. In 1672 he was licensed as an Independent teacher in his house at Red Cross Street, outside Cripplegate, London. Warrants were again issued in 1678 for his appearance and for the search of his house, and he was convicted for unlawful preaching at the Old Bailey in 1682 and 1683. 
Cokayn continued his ministry at Red Cross Street until 1690, and there was a close intercommunion between his congregation and the church of John Bunyan in Bedford. In 1688 he wrote a preface for Bunyan's 'Acceptable Sacrifice', and may have been the author of 'A Continuation of Mr. Bunyan's Life'. He was also instrumental in the creation of the Presbyterian-Independent Common Fund, to which he contributed $100 in 1690. Cokayn died at Red Cross Street on 21 November 1691, and was buried on 27 November at Bunhill Fields. He was survived by his wife, two sons (John and William), and a daughter (Elizabeth). He had land, a mansion house, and a number of messuages in Cardington, Bedfordshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 5821


Cokayne, John (d. 1429), justice, is frequently confused with his nephew, Sir John Cokayne (died 1438) of Ashbourne in Derbyshire. Contemporary sources distinguish the two by referring to the justice as 'the elder' or 'the uncle'. He was the younger son of John Cokayne (died 1372), chief steward of the northern parts of the duchy of Lancaster, and Cecilia Vernon (she later married Robert Ireton). His marriage, probably in the early 1380s -- the marriage had produced grandchildren by 1400 -- to Ida (died 1426), daughter of Reynold, Lord Grey of Ruthin (died 1388), reflected the quality of his family's connections. He must already have been well established in the legal profession when, in April 1383, the king granted him a life annuity of $15. In the following decade he was appointed to his first major legal offices: by October 1394 he was serving as recorder of London -- an office he surrendered in 1398 -- and in October 1396 he became a serjeant-at-law. By this time he had already followed the family tradition of service to the house of Lancaster, holding, as his father had done before him, the chief stewardship of the northern parts of the duchy (1398-1400). In his will of February 1398, John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster, nominated Cokayne as one of his executors. Such impeccable Lancastrian connections ensured further promotion on the accession of Henry IV. In November 1400 he was appointed chief baron of the exchequer, and in May 1405 he was elevated to the bench of the common pleas. He continued to hold both offices until Henry V's accession in 1413, when he surrendered his exchequer office. 
The profits of office and royal patronage -- while a justice he enjoyed the grant of several royal wardships -- enabled Cokayne to lay the landed foundations of a gentry family that was to endure for more than 300 years. By 1394 he had acquired lands at Bearwardcote in his native Derbyshire, and in 1398 he secured a life interest in the Hertfordshire manors of Almshoe, in Ippollitts, and Radwell. His major purchase, that of the Bedfordshire manor of Bury (now Cockayne) Hatley, was made in 1417; when he drew up his will on 10 February 1428 he expressed his wish to be buried in the parish church there (his altar tomb is now lost). His bequests looked back to the patrons who had made his worldly success possible: he endowed prayers for the souls of John of Gaunt, the first two Lancastrian kings, and, most interestingly, Richard II. He died on 22 May 1429, probably at Bury Hatley. 


@@@@@


doc= 5822


Cokayne, Sir Thomas (1519-1592), soldier and huntsman, was the son of Francis Cokayne of the family of Cockaine, which for generations had owned estates at Ashbourne, Derbyshire, and his wife, Dorothy Marrow. Brought up in the household of Francis Talbot, fifth earl of Shrewsbury, Thomas came into his inheritance at the death of his father on 5 August 1538. The following year he was admitted to Gray's Inn. About 1540 he married Dorothy (died 1595), daughter of Sir Humphrey Ferrers of Tamworth, who was his stepfather. Sir Humphrey's eldest son, John Ferrers, married Barbara Cokayne, Thomas's sister. Thomas and Dorothy Cokayne are known to have had seven daughters and three sons. 
In 1544 Cokayne accompanied Edward Seymour, earl of Hertford, in the expedition to Scotland and was knighted at Leith on 11 May after the taking of Edinburgh. On 26 May 1547 his name appears for the first time on the commission of the peace for Derbyshire. He was with the forces sent to the relief of Haddington under George Talbot, sixth earl of Shrewsbury, named on a muster of 13 August 1548 as one of the captains selected 'For the Battaile'. The following year he was pricked for sheriff of Derbyshire, a position he filled also in 1559, 1569, 1579, and 1585. In 1587 he was one of the attendants on Mary, queen of Scots, on her journey 'with but a small trayne' as far as Derby, as she travelled towards her final imprisonment at Fotheringhay. 
From 1583 Cokayne helped found the grammar school at Ashbourne, donating $18 and granting to it a yearly charge of $4 out of his estate, though it is clear that one Thomas Carter of the Middle Temple was the main mover and financier of the foundation. Raphael Holinshed, author of the famous chronicles, was a steward on an estate neighbouring Cokayne's manor of Pooley in Polesworth, Warwickshire, and is reported to have been a frequent visitor at Pooley. Though 'a professed hunter, and not a scholler', as he himself remarked, Cokayne was enough of the latter to write a manual on his passion: 'A Short Treatise of Hunting' (1591), dedicated to Gilbert Talbot, earl of Shrewsbury. The book contains illustrations of the fox, the hare, and the stag and deals with the practical arrangements for hunting. Its preface to 'gentlemen-readers', dated from Ashbourne, 31 December 1590, argues that 'hunters by their continual travail, painful labour, often watching, and enduring of hunger, of heat, and of cold, are much enabled above others to the service of their prince and country to the wars'. It draws attention to the role of hunting in protecting the countryside 'from the hurt of foxes and other ravenous vermine' despite 'the carping speeches of the enemies thereof'. 
Cokayne was buried on the night of 15 November 1592; his widow died at Derby on 21 December 1595. Both were interred at Ashbourne church in a tomb once described as 'a stately mural monument of marble, in the Renaissance style' (Cox, 2.386). Pevsner is more prosaic: 'Thomas Cokayne buried 1592, standing wall monument; rusticated pillars below, the figures lifesize and kneeling, facing each other across a prayer-desk; pilasters left and right with much strapwork; arch above the figures; the children in the predella below' (Pevsner, 44). 


@@@@@


doc= 5823


Cokayne, Thomas (1587-1638), lexicographer, was born on 21 January 1587 at Mapleton, near Ashbourne, Derbyshire, the son of Sir Edward Cokayne of Ashbourne (died 1606), sheriff of the county, and his wife, Jane (died 1647), daughter of Sir Nicholas Ashby of Willoughby in the Wolds, Nottinghamshire. He was the grandson of Sir Thomas Cokayne of Ashbourne (1519-1592), sheriff of Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire, and author of 'A Short Treatise of Hunting' (1591). 
Thomas Cokayne entered Corpus Christi College, Oxford, but left without taking a degree, probably upon his inheritance of Ashbourne Hall and other family properties at his father's death. Shortly afterwards he married Anne (or Ann) Stanhope ('c'.1592-1664), who was the daughter of Sir John Stanhope, of Elvaston, Derbyshire, and his wife, Dorothy Trentham, and half-sister of Philip Stanhope, first earl of Chesterfield. The eldest of their seven children was the poet Sir Aston Cokayne, baronet. 
Neither the grapes of Ashbourne's vineyards, however, nor the asparagus, apricots, and peaches of her gardens that Aston would write about in his poem to his mother in 1658 sufficed to keep Thomas Cokayne from leaving his wife, two sons, and five daughters shortly after 1616 to go to London, where he took lodgings in Gray's Inn Lane and lived under the assumed name of Browne (or Brown). A letter from John Donne to Anne Cokayne, who 'warmly engaged Donne's affections' (Bald, 501) in the late 1620s, suggests that Thomas Cokayne's 'perversnesse' put her to the 'necessity of hiding' her sons ('A Collection of Letters', 345) to prevent his discovering their whereabouts. Presumably Donne visited Ashbourne more than once, for a room there was long known as 'Dr Donne's chamber'. In 'An Epitaph on my Father Mr. Tho. Cokain' ('Poems', 128 [i.e. 228]), Aston Cokayne expresses no bitterness but praises his father's 'great worth' and implies that Thomas Cokayne experienced a spiritual awakening, choosing to sacrifice 'all terrene wealth'. 
Details of Thomas Cokayne's life in London are not recorded, but it appears that he devoted his energies to lexicography. Anthony Wood claimed that he wrote, in collaboration with unnamed assistants, 'A Greek English lexicon, containing the derivations and various significations of all the words in the New Testament' ('By 'T. C.' late of C. C. C. in 'Oxford''), published posthumously in 1658, in which the etymologies, denotations, and connotations of biblical Greek words are expounded, with extensive references to 'New Testament' chapters and verses. The lexicon is supplemented by Greek and English indexes (evidently prepared by Henry Jessey); an explication, verse by verse, word by word, of the book of 'Romans', chapter two; and an essay on Greek and Hebrew dialects. It is, according to the author, 'fitted for [those of] the meanest capacity', ignorant of Latin, who through diligent use of the lexicon may comprehend Greek more quickly and more fully than 'many who have spent many years time in 'Cambridg' or 'Oxford' to their friends no small expence and charges' -- all for the 'bare price of this book' (T. C., 'A Greek English Lexicon', 1658, foreword). The work was reissued in 1661 with the title 'An English-Greek Lexicon', 'published, and recommended to all' by eight nonconformist London ministers, including Joseph Caryl, who had 'a prime hand' in the work (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.982), and George Cokayne (possibly a relation of Thomas Cokayne). The 1658 work has variously been attributed to each of them. 
Having just passed his fifty-first birthday, Thomas Cokayne died at London and was buried on 27 January 1638 in the church of St Giles-in-the-Fields. On 6 December 1638 administration of his personal effects was granted in London; and in 1640 an inquisition post mortem was held concerning his estates at Ashbourne and Pooley, Warwickshire. His widow retired to Ashbourne Hall where she died on 29 August 1664, aged about seventy-two. She was 'an honourable person... a royalist, of highest elevation, yet a woman of sense' ('History... of Ashbourn', 24). Her nephew, the poet Charles Cotton, called her 'Mrs. Cokain in the Peake', an allusion to her eccentric headdress ('N&Q', 3rd ser., 4, 1963, 415-16). 


@@@@@


doc= 5824


Cokayne, Sir William (1559/60-1626), merchant, was the second of the seven sons of William Cokayne (died 18 Nov 1599) of Baddesley Ensor, Warwickshire, a freeman of the Skinners' Company of London and sometime governor of the Eastland Company, and his first wife, Elizabeth (died 2 April 1589), the daughter of Roger Medcalfe of Wensleydale, Yorkshire, and of Alspade and Meriden, Warwickshire, also a freeman of the Skinners' Company of London. His family had been established near Ashbourne, Derbyshire, since the middle of the twelfth century, and included the judge Sir John Cokayne (died 1438); Thomas Cockayne, recorder of London in 1439, was probably a member of the same family. William was apprenticed to his father at Christmas 1582, and became free of the Skinners' Company by patrimony on 28 March 1590. He was admitted to Gray's Inn on 10 August 1600. On his father's death he succeeded to the latter's business, and quickly achieved prominence among London merchants. Like his father, he was a leading member of the Eastland Company, which at that time was the chief rival trading company of the Company of Merchant Adventurers (of which neither Cokayne nor his father were members). He was also an active member of the East India Company committee (1606-9), and was master of the Skinners' Company in 1609, 1611, and 1625. 
Cokayne exported cloth to the Baltic on a considerable scale, becoming enormously wealthy, and he lent money to James I. By 1603, if not earlier, he was purveyor to the English force sent to quell the Irish rising, and for many years he employed William Cradock as his resident factor respecting the purveyorship in Hamburg (through which port most munitions used to be bought or transported at that time). Cokayne served as a sheriff of London (1609-10) and alderman for the wards of Farringdon Without (1609-13), Castle Baynard (1613-18), Lime Street (1618-25), and Broad Street (1625-6). He was lord mayor of London in 1619-20, and first governor of the Irish Society, from 1610 to 1614, when he took in hand the defences of Londonderry (1613). He was auditor (1606-7), colonel of the trained bands (1618-26), and president of St Thomas's Hospital (1622-6), as well as a benefactor and governor of Christ's Hospital. 
Cokayne married, on 22 June 1596, at St Leonard Eastcheap, London, Mary ('bap'. 10 May 1573, died 1648/9), the fifth and youngest daughter of Richard Morris of Suffolk, a freeman of the Ironmongers' Company of London, and his wife, Maud, formerly the wife of John Barlow, also a freeman of the Ironmongers' Company of London, and the daughter of John Daborne or Dawborne of Guildford, Surrey. After Cokayne's death Mary married Henry Carey, first earl of Dover, the father of her future son-in-law. Mary was buried on 8 January 1649 with Cokayne in St Paul's Cathedral. 
Cokayne became an influential adviser to James I, who frequently consulted with him both in council and privately, speaking highly of his business methods and his 'language, accent and manner of delivering himself' (G. E. Cokayne). As early as 1606 Cokayne was concerned with what he considered to be the great project of his life: the dyeing and dressing of all cloths made in England before their exportation. His chance came in 1612, with the death of Salisbury: James was increasing his power, and the treasury was trying to improve the state revenues. Cokayne used his influence with the king to override privy council concerns and promote his own, and the Eastland Company's, project to transform the Merchant Adventurers' sole privilege of the exportation of undyed and undressed cloths into an exportation of the finished product. The Company of Merchant Adventurers considered the project doomed, refused to co-operate, and was suppressed. The New Company of Merchant Adventurers was established in its place and received its letters patent on 29 August 1615; Cokayne became its first governor. The nucleus of this company consisted of Eastland merchants, and included William Cradock, Cokayne's old factor from Hamburg, which became the King's Merchant Adventurers' staple town in Germany. All licences for the exportation of undyed and undressed cloth were withdrawn, which annoyed the Dutch, the principal buyers. The project, and the new company, failed, and gave rise to one of the most severe trade crises ever to devastate England. 
During the brief term of the new company, on 8 June 1616 Cokayne entertained the king in his own home, Cokayne House, directly opposite the church of St Peter-le-Poer in Broad Street. The cost of the entertainment came to over $3000, and was paid for by the new company, although Cokayne took the credit; he was knighted with the City's sword at the end of the festivities on that day. A gold basin and $1000 was given to the king, and $500 to Prince Charles. However, by the autumn of 1616 the king had lost faith in the New Merchant Adventurers', and Cokayne was out of favour. By 1 January 1617 the king had restored the old Merchant Adventurers' company, and the New Company of Merchant Adventurers was dissolved. Cokayne managed to avoid falling into disfavour for long, however, and by 1618 his reconciliation with the king was complete. 
During his mayoralty, on 26 March 1620, Cokayne received in great state the king and the prince of Wales, who visited St Paul's Cathedral with a view to raising money to complete the spire, which had blown down in 1561. The title of his mayoral pageant, which was paid for by the Skinners' Company, was 'The Triumphs of Love and Antiquity'; it was written by Thomas Middleton, who also wrote 'The First Entertainment', held at Cokayne House on Monday and Tuesday in Easter week 1620. On the Saturday following, 22 April, the latter entertainment was reworked for the privy council, and on the same day Cokayne's eldest daughter, Mary, married Charles Howard, third baron Howard of Effingham. 
Cokayne was one of the financiers who equipped William Baffin for his voyage in search of a north-west passage in 1612, and in his honour Baffin named a harbour in Greenland Cockin's Sound. 
As well as Cokayne House in Broad Street, which was destroyed by fire on 12 November 1623 and had to be totally rebuilt, Cokayne purchased large estates in several counties, including (in 1619) Elmesthorpe, Leicestershire, and Rushton, Northamptonshire, the latter of which was the home of his descendants until 1828. He also possessed a manor house, Coombe Nevill (once owned by the earls of Warwick), at Kingston, Surrey, where he died, after two days' illness, on 20 October 1626, aged sixty-six. He was buried on 12 December in St Paul's Cathedral, where a stately monument, including effigies of him and his wife and a lengthy Latin inscription, was erected to him. Of this monument, only part of his effigy, comprising his figure down to the knees, still survives in the crypt of the cathedral. The monument and epitaph are illustrated in Sir William Dugdale's 'History of St Paul's Cathedral' (1658). His funeral sermon was preached by John Donne, dean of St Paul's. Letters of administration were granted on his estate on 20 December 1626, and his nuncupative will was proved on 20 June 1627. He left his son Charles estates worth $12,000 per annum and $10,000 for each of his six daughters, and he bequeathed to the Skinners' Company five silver-gilt loving cups, which they still possess, in the form of cocks standing on turtles. 
Cokayne was the ancestor of a number of English aristocratic families. His only surviving son, Charles (1602-1661), was created Baron and Viscount Cullen of co. Tipperary in the peerage of Ireland in 1642 and married Lady Mary O'Brien, the first daughter and coheir of Henry, fifth earl of Thomond in Ireland. His eldest daughter, Mary (1598-1650/51), married Charles Howard, third Baron Howard of Effingham, later second earl of Nottingham. Anne (1604-1668) married Sir Hatton Fermor, of Easton Neston, Northamptonshire, and was the ancestor of the earls of Pomfret. Martha (1605-1641) married firstly John Ramsay, earl of Holdernesse, and secondly Montagu Bertie, Lord Willoughby de Eresby, who succeeded as second earl of Lindsey in 1642; by the latter marriage she was ancestor of the earls of Lindsey, the dukes of Ancaster, and the earls of Ancaster. Elizabeth (1609-1667/8) married Thomas Fanshawe, created Viscount Fanshawe of Dromore in Ireland in 1661, remembrancer of the exchequer. Abigail (1610-1687/8) married John Carey, Viscount Rochford, later second earl of Dover, whose father, the first earl, had married her mother some six months earlier. Jane (1611/12-1683), Cokayne's youngest daughter, married the Hon. James Sheffield, the son of the earl of Mulgrave. 


@@@@@


doc= 5825


Coke, Daniel Parker (1745-1825), barrister and politician, was born on 17 July 1745, the only son of Thomas Coke (1700-1776), barrister, and his wife, Matilda (1706-1777), daughter and heir of Thomas Goodwin of Derby. He belonged to an old Derbyshire family, the Cokes of Trusley, of which he became in time the chief representative, though without an inheritance, the patrimonial estate descending in the female line. After being educated by the Revd Thomas Marlove at Derby School, he matriculated at Queen's College, Oxford, in 1762, and migrated to All Souls, graduating BA in 1769 and MA in 1772. He was called to the bar in 1768, at Lincoln's Inn, and practised for many years on the midland circuit. In 1776 he was elected to parliament as member for Derby, which he represented until 1780. At the general election in that year he visited neighbouring Nottingham, to assist the corporation candidate Sir Edward Every, but was himself persuaded to stand. He was elected with the whig Robert Smith, and represented the town until 1812, when he retired from parliament. 
Coke built a solid base of personal support in Nottingham by assiduously promoting the interests of his constituents. On their behalf he urged the abolition of the receipt tax in parliament in December 1783. He suggested instead a tax on the stalls of deans and prebendaries, 'the most useless order of ecclesiastics in existence... he should be happy when the day arrived, on which they were to be abolished' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 101). This was a bold statement, given his strong Anglican ties, but one that was likely to be well received among Nottingham's politically powerful nonconformist community. In May 1784 he defended Nottingham trade by opposing the government's Irish commercial proposals on protectionist grounds. And in May 1788 he promoted the interests of Nottingham hosiers, with a bill to make frame-breaking punishable by death. It was rejected by the Commons as an unnecessary addition to the long list of existing capital crimes. 
In 1791 Coke held a brief for the crown in the prosecution of the ringleaders of the Church and King mob which sacked the Birmingham house of the prominent dissenter Dr Joseph Priestley. He opened the second day of the trial with a personal declaration: '[He] did not profess to agree with Dr Priestley either in his religious or his political opinions; but if he had been at Birmingham when the riots took place, he should have risked his life in the protection of Dr Priestley's house; and the more so, because he had differed in opinion from him. ('A Full and Accurate Report', 39)' The following year, in 1792, he opposed a motion for an inquiry into the culpability of the magistrates at Birmingham. By then the effects of the French Revolution were beginning to be widely felt in Britain, and even liberal-minded independent politicians such as Coke turned instinctively to the defence of the established order. 
Coke gave consistent support to the government during the war with France, which began in 1793, and in Nottingham this left him politically exposed. At the 1796 election in the town both he and Robert Smith faced opposition from Dr Peter Crompton, 'an opposer of the war, and all its train of ruinous consequences' ('Nottingham Journal', 4 June 1796). Though they were both comfortably re-elected a new dimension had been added to the debate: 'Loyalists' had clashed with 'Democrats', and the French Revolution had become 'an object of admiration to one part of the people, and of terror to the other' (Blackner, 300). 
By the time of the 1802 general election Coke was deeply unpopular in Nottingham because of his support for the war, 'to which was attributed the excessive high price of provisions' (Blackner, 301). Political radicalism and popular discontent now converged to produce a specially turbulent poll. Coke and his supporters were subjected to constant intimidation and abuse, and on one occasion Coke himself was stoned and bloodied by a crowd as he crossed the market place. He eventually withdrew from the contest 'from the just apprehension of hazard to his life' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 36, 1801-3, 1230). Victory went to his radical opponent, Dr Joseph Birch of Preston, described by one source as 'a whig, and something more' (Bailey, 222). Birch hailed his success, which came aptly on 14 July, as a triumph for civil liberty, and he alluded to the fall of the Bastille. Coke however saw at work 'Jacobinical' principles, which aimed ultimately at placing 'the Tenant above his Landlord, the Servant above his Master, and the Subject above his Prince' ('Coke and Birch', 298-300). 
Coke successfully petitioned parliament against Birch's election and in May 1803 they contested the seat again. To ensure freedom of election parliament had controversially extended to the town the jurisdiction of the county magistrates, who were predominantly conservative and in opposition to the corporation. In this changed setting Coke made a triumphant return to Nottingham, on 26 May, at the head of 1600 horsemen wearing his colours. It was a powerful display of strength and he won a resounding victory. At the nomination he and Birch had respectfully disputed the right of property to exercise influence at elections. Coke took a traditional view on this, and there is no doubt that such influence played its part in his success. He fought off another challenge from Birch in 1806, and from Crompton in 1807, before retiring in 1812. That year, significantly, both Nottingham seats were won by radicals. Coke continued as chairman of the Derbyshire quarter sessions until 1818. A lifelong bachelor, he died at his house, The College, in Derby, on 6 December 1825, aged eighty, and was buried in the local church of All Saints. A memorial stone there pays tribute to his record of public service, lauding him as 'high-minded, and in its true and just sense liberal'. 


@@@@@


doc= 5826


Coke, Sir Edward (1552-1634), lawyer, legal writer, and politician, was born on 1 February 1552 at Mileham, Norfolk, the only surviving son of Robert Coke (1513-1561), lawyer and landowner of Mileham, and his wife, Winifred (died 1569), daughter of William Knightley of Norwich. The families whose arms Coke quartered bore names long known in Norfolk and the Conisford ward of Norwich -- Coke, Pawe, Folcard, and Woodhouse -- while the Knightleys were prominent in Northamptonshire. Coke's family were minor gentry. Estimates of the family's income vary from $40 per annum to $300 per annum. Robert Coke was a rising man, a member of Lincoln's Inn and an attorney and servant to the Townshend family. He obtained a coat of arms during Mary Tudor's reign and served as JP during the reign of Elizabeth. The fact that Winifred Coke owned law books suggests something remarkable. Her connections aided her son. Her sister Elizabeth married Sir Thomas Gawdy, providing a useful link to that clan of lawyers and judges. Winifred's second husband, Robert Bozoun, of Whissonsett, Norfolk, was a man who drove hard bargains, even when dealing with Sir Nicholas Bacon, lord keeper, and probably taught his stepson some of his hard-headedness. 
Coke was probably a middle child, the only boy among seven sisters. After attending the grammar school in Norwich, he enrolled in 1567 as a pensioner at Trinity College, Cambridge; he left at the end of 1570 without taking a degree. His years at Cambridge, significantly, were also the years of the vestiarian controversy -- protests by puritan dons and students which culminated in an attack by Thomas Cartwright on the governing structure of the Church of England. During Coke's last term the protests ended with a crackdown by John Whitgift, master of Trinity College, presaging decades of conflict between the church establishment and puritan dissidents. Coke was enmeshed in these stirs both professionally and personally. Whitgift, Coke's college tutor, later sent his old student a 'Bible', urging that he study the law of God. Cartwright was linked to Coke by marriage, being brother-in-law to one of his sisters. 
When Coke set off for London, it is said that he left with the horse on which he rode, $10 in his pocket, a rapier, and a diamond ring inscribed 'O prepare'. He reached the capital on 21 January 1571 and that same day enrolled at Clifford's Inn, an inn of chancery. In 1572 he moved on from this minor institution to the more prominent Inner Temple. In a Temple moot Coke reportedly won acclaim for arguing 'the cook's case'. This may be a stale pun on Coke's name, or, possibly, raised issues of parliamentary privilege: in 1532 the Inner Temple's cook had avoided arrest for debt because he also served Thomas Audley, speaker of the House of Commons. By early 1572 Coke was attending the courts in Westminster Hall. At some point during his student days he began keeping a commonplace book; in 1579, possibly in connection with his taking up a readership at Lyon's Inn, Coke began keeping detailed records of cases. 
Coke was called to the bar on 20 April 1578. In 1579 he argued his first case in the court of king's bench, and won because he presented it well and it was thoroughly researched. Edward Cromwell, third Baron Cromwell, had sued a parson for defamation, and construing the governing statute Coke showed that opposing counsel had cited a badly translated and recent law French abridgement rather than the original Latin text. Soon afterwards Coke's role in arguing 'Shelley's case' (1581) brought him wider acclaim. The case featured anomalous facts, an ingenious new reading of standard conveyancing terms, and a prominent family bitterly divided over religion. Likely selected by William Cecil, first Baron Burghley and lord treasurer, to protect royal interests, Coke pulled off an energetic, brilliant defensive action. He commemorated the victory by circulating manuscript copies of his arguments. 
During the 1580s and 1590s Coke became one of the most prominent lawyers in England. His fame grew. In 1579-80 he gave readings on the statute of 27 Edward I, 'Finibus levatis', and in 1592, at the Inner Temple, on the statute of uses. The readings in 1592 were cut short when plague broke out in London. To browse through any volume of Elizabethan law cases -- the reports ascribed to Sir George Croke, William Leonard, John Godbolt, or Sir Francis Moore -- is to find Coke representing a broad range of clients: country gentlemen, acquisitive parsons, Roman Catholic exiles, puritan dissidents, cockney publicans and City haberdashers, duellists, forgers, and burglars. He represented the Drapers' Company and other London guilds. The Howard family, struggling after the attainder of Thomas Howard, fourth duke of Norfolk, were important clients; others included the family of the financier Sir Thomas Gresham and the sons of Sir Nicholas Bacon (1509-1579) -- Sir Nathaniel (died 1624) and Sir Nicholas Bacon (died 1624). 
Coke argued successfully many of the great cases to come before the bar during the reigns of Elizabeth and James I and these helped to refine legal doctrine. In 'Chudleigh's case' (1594) he argued that the statute of uses categorically made all transfers 'to use' subject to the rules on similar transfers made at law. In 'Slade's case' (1602) he argued successfully that a plaintiff seeking payment for an unkept promise to pay money should be allowed to sue in assumpsit, rather than be required to bring an action for debt. Coke owed something of his success to his growing status. He married Bridget (1565-1598), daughter of John Paston of Suffolk, on 13 August 1582. It was rumoured that this connection brought a dowry of $30,000 and substantial amounts of property. Bridget Coke was a beautiful young woman and the couple set up house together at Huntingfield, Suffolk. They had seven sons and three daughters, including Anne (1585-1671/2) ['see 'Sadleir, Anne]. Coke became a notable figure in Norfolk's emerging county community -- though local politics became more volatile in the wake of the collapse of the Howard family and the growing conflict among the gentry leaders. He was appointed JP for Norfolk in 1586 and for Suffolk and Middlesex by 1593. As his practice grew and he travelled to cities and towns throughout England, including Coventry and London, his expertise was sought by various municipal governments: he was appointed recorder of Coventry in 1585, Norwich in 1586, London in 1591-2, Orford in 1593, and Harwich by 1604. 
In the closing years of Elizabeth's reign, Norfolk displayed the political fracture lines that later divided the nation under the Stuarts. Ambitious gentlemen allied with the episcopal hierarchy, and armed with royal patents and militia commissions, challenged the traditional system of county government. They were resisted by country magistrates and puritans, on whose side Coke generally stood. When the authorities cracked down on puritan ministers at Bury St Edmunds, Coke represented pastor William Fleming and won his acquittal. In 1591, from a Norfolk quarter session bench, Coke and Francis Wyndham, justice of the common pleas, charged the grand jury that church courts could not force defendants to incriminate themselves. The statement resonates in Coke's later jurisprudence. In his native Launditch hundred, where his purchases made him a landowner to be reckoned with, he allied himself with puritan partisans -- squires who feuded over grazing rights and brought lawsuits over rectories. During the parliamentary election of 1592 Coke stood as MP in partnership with the austere religious Sir Nathaniel Bacon; a hard-fought campaign saw them elected as knights of the shire. 
Coke's partnership with the Cecil family was close. It was to Burghley that he owed his appointments as solicitor-general on 16 June 1592 and attorney-general on 10 April 1594 over the claims of his rival Francis Bacon, who had been supported by Robert Devereux, second earl of Essex. That conflict was part of the ongoing faction between Essex and the Cecils during the 1590s, being one of the biggest flashpoints. Coke was among the courtiers who profited from the wardships in which Burghley trafficked. He served as speaker of the House of Commons in 1593, the first parliament in which Sir Robert Cecil played a prominent part. Over the rest of the decade, as Norfolk politics became more volatile and popular, with mob violence and local rivalries (between supporters of the Cecils and Essex), Coke proved a shrewd electoral manager. As East Anglian boroughs put themselves into his pocket, allowing him to name the MPs that they returned, he dealt out seats to other Cecil partisans. 
In the early 1590s Coke advanced rapidly. In 1596 he became treasurer of the Inner Temple, and for years thereafter he had a strong influence on the inn, especially regarding admissions. As attorney-general he took part in the treason trials of Roderigo Lopez, Edward Squire, the Jesuits John Gerard and Henry Walpole, and Sir John Smyth. He badgered Essex after the earl's disastrous return from Ireland, and early in 1601, after Essex's frustrated 'coup d'etat', Coke presented the case which sent the one-time favourite to the scaffold. He also helped to orchestrate the government's running battle against Catholic infiltrators. On 15 November 1602, with Sir John Popham, chief justice of the queen's bench, and 'such men as we could trust', he staked out a corner of Gray's Inn Fields and personally arrested couriers from an Italian cardinal ('CSP dom.', '1601-3', 261-2). He questioned suspects in the Tower of London, and Gerard, who later escaped, provided a unique account of one such interrogation from the prisoner's point of view. Coke served the crown in this position for twelve years, prosecuting Sir Walter Ralegh and Henry Brooke, eleventh Baron Cobham, in 1603. There were mundane, lawyerly duties as well -- drafting pardons and engrossing commissions. However, if the treason prosecutions earned Coke prominence, the routine legal work finally brought him wealth. As attorney-general he collected fees for processing certain transactions, and the growing popularity of recourse to law made life particularly lucrative. During the 1590s, by Thomas Wilson's jaundiced but well-informed estimate, Coke's income rose from $100 per annum to $12,000 per annum, a figure comparable with those of the wealthiest men in the kingdom. In 1603, when James VI of Scotland succeeded Elizabeth, a coronation windfall came Coke's way. John Aubrey had the story: Coke advised 'every man of estate (right or wrong) to sue-out a pardon' from the incoming monarch. With a fee of $5 for processing each pardon, Coke was said to have gained $100,000 that year ('Brief Lives', 162). However, this practice was rare and Aubrey may have exaggerated. In the heady days of James's arrival at Westminster, a knighthood followed, on 22 May. 
In prosecuting Ralegh, the bitterest proceeding of his career, Coke was brutally vituperative. 'Thou viper', he called him, 'thou hast an English face, but a Spanish heart... thou art the most vile and execrable traitor that ever lived' ('State trials', 2.7, 10, 25). Coke's language was so overwrought that Ralegh turned its force against the attorney-general, like a swordsman sidestepping the clumsy sweep of a halberd, and with fearless calm and quiet rejoinders redeemed his own reputation. Yet despite his eloquence and the lack of any real connection between the 'Main plot', with which he was charged, and the 'Bye plot', which Coke attributed to him, the fact remains that Ralegh could not explain why he had known so much and yet kept silent about Cobham's dubious political designs; and while proof of his guilt was weak, much stronger was the evidence that he had tried to conceal his own uncertain role. It was this part of the case that Coke hammered home, and, however inflammatory his rhetoric, he used language no more abusive than that with which Sir Thomas More had berated heretics. In other courtrooms, moreover -- notably in 'Lord Paget's case' (1591) -- Coke argued just as forcefully on behalf of other enemies of the state. 
By 1600 Coke was a very wealthy man with many possessions; he eventually owned at least 105 properties (manors, farms, rectories, advowsons, mills, and two mansions), most dotting the landscape in north-western Norfolk around Tittleshall and Holkham, with another cluster in Suffolk near Huntingfield. He was extremely acquisitive. A suit brought by Sir Francis Hubert, a hapless courtier and poet who blundered across his path, records the guile and audacity which the great lawyer could show. Coke acknowledged his tight-fistedness with a hint of self-mockery: when someone suggested that his high-living sons would spend his wealth faster than he had earned it, he replied, 'They cannot take more delight in the spending of it than I did in the getting of it' ('Brief Lives', 162). Yet very often he showed a neighbourly generosity. Bridget Coke's household account book, preserved at Holkham, records regular payment for favours and the exchange of presents -- salmon and venison traded back and forth between courtiers and her husband, 4died was given to a boy who brought strawberries, and $1 was provided for Coke's superannuated nurse. 
Bridget Coke died on 27 June 1598. On 6 November Coke married Elizabeth, Lady Hatton (1578-1646), daughter of Thomas Cecil, second Baron Burghley and first earl of Exeter, and his first wife, Dorothy, and widow of Sir William Hatton. By worldly standards it was a brilliant marriage. Elizabeth was a young widow, an heiress, a society beauty, and a niece of Sir Robert Cecil, principal secretary. Held at night without banns or licence, the wedding gave rise to considerable speculation. The incredulity of the letter writer John Chamberlain was typical: 'the quenes atturney married the Lady Hatton, to the great admiration of all men, that after so many large and likely offers she sholde decline to a man of his qualitie, and the[y] will not beleve it was without a misterie. ('Letters of John Chamberlain', 29, 63)' Certainly Lady Hatton had her own motives. She was twenty-six years younger than Coke, kept her former title, and sparred with her new husband over her jointure property. Gossips questioned her faithfulness. Yet if Coke and she were not wholly compatible, at least they were well matched. They had two daughters and over the years, as she herself matured from a society beauty into a royal confidante, she stalwartly supported her husband's standing at court. 
Coke was appointed chief justice of the court of common pleas on 30 June 1606, being created serjeant-at-law for the occasion, and chief justice of the king's bench on 25 October 1613. His tenure in these courts proved turbulent, being marked by friction with James and with two archbishops of Canterbury, Richard Bancroft and George Abbot. Early in James's reign, after the Hampton Court conference of 1604 had failed to resolve the tensions within the Church of England, the puritan leadership revived a strategy that had served them well in the 1590s. Facing prosecution by church courts and by the court of high commission -- tribunals which were perennially criticized, not unjustly, for handling sectaries more harshly than Roman Catholic recusants -- the puritans sued in common-law courts for writs of prohibition, orders enjoining prosecutions in such ecclesiastical tribunals. To enforce religious conformity, the commission compelled self-incrimination. Commissioners put defendants under oath in order to interrogate them about their religious principles as well as any plans further to reform the English church. (This was the notorious 'ex officio' oath, so called because it was used in proceedings initiated directly by the commission.) The commission also meted out fines and prison terms. Critically, none of these powers was spelled out in the 'Act of Supremacy' (1559), which authorized the commission. The commissioners claimed the powers because they were authorized by letters patent, as the statute had stipulated rather vaguely, commissions issued by crown officials. On the other side puritan lawyers argued that the commission's powers to interrogate, fine, and imprison were invalid, simply because these powers were not set forth in the statute. This set the common-law judges against the Church of England. To say that the commission's powers were limited by the statute was to say that the commission was subject to parliament and to the common-law judges who interpreted the law. More broadly, such arguments aligned judges and parliament against the crown. As a matter of constitutional logic, if the statute limited the powers which the king's commissions could grant, then parliament's authority on religious matters outweighed the king's. 
In 1591, in 'Cawdrey's case', the judges ruled broadly in the high commission's favour -- so broadly that the case settled little. By the first years of James's reign, many prohibitions had issued from the common-law courts. Coke was only the most prominent of the many common lawyers who favoured such limitations on ecclesiastical tribunals. In 1604 he sought to restrict the commission's use of the oath 'ex officio'. In October 1605 Bancroft presented to the king a list of complaints against the judges, the so-called 'articuli cleri'. Over the next four years an indecisive series of conferences between the churchmen and the judges was held. In the meantime Coke and the judges continued to issue prohibitions, barring church-court prosecutions for churchyard altercations and vandalism, simony, and irregular sexual conduct. Coke was not opposed to the commission's existence, nor even categorically opposed to the use of the oath 'ex officio'. Rather, he emphasized the need to limit the commission to serious, 'enormous' cases, and to prevent misuse of the power to compel self-incrimination. None the less, compared to other judges, Coke circumscribed the commission's jurisdiction more closely, and ruled more frequently against self-incrimination. He argued, with transparent naivety, that the oath 'ex officio' so strongly tempted men to perjury (at the risk of their souls) that only the common law or statute should require its administration. 
Two years after Coke's appointment to the bench the controversy deepened. One milestone was 'Fuller's case' (1607). Nicholas Fuller, a lawyer, tried and failed to obtain a ruling in a test case that the high commission lacked the power to fine and imprison. Until the end, he was supported by the judges of both common pleas and king's bench. Even though he went to prison, he retained Coke's support. It had been determined in this litigation, Coke wrote, that 'when there is any question concerning what power or jurisdiction belongs to ecclesiastical judges... the determination of this belongs to the judges of the common law' (E. Coke, 'Reports', 1600-1659, 12.41). In November 1608, when James tried personally to resolve the feuds among his various courts of law, the controversy intensified. The king summoned the common-law judges to the council chamber in Whitehall Palace to explain their obstruction of the high commission. He informed the judges that he planned to decide the dispute among his courts; the judges were all his servants, he explained, and accordingly he could withdraw cases from their consideration and decide them himself. He questioned the decision. As Coke recalled the incident, he had told the king: 'God had endowed His Majesty with excellent science, and great endowments of nature; but his Majesty was not learned in the laws of his realm of England... which law is an act which requires long study and experience, before that a man can attain to the cognizance of it. (ibid., 12.63, 65)' Other sources say that Coke denounced church-court jurisdiction as 'foreign', and asserted that James was 'defended by his laws' -- which triggered an angry reaction from the monarch, who was already furious about Coke's assertion that he could not participate in judicial proceedings: '[the king] fell into that high indignation as the like was never known in him, looking and speaking fiercely with bended fist, offering to strike him, etc., which the Lord Coke perceiving fell flat on all four; humbly beseeching his majesty to take compassion on him and to pardon him. (Usher, 'James I', 669-70)' James continued to rage, until Cecil (now first earl of Salisbury), also knelt and asked pardon for his niece's husband. 
As tempers cooled James, rather than issuing further prohibitions, instructed his judges to refer jurisdictional conflicts to him. They ignored this. In May 1609 the churchmen asked for a declaration regarding the high commission's powers. The judges responded by denying that the commission could rule on 'any thing concerning meum and tuum [such] as legacies, tithes, and pensions', and that it was restricted to heresy and 'enormous' offences (Usher, 'James I', 191). The May conference ended inconclusively and the skirmishing continued. William Crashawe, an Inner Temple preacher and protege of Coke's, was apprehended by the church authorities during the summer. In 1610 the Commons attacked one of Bancroft's closest allies, the civil lawyer John Cowell, an action traditionally ascribed to Coke. In May 1611 the judges were summoned before the privy council -- 'the first time', Coke told the privy councillors, 'that ever any judges of the realm have been questioned for delivering their opinion in matter of law according to their consciences in public and solemn arguments' (Usher, 'High Commission', 213). Coke reaffirmed the judges' stand that the commission could punish only 'enormous' crimes, and that it could fine and imprison only heretics, schismatics, and incontinent priests. Then he flung out a final barb: that the commission's penalties had to be reasonable, which would have allowed the judges to test the reasonableness of every fine or gaol term. He later turned against the churchmen even this concession. When heresy proceedings were opened against Bartholomew Legate, Coke's argument that heresy could be investigated only by the high commission, and not by any bishop, threatened briefly to derail the prosecution. 
Comparing two decisions which Coke wrote or published about this time, 'Mackalley's case' (1611) and 'Allan Ball's case' (1609), shows how opinions had hardened. It should be adjudged murder if a debtor killed a bailiff arresting him for debt, Coke affirmed, but only manslaughter if a householder killed a high-commission pursuivant trying to make an arrest for adultery. In autumn 1611 Abbot offered a final compromise by allowing eight judges (including Coke) to sit as commissioners. The new body convened with an odd interlude of legal pantomime. The judges, after entering the conference room, refused to take their oaths as commissioners, asserting that they had not seen the oath's terms. To show that they did not sit officially, the judges physically remained standing, and on this singular discordant note the controversy faded away. 
In these same years the high commission was not the only court whose jurisdiction the common-law judges sought to circumscribe. Prohibitions were issued against the court of admiralty, the king's council of the north, the council in the marches of Wales, and virtually all prerogative courts. (All of these, like the church tribunals, were courts with which the common-law courts had long-standing rivalries.) In 1608 Coke and the judges ruled that commissions of inquiry held only limited powers. In 1610, while affirming the king's right to issue proclamations, Coke and the judges implied that such royal action needed validation by their own decision. In 'Bagg's case' (1615), Coke announced that the king's bench had the authority 'to correct all lesser authorities in the realm', a claim which could be stretched to cover even the court of chancery (E. Coke, 'Reports', 1600-1659, 11.93b, 98a). 
However confrontational the course Coke steered as chief justice, the confrontations are not the entire story. He was not constantly at odds with the crown and with chancery; nor was he the only judge to infuriate James, or whom James bullied or suspended. Coke was frequently willing to favour the crown. 'The prince's case' (1606) flattered royal finances, allowing James to recover many properties hastily sold off under Elizabeth. In 'Calvin's case' (1608), Coke and the judges finessed a delicate political compromise over whether James's Scottish subjects, through his accession, had acquired the rights of English subjects. Coke threw James yet another favour in a lawsuit between the crown and the bishop of Bristol, ruling that benefices should pay taxes on their actual current values, not according to values discounted by decades of inflation -- a decision which enriched the crown at the church's expense. 
In the long pauses between the explosive confrontations, Coke prospered. The period 1603-25 saw Coke's children married into wealthy families. Coke himself bought up manors and profited every year in reputation and fortune, as volume after volume of his case reports was published. In 1614 Coke was named vice-chancellor of Cambridge University. He and his sons invested in the Virginia Company of London, profiting from the growth of English foreign trade. The storms of legend, so to speak, may also be considered the tempests of a balmy summer. 
In 1613, against his own will, Coke was advanced to chief justice of the king's bench. Bacon had proposed his promotion: the lower fees of this office, he argued, 'will be thought abroad a kind of discipline to him for opposing himself in the king's causes'. Bacon also thought, however, that Coke would 'think himself near a privy councillor's place, and thereupon turn obsequious' ('Works', 4.381). On 25 October Coke was sworn in as chief justice and on 4 November he was sworn in as a member of the privy council. This elevation did not make him obsequious. 
For more than a century a quarrel had intermittently flared up between king's bench and chancery. King's bench judges asserted that lord chancellors could not interfere with the finality of their judgments, while lord chancellors just as often asserted their power to mitigate after a judgment had been made. Sir Thomas Fleming, chief justice, breathed new life into the dispute, and Coke, on his transfer to king's bench, inflamed the controversy. In 'Heath v. Ridley' (1614) Coke announced that no court of equity could interfere with judgments given by common-law courts, and that any litigant who sought this would violate the statutes against 'praemunire' (originally enacted to keep English litigants from appealing to papal courts, but which had more recently been used to rein in church tribunals). In 'Glanvill v. Courtney' (1614), Coke and Thomas Egerton, first Baron Ellesmere and lord chancellor, clashed again. Richard Glanvill, a jeweller of dubious reputation, had won a king's bench judgment allowing him to collect on a transparently usurious contract. The debtor counter-sued in equity, alleging fraud; Ellesmere gaoled Glanvill when he failed to appear, prompting Coke to issue a writ of 'habeas corpus'. Another conflict, with more exalted parties, was the 'Case of Magdalene College' (1614). This pitted Magdalene College, Cambridge (which was suing to reclaim a property in London), against Henry de Vere, eighteenth earl of Oxford, who had erected buildings worth more than $10,000 on the site. When Coke ruled in the college's favour, the earl applied for relief to Ellesmere and won the appeal. 
Within two years of his elevation, Coke stirred up the enmities which eventually brought him down. In 1614, during the Addled Parliament, he reversed precedent, and kept the judges from advising the House of Lords on points of law. He prevented the crown from appropriating the estate of Sir Thomas Sutton, ensuring that these went to endow Charterhouse School. A puritan parson in Somerset, Edward Peacham, was gaoled for writing a sermon which stressed God's judgments on wicked kings; Bacon polled the judges 'seriatim' before the trial, asking each whether this were treason, but Coke growled at this 'auricular taking of opinions' ('Works', 5.100). Coke would readily give out-of-court opinions to the crown -- he did so, in these same months, in another treason prosecution, 'Owen's case' -- provided that the judges collectively considered the issues. What he resisted in 'Peacham's case' was the king's attempt to exert pressure on individual judges. It is very likely (Coke thought so, among others) that Bacon's enmity ensured that the king remembered this resistance. 
Coke's fall was postponed by the greatest scandal of James's reign, the prosecution of Robert and Frances Carr, earl and countess of Somerset, for the murder of Sir Thomas Overbury. During autumn 1615 this played out on the rostrum of Westminster Hall. Every motif of Jacobean melodrama was present: intrigue, adultery, love potions, poisons, the hint of witchcraft, and the suggestion of regicide. This was the last great investigation Coke directed and possibly the most intense, and he personally took more than 300 depositions. He had lost none of his prosecutor's harshness and sent several conspirators to the gallows while other defendants were still awaiting trial. Closely involved with the case, he is said to have voiced a suspicion he could not prove: that Somerset had procured the death of James's son Henry, prince of Wales, in 1612. Such overzealousness may have persuaded James to replace Coke with Bacon for the last phase of the proceedings. In spring 1616 hostilities resumed. Arrayed against Coke were the Church of England, chancery, and the crown -- and now, perhaps most fatally, the rising George Villiers, duke of Buckingham, to whom Coke had denied a choice patronage appointment. Glanvill, who also acted as a moneylender, returned to king's bench, seeking a 'praemunire' indictment against the chancery officials who had hindered his earlier lawsuit. A grand jury was convened; Coke tried futilely to browbeat the jurors into issuing charges. 
Meanwhile a new case arose which pitted common-law rights against episcopal privilege. James supplemented the income of John Overall, bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, with the profits of an additional rectory, granted 'in commendam', only to see a landowner challenge his action. Coke's pivotal role in 'Colt v. Glover', also known as 'The case of commendams' (1616), finally brought matters to a head. James wrote to the judges that the case concerned his power to govern the church, and asked that they stay proceedings until he decided whether further consultation between judges and churchmen was required. His position was strengthened by a writ which Bacon produced, 'non procedendo rege inconsulto', allowing the king to intervene in cases close to royal interests, which the attorney-general had tested in other cases. The judges countered unanimously, in a reply drafted probably by Coke, that the king's letter was 'contrary to law' and that 'our oath in express words is that in case any letter comes to use contrary to law that we do nothing by such letters, but certify your Majesty thereof, and go forth to do the law' ('Ninth Report', HMC, 372). Responding forcefully, James summoned the judges before the privy council, tore up their letter, and demanded of each judge whether he would obey any future royal order. All the judges save Coke backed down. Asked what he would do, Coke answered, 'when that case should be, he would do that should be fit for a judge to do' ('Works of Francis Bacon', 5.367). 
Armed with memoranda from Bacon and Ellesmere, both strong critics of Coke's objectionable rulings, James offered his chief justice one further chance to conform. Late in June Coke was suspended from the privy council -- charged, 'inter alia', with showing contempt for chancery and the crown. Meanwhile James ordered that Coke was not to ride on the summer assize circuit. Instead he was to censor his own law reports, 'wherein (as his majesty is informed) there be many exorbitant and extravagant opinions set down and published for positive and good law' ('Letters of John Chamberlain', 2.14). Coke complied, albeit superficially. He acceded to James's views on the commendams lawsuit; more than that he would not do. On 2 October 1616, after perusing his 'Reports', Coke reported that he had found only five trifling errors. This was defiance, and James took up the gauntlet. He demanded that his obstinate chief justice explain five of his most dangerous conceits. When Coke refused this final opportunity to recant, yielding nothing, the king acted. On 16 November Coke was removed from the bench. It was said, Chamberlain wrote, that 'four p's' had overthrown the chief justice: 'that is, pride, prohibitions, praemunire, and prerogative' (ibid., 2.34). 
Within six weeks Coke had bought back royal favour. He arranged a match between his fourteen-year-old daughter, Frances, and Sir John Villiers, Buckingham's older brother (apparently a gentle lunatic). Lady Hatton opposed the marriage. In July 1617 she carried the girl out of her husband's reach, and he pursued her. Both sides obtained warrants and exchanged charges in the court of Star Chamber, but the struggle was lawless: troops of bully-boys were hired, pistols issued to servants, and two doors smashed in with a heavy piece of timber. As his servants moved forward with their makeshift battering ram, Coke is said to have dispersed his wife's men by shouting that it would be justifiable homicide if his men killed any of them, but murder if he or his own people were killed. Little evidence supports this or the darker allegation that he tied Frances to the bedposts and whipped her until she agreed to the marriage. In September 1617, after final haggling -- Coke refused to buy favour too dearly -- the wedding was celebrated. The marriage was not happy, providing twenty years of scandal and doing nothing to improve Coke's reputation. Lady Hatton, who briefly suffered confinement at her husband's instigation, never willingly suffered his presence again. Coke returned to the privy council on 28 September, the day before Frances's wedding, though he was not restored to the judiciary. In winter 1619-20, when chronic illness kept Bacon from sitting in the Star Chamber, other privy councillors treated Coke as the senior member. Coke chaired the committee which ran the treasury. He sat in judgment on Thomas and Catherine Howard, earl and countess of Suffolk, and on Sir Henry Yelverton. Although he seems never to have returned to the courtroom, let alone to the bench, he proved too useful to be ignored. 
Coke showed an unusual blend of energy, obstinacy, bookishness, and vanity. 'He would play with his case as a cat would with a mouse, and be so fulsomely pedantic that a schoolboy would nauseate at it', John Aubrey wrote. 'But when he comes to matter of law, all acknowledge him to be admirable... He was of wonderful painstaking, as appears by his writings. He was short-sighted but never used spectacles to his dying day' ('Brief Lives', 163). An anonymous puritan, who knew Coke well (possibly the young Joseph Hall), warned him in 'An Expostulation to the Lord Coke' against loving his own words, preferring books to men, and patronizing sycophants. The other side of Coke's vanity was a ferocious energy. Not only did he regularly rise at three o'clock in the morning; he posted letters from the Tower of London at three in the morning. At the Northampton assizes in 1606 he spoke for two and a half hours. With this energy went a hard-edged inverse snobbery. Near the end of the great lawyer's career, after his prosecutions of Essex, Ralegh, Somerset, Bacon, and Lionel Cranfield, first earl of Middlesex, Sir Edward Conway quipped that Coke would die if he could not help ruin a great man at least once every seven years. 'Succedo arduus Eduardus cucus', runs an anagram penned in one of Coke's early law books: 'I Edward Coke succeed through hard work', or, 'To be Edward Coke is to work hard' (Hassall, 33). This was the most fitting motto Coke ever chose for himself. Neither of his two official mottos, 'Prudens qui patiens' ('It is prudent to be patient'), which he copied from Burghley, or 'Lex est tutissima cassis' ('Law is the surest protection'), which he took when created serjeant-at-law, offer as sharply drawn a self-portrait. 
Coke was a handsome man, with something of the lawyer's vanity and pomposity. 'The jewel of his mind was put into a fair case, a beautiful body, with a comely countenance', Thomas Fuller flatteringly wrote, 'a case which he did wipe and keep clean, delighting in good clothes well worn, and being wont to say 'that the outward neatness of our bodies might be a monitor of purity to our souls'' (Fuller, 415). A jibe from Bacon suggests that Coke gained weight as he prospered (neither the judge nor the philosopher took a lofty tone in comments about each other). Coke's portraits show that he had brown hair and a well-kept beard, with dark, penetrating eyes. They suggest a good deal of self-assurance and calculation. 
Coke lived his life on the cusp between the international aspirations of Renaissance learning -- extensive in its breadth, Latin in its ancestry -- and the insular, assertive traditions of the English common law. When he quoted the 'Bible' he generally quoted the 'Vulgate'. It was in Latin that he composed serious verses -- to commemorate his son's wedding, or to while away confinement in the Tower. He knew his classical authors well: Virgil, Cicero, Tacitus, Ovid, Sallust, Seneca. But while Coke knew Justinian's codes, he resisted the codification of the judges' wisdom. He challenged the civil law of the continent by reporting cases in the peculiar professional dialect, law French, of the English bar, and by using English for his institutional writings. He wrote: 'Our English language is as copious and significant, and as able to express any thing in as few and as apt words, as any other native language... And (to speak what we think) we would derive from the Conqueror as little as we could. (E. Coke, 'Third Institute', 'Proeme', 1642-4)' Deriving little from William the Conqueror -- that is, finding the source of law in popular custom and judicial wisdom rather than in royal command -- Coke gave mythic dimensions to the common law by tracing legal doctrines into dim antiquity. Following Sir John Fortescue he claimed that the unwritten law of England had operated unchanged since the days of the druids. He traced parliament to Anglo-Saxon days, possibly back to the 'conventus' described by Tacitus, and he held that the rule against distraining beasts of the plough had been established by the mythical Celtic lawgiver Dunwallo Molmutius. This penchant for anachronism, common among Tudor lawyers, has been derided as a pathology of 'the common-law mind'. Yet Coke's myth-making was rooted less in mentality than in ideology. Like the Tudor divines who unearthed proofs that the Church of England was as ancient as the Church of Rome and preceded the establishment of papal authority, the lawyers' efforts to trace their discipline to a glorious British past reflected nationalist sentiment; the venerability of the common law reflected the heroic character of the English people. It was also a useful weapon against the encroachment of civil law. Fittingly, it was from Geoffrey Chaucer that Coke took his favourite judicial saying: 'out of the old fields, as men saith, cometh at this new corne fro yere to yere'. 
Despite his reckless conclusions, Coke was a diligent searcher of the historical record. He collected manuscripts, trying to obtain the best possible versions and exchanging them with Sir Robert Cotton. Some of his historical manuscripts had been among those collected by Matthew Parker, archbishop of Canterbury, and Coke drew on the knowledge of prominent members of the Elizabethan Society of Antiquaries, Joseph Holland, Francis Tate, and Arthur Agard. Coke never questioned how the 'feodum' of English law might relate to the 'feodum' of the continent; but Sir Henry Spelman, who did make this connection -- and so, as the legal historian Frederic Maitland put it, introduced the feudal system to England -- was a neighbour and friend. Another member of Coke's circle was Sir John Davies, one of the shrewdest historians of his day. In this intellectual milieu Coke may have been something of a savant. 
Coke's relationship with literature has been double-edged. He denigrated players and rhyming poets. In 1606 he advised a Norfolk grand jury that they might properly drive out of the shire 'stage players, wherewith I find the country much troubled' -- but in the same speech borrowed from 'The Summoning of Everyman' and stole from Shakespeare the famous patriotic speech of John of Gaunt in 'Richard II' (E. Coke, 'The Lord Coke his Speech and Charge', 1607, sig. H2). Coke even alluded, very specifically, to 'The Poetaster' by Ben Jonson, who returned the compliment with verses suggesting that Coke's rise owed everything to talent and industry. To James's great merriment the Cambridge production of 'Ignoramus' (1615) broadly ridiculed both the common law and the chief justice. Coke's conflict with Ellesmere and the king found its way into the satirical twists of Jacobean drama ('The Widow's Tears', by George Chapman, and 'The Old Law', by Thomas Middleton). For a flattering literary portrait, the chief justice had to wait three centuries, for the later cantos of Ezra Pound (particularly the 'Rock-drill' and 'Thrones' sections, published in the 1950s). In Pound's verses, which recite snippets of the 'Institutes' to denounce usury and extol the people's ancient liberties, Coke appears alongside John Adams and classical Chinese mandarins, as a statesman and jurisprudent. 
Across fifty years Coke befriended the puritans of England. The connections began with his own family. His cousin and ally in the Commons, Sir Richard Knightley of Fawsley, Northamptonshire, sheltered the Marprelate press. Even more important was Coke's sister Anne. She married into the Stubbe family, becoming sister-in-law to both Thomas Cartwright and John Stubbe. She was prominent among the sectaries of Norfolk, and criticized Cartwright vigorously for arguing that churches should be led by learned preachers rather than steered by the voice of the congregation. 
Coke's religious beliefs were conventional. His household met for daily prayer, but he obtained a licence to eat meat himself on fast days. A deathbed prayer ascribed to him recites blocks of the Church of England liturgy. In churches under his influence (Weasenham in Norfolk, and Huntingfield and Bramfield in Suffolk), medieval decorations and rood screens survived intact. He could parrot the official line that Brownists were nearly as dangerous as papists. Nevertheless, inconspicuously but consistently, he favoured puritans. He was among the Inner Temple lawyers who took notes of the sermons preached by Walter Travers. He gave livings to ministers who avoided wearing surplices, omitted ceremonies, and taught in unlicensed schools: Robert Gold at Cokely in Suffolk, Edmund Stubbe at Huntingfield, and Coke's brother-in-law George Leedes at Holt. In 1600 he endorsed William Playfair as master of Clare College, Cambridge. 
Coke attracted sermon dedications from godly divines such as Richard Rogers, Miles Mosse, and the literary executors of Thomas Perkins. The author of 'A Godly Sermon Preached at Tittleshall' (1600), who dedicated this work to Coke, showed a puritan's concern with politics and disdain for chivalric romances. Coke's library at Holkham was filled with similar works: books by Hugh Broughton, William Crashawe, Samuel Hieron, Andrew Willet, and Thomas Brightman. Among his trusted servants in Norfolk were the Skippon family of Weasenham. Philip Skippon, Christian apologist and ramrod of the New Model Army, grew up on the edge of Coke's household. Coke's daughter Bridget chose John Milton to tutor her son Cyriack, and is said to have paid for the schooling of Andrew Marvell. Perhaps the most vital connection came late in Coke's career, between the elderly privy councillor and the young Roger Williams, who, long before he argued against religious persecution in England and made religious toleration a political reality in Rhode Island, took shorthand notes for Coke in the Star Chamber. 
Coke defined law as the 'artificial reason' of the judges, a professional consensus based on training and experience. Paying lip service to the view that the common law was custom, he was in fact a great believer in judicial action, who viewed the practice of law as an art: 'Reason is the life of the law', he wrote, 'nay the common law itself is nothing else but reason; which is to be understood of an artificial perfection of reason, gotten by long study, observation and experience, and not of every man's natural reason.' The common law of England, he continued, had 'been fined and refined by an infinite succession of grave and learned men, and by long experience grown to such a perfection, for the government of this realm' (E. Coke, 'The First Part of the Institutes', 1628, 97b). This view of law was grounded in the traditions of classical rhetoric, learning drilled into Coke and every other lawyer of his generation, in the grammar schools of Tudor England. It equated the good and the true with the persuasive and the public-spirited. Coke maintained (following Cicero and Quintilian) that, 'I never saw any man of excellent judgment in these laws, but was withall... honest, faithful, and virtuous' (E. Coke, 'Reports', 1600-1659, 2, preface). He asserted that the common law was inerrantly 'certain', in other words, reliable (ibid., 4, preface). 
Part of this vision was conservative. Coke asserted that judges found law and did not make it. He felt that legal traditions were rich enough to solve any question facing a court. He felt that legal rules were best exemplified in individual cases and set great store by precedent, which he saw as the unique quality of common law. In 'Calvin's case' he argued that medieval precedents on the rights of Edward III's Gascon subjects defined the rights of James's Scottish subjects. By contrast Ellesmere suggested frankly that, when new issues arose, courts made new law in resolving them. Rather than asking whether legal fictions, in order to ensure precedent, might be a cancer on the legal system, Coke unhesitatingly approved their use. In cases such as 'Rockwood v. Feasar' (1591), he proved his magisterial ability, as George Croke admiringly put it, to devise a plea to alter the trial. His faith in the professional wisdom of bench and bar did not go unchallenged. Thomas Hobbes, most notably, argued that the law should be rooted in common reason rather than legal arcana. None the less, Coke's focus on the craft of lawyering -- the etiquette of beheading a peer, the details of executing a will -- emphasized the careful practice and broad learning necessary to put law into action. 
Coke consistently held to the Tudor vision of the realm as a commonwealth, distinguishing public good from private gain. As a lawyer and judge -- in cases such as 'Davenant v. Hurdis' (1598), 'Tooley's case' (1613), and the notable 'Taylors of Ipswich' (1614) -- he supported artisans seeking to follow their trades over opposition from craft guilds. In 1607, in the Star Chamber, Coke ruled in favour of a west country apothecary who faced hostility from the medical establishment. He mocked purveyance and wanted to abolish certain feudal tenures. He opposed the sale of office; the positions which he had held, he boasted, had all been acquired 'sine prece et pretio', without begging or bribery ('Ninth Report', HMC, 374). In tithe litigation he led the judges who broke with medieval practice, forbidding the tithes on products of the earth (stone, brick, lead, coal, peat) and profits earned on sales of real estate and beer. He denounced torture, though he had signed warrants for torture in the past, including authorizing its use on Bartholomew Steer. He brooded over the number of felons who every year were sent to the gallows, and hoped that 'justice severe puniens' might be replaced with 'preventing justice', instruction in trade, and religion (E. Coke, 'Institutes', 1642-4, 3.243). 
'Nothing that is contrary to reason, is consonant to law', Coke wrote (E. Coke, 'The First Part of the Institutes', 1628, 56b). While such assertions dated back to Henry of Bratton, Coke and his colleagues pursued the principle with new-found energy. Defining law as the judges' reason allowed Tudor courts to review manorial customs, medieval precedents, municipal ordinances, and even acts of parliament. What they found reasonable, the judges approved; whatever failed to satisfy them, they struck down. Coke was willing to extract principles from yearbook jurisprudence, supplying new rules which the common law found indispensable. He preferred such reform by judicial action to reform by legislation. He looked down on statutes 'overladen with provisoes and additions', or 'penned or corrected by men of none or very little judgment in law' (E. Coke, 'Reports', 1600-1659, 2, preface; 4, preface). Despite his reputation as a master of the unwritten law, Coke worked routinely and comfortably with statutes. The law had three parts, he wrote -- common law, statute, and custom -- and he chose to report cases which elucidated important statutes. 
In 1610, in 'Bonham's case', Coke laid the foundations for judicial review of legislation, allowing judges to strike down statutes. Thomas Bonham was a doctor practising in London, who, denied admission by the College of Physicians, was gaoled and fined when he continued to work. The court of common pleas, led by Coke, freed Bonham and fined the college. The relevant statute, Coke explained, improperly made the college a judge of cases in which it held an interest: 'And it appears in our books, that in many cases, the common law will control acts of Parliament, and sometimes adjudge them to be utterly void; for when an act of Parliament is against common right and reason, or repugnant, or impossible to be performed, the common law will control it, and adjudge such act to be void. (E. Coke, 'Reports', 1600-1659, 8.107a, 117b)' With this sentence Coke broke new ground: in the scattered medieval precedents which supported his ruling, judges might have ignored the effect of a statute, but 'to this fact Coke [had] really added an explanation and a theory all his own' (T. F. Plucknett, ''Bonham's case' and judicial review', 'Harvard Law Review', 40, 1927, 36). Pressed to recant this ruling, Coke never explicitly did so; neither did he expressly reaffirm it, nor did he ever clearly state which he held to be the highest constitutional authority -- the court of king's bench or the high court of parliament. However, in his 'Fourth Institutes' he may have backed down somewhat. English courts soon abandoned the theory of judicial review, but in colonial Massachusetts and Virginia 'Bonham's case' was cited as precedent for striking down unjust laws, and lawyers in the United States have not hesitated to see Coke's decision as a forerunner of 'Marbury v. Madison' (1803), which asserted it for American federal courts. 
Coke's experience as a lawyer and judge was matched by his record as a parliamentarian. He sat in the parliaments of 1589 and 1593 as MP for Aldeburgh, Suffolk, and for Norfolk respectively, serving as speaker of the Commons during the latter session. He markedly tightened procedure. Absent from the Commons for nearly thirty years, he was returned for four parliaments in the 1620s: for Liskeard, Cornwall, in 1621, Coventry in 1624, Norfolk in 1625, and Buckinghamshire in 1628. In these assemblies he figured as one of the Commons' most prominent leaders. Always an oracle, Coke ended as something of a statesman, moving into opposition to the crown -- ambivalently and intermittently, but ineluctably. Against the background of a trade depression Coke attacked bills of conformity (chancery orders which settled debts at a discount) and abuses within the legal system, seeking to define the courts' jurisdiction and to streamline proceedings in the exchequer and the court of wards. On trade and commerce, another area in which he hammered on grievances, his outlook was quintessentially mercantilist. He sought to keep wool prices high, rather than promote free trade; he attacked monopolies and trading companies' privileges, but intimated that trade was an area in which government policy had a role. 
His fondness for denouncing abuses and attacking scapegoats made it easy for Coke to lead the Commons in its new-found vogue for impeaching state officers. He supported this effort by supplying medieval precedents and conducting crucial hearings himself -- gradually distancing himself from royal interests. This zealousness drew from the king a pointed criticism, made in a speech to the Lords: 'For though Sir Edward Coke be very busy and be called the Father of the Law and the Commons house have divers young lawyers in it, yet all is not law that they say, and I could wish, nay I have told Sir Edward Coke, that he [should] bring precedents [from] good kings' times... [and not from the reigns of] silly weak kings [such as Henry VI]. (Zaller, 69)' James concluded ominously, 'I hope in his vouching precedents to compare my actions to usurpers or tyrants' times you will punish him' (ibid.). This warning put at risk Coke's liberty and fortune, and possibly more. Yet within weeks he had snatched a great deal of gratification from the jaws of his own potential ruin. From corrupt patentees like Sir Giles Mompesson, the Commons turned relentlessly upon the man who had approved their patents -- Francis Bacon, first Baron Verulam and Viscount St Albans, the lord chancellor -- bringing well-founded charges of bribery. Coke headed the committee which investigated Bacon and fended off compromises which might have saved his rival. He must also have been active behind the scenes: some unknown individual had painstakingly gathered the evidence which the Commons now so quickly and devastatingly threw into public view, and the thoroughness of the inquiry betrayed a master's hand. Coke remained vulnerable himself to the rough power-plays of impeachment politics, even after Bacon resigned his office and was sent to the Tower. James long retained hopes that the Commons would vote him what he sought, and he continued to draw on Coke's legal knowledge. In autumn 1621, while the Commons continued to sit, James relied on Coke in a case involving Archbishop Abbot. Abbot had accidentally killed a gamekeeper while hunting, and, under scrutiny for shedding guiltless blood, was cleared by Coke's opinion that it was lawful for a bishop to hunt -- implicit, Coke explained, in the old rule that a bishop's pack of hunting dogs escheated to the crown. Yet over the course of the autumn James's exasperation with the Commons and with his uncompliant privy councillor continued to grow. In November, with royal support, two patentees, John Lepton and Henry Goldsmith, prepared their own attack on Coke: a long list of alleged misconduct from his days as a judge. Coke parried this initiative, but James was ready to take stronger measures himself. At the end of the year, after Coke and the Commons had asserted the right to debate and legislate on all matters concerning the commonwealth, James struck. On 27 December, eight halberdiers marched Coke off to the Tower, and shortly thereafter the king dissolved parliament. Coke spent most of 1622 in confinement, first in the Tower and later under house arrest at his mansion in Stoke Poges, Buckinghamshire. He consoled himself by writing Latin verses which mentioned the lions roaring in the Tower precincts and wishing himself back at his house in Godwick, Norfolk. 
In the parliament of 1624 Coke was returned for Coventry. The king planned to keep him out of the way by sending him on a commission to Ireland, but last-minute lobbying by Charles, prince of Wales, changed James's mind. Shifts in foreign policy had reduced frictions between crown and Commons and also contributed to the king's decision. Complaints were once more aired, but this time hopefully, and Coke chaired the committee on grievances. Two bills he had sponsored but seen voted down in 1621, on monopolies and bankruptcy reform, were now enacted. Some tensions remained in one bill that he sponsored, a limitations measure which would have protected against 'concealers' (and the crown) all land already held for more than sixty years. Concealers were typically vilified as minions of a corrupt and venal court; Coke played the country gentleman memorably in denouncing them as 'viperous vermin' and 'caterpillars of the commonwealth' (White, 72-6). Yet he worked well in this parliament with Buckingham. When the duke spoke of war with Spain, Coke seconded him -- perhaps outdid him. When the duke moved to bring down Cranfield, it was Coke who marshalled the evidence and managed proceedings in the Commons. 
The parliament of 1625, the first convened by Charles I, saw a sea change in Coke's role. No longer was he the energetic committee-man who argued the details of countless bills. Instead, linked with Sir John Eliot and Sir Edwin Sandys in a loose opposition group, he pressed a series of initiatives uncongenial to the new king, criticizing Charles's foreign policy, challenging his decisions on religion, and hesitating to grant financial support. Coke clearly thought that the king's expenses could be trimmed. In a major speech on 4 August 1625 he analysed the income and expenses of the crown, making recommendations on both sides. He argued that the king should ordinarily live of his own, seeking taxes only for extraordinary ventures, and that the king could do this if he would only improve the management of crown lands and cut expenses by reducing the size of the royal household, limiting pensions, and eliminating prerogative courts. Amid the debate over tonnage and poundage, Coke seems to have intended an attractive compromise. He clearly meant to establish that tonnage and poundage was revenue which the king enjoyed only by parliamentary grant. However, he also proposed that parliament establish a new scale of customs tariffs, which would likely have adjusted duties to account for inflation, thus offering Charles a larger, more predictable income. On matters of religion Coke also joined vigorously in the Commons' attack on Richard Montague, whose Arminian beliefs were portrayed as crypto-Catholic. Beneath discussions of religious doctrine lay power politics. The crown had begun to pack the bench with its supporters among the Laudian clergy, and the wealth of the Church of England had become a reservoir upon which the king might draw without parliamentary approval. 
As well as exploring fiscal concerns, debating crown finances, and defending the Church of England, parliament took the opportunity to review foreign policy. It found little to praise. Coke was among the veteran legislators who found putting royal finances in order more important than funding a fleet. As the parliament ended he obliquely criticized Buckingham with obscure historical references, approving the medieval practice of not creating dukes (Buckingham had reached this title with unseemly speed) and questioning whether one lord admiral (Buckingham's title) could meet the duties traditionally allotted to two. Charles fathomed Coke's historical allusions and prevented him from sitting in the parliament of 1626. Coke was among six former parliamentarians pricked by the crown that year to serve as sheriffs, a duty requiring that they remain in their home counties (in Coke's case, Buckinghamshire) rather than join the Commons at Westminster. Coke fought this. With a typical blend of antiquarian learning, protestant sympathy, and canny legalism, he insisted that he could not in good faith take the sheriff's oath because it required him to persecute Lollards. The government riposted, graciously and effectively; it struck the clause on Lollards, and required Coke to take the oath and serve. 
In 1628 Coke returned for what proved to be his most memorable parliament. Buckingham's wars with France and Spain led to new crises at home: soldiers quartered in citizens' homes, martial law (imposed on soldiers, threatened for civilians), and the king's penchant for demanding funds under colour of prerogative claims and then gaoling gentlemen who objected to paying the taxes that he demanded. Coke was perhaps the king's most prominent critic, speaking out against taxation without parliamentary consent, the creeping spread of martial law, and the royal power to imprison without cause shown, a prerogative claim which he sought to ban absolutely. Coke was now seventy-six. Some of his oratory was needlessly baroque, and gaps appeared in his vaunted memory. The king's lawyers nettled him with proof that he himself had long supported a royal power to gaol men without showing cause. Yet ultimately Coke proved invaluable. According to Conrad Russell, 'Other Parliaments had been concerned with particular liberties', purveyance and customs duties, and monopolies, but it was this parliament 'which first saw these liberties as collectively threatened by a threat to the ideal which held them all together, the rule of law' (Russell, 343). The metaphors on which Coke relied -- his claim that no man was a tenant-at-will for his liberties, or that if a lord could not imprison a villein without cause then no king could imprison a freeman without cause -- essentially provided an ideology which closely linked liberty and property, an ideal at the heart of the English psyche. 
Coke led the Commons in rejecting compromise. With John Selden he carefully picked apart the ambiguities and omissions which made Charles's proposals meaningless. In conference with the Lords he proved an effective spokesman. He refused to trust the king's personal word. 'I know that prerogative is part of the law', he cautioned, 'but sovereign power is no parliamentary word: in my opinion, it weakens Magna Carta... Magna Carta is such a fellow that he will have no sovereign' (Russell, 352). 
When Charles warned the Commons that he would veto any bill that did more than reconfirm Magna Carta, Coke must have scented a rare opportunity; the king's demand offered the old judge the chance to make new law out of the greatest medieval statute. The result was the petition of right, something more than a list of grievances, if less than an actual bill of rights. It was Coke who suggested the petition. The king answered the petition evasively, and on 4 June did so a second time announcing his intention to prorogue parliament. Coke now played a final, pivotal role. On 6 June, in highly dramatic circumstances, he spoke up, telling his colleagues that there were no abuses that the Commons could not debate or act on, and that medieval parliaments had not hesitated to name and condemn ministers of state. In this tradition Coke then pointed to Buckingham, finally, by name, as 'the grievance of grievances' and 'the cause of all our miseries'. This speech, wrote one Yorkshire MP, was 'answered with a cheerful acclamation of the House, as when one good hound recovers the scent, the rest come in with a full cry' (Bowen, 502). Coke spoke in the afternoon; by evening work on impeachment was well advanced. With the favourite under attack, Charles backed down. On 7 June the king came to Westminster and assented to the petition, 'soit droit fait comme est desire' -- words acceptable to show royal assent, as Coke assertively told the Commons (E. Foster, 'Petitions and the petition of right', 'Journal of British Studies', 13, 1973, 22). 
This was Coke's last venture into public life. He retired to his mansion at Stoke Poges. In 1628 he published 'The First Part of the Institutes of the Lawes of England, or, A Commentarie upon Littleton', and for the remaining six years of his life he seems to have worked to complete his 'Institutes'. He was seriously ill in 1631. Friends sent him doctors, Lady Hatton set out for Stoke to claim what she could find there, and the government pondered seizing his papers. Coke recovered. He was still hale in many respects and could ride at eighty, worry over his sons' debts, and hunt ready money for orphaned granddaughters' marriage portions. He played out, too, an endgame with Charles. In April 1632 the king's men raided Stoke; newswriter John Pory reported that Coke wept as his papers were removed. In 1633 Charles sealed Coke's rooms at the Inner Temple. Finally, in the last days of August 1634, while the old man lay dying, the king's men ransacked both Coke's study at Stoke and his files at the Inner Temple. Roger Coke, the judge's grandson, wrote that they seized more than fifty manuscripts and other papers. 
Coke died at Stoke House shortly before midnight on 3 September 1634, 'in his bed quietly like a lamb, without any groans or outward signs of sickness, but only spent by age', his friend Sir Julius Caesar noted (Inderwick and Roberts, 2.lxix). His body was interred in St Mary's Church at Tittleshall, Norfolk, exactly one month later. His papers vanished for seven years, until the Long Parliament voted that they be returned to his heir, Robert Coke, and published. The vote was taken, perhaps not coincidentally, on the same day on which Thomas Wentworth, earl of Strafford, was beheaded. 

Roger Coke (c.1628-1704x7) claimed that his grandfather's will was removed by Charles's servants and never seen again. However, a will and a codicil, signed by Coke in November 1623, were proved in early 1635. Throughout his career Coke had put in trust the lands he acquired, and his will added the briefest coda to these dispositions, directing simply that his executors dispose of his estate as directed by the trustees. This masterfully opaque directive left Coke's property in hands he trusted, revealed nothing to outsiders, and skirted the church courts' probate jurisdiction. The codicil added only one detail, his request that his library be preserved. Coke's executors, Sir Thomas Coventry and Sir Randolph Crewe, carried out the testator's intentions. Coke had amassed great wealth -- all his sons had eldest sons' portions, it was said -- and his heirs and their trustees kept firm hands on it. Indeed, in the reign of Elizabeth II his descendants retained much of the wealth that the family had acquired during the reign of Elizabeth I. 
Coke's first well-known work was a manuscript report of 'Shelley's case', circulated soon after the decision in 1581. In 1600, afraid that unauthorized versions of his case reports might be printed -- and probably following the example of Edmund Plowden, with whom he had worked and whom he revered -- Coke issued the 'First Part' of his 'Reports'. He put out eleven volumes by 1615. Making available more than 467 cases, carrying the 'imprimatur' and the authority of the lord chief justice, these case reports provided a critical mass of material for the rapidly developing modern common law. Reversing medieval jurisprudence, which had often relied on general learning and reason, Coke preferred to amass precedents. 'The reporting of particular cases or examples', he asserted, was 'the most perspicuous course of teaching the right rule and reason of the law' (E. Coke, 'Reports', 1600-1659, 4, preface). 
Coke began by printing great cases. With the 'Fourth Part' and 'Fifth Part' (1604-5) he shifted to shorter cases, grouped by topics. The 'Fifth Part' featured 'Cawdrey's case', with Coke's treatise on the crown's ecclesiastical supremacy. Beginning with the 'Sixth Part' (1607), Coke emphasized recent decisions. For his massive 'Book of Entries' (1614) he collected pleadings for his fellow lawyers' better guidance. 
In reporting cases Coke could be robustly egocentric, trimming or omitting other lawyers' arguments. His accuracy could vary. Yet the value of these collections, as a working reference for the bar, has never been gainsaid. Bacon himself wrote: 'Had it not been for Sir Edward Coke's reports (which, though they may have errors, and some peremptory and extrajudicial resolutions more than are warranted, yet they contain infinite good decisions and rulings over of cases), the law, by this time, had been almost like a ship without ballast. ('Works', 6.65)' In prefaces to each 'Part', very often free-standing essays, Coke found opportunity to expound his understanding of the law. It was in these pages, 'inter alia', that he praised the common law, honoured parliament, and attacked the Huguenot jurist Francois Hotman for his irreverence toward Littleton. In the prefaces to the 'Fifth' and 'Sixth' parts, Coke quarrelled with the exiled Jesuit Robert Persons, unwisely drawing return fire from a deadlier wit. 
In 1628 Coke published his masterwork, the 'Commentarie upon Littleton', known ever thereafter as 'Coke on Littleton'. The book ostensibly presents Coke's glosses on the text of Littleton's 'Tenures', an outline of the law of real property. In fact, however, his glosses overwhelm Littleton's language, ranging broadly across the law of his day. To Littleton's short first paragraph, defining tenancy in fee simple, Coke devoted eighteen folio pages of annotations. He is described as writing: 'like a helpful old wizard... anxious to pass on all his secrets, but not quite sure where to begin or end... [T]he commentary wanders through such disparate topics as etymology, alien status, misnomer in grants, interest rates and usury... the 'Domesday Book', the eight parts of a deed, the styles and titles of the kings of England, the ownership of the Isle of Man, and the legal status of monsters and hermaphrodites. (Baker, 'Introduction', 218)' The book long absorbed and exasperated lawyers. In the opinion of Sir James Fitzjames Stephen, 'A more disorderly mind than Coke's and one less gifted with the power of analysing common words it would be impossible to find' ('History of the English Criminal Law', 1883, 2.206). The height of idiosyncrasy may be the section in which Coke collects the 119 places where Littleton uses the abbreviation '&c.' 

'Coke on Littleton' was the first volume of Coke's four 'Institutes of the Laws of England'. He probably chose the title to assert that his work, in epitomizing the law of England, ranked equally with Justinian's codification of Roman law. The 'Second Institute' covers thirty-nine statutes of significance, glossing them on a clause-by-clause basis. It begins with Magna Carta, continues through Plantagenet and Tudor legislation, and ultimately ends with the Jacobean statutes on houses of correction. Coke heaped honorifics on Magna Carta, which he asserted merely declared the rights all English people enjoyed under common law. The 'Third Institute' covers the criminal law. Coke's background as attorney-general shaped it: more pages are devoted to treason, misprision of treason, and heresy than to homicide, rape, robbery, burglary, larceny, and theft, because the first three crimes were more serious. The 'Fourth Institute', concerning the jurisdiction of courts, was a treatise on structural constitutional law and organs of government. Coke reviewed the powers of the various government bodies existing in England -- legislative, administrative, fiscal, mercantile, ecclesiastical, collegiate, metropolitan, and baronial. 
After Coke died some of his other works found their way into print, including his 'Treatise on Bail and Mainprise' (1634) and 'The Complete Copyholder' (1650). Publishers, working from manuscript collections of his opinions and memoranda, brought out books denominated the 'Twelfth' and 'Thirteenth' parts of the 'Reports' in 1658 and 1659 respectively. Their uncertain provenance and varying quality long cast doubts on these reports' authority, but their connection with Coke now appears established. 'The Complete Copyholder' explored a narrow topic in a rigorously structured manner, in sharp contrast to the sprawl of 'Coke on Littleton'. 
Thomas Fuller wrote that Coke would be admired 'whilst Fame hath a trumpet left her, and any breath to blow therein' (Fuller, 416). Wherever the common law has been applied, Coke's influence has been monumental. Between the medieval era and the modern, Maitland wrote, 'Coke's books are the great dividing line, and we are hardly out of the Middle Ages till he has dogmatized its results' (Holdsworth, 'Eng. law', 5.489). Coke is the earliest judge whose decisions are still routinely cited by practising lawyers, and to whose writings one turns for a statement of what the common law held on any given topic. 
As Sir William Holdsworth noted, Coke's works have been to the common law what Shakespeare has been to literature and the King James 'Bible' to religion. No master of the common law bears more responsibility than Coke for creating the legal regime which Sir William Blackstone rationalized, and Jeremy Bentham attacked, the idea of law as a 'forest sauvage' of archaicism and legal fictions. At the same time -- and with no less fairness -- Coke has always been honoured as a champion of progress and justice. His commentary on the phrase 'nisi legem terrae', in a discussion of Magna Carta, is one of the earliest judicial commentaries to give a truly constitutional resonance to the phrase 'due process of law'. John Lilburne and other Levellers cited his writings, and Thomas Jefferson considered that 'a sounder Whig never wrote, nor of profounder learning' (Bowen, 514). From Coke's stenographer and protege Roger Williams derives a tradition of religious toleration and political independence which contrasts sharply with the intellectual legacy of Bacon's stenographer and protege Thomas Hobbes. 
The nineteenth century honoured Coke as an exponent of personal liberty and representative government. The twentieth century honoured him as the prototype of the activist judge -- able to draw broadly on social and economic knowledge, and not afraid to strike down laws. For the learning he amassed, for the reports he published, for pioneering judicial review, and for asserting judicial independence, Coke deserves to retain this respect. 


@@@@@


doc= 5827


Coke, George (1570-1646), bishop of Hereford, was born on 3 October 1570, the fifth son of Richard Coke (died 1582) of Trusley, Derbyshire, and his wife, Mary (died 1580), daughter of Thomas Sacheverell of Kirby, Nottinghamshire. He matriculated at St John's College, Cambridge, in 1588, graduating BA in 1593 and proceeding MA in 1596. He was made a fellow of Pembroke College in 1597, rhetoric lecturer in 1602, and was junior taxor of the university in the year 1605/6. In 1608 he was presented to the rectory of Bygrave in Hertfordshire, worth nearly $300 p.a., where, Fuller quaintly observed, 'a lean village (consisting of but three houses) maketh a fat living' (Fuller, 'Worthies', 115). About the end of 1609 he resigned his fellowship and between 18 November that year and 9 January 1610 he married Jane Heigham. He moved to Bygrave, where he remained for the next twenty-three years. Fuller called him 'a meek, grave and quiet man' (ibid.). Only after Sir John Coke (1563-1644), one of his older brothers, was advanced to be secretary of state in autumn 1625 was this essentially mediocre yet personable cleric plucked from the obscurity of his country living and preferred beyond his abilities, a minnow in a world of sharks. 
On 19 January 1626 Coke was collated to the prebend of Finsbury in St Paul's Cathedral, and, having received a DD degree in 1630, on 10 February 1633 he was consecrated bishop of Bristol. In June 1635 he was instituted as rector of Maiden Newton, Dorset, despite the opposition of Sir John Strangeways who believed that the advowson was his. Coke was translated to Hereford in July 1636, apparently, as in his elevation to Bristol, with the support of William Laud. At the same time he resigned both Bygrave and his prebend at St Paul's. 
Coke had an unhappy time at Hereford, which he described in February 1640 as 'this place of tryal, under so much variety of business and among such men, as are... too strong and cunning for me' (BL, Add. MS 69868, fol. 142'r'); two years earlier he had said that of all the justices in Herefordshire, no more than four were his defenders in a county where local juries were habitually against the church and the bishop. By the end of 1637, to add to his troubles, his eyesight was failing and in dim light he was forced to wear spectacles. In October 1638 he was censured by Archbishop Laud for presenting one who was insufficiently learned to cathedral office: one of Coke's sons had deserted his apprenticeship and run away to sea but, seeing in the storms that beset his vessel a providential sign, had turned back and sought ordination, and his father had made him precentor of Hereford Cathedral. On Laud's protest Coke replaced his son with his nephew Francis Coke (died 1682), son of his eldest brother Sir Francis Coke, but he was soon complaining that Francis was unthankful and unfriendly to him. 
In December 1641 Coke was one of the twelve bishops who petitioned parliament, for which he was impeached and imprisoned for seventeen weeks. Retiring to his see, he was in Hereford in April 1643 when it fell to the parliament but, under the articles of surrender of the town, escaped molestation. However, when Hereford fell for the second time, in December 1645, he was captured and taken to Gloucester, and on 3 January 1646 the Commons ordered that he and the other prisoners be sent to London. His estate at Queest Moor in the parish of Eardisley in Herefordshire was sequestered on 13 August 1646 and, although thrifty, he was reduced to living on the charity of his relations. He died on 10 December 1646 at Queest Moor and was buried in Eardisley church five days later. After the Restoration an elaborate monument, with recumbent effigy, was erected in Hereford Cathedral; it was much altered in the mid-nineteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 5828


Coke, Sir John (1563-1644), politician, was born on 5 March 1563 in London, the fourth of eleven children born to Richard Coke (died 1582) of Trusley, near Derby, and his wife, Mary Sacheverell (died 1580), daughter and heir of Thomas Sacheverell of Nottinghamshire. 
As a youth Coke may have attended Westminster School. He matriculated from Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1576, received a scholarship there beginning in 1580, and earned his BA in 1581 and MA in 1584. He remained at Cambridge as a fellow of Trinity until 1591. During this time he apparently was a lecturer in rhetoric. Thomas Fuller wrote that Coke 'being chosen rhetoric lecturer in the university, grew eminent for his ingenious and critical readings' (Fuller, 'Worthies', 1.371). These years at Cambridge left an indelible impression on Coke. 'I was not bred in servile or illiberal trades; the university was my nurse', he later wrote (Coke to the marquess of Buckingham, 12 Oct 1622, Coke MSS). In particular he acquired a passion for order and a civic humanist's sense of duty to the public good. He also became loosely acquainted with the earl of Essex's circle, especially the literary figure and courtier named Sir Fulke Greville, who proved a lasting friend and patron. Coke needed a patron because his older brother Francis had inherited the family lands, leaving him only a small annuity of less than $7. When he left Cambridge, he worked as an auditor or accountant for Greville's estate, and from 1593 to 1597 he travelled on the continent. 
Coke's first major employment by the crown lasted from 1599 to 1604 as deputy treasurer of the navy, working under Greville who was treasurer during those years. Together the two men battled against the gross corruption, thievery, and disorder that flourished in the navy under Lord Admiral Nottingham. In this effort, Greville told Coke, 'we will perish or prosper together' (Greville to Coke, 'c'.1600, Coke MSS). They did not prosper for long. They had the misfortune of advocating an ambitious plan for naval reform at precisely the time Queen Elizabeth, Greville's sole patron, died. This left them perilously exposed to their enemies when James VI and I came to the throne. Nottingham succeeded in removing Greville from office, replacing him with the more compliant Sir Robert Mansell. 
Forced into early retirement and exiled from the court, Coke spent the years 1604 to 1618 continuing to help manage Greville's personal estate and to build one of his own. Some time during 1604 he married Marie Powell (died 1624), daughter of John Powell of Preston, Herefordshire, another one of Greville's employees. During the first years of their marriage they lived with Marie's parents while Coke continued to travel in connection with Greville's business affairs. The letters Coke and his wife exchanged reveal that they were very much in love, although he was torn between continuing to hope for a revival of his career or settling down in the countryside. About 1607 he chose the latter course; in 1608 he and Marie built a new home for themselves near her parents in Herefordshire. They named it Hall Court and lived there happily for a decade. In the course of time they had six children who survived infancy (Joseph, John junior, Thomas, Mary, Elizabeth, and Anne). Coke monitored events at court from a distance, looking for signs of change in his favour. In 1614 Greville made a surprising return to office as chancellor of the exchequer, and in 1618 another old friend, Sir Robert Naunton, was appointed secretary of state. At first Coke resisted their invitations, but eventually they succeeded in luring him back to court. 'I pray God from my heart', he wrote, 'I may not move from my retreat except it be for a better account of my life' (Coke to Naunton, early 1618, Coke MSS). 
Coke returned to royal service in June 1618 when Lionel Cranfield, supported by the marquess of Buckingham, was reforming various departments of government, and was appointed to a commission responsible for investigating the state of the navy. This gave him a remarkable opportunity to pick up where he had left off fourteen years earlier, and he certainly made the most of it. Owing to his prior experience, knowledge of the navy, organizational ability, and zeal for reform, he quickly became the leading member of the commission and authored its report. Nottingham and Mansell were persuaded to step aside and Buckingham took the office of lord admiral, although he quickly delegated the actual daily administration of the navy to the commissioners. On 12 February 1619 the naval commission was converted from an investigative body into a board of governors with authority to implement their own proposals for reform. In less than a year Coke had managed a remarkable political comeback and turned the tables on his old enemies. By virtue of the trust that Buckingham put in him and his dominance of the commission, he was now the chief administrator of the English navy. He has justly been called 'the Samuel Pepys of his day' (Lockyer, 76). 
Coke aimed higher, however. On 8 November 1621 he received a royal grant of $300 per annum for his services in the navy, but this did not wholly satisfy him. What he really wanted was the security of an office at court, and he continued to press Buckingham to find one for him. Buckingham eventually arranged for him to be appointed a master of requests and he took his oath on 20 November 1622. The following July he triumphantly moved his family to London. Triumph soon turned to tragedy, however. At the beginning of 1624 his oldest son, Joseph, died of spotted fever. A few months later his wife, Marie, died, shortly after giving birth to twins who barely outlived her. In late 1624 Coke, left with the responsibility of five children to care for, married again. His second wife was Joan Gore ('nee' Lee), daughter of a former lord mayor of London, Sir Robert Lee, and widow of a former alderman, William Gore. Coke and his second wife had an amicable relationship, but it was essentially a marriage of convenience. 
Coke sat in all the parliaments of the 1620s. In 1621, when he sat for the borough of Warwick, presumably through Greville's influence, there is little evidence of his participation. In 1624, owing to the influence of his brother-in-law, Valentine Carey, bishop of Exeter, he sat for the borough of St Germans; he was knighted on 9 September that year. He was still a minor figure but enthusiastically supported the call for war. Like many others who came of age at the time of the Spanish Armada, he hated Roman Catholicism and wanted to resume the Elizabethan war against Spain. Unfortunately the harsh realities of renewed warfare made life infinitely more difficult for Coke. To him fell the task of preparing the war fleets, explaining their failures, and imploring parliament for money. He was involved in numerous employments: he oversaw preparation of the fleet that sailed to Cadiz; he was instrumental in extorting money from the East India Company; and he was involved in frantic efforts to ensure that English ships lent to the French government would not be used against the French protestants then in rebellion. 
In 1625, in the first parliament of King Charles I's reign, Coke, again sitting for St Germans, was a much more visible participant. Both Buckingham and Charles employed him to make the case for further supply. He laid out the financial needs of the government in painstaking detail, but his pleas met with a hostile reception, especially from two personal enemies in the Commons, Sir Robert Mansell and Sir John Eliot. Eliot's animus towards Coke is evident in his account of these years entitled 'Negotium posterorum'. Coke's speech on 4 August 1625 was especially controversial. The king chose him at the very last minute to address both houses of parliament and instructed him to ask again for money. Some objected simply to the fact that, as a mere commoner, he had been employed to deliver the king's pleasure to both houses. Coke had not coveted this dubious honour: 'For my part', he wrote to Greville, 'I neither had ambition nor thought of speaking in that place' (Coke to Greville, 4 Aug 1625, Coke MSS). 
In September 1625 Buckingham arranged for Coke to be appointed one of the king's two principal secretaries of state. The senior secretary, Sir Edward Conway, retained fairly exclusive control over foreign affairs, but Coke had a great many additional responsibilities in the domestic realm now added to his continuing burden in the navy. He was particularly zealous in using prize goods or contraband to finance the war effort. 
In the parliament of 1626 Coke, sitting now for Cambridge University, was again prominent in trying to defend the lord admiral and rally support for the war. He was very much on the defensive because he was deeply involved in many of the affairs complained of in this parliament, some of which became articles of impeachment against Buckingham. Coke and his old nemesis, Mansell, sparred over the role of the council of war, the controversial ships lent to the French, and the failure to protect the seas and coastlines from pirates. Coke was also employed again to ask for further supply. He now estimated that the war effort required $1,067,221. 
When Charles dissolved parliament, resorted to a forced loan to raise money, and imprisoned resisters, there is reason to believe that Coke was one of the more moderate members of the privy council who was uncomfortable with this approach. This suspicion is reinforced by his performance in the parliament of 1628-9, where he again sat for Cambridge University. There were only three privy councillors in the Commons in 1628, and he was by far the most active. Though his performance has sometimes been judged harshly, his position as an intermediary between the king and Commons was a difficult one, especially given the constant sniping by Eliot. Coke took painstaking care not to offend. 'My desire', he declared, 'is not to stir but to quiet, not to provoke but to appease' (Johnson and others, 2.65). He admitted that illegal courses had been taken, and he actually encouraged passage of the petition of right. His performance was not flawless but generally speaking his conciliatory approach made the best of a bad situation. 
Coke's participation in the parliament of 1628 was cut short when he was dispatched to Portsmouth to prepare another fleet in mid-May. He kept a detailed journal of his work at Portsmouth which illuminates the reasons why the navy performed so badly in these years. He had to contend with a chaotic situation, inexperienced commanders, rotten victuals, mutinous seamen, a chronic shortage of money, and resurgent corruption. One night someone even tried to shoot him. Of course Buckingham fared worse. When he was stabbed to death at Portsmouth on 25 August 1628, Coke interrogated the assassin. 
During Charles I's personal rule of the 1630s Coke undertook an enormous amount of work, as indicated by the many state papers, both foreign and domestic, which are in his hand: he was a member of all the standing committees of the privy council; he served on commissions to reform the wardrobe and ordnance office, though both reforms were thwarted; he played a major role in the successful reform of the postal system; and he continued to take great interest in the navy, though he had less authority over it than before. His passion for administrative efficiency made him a natural ally of Archbishop Laud and Thomas Wentworth, later earl of Strafford. Wentworth praised Coke for his integrity, arranged for him to receive a grant of Irish land, and vowed, 'I shall honour you all the Days of my Life' ('Earl of Strafforde's Letters and Dispatches', 1.494). 
As one of two principal secretaries of state Coke had worked harmoniously with two partners (Conway and Sir Dudley Carleton), but the appointment of Sir Francis Windebank in June 1632 initiated a debilitating rivalry that lasted throughout the decade. This rivalry is particularly evident in the conduct of foreign affairs where there was an unhealthy competition between the secretaries, for which King Charles must bear part of the blame. 
On 22 June 1636 Coke gave a speech at Oxford University which is the best expression of his political views ('Works of... Laud', 5.1.126-32). Not surprisingly he took a hierarchical view of society and an absolutist view of the monarchy, yet these were tempered by his lifelong devotion to the public good and the rule of law. His views on matters such as swearing and drinking could be described as puritanical. His religious views were presumably similar to those of his brother George Coke (1570-1646), bishop of Bristol and of Hereford: he was a firm anti-Catholic protestant and a prudent conformist, uneasy with all forms of separation and zealotry. 
As Coke grew older others enviously eyed his office, particularly Robert Sidney, earl of Leicester, and Sir Henry Vane, who enlisted the support of Queen Henrietta Maria. By 1638 age was also taking its toll on Coke; he managed to accompany King Charles to Berwick in 1639 during the first bishops' war, but on 10 January 1640 Charles requested his resignation. He resisted, and Strafford strenuously supported him, but to no avail. On 31 January Coke surrendered the seals of office. Charles acted under pressure from the queen, but it was equally clear that Coke, at the age of seventy-six, was no longer able to discharge the duties of his office, especially given the prospect of renewed fighting in Scotland and the meeting of a new parliament. 
Coke could well afford to retire. In 1628 he had sold Hall Court for $3000, and between 1626 and 1634 he purchased land in Derbyshire and Leicestershire costing at least $20,000. By the mid-1630s his annual income was approximately $3500 ($2000 from the secretaryship and $1500 from rents). Edward Hyde, earl of Clarendon, wrote of him: 'His cardinal perfection was industry, and his most eminent infirmity covetousness' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 1.81). The centrepiece of his estate was Melbourne Hall, a manor in Derbyshire not far from his ancestral home of Trusley and it was to Melbourne that he retired in 1640. 
Coke's retirement was far from peaceful. Following the outbreak of civil war in 1642 his property was destroyed, his home was invaded, and he was repeatedly harassed. His own family was divided because his oldest son, John, an MP for Derbyshire, sided with parliament, and his younger son, Thomas, an MP for Leicester, took the king's side. His own position is ambiguous; it has been described as neutralist or parliamentarian. It is true that he grew estranged from his royalist son, and he twice wrote expressions of support for parliament, declaring that 'my heart is faithful and my prayers assiduous for the prosperity of the Parliament, wherein consisteth the welfare of this church and state' (Coke to the earl of Essex, 20 Sept 1642, Coke MSS), but these poses could have been dictated more by expediency than conviction. Perhaps more revealing was a letter he wrote recounting his lifetime of tireless efforts at administrative reform under three different monarchs. 'Now by all these and such other employments', he concluded, 'I have been taught that which the Archbishop of Canterbury said often: that kings cannot be served against their wills' (Coke to John Coke, late 1640, Coke MSS). 
Coke was eventually forced to leave Melbourne and take refuge in his wife's home at Tottenham. There he died on 8 September 1644. Perhaps owing to the confusion of the civil war, his will could not be found after his death, and his place of burial is unknown. His wife survived him. 
Coke has sometimes been considered terribly hardworking but mediocre, being described as one of Charles I's 'more humdrum' ministers (Aylmer, 234). He was certainly exceptionally industrious but it is possible to regard the quality of his work, especially in the navy, more favourably. The embittered opinion of Sir John Eliot should not be accepted at face value. Compared to a man like Eliot, Coke lacked charisma and passion, but he had his own solid qualities of character. A dedicated and honourable man, he was an unusually able administrator, and if he had not possessed finer qualities of mind, he would not have enjoyed the friendship and admiration of Sir Fulke Greville. 
Coke achieved high office, played a major role in the political life of the nation, and grew rich. Yet measured by other standards, his life was a failure. He professed to believe that a public office was 'a stage to do good', and he vowed not to 'dispose of my life for wages'. But in the end, what good had he achieved and what did he have to show for his work except wages? (Young, 62, 98, 275). There was no lasting achievement. Even reform of the navy, his chief accomplishment, was wrecked by the very war that he himself had eagerly advocated. 
Coke has been criticized most severely for his apparent toadyism. To the modern eye his deferential demeanour may look like crass servility, but it was a function of his conservative nature and an absolute necessity for survival at court. Moreover, his final evaluation of his own career is hardly servile. As noted above, he himself concluded that the lesson of his whole life's work amounted to this: 'that kings cannot be served against their wills'. 


@@@@@


doc= 5829


Coke, Roger (c.1628-1704x7), political writer and economist, was the third son of Henry Coke (1591-1661), of Thorington, Suffolk, and his wife, Margaret, daughter and heir of Sir Richard Lovelace of Kingsdown, Kent. He was educated at Queens' College, Cambridge, where he 'became well vers'd in several Parts of Learning' though 'Mathematicks, for some time, seem'd to be his principal Study' (Coke, xiii). However, he was to leave Cambridge, for reasons unknown, without ever having completed his degree. By 1648 he was married to Frances (maiden name unknown) and on 6 February 1649 their daughter -- and only child -- was baptized at Mileham, Norfolk. 
Coke appears to have welcomed the Restoration and in 1660 published 'Justice Vindicated', which attacked the 'false' theories of Thomas White, Thomas Hobbes, and Hugo Grotius, while supporting the monarchical system and the Church of England. Shortly after 1661 Coke was granted a pension of $100 per annum out of the 'grand estates' left to his nephew Robert Coke (1650-1679) of Holkham. In April 1672 he was charged with administering the property and finances of his family at Thorington and successfully renegotiated the lease of the manor at Farnham Royal, Buckinghamshire, in favour of his nephew's future heirs. However, his subsequent business ventures in the City of London failed and he was imprisoned for several years in the Fleet prison, as the result of the non-payment of his accumulated debts. 
It was Coke's personal tragedy that his practical application of the principles of trade did not measure up to the entirely original and radical economic theories that he was developing and expounding throughout the 1670s. Though he retained conventional mercantalist views on many subjects -- such as the desirability of government control and supervision of the retail trades, the need for a council of trade to direct national policy, and the need to reserve colonial markets and the home waters purely for the benefit of English carriers -- there is much in his thought that bridges the gap between the schools of mercantilist and 'laissez-faire' economics ('A Treatise Concerning the Regulation of the Coyn of England', 1696, 15, 69, 129-37; Coke, 2.486). In contrast to the vast majority of his contemporaries, he attempted to analyse economic criteria mathematically and with a greater degree of objectivity than before. As a result, he came to criticize the 'Navigation Acts' which debarred 'the greatest part of the World from Trading with us', attacked the special privileges of the joint-stock companies which allowed them to monopolize the conditions and operation of trade, and argued for the free importation of goods into England as a stimulus to economic endeavour ('A Treatise', 36, 59, 69; Coke, 1.xliii-xlvi, 16-17; 'England's Improvements', 1675, 114). 
Coke's later years were spent in the production of more conventional historical and political studies. As a visceral opponent of King James II, the dispensing power, and the 'barefac'd design of introducing Popery to the Subversion' of both church and state, he enthusiastically supported the revolution of 1688, and wrote a withering attack -- based jointly on political and economic critiques -- of coin clipping and monopoly capitalism, as practised respectively by Jacobite sympathizers and by the tory grandees of the East India Company ('A Treatise', 13, 17, 20-29, 42-3). This perspective had also informed his more popularist study, 'A Detection of the Court and State of England' (2 vols., 1694) in which he presented an idealized portrait of England's 'ancient' constitutions and liberties, while radically reassessing his opinion of Charles II and concluding that though his actions 'were little and dark' he had corrupted the nation and squandered its wealth to an unprecedented level (Coke, 1.vi, 2. 390-91). 
Following the publication of his two assaults on the abuses of the East India Company ('Reflections upon the East Indy and Royal African Companies', 1695, and 'A Treatise'), Coke quickly faded from the notice of the public. The anonymous editor of the fourth edition of his 'Detection', published in 1719, mistakenly thought that he had always been a bachelor and it may be concluded from this that by the turn of the eighteenth century Coke had already outlived both his wife and child by many years. He died in 'about the seventy-seventh year of his age', between 1704 and 1707, and was consigned to an unknown grave, probably within the bounds of the City of London. 


@@@@@


doc= 5830


Coke, Thomas (1747-1814), Church of England clergyman and founder of Methodist missions, was born at Brecon on 28 September 1747, the third but only surviving son of Bartholomew Coke (1701/2-1773) and Ann(e) Phillips (1712/13-1783), and was baptized on 5 October at St Mary's Church, Brecon. His father, the eldest son of Edward Cooke of Llanfrynach (died 1730), prospered as an apothecary in Brecon, where he became a common councillor and alderman and was twice elected bailiff (or mayor), dying on 7 May 1773, aged seventy-one. His mother, the daughter of Thomas Phillips of Trostre, Cantref, a neighbouring parish of Llanfrynach, died on 17 May 1783, aged seventy. Following in his father's footsteps, Thomas was elected to the common council on 24 September 1769 and a year later became bailiff. He continued his association with the council 'in absentia' at least until 1798. 
Thomas was educated at Christ College, Brecon (where he was a contemporary of Walter Churchey), and at Jesus College, Oxford, where he was enrolled as a gentleman commoner on 6 April 1764. He graduated BA in 1768 and MA in 1770, and in 1775 obtained his DCL with the support of the prime minister, Lord North. Meanwhile, he had been ordained deacon on Trinity Sunday 1770 and priest on 23 August 1772. No remaining evidence of a supposed curacy at Rode, Somerset, has been traced; but by 14 July 1771 he had taken up his duties as curate to the Revd Robert Twyford, vicar of South Petherton, and from the spring of 1773 seems to have been largely in charge of the parish, perhaps because of Twyford's ill health. Despite showing marked high-church tendencies at first, he came increasingly under Methodist influence, chiefly through reading the works of John Wesley and John Fletcher, and on 13 August 1776 rode over to Kingston St Mary, north of Taunton, to meet Wesley. They talked at length and Coke appears to have been ready to leave his post to serve in Wesley's 'world parish'. But Wesley sent him back to South Petherton, advising him to do 'all the good he could, visiting from house to house, omitting no part of his clerical duty' and to avoid 'every reasonable ground of offence' (Moore, 2.9). Within a few months, however, Coke's Methodist 'enthusiasm', which included open-air preaching and cottage meetings, brought local opposition to a head, and a change of incumbent provided the opportunity his opponents sought to drive him from his curacy at Easter 1777. 'Dr Coke', wrote Wesley on 19 August 1777, 'has bid adieu to his honourable name and determined to cast in his lot with us' ('Journal of... John Wesley', 6.169). 
From this point on Coke was closely associated with the Methodist movement and quickly became a leading figure, enjoying the confidence of the ageing Wesley and entrusted by him with a variety of tasks and responsibilities. In London he acted as Wesley's amanuensis. As Wesley wrote to Mary Fletcher in 1782: 'It seems to have been the will of God for many years that I should have none to share 'my proper labour'. My brother never did. Thomas Walsh began to do it; so did John Jones. But one died and one fainted. Dr. Coke promises fair; at present I have none like minded. (J. Wesley to M. Fletcher, 12 July 1782, 'Letters of... John Wesley', 7.128)' Coke also found himself travelling more and more extensively through the British Isles as Wesley's representative and trouble-shooter. In 1782 he presided for the first time in place of Wesley over the Irish conference. His education and social background singled him out among the Methodist itinerants and was one cause of the misgivings and suspicions that surfaced from time to time. Charles Wesley was particularly unhappy, suspecting Coke of usurping his place in his brother's affections and confidence and of wielding too much influence on him. But Coke's usefulness was demonstrated in a variety of ways and situations, from the disputes that broke out in Birstall and Dewsbury over the legal settlement of the preaching-houses to the drafting of the 'Deed of Declaration', which gave official status to the conference as heir to Wesley's authority after his death. (Wesley, however, firmly denied that Coke had any say in the choice of preachers named as the legal hundred.) 
These administrative and diplomatic roles, which earned Coke more criticism than approval, were no more than a prelude to the major tasks which later occupied his time and energies and for which he has chiefly been remembered. The year 1784 in which the deed was drafted proved to be a watershed in his life. His involvement from then on in the establishment of an American Methodist church independent of Wesley and the British conference, and also of the first Methodist overseas missions, placed him at the centre of developments in Methodism on both sides of the Atlantic in the two decades after Wesley's death in 1791. There had been Methodists in the American colonies since the 1760s and Wesley had sent over several of his itinerant preachers, notably Francis Asbury, to foster the work there. The War of American Independence had left the colonial Methodists 'as sheep without a shepherd' and bereft of the sacraments, since many of the Anglican clergy and the British itinerants had left the colonies. Legal and constitutional difficulties delayed any effective action by the bishop of London; and in August 1784 Wesley responded to repeated pleas for help from his American followers by ordaining two of his preachers and dispatching them to the newly independent United States. At the same time Coke was 'set apart' as superintendent of the American work. Presiding over the hastily convened Christmas conference in Baltimore, he in turn 'ordained' Asbury as deacon, elder, and fellow superintendent (a title soon changed to the more scriptural but controversial bishop) and an autonomous Methodist Episcopal church was formed, despite a last-minute attempt by two local clergymen to avert a formal separation. 
Coke's role in this sequence of events has been much debated and the evidence is inconclusive at several points. Charles Wesley, when news of the ordinations belatedly reached him, was horrified, and in a series of sarcastic verses had no hesitation in blaming Coke for leading his ageing brother into such serious irregularities, identifying self-aggrandizement as his motive: '
So easily are Bishops made 

By man's or woman's whim? 

W--- his hands on C--- hath laid, 

But who laid hands on him? 




Hands on himself he laid, and took 

An Apostolic Chair; 

And then ordain'd his creature C--- 

His Heir and Successor. 
('Representative Verse of Charles Wesley', 367-8)' The questions remain: did the idea of his giving authority to Coke by setting him apart originate from Wesley himself or from the younger man? Was Coke responsible for encouraging the American Methodists to go further in the direction of independence from the Church of England (and the British Methodists) than Wesley ever intended? In particular, was he motivated by an unalloyed desire to serve the evangelical cause or by the self-seeking ambition of which his detractors accused him; or was it, more plausibly, a case of mixed (and at least partially unconscious) motives? On these matters the jury is still out, but it can at least be said that neither his contemporary critics nor subsequent scholarship have in general been willing to give him the benefit of any doubt. 
Coke's visit to the United States in 1784-5 was the first of nine in the next twenty years. In spite of his growing commitments at home and the upheaval in the British connexion caused by Wesley's death in 1791, he continued to fulfil his episcopal responsibilities as fully as the American Methodists' allegiance to Asbury and Asbury's own reluctance to share his authority permitted. In particular, although Cokesbury College, the educational venture which he initiated in spite of Asbury's misgivings, proved abortive, it set a precedent which American Methodism was to follow in later years. But the fact that he remained a British citizen, though sympathetic to the American cause, coupled with his frequent absences, restricted Coke's influence and usefulness there. Eventually it was his marriage in 1805 that brought his trans-Atlantic commuting to an end; and though he made one last offer to settle in America, his usefulness had passed its zenith and his offer was not taken up. 
Coke was in America when news of Wesley's death reached him and he hurried back to England in time for the conference, no doubt expecting to step into Wesley's shoes. But this was not to be. Wesley's benevolent autocracy had left the itinerant preachers in no doubt that they would have 'no king in Israel' and they determined on an annual presidency, with one of their own number, William Thompson, as Wesley's first successor. It was not until 1797 that Coke was elected to the presidential chair. But whenever he was in England he served as secretary, and he was chosen as president a second time in 1805, when there was some fear that he might settle in America. But there was never any question of there being a second Wesley. 
In the course of his trans-Atlantic voyages, Coke also paid four visits to the West Indies, where he was instrumental in establishing Methodism in a number of islands; and it is as the pioneer of British Methodist overseas missions that he has chiefly been remembered in England. Methodism was transplanted to the Caribbean in the 1760s by lay persons who had come under its influence back home. Early appeals for spiritual nurture and leadership went unheeded, primarily because Wesley's limited resources were over-stretched by the rapid expansion of British Methodism. It was the enthusiasm of Thomas Coke which persuaded Wesley and the conference to appoint the first missionaries to overseas stations. At the end of 1783 (and eight years before William Carey's better known 'Enquiry'), in conjunction with Thomas Parker, a Methodist layman from York, he issued a 'Plan of the Society for the Establishment of Missions among the Heathens'. This first venture was abortive, largely because he failed to enlist Wesley's support in advance. It was, in any case, overtaken by the events of 1784, culminating in the Christmas conference at Baltimore. Two years later, however, Coke returned to the fray with an 'Address to the Pious and Benevolent', in which he proposed missions both to the Scottish highlands and islands and the Channel Islands, and to the West Indies and British North America. This time he had taken the precaution of obtaining Wesley's approbation and support; the proposals were given conference approval and Coke sailed for the New World with three of the itinerant preachers who had volunteered for the mission. The party landed in Antigua early on Christmas morning and Coke began a tour of the islands, in the course of which he left missionaries in Antigua, St Vincent, and St Kitts, despite the fact that two of them had been allocated to Newfoundland. This was the first of four visits, as a result of which by 1793, despite strong disapproval in some islands from slave-owning planters and government officials, Caribbean Methodism grew from a single society of 2000 in Antigua to a membership of 6570, with twelve missionaries working in ten of the islands. British Methodism's earliest mission field was firmly established. 
During these years Coke was also involved in launching missions to Sierra Leone and India, as well as home missions in Ireland, north Wales, and parts of rural England untouched by Methodism. These ventures placed a considerable financial burden on a movement just emerging into denominationalism, and the Methodist preachers, meeting in their annual conference, gave only hesitant and qualified approval to them. Coke's enthusiasm and vision outran his organizing ability, but it is to his credit that he not only initiated and administered the missions, virtually single-handed, but also undertook their funding by a series of published appeals, by begging tours, and, in the last resort, from his own personal resources. The first effective missionary committee was not appointed until 1804. Its purpose was to contain and regularize what Coke had initiated, and a difficult period of adjustment between him and the new committee followed. But it was not until 1813, on the eve of his departure for India, that effective steps were taken to finance the missions adequately through district missionary societies. By then Coke's right to be considered 'father of the missions' was universally, if sometimes grudgingly, recognized. 
Despite the peripatetic lifestyle to which he committed himself from 1777 onwards, Coke published a considerable amount, ranging from sermons and missionary reports to extracts from the journal he kept while travelling abroad (published in a collected edition in 1816). His most substantial works were a 'Commentary on the Bible' in six large volumes (1801-7) and a three-volume 'History of the West Indies' (1808-11). Both were heavily derivative. He also lent his name to the official life of John Wesley, largely written by Henry Moore and rushed into print in 1792. 
Coke was short and in later years increasingly stout, with pleasant, boyish features described by Wilberforce as 'such a smooth apple face, and little round mouth, that if it had been forgotten you might have made as good a one by thrusting in your thumb' (Wilberforce and Wilberforce, 3.389-90). He was of a warm-hearted and friendly disposition, but impulsive sometimes to the point of indiscretion and offensiveness. His attitude towards the established church vacillated between outspoken criticism and attempts to repair the bridges between Methodism and the church on both sides of the Atlantic. John Wesley commented wryly that he and Coke were like a louse and a flea. 'I creep like a louse, and what I have I keep. Dr. Coke leaps like a flea and is often obliged to leap back again' (Vickers, 'Thomas Coke', 46). His enthusiastic good intentions often led him into naivety, as when he made a bid for the proposed new Indian bishopric in 1813. But his faults were the defects of his merits, and his mistakes and errors of judgement may be deemed the price he paid for his considerable achievements. He remained a bachelor until 1805, when he met, fell in love with, and married (1 April) Penelope Goulding Smith (1762-1811), a spinster from Bradford-on-Avon, who was among his more generous missionary subscribers. Her fortune, like his own, was devoted to keeping the missions solvent, but she died after about five years of sharing in his itinerant and hyperactive existence. Within a year (16 December 1811) Coke married Ann Loxdale ('c'.1755-1812), a well-known Methodist from Shrewsbury. He was devastated by her death on 5 December 1812, declared himself 'dead to Europe' (T. Coke to S. Drew, 28 June 1813, Drew, 350), and flung himself into preparations for a mission to Ceylon and India. 
As early as 1784 Coke had had India in his sights and had corresponded with Charles Grant about the possibilities of a mission. But other commitments took priority without ever entirely obliterating the vision. Now, with the renewal of the East India Company's charter, the circumstances seemed right at last. For the last time Coke persuaded a hesitant conference to back his proposals, and six missionaries were recruited to accompany him. They sailed from Portsmouth at the end of 1813 on what was to prove a slow and stormy voyage, Coke devoting much of his time to a study of the Portuguese 'Bible'. On the morning of 3 May 1814, as they were crossing the Indian Ocean, he was found dead on the floor of his cabin, apparently as the result of a stroke, and was buried at sea that afternoon. 


@@@@@


doc= 5831


Coke, Thomas William, first earl of Leicester of Holkham (1754-1842), politician and agriculturist, was born in London on 6 May 1754 and baptized at St James's, Piccadilly, on 22 May, the eldest son of Wenham Roberts Coke (1717-1776), a landowner, and his second wife, Elizabeth Chamberlayne-Denton (died 1810), the daughter of George Chamberlayne-Denton of Hillesden, Buckinghamshire. 
Coke was educated at Eton College (1765-71), after which he travelled abroad (between 1771 and 1774), spending lengthy periods in Turin and Rome, and visiting Naples, Florence, Vienna, and Paris. A strikingly handsome man, he was the subject of a flamboyant portrait by Pompeo Batoni (1774). Following his return to England he married, on 5 October 1775, his cousin Jane Lennox Dutton (1753-1800), the daughter of James Lennox Dutton of Loughcrew, co. Meath, and his second wife, Jane Bond. On the death of his father Coke succeeded to the family estates in Norfolk, and in May 1776 was returned as MP for the county. An archetypal whig country gentleman, he was a staunch supporter of Charles James Fox but an irregular speaker in the house. He was most likely to be found addressing his fellow MPs on agricultural matters, partly because he believed the landed interest to be neglected by the government. He claimed to be an unwilling politician, and recalled at the close of his political career in 1833: 'when I first offered myself for this county, I did so with great reluctance, for I had no wish to come into Parliament. I was no orator, no politician' ('GM', 316). He stood because he was convinced by a number of local gentlemen that unless he did so a tory would take the seat: 'at the mention of a Tory coming in... my blood chilled all over me from head to foot, and I came forward' (ibid., 316). Be that as it may, he entered parliament as the youngest member elected that year and sat for fifty-six years with only one major interruption, from 1784 to 1790. 
At the 1784 general election Coke was one of Fox's so-called martyrs when he did not present himself for re-election. He temporarily retired to Norfolk, where in 1776 he had inherited a 30,000 acre estate with a rental income in 1780 of $13,118. Although the estate was well managed, with a substantial house, Holkham, completed by Matthew Brettingham in 1765, it also carried considerable debts as a result of building and of unwise speculation by his predecessors in the South Sea Company in 1720. Coke set about improving the estate. He bought up additional properties to round out his landholdings, he promoted enclosure acts in parishes where open fields still survived, and he encouraged his farmers to adopt new rotations designed to improve the output and productivity of the soil. The Park (or Home) Farm was cultivated to the highest technical standards, and the continuous experimentation was brought to the attention of a wider audience through the annual sheep shearings he instituted in 1800. This development followed the death of the acknowledged champion of improved farming, the fifth duke of Bedford. The shearings were for many years a highlight of the farming calendar until they were discontinued in 1821. 
In 1790, after a careful canvass, Coke was returned unopposed as MP for Norfolk, and he subsequently became a frequent if not always regular attendant at the house, particularly when agricultural issues were discussed. He represented Norfolk, with one short break (1806-7), until 1832. Although he never held government office, he was a member of the board of agriculture from 1793. He opposed the war with France, and met regularly with other whig leaders at Holkham. On 8 April 1794 he complained in the house that Norfolk was 'very dissatisfied with the war' (Thorne). It was again Norfolk interests which he had in mind when supporting a motion for peace early in January 1795: 'the county of Norfolk felt the danger to which the coast was exposed by the French getting possession of Holland, and wished for peace' (ibid.). A month later he defended the Norwich petition for peace. Early in 1796 he was associated with a bill designed to amend the game laws to fix a later start to the game-shooting season. 
From 1797 Coke was able to control the return of the second Norfolk MP, and in the longer term this led to animosity against him on the grounds that his political control appeared to be turning the county into the equivalent of a pocket borough. The issue came to a head in 1815. Although Coke, as a whig, supported the parliamentary reform cause, he always voted for the protection of agricultural interests, and this caused problems when he supported the corn law proposals in 1815. He addressed a meeting in Norwich in March, after which he was threatened with physical injury by an anti-corn law mob, and he was apparently saved only when a butcher by the name of Kett let loose a bull which hastily dispersed the crowd. Undaunted, on 6 June he presented a county petition in favour of the corn law. 
In the aftermath of this incident, it was alleged in Norfolk that Coke's agricultural improvements were detrimental rather than beneficial to the local countryside. The 'reputed injury', Dr Edward Rigby told the Norwich Philosophical Society in December 1816 during a spirited defence of Coke, 'was charged with producing various ill consequences, and depriving the poor of employment, and rendering corn dear'. Rigby argued that this was a misunderstanding: 'what before was, probably, principally a meagre sheep walk here and there only, exhibiting patches of ordinary rye, oats, barley and badly cultivated turnips, with not a single ear of wheat being seen... has become most productive land' (Rigby, 3.45). Rigby's was the first of a series of defences, most of which depended on Coke's own account of events at Holkham. In Earl Spencer's words in 1842, Coke was 'the only person now living who is able to recollect the former state of this district, and to tell the means by which it has been improved into its present flourishing condition' (Spencer, 2). This, however, was in the future. 
In 1816 Coke had a political agenda because he was anxious to show that the new husbandry he was promoting, although requiring farm consolidation, increased rather than diminished employment opportunities by bringing into cultivation previously unused land. What Coke helped to foster from 1816 onwards was little less than a mythical view of his own achievements, and the older he grew the fewer were the number of contemporaries who could question his interpretation. He claimed, in Spencer's words, that when he inherited the estate in 1776: 'the whole district round Holkham was unenclosed, and the cultivation was of the most miserable character... no manure was purchased, and very little, and that of no value, was produced on the farm. The sheep were of the old Norfolk breed, and, with the exception of a few milch cows, there were no cattle kept upon any of the farms. (Spencer, 2)' His interest in agricultural improvement was sparked when in 1778 one of the tenants on his property refused a renewal of his lease at 5's'. an acre. Coke decided to work the land himself, and since he knew little about farming he gathered around him a number of practical men, and each year invited farmers from neighbouring districts to examine his farm and discuss its management. These meetings gradually developed by 1800 into the famous sheep shearings. Coke also claimed that, by adopting an improved course of husbandry, including the regular application of marl and an increase in livestock, the land was rapidly improved, and in 1787 wheat was cultivated for the first time. Gradually, as a result of his initiative, the old farming systems fell into disrepute and he converted west Norfolk from a rye-growing into a wheat-producing district. The only help he acknowledged was from the tenant farmers, who were carefully restricted by their lease covenants to ensure good farming. Coke also claimed to have improved the breeds of sheep, cattle, and pigs on his estate, and as a result to have raised the rent from $2200 in 1776 to more than $20,000 forty years later -- at the same time spending more than $100,000 on farm houses and outbuildings. 
Coke's version of events was widely accepted in the nineteenth century, and he came to enjoy the reputation of being a pioneer of the English agricultural revolution. Obituarists went into raptures: Coke had 'raised forests where there was scarcely a blade of grass; from which, should it be required, the British navy may be hereafter amply supplied'. A vessel had been launched in 1832 'built of oak produced from acorns planted by Mr Coke himself' ('GM', 316-17). More recently a reappraisal has taken place, and it is now accepted that much of what passed for fact was a carefully controlled exercise in public relations designed primarily to enhance his own reputation. Agriculture in north-west Norfolk was already well advanced when Coke inherited the Holkham estate from his father in 1776: Arthur Young had commented several years earlier on the great quantities of wheat already being grown, and in 1784 he was to single out Coke for praise because he had done so well 'in the midst of the best husbandry in Norfolk' (Young, 353). Many of the innovations Coke claimed to have pioneered were known and practised long before 1776; the farm which, according to his account, he had taken in hand in 1778 had actually been the home farm since 1721 (although he did extend it), and rents on the estate doubled between 1776 and 1816 (much as they did on similar land elsewhere in this period). Unfortunately Coke's response to the accusations levelled against him in 1816 led him into serious exaggeration, and the image had then to be maintained. At the 1819 sheep shearing Coke proposed a toast to Dr Rigby, who in turn took the opportunity of his response to re-emphasize the poverty of Norfolk before Coke inherited his family estates. 
Much of the improvement which came to be attributed to Coke predated his inheritance of the estate and, equally, much of it was the work of tenant farmers upon whom Coke depended, and whose progress impressed visitors as much as the Park Farm. However, the myth became greater than the reality, particularly after Coke no longer needed it to serve a political purpose. By the time Spencer wrote in 1842 the drift of Coke's argument was to emphasize his own role in more or less transforming English agriculture. These views were later adopted by other writers, notably Lord Ernle, who wrote that between 1778 and 1842 Coke 'stood at the head of the new agricultural movement' (Prothero, 217), and that he had turned a landscape without wheat, with only scanty crops of rye and undernourished animals, into a thriving and progressive agricultural estate. At a later date he had helped to disseminate such knowledge more widely through the activities of his tenants, and through agricultural meetings convened at Holkham. 
Coke's smokescreen all too easily obscured the undoubtedly important innovations he promoted. His farmers were on twenty-one-year leases, and from 1815 they were expected to follow the Norfolk four-course rotation of turnips, barley, grass, and corn. Although some were less conscientious than others, there is little reason to doubt that they largely worked their land in accordance with the terms of their leases, and Coke was himself of the view that his leases were the main reason for the improvements which took place on his estates. He was undoubtedly a pioneer of agricultural change, but he is no longer considered to have played the key role he attributed to himself over the period 1816-42. 
In February 1816 Coke vouched in parliament for the agricultural distress, and he spoke against the renewal of the property tax and wartime malt taxes. He continued to speak on agricultural issues for the rest of his parliamentary career, and in February 1822 he introduced the Norfolk agricultural petition into the house in which it was argued that the present misery suffered by farmers was a result of high taxation causing distress. 
Coke and his first wife, who died on 2 June 1800, had three daughters, to each of whom he gave a portion of $30,000. On 26 February 1822, at the age of sixty-seven, and after twenty-two years as a widower, he married for the second time. His bride was his goddaughter, Lady Anne Amelia Keppel (1803-1844), the daughter of William Charles Keppel, fourth earl of Albemarle, and his first wife, Elizabeth Southwell; she was fifty years his junior, and seven years younger than his granddaughter. Coke was supposed to have married 'in consequence of dissatisfaction with his nephew and heir presumptive' ('GM', 317), although other accounts suggest that he had originally intended her to marry his nephew and heir but the young people refused to marry. The difference in their ages led to considerable speculation in the newspaper gossip columns. The couple had five sons and a daughter, of whom the eldest son, Thomas William Coke, agriculturist and landowner, was born on 26 December 1822. 
Coke's remarriage led to an investigation of his financial position. In addition to extensive land purchases he spent perhaps $40,000 on elections, and he claimed to have invested $500,000 on estate improvements. As a result, between 1776 and 1822 his debts increased by $133,000, by which time he was facing something of a crisis. His spending, or predicted spending, exceeded his income by about $10,000, while debts and other charges on the estate amounted to nearly $300,000. At the same time, as a result of the post-war agricultural depression, considerable rent arrears had developed, rent abatements had to be granted, and new tenants were needed. To tackle this crisis Coke's estate at Hillesden in Buckinghamshire was sold for $127,000, and expenditure at Holkham was severely cut. Over the next twenty years, partly because Coke now had a son to succeed him, the burden of debt was gradually reduced -- in 1828, for example, a mortgage of $10,000 outstanding since 1759 was finally redeemed. The total stood at only $8000 when he died. 
Coke, despite his claims about providing agricultural work, was happy to break up labourers' protests in 1831, and in 1834 he welcomed the new poor law. It seems unlikely that farm labourers on his estate shared the respect, admiration, and gratitude that his tenants felt for him. He retired from the Commons at the end of the last unreformed parliament, having been for many years 'father of the house'. To celebrate his retirement a public dinner was given at St Andrew's Hall, Norwich, on 12 April 1833, with the duke of Sussex in the chair and more than 500 people sitting down to eat. 
Coke claimed to have rejected a peerage on six separate occasions. The offers were made in 1776 by the duke of Portland as a bribe to desert Fox, in 1778 by Lord North, in 1783 by Portland and again when he joined Pitt, in 1794, in 1806 by Charles James Fox, in 1831 by Earl Grey, and in 1837 by Lord Melbourne. He turned down the 1806 offer because 'he felt he could serve his country better as a commoner than as a peer' (Thorne). He accepted the offer in 1831 on the grounds that 'every measure for which I was most eager will be completed upon the Reform being carried; I have now sons, and feel, as a father, I should not be justified in refusing your offer' (Stirling, 556). Unfortunately the proposal was rejected by the king, apparently on the grounds that Coke had insulted George III. However, after enjoying for many years the unofficial title of 'the first commoner of England', he was eventually created earl of Leicester of Holkham and Viscount Coke on 12 August 1837, following Queen Victoria's accession. He had wanted to revive the title which had become extinct on the death in 1759 of his great-uncle, despite the fact that the Townshend family at that time had an earldom of Leicester. His ambition was achieved by taking the title earl of Leicester of Holkham, although he seems not to have intended to use the last two words. 
Coke was the archetypal country gentleman. At Holkham he was a delightful host who loved hunting, shooting, and gambling as well as -- by repute -- cock fighting and bull baiting. He was a master of fox hounds, and numerous stories were told of his prowess in field sports. The Revd W. B. Daniel wrote in 1813 that 'Mr Coke is so capital a marksman that as he inflicts death whenever he pulls the trigger, he should in mercy forbear such terrible examples of his skill' (Stirling, 208). He was also a keen game preserver. He was active in the Norfolk yeomanry during the French wars, as major commandant of the Holkham yeomanry (1798), and captain (1803) and lieutenant-colonel in the West Norfolk yeomanry cavalry (1804). 
Coke died at Longford Hall, Derbyshire, on 30 June 1842, aged eighty-eight, after a short illness during which -- according to his doctor -- 'now and then in his sleep he talked about his farms' (Stirling, 596). On 11 July he was buried in the family mausoleum attached to Tittleshall church, Norfolk. A memorial column depicting agricultural scenes commemorating his work in Norfolk was erected at Holkham by public subscription. Coke was succeeded by his eldest son, Thomas William, Viscount Coke. His widow married the Right Hon. Edward Ellice MP, in June 1843, and died in childbirth on 22 July 1844. 


@@@@@


doc= 5832


Coker, John (d. 1631/1635), Church of England clergyman and supposed antiquary, was the third son of Robert Coker (died 1571/2) of Mappowder, Dorset, and Elizabeth, daughter and heir of Henry Beaumont of Giddesham, Devon. He appears never to have married. He was rector of Tincleton, Dorset, from 1576 until 1579, or perhaps 1582 when a new rector's name was noted. On his resignation of Tincleton, Coker perhaps retired to Mappowder, the parish register of which records the burial of a John Coker in 1631 and of another in 1635. 
Coker was long known as the author of 'A Survey of Dorsetshire... to which is Prefix'd a Map of the County' (1732). The map is by Richard Seale William, cartographer and engraver. The work is in fact by 


@@@@@


doc= 5833


Colbatch, Sir John (bap. 1666?, d. 1729), physician, was probably the son of William Colbatch baptized at St Swithin's, Worcester, on 1 August 1666. John Colbatch began as an apothecary's apprentice in Worcester, gradually rising to the rank of master in the Mercers' Company (to which the apothecaries belonged); he moved from Worcester to London some time in the early 1690s. By the autumn of 1693 Colbatch was beginning to be known for his proprietary Vulnerary Powder and Tincture of the Sulphur of Venus, which he claimed to have found empirically through his own studies, chemical experiments, and other experiments on dogs and other animals. The first remedy he promoted as being able to stop bleeding quickly even in very bad wounds, the second as restoring wounded flesh. The London surgical establishment evinced sceptical interest, and a public trial of his medicines was carried out on a dog; as reported by William Cowper ('PTRS', 18, 1694, 42-4), the experiment performed on the dog was successful, but the subsequent trial on two patients of St Bartholomew's Hospital failed. In response to Colbatch's counter-claim that his envious rivals were lying about the results on the humans, Charles Bernard arranged for yet another experiment on patients at St Bartholomew's, but again it failed: Colbatch explained that the associate of his who had been present had not been allowed to use his remedy properly. Early in 1694, with the help of a patron among the army officers, Colbatch was allowed to try his wound remedies on soldiers, claiming to have performed a hundred experiments with only five miscarrying, for which failures he blamed his opponents. He obtained a pass from the government in May 1694 to go to the summer campaign in Flanders. There Major-General Sir Henry Bellasis arranged for wounded men to be treated by Colbatch; despite continued harassment from the surgeons, only one of them died. Colbatch published 'Novum lumen chirurgicum, or, A New Light of Chirurgery' (1695), a book about his successes, shortly after his return from campaign, and claimed to have survived a surgeon's attempt to poison him. The surgeons replied with a pamphlet of their own (W. W., 'Novum lumen chirurgicum extinctum', 1695), lambasting Colbatch and claiming his powder to be nothing more than dried 'Vitriol of Copper... which hath a small Mixture of Iron', and his tincture to be 'a Mixture of Oil of Vitriol, and Spirit of Wine'. Colbatch defended himself with yet another pamphlet ('Novum lumen chirurgicum vindicatum', 1695), and by returning to Flanders in the summer of 1695, where he may even have gained the position of local surgeon-general during the siege of Namur. 
Colbatch moved to gain further legitimacy in 1696 by selling off his secrets to his publisher, Daniel Brown, who made and marketed the medicines. During the summer he began the process of gaining the licence of the Royal College of Physicians, and on 14 and 23 August, and 11 September 1696, he underwent the formal examinations in physiology, pathology, and therapeutics. He was admitted as a licentiate on 22 December 1696. Colbatch now sought to publish books setting out a rationale for why his medicines worked. His 'Physico-Medical Essay Concerning Alkaly and Acid' (1696), and 'Some Farther Considerations Concerning Alkaly and Acid' (1696), explained physiology and therapeutics in the light of the doctrine of acids and alkalis, which was more widely accepted on the continent than in England. But Colbatch's views, in arguing that acids rather than alkalis cured disease, were even more unorthodox, placing him among the few other advocates of acids, such as Edward Baynard and William Cole. He presented his claims in the language of the new and experimental philosophy, praising Robert Boyle especially, and argued for the usefulness of 'ocular demonstrations' over university learning. In elaborating this doctrine in a book on gout, and in writing of the blindness of orthodox medical opinion, he came under censure from the physicians. Samuel Garth's mock-epic poem, the 'Dispensary' (May 1699), mentioned Colbatch as a target of abuse. But Colbatch, who apparently enjoyed the patronage of at least one person of influence, brushed aside these assaults and continued to produce more books. Colbatch's publisher, Brown, brought out collections and editions of Colbatch's works in response to the publicity. 
In the end Colbatch gained a social reputation as a good physician, and published only a few books more. In his 'Dissertation Concerning Misletoe' (1719) he not only mentions the continued friendship of Dr Cole, and his own continued preference for the theory of acids, but describes himself as driving through the countryside in a carriage, thereby letting it be known that he had become well-to-do. Colbatch received a knighthood from George I on 26 June 1716. During the threatened plague epidemic of 1720-21, Colbatch submitted an unexceptionable scheme for its prevention to the king and parliament. In 1723 he could afford to give $50 to his manservant to set him up in business. Colbatch died on 15 January 1729. His will, witnessed by Sir Philip Boteler and Elizabeth Boteler of Teston, Kent, was probated in mid-March; he left all his estate to his wife, Elizabeth. After his death a manual of family medicine was published under his name. 


@@@@@


doc= 5834


Colbatch, John (1665-1748), Church of England clergyman and university teacher, was the son of John Colbatch of Ludlow, Shropshire. He was educated at Westminster School, where he was made scholar in 1680, and at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he was admitted as a pensioner in 1683. He graduated BA (1687), MA (1690), BD (1701), and DD (1706). He became a fellow of his college in 1689 and was ordained priest in 1691. In 1693 he was appointed chaplain to the British factory at Lisbon, with a salary of $200 a year. At the request of Bishop Gilbert Burnet he wrote an 'Account of the Court of Portugal' (1700), which attracted promises of preferment from Burnet and from Queen Mary, and which was quickly translated into French. In 1700 he returned to England to prepare Burnet's eldest son for Trinity College, at a salary of $40. In 1701, on the recommendation of Richard Bentley, Colbatch was appointed tutor to Lord Hertford, eldest son of the duke of Somerset, chancellor of Cambridge University. In 1703 Colbatch was persuaded by the duke to travel for a further two years with his pupil on the continent, at a salary of $100. But at the end of the tour the duke quarrelled with Colbatch and dismissed him from his post, refusing to pay his expenses. The duke was persuaded by Bentley to retract his slurs on Colbatch but he refused to pay additional salary or to fulfil his promises of preferment. Through Burnet's patronage Colbatch held the prebend of Yatminster, at Salisbury, worth just $20, from 1702 to 1720. In 1705 he returned to Cambridge, at the age of forty, impoverished and disappointed. From 1707 to 1748 he was professor of moral philosophy and his lectures brought him a great reputation; they represented the heyday of the professorship, which by 1769 held no duties. He formed friendships with many scholars, including Daniel Waterland, Ralph Thoresby, and William Whiston. He was also a donor of books to Edward Harley's collection. 
Colbatch's residence at Trinity involved him in the feud between Richard Bentley and the fellows of the college. Initially Colbatch was a counsellor of moderation, and he published a pamphlet in defence of Bentley's contention that a BD or DD gave an MA seniority within the fellowship. He also refused to join Miller's attack on Bentley, and in 1717 he preached a sermon in the college, appealing to the religious feelings of his colleagues. He found it increasingly difficult to remain neutral in the quarrel, however. While in 1714 he refused Bentley's offer of the vice-mastership because of his lack of seniority, it sparked a long contest with him. Colbatch led the fellows in their efforts to persuade Bishop Fleetwood to prosecute Bentley. In 1719 Colbatch petitioned Archbishop Wake, Lord Sunderland, and Lord Parker and persuaded them to bring the fellows' action against Bentley before the privy council. In 1720 Colbatch sought nomination to the college living of Orwell, and Bentley hoped to force him to surrender his fellowship. But Colbatch 'fairly threw Bentley on his back' (Monk, 2.98) and won the dispute when the fellows supported his claim. 
In 1720 Bentley published a pamphlet attacking Colbatch, to whom he erroneously attributed an attack upon his proposals for a new edition of the 'Greek Testament'. Colbatch endeavoured to get damages in the courts for this libel but it was litigation that lasted for more than a decade and was said to have cost Colbatch over $1000. In 1722 he issued a tract entitled 'Jus academicum', which attacked the failure of the vice-chancellor's court to bring Bentley to justice and sought the authority of the court of the king's bench over the university. In response Bentley brought an action against Colbatch in 1723. The judge imagined that Colbatch's attacks on Bentley were aspersions upon the king's bench and, owing partly to his own want of tact at the trial, Colbatch was fined $50 and imprisoned for a week. In 1727 Bentley generously presented him with the old college clock for his church at Orwell. But Colbatch had committed himself to the battle. In 1727 he wrote to Bishop Gibson of London, denouncing the unfitness of a candidate for orders, and in doing so drew his attention to the state of Trinity College. In 1729 he published a tract entitled 'A defence of the lord bishop of Ely's visitatorial jurisdiction over Trinity College in general, and over the master thereof in particular'. In 1738 his fifteen-year refusal to pay Bentley, who was also archdeacon of Ely, his fees for the living of Orwell led to a prosecution. Colbatch was defeated in the courts but denounced Bentley for failing to visit his archdeaconry, in 'The Case of Proxies Payable to Ecclesiastical Visitors'. 
Colbatch died in Cambridge on 11 February 1748. He left $30 a year to a charity school at Orwell, and during his lifetime had been a considerable benefactor to the church. 


@@@@@


doc= 5835


Colborne, John, first Baron Seaton (1778-1863), army officer and colonial governor, younger child of Samuel Colborne (died 1785), a landowner of Lyndhurst, Hampshire, and his wife, Cordelia Ann (died 1791), only daughter of John Garstin of Leragh Castle and Ballykerrin, co. Westmeath, was born at Lyndhurst on 16 February 1778. His father had lost money through unsuccessful speculations and left his widow and two children in straitened circumstances. Having been educated at Christ's Hospital, London (1785-9), and Winchester College (1789-94), where he took part in the great school rebellion of 1793, Colborne entered the army as an ensign in the 20th foot on 10 July 1794 by the interest of the earl of Warwick, and was to gain all subsequent rank without purchase. He served in the Helder campaign (1799) and, following his promotion to captain (January 1800), on the Belle Ile expedition and in Minorca, Egypt, Malta, and Sicily. After distinguishing himself at Maida (4 July 1806) he was appointed military secretary to General the Hon. Henry Edward Fox, and later to General Sir John Moore. 
Gazetted major in January 1808, Colborne accompanied Moore to Sweden and Portugal, and was with him on the retreat to Corunna; in accordance with Moore's dying wish he was promoted lieutenant-colonel (5th garrison battalion) in February 1809. Colborne returned to the Peninsula in August, and spent some months liaising with the Spanish army of La Mancha; he witnessed its defeat by Soult at Ocana (19 November), before assuming command of the 2nd battalion of the 66th foot. He was present at Busaco in temporary command of a brigade, and in the autumn of 1810 was appointed to the arduous charge of the advance guard at Alhambra outside the lines of Torres Vedras. In the following March he took part in the recovery of Campo Mayor and was then employed on detached duty, commanding a brigade of the 2nd division, in disrupting French communications south-east of Badajoz. He joined Beresford at Albuera, where, on 16 May his brigade, its visibility obscured by a hailstorm, was badly mauled by French lancers and chasseurs. 
In July 1811 Colborne exchanged into the elite 52nd regiment, forming part of the famous light division, and at the siege of Ciudad Rodrigo he commanded the assault (8 January 1812) on Fort San Francisco and was wounded in the right shoulder and arm during the storming of the city (19/20 January). Partially disabled in his right arm, Colborne was invalided home. He married on 21 June 1814 Elizabeth (died 28 November 1872, aged eighty-two), eldest daughter of the Revd James Yonge of Puslinch, Devon, rector of Newton Ferrers, Devon. Called 'the beauty of Devonshire' (Moore Smith, 'Life of John Colborne', 125) and by her niece Charlotte M. Yonge 'the brightest, most playful and lively of creatures' (ibid., 253), she was charming and gracious and a devout Anglican. 
Colborne rejoined Wellington's army in July 1813. Taking temporary command of the 2nd brigade of the light division, he led the attack at the storming of the pass of Vera (7 October) and commanded it at the battles of the Nivelle (10 November) -- when Colborne, though his own force was outnumbered, bluffed the strong French garrison of the Star Redoubt to surrender -- and the Nive (9-12 December). He returned to the 52nd and handled it brilliantly at the battle of Orthez in the following February and afterwards at the siege of Toulouse. With the coming of peace Colborne was promoted brevet colonel and aide-de-camp to the prince regent, receiving at the same time the peninsular gold cross with three clasps and, on 2 January 1815, following the reconstitution of the Order of the Bath, being appointed KCB. 
Colborne was appointed military secretary to the prince of Orange, then commanding the British forces in the Netherlands, and on Bonaparte's escape from Elba he resumed command of the 52nd, brigaded with the 71st and the 2nd battalion of the 95th under Sir Frederick Adam in the division of Sir Henry Clinton. At Waterloo the brigade was initially posted on the extreme right of the allied position, before advancing to the right centre of the front line soon after 3 p.m. Although the brigade was only partially protected by the lie of the ground from the unremitting French cannonade, thanks to Colborne's skilful handling of his regiment casualties were comparatively light. As the crisis of the battle approached (about 6.30 p.m.) the 52nd and 71st fell back to the crossroad on the ridge to the immediate left of Hougoumont. In the melee that ensued as the imperial guard attacked the English centre Colborne, anticipating Wellington's orders, threw his regiment forward, wheeled it to the left of an advancing column to the west, fired volley after devastating volley into its flank, and drove it back in disorder. Although he deserved every credit for this bold initiative, it is absurd to speak of it as having assured a decisive victory. And while no slight was intended, the omission of Colborne's name from Wellington's Waterloo dispatch gave rise to a controversy which he correctly refused to enter. 
Colborne remained with his regiment in Paris as part of the army of occupation until January 1816, when he obtained leave of absence. After an extensive tour through Europe he rejoined the 52nd in May 1818, being employed in garrison duty largely in the northern command to deal with the threat of disturbances in the manufacturing areas. In July 1821 he was appointed lieutenant-governor of Guernsey, the first of several civil postings in which he was to serve with distinction. A devout Anglican, of spartan habits and studious disposition, blue-eyed and curly-haired, tall and spare of person, he was very much the beau ideal of a soldier; contemporaries frequently remarked his striking similarity to the duke of Wellington in his simplicity of manner, integrity, and devotion to duty. Yet there the resemblance ended. He once described himself as a reasonable conservative, anxious to preserve institutions worth maintaining, but fully alive to the necessity of reforming those that were not (Moore Smith, 'Life of John Colborne', 341); and his administrative career revealed him as anything but a tory in the mould of his old commander. In Guernsey he was instrumental in restoring confidence in government by improving communications, agriculture, public works, and education. He reformed the decayed Elizabeth College (founded 1563), which reopened in 1824. Having been promoted major-general in May 1825, Colborne was offered the military secretaryship under a proposed reorganization of the War Office in July 1827. That project failing in consequence of Canning's death, Colborne was gazetted lieutenant-governor of Upper Canada in August 1828. Earlier he had refused the governorship of Trinidad. 
Colborne arrived at York (Toronto) shortly after an election which had returned a sizeable 'reforming' majority to the provincial assembly, and in the wake of the publication of the proceedings of a parliamentary select committee ('Parl. papers', 1828, 7.569) animadverting on administrative arrangements. While regarding the crude parochialism of local politics and the frequently unconstitutional proceedings of the assembly with distaste, his administration was conspicuous for its tact and conciliation, and strict impartiality towards the amorphous groups that constituted political life in the colony. Although, in what was still virtually a backwoods settlement, the province was unready for responsible government, he effected changes in the composition of the legislative council and was sparing in his use of patronage; in conjunction with the Colonial Office, steps were taken towards a greater fiscal autonomy and to render the judiciary more independent. Determined to promote English influence in a dependency which had been overly exposed to American settlement, he encouraged immigration from the United Kingdom and spared no effort or expense to ensure its success; and during his administration the population of the province increased by some 70 per cent. His Indian policy, in his efforts to persuade the tribes to come to terms with European settlement through education and agriculture, was distinguished by humanity and enlightenment. Elsewhere he initiated extensive public works, extended communications and education, and in 1830 instituted Upper Canada College. Despite his dislike of sectaries his attitude towards religious problems was generally pragmatic and clear-headed, though his policy in regard to the clergy reserves and the endowment of Anglican rectories was censured. An outstanding governor, Colborne had the misfortune to administer Upper Canada at a time of intense political animosities, exacerbated by the poisonous nature of the provincial press and colonial demagogues, most notably William Lyon Mackenzie who poured forth a constant stream of vituperation. His overt and prescient contempt for this vociferous, if unrepresentative, minority was to prove his undoing. On a visit to London in 1832 Mackenzie had acquired a fortuitous and wholly undeserved reputation in official circles as the mouthpiece of colonial opinion, and on Mackenzie's persuading a half-empty chamber to accept his 'Seventh Report on Grievances' in April 1835, the new secretary of state, Lord Glenelg, reacted with alarm. Colborne was severely rebuked for the infrequency and meagreness of his public dispatches, his full and dispassionate analysis of events in his private correspondence with the Colonial Office being dismissed as partisan statements. Stung, he forestalled recall by resigning in high dudgeon. 
Amid widespread regret Colborne left the province in January 1836, and was on the point of returning to England when he was offered the command of the forces in the Canadas. Accepting with reluctance, he moved to Montreal. He arrived at a critical juncture in the affairs of Lower Canada, where the long-running fiscal dispute between the French-dominated assembly and the executive had made government all but impossible. This volatile situation, aggravated by widespread economic distress, was scarcely eased by the announcement of coercive measures by the imperial government in April 1837, and Colborne began preparing to meet a possible uprising. When the highly localized outbreak did come, in mid-November, martial law was declared and he quickly isolated the insurgent areas and personally led 2000 regulars and volunteers against the rebel centres at St Eustache and St Benoit. Within barely a month the Lower Canadian 'rebellion' was over, and on the resignation of the governor-in-chief, Lord Gosford, Colborne assumed the administration of the government. With the arrival of Lord Durham as high commissioner to enquire into the affairs of the Canadas in May 1838, Colborne, though anxious to resign his command, was persuaded to remain at Glenelg's urgent insistence. Possessing little confidence in the home government and uneasy about the administrative innovations, particularly the union of the two Canadas, proposed by Durham and his numerous suite, he meantime prepared to meet a further recrudescence of violence in the province. Viewing Durham's hasty resignation and departure (1 November) with evident relief, because it avoided possible friction between the civil and military commands, he moved swiftly to deal with the further insurrection. By 17 November the small groups of rebels in various locations had been dispersed and order restored, though the behaviour of some of his irregular forces was to earn him the name 'le Vieux Brulot', and, after his elevation to the peerage, 'Baron Saton'. Gazetted governor-in-chief of British North America on 12 December, Colborne now eschewed the mildness with which he had dealt with the previous outbreak and determined, for the future peace of Lower Canada, that the rule of law had to be vindicated. Following a series of courts martial, twelve rebels were hanged and fifty-eight transported to the Australian colonies. Damned by 'loyalists' for his leniency and execrated by 'Patriotes' for his bloodthirsty tyranny (Moore Smith, 'Life of John Colborne', 307), he nevertheless hoped that a period of firm, but enlightened, administration would restore tranquillity and some much-needed realism to the political affairs of the Canadas. Yet such was not to be under his dispensation: with an astonishing insouciance, Melbourne's government now proposed to send out yet another whig civilian as governor-in-chief, but in the hope that Colborne would consent to remain commander-in-chief. Not surprisingly he reacted with indignation and refused to countenance the proposal. Having already been made GCH (October 1836) and promoted lieutenant-general (June 1838), he was invested GCB a few days before he left Montreal, on 23 October, after the arrival of his successor, Charles Poulett Thomson (afterwards Lord Sydenham). 
On his arrival in England Colborne was raised to the peerage (14 December 1839) as Baron Seaton, with a pension of $2000 for three lives for his services, an honour generously made at the instance of Lord Melbourne, with whose administration he had so often been at odds. Rumours of an Irish command coming to nothing, he remained unemployed until January 1843 when he was offered, and eagerly accepted, the long-sought position of lord high commissioner of the Ionian Islands (GCMG, July). He arrived in April, following the enforced resignation of J. A. Stewart Mackenzie, and found the political and administrative affairs of the protectorate in some disarray. His predecessor, of whom much had been expected by proponents of liberalization, had not displayed any marked administrative talents and had been little trusted by the Colonial Office, while his acerbity of manner had antagonized many prominent Ionians. Initially unwilling to propose constitutional concessions Seaton, much impressed by the justice of Ionian demands, as also by the 'revolution' in Greece in the autumn of 1843, began preparing the ground for such concessions by cultivating the liberal intelligentsia in Corfu and associating the people more closely with the administration. Municipal authorities were encouraged and granted greater responsibility, the reform of the judiciary and the police establishment was extended, and the press laws were relaxed; and at a time of increasing economic prosperity he embarked on extensive projects of social amelioration and public works. Meantime he used his powers to promote his views: liberal politicians were advanced in both senate and assembly, and senior administrative positions hitherto held by Englishmen were thrown open to Ionians. He then, in a series of breathless dispatches between January and July 1848, advocated the freedom of the press, financial autonomy, and free elections to both the municipalities and assembly; in January of the following year he proposed an extension of the franchise, and in May the introduction of the secret ballot. Earl Grey, the secretary of state, then in the process of furthering colonial self-government throughout the empire, was generally sympathetic, though informed opinion within the Colonial Office, already alarmed at Colborne's taste for deficit financing and distrustful of his impulsiveness and assumption of Ionian willingness to actually work his reforms, was more cautious. As it was, a revolt in Cephalonia in September 1848 notwithstanding, his projects were blithely adopted in principle, but left to his successor, Sir Henry Ward, to implement (June 1849) (cf. 'Parl. papers', 1850, 36, 1276). When it became apparent that reform, far from proving a panacea for legitimate grievances, had provided Ionians with the means for loudly expressing discontent and agitation for union with Greece, Colborne's proceedings were attacked (most notably, and with considerable personal animus, by G. F. Bowen, in 'The Ionian Islands under British Protection', 1851, and 'Quarterly Review', 91, 1852, 315-52). Warmly defended by Ionian supporters (for example George Dracatos Papanicolas (died 1862), in 'The Ionian Islands: what they have Lost and Suffered', 1851, and Antonios Dandolo (1783-1872), in 'Des Iles Joniennes', 1851), he published his own 'Apologia' ('Edinburgh Review', 97, 1853, 41-86). 
Although in his seventies and suffering from intermittent ill health, Colborne, long associated with the peacetime reform of the armed forces (for example 'Our defensive armament', 'Edinburgh Review', 96, 1852), and combining immense practical experience, an open mind, and a thorough theoretical knowledge, made an ideal choice for the command of the experimental manoeuvres at Chobham camp in June-August 1853. Promoted general in June 1854 -- age and infirmity precluded his appointment as Lord Raglan's successor in the Crimea and as commander-in-chief following the resignation of his friend, Lord Hardinge -- he was still sufficiently robust to accept the command of the forces in Ireland in January 1855. There, at a time of relative tranquillity, he occupied himself with the reform of the Royal Hospital at Kilmainham, in training the regular troops and militia, and instituting a series of annual reviews at Curragh. His term of office having expired in March 1860, he was raised to the rank of field marshal in April and appointed an Irish privy councillor. Having purchased the house and grounds of Beechwood, by Sparkwell in Devon in 1856, Seaton spent his remaining years in improving his estate and promoting the welfare of the parish. Still consulted by government ministers -- Colborne advised Sir George Cornewall Lewis on the defence of Canada when aged eighty-three in December 1861 -- he was gazetted colonel of the rifle brigade in February 1862, in succession to the prince consort at the express wish of the queen (having previously been colonel of the 94th foot, December 1834; 26th foot, March 1839; 2nd Life Guards, and bearer of the gold stick, March 1854). Following a lengthy illness he died at Valetta House, Torquay, Devon, on 17 April 1863, and was buried in the churchyard of Newton Ferrers on 24 April. He was succeeded by his eldest son, James (1815-1888), army officer. 
Seaton was a man of many parts and wide sympathies, a Christian gentleman, and an inspiration and example to those with whom he served. 'J'ai grande confiance dans Colborne', said General Alava: 'officier du premier ordre, tres aime tant de Sir J. Moore comme du Duc de Wellington, et quel bel eloge! Il est non seulement excellent militaire, mais qualifie pour tout espece de commandement, et d'une moralite et probite dignes d'autres temps.' He was a soldier of singular abilities and a colonial governor of note, a man whose influence was decisive in the Canadas and whose Ionian administration determined, for good or ill, the ultimate fate of the protectorate; John Colborne, Field Marshal Lord Seaton, was, in fine, a most distinguished man in a most distinguished age. 
In addition to his many English honours Colborne was appointed to the order of the Tower and the Sword of Portugal in March 1813, and was made knight of the Habsburg order of Maria Theresia and the Russian order of St George in August 1815. A bronze statue, by George Adams, raised by public subscription, was unveiled at Mount Wise, Devonport (November 1866), a cairn having already been erected in 1844 by the Glengarry Highlanders on an island in Lake St Francis, Ontario, with the inscription 'To the Saviour of Canada'. 






@@@@@


doc= 5836


Colburn, Henry (1784/5-1855), publisher, was born in Chelsea and began his career as an assistant in the circulating library of William Earle, a bookseller at 47 Albemarle Street, London. Colburn's origins are uncertain; rumour had it that he was an illegitimate son of 'old Lord Lansdowne' (Hall, 1.316) or of the duke of York (W. C. Hazlitt, 'Four Generations of a Literary Family', 2 vols., 1897, 1.168). An input of capital by a secret sponsor would help explain his establishment, probably in 1806, as the proprietor of the English and Foreign Circulating Library at 48-50 Conduit Street, off New Bond Street, London, from where his publishing operations shortly began. Between 1807 and 1815 Colburn published more than 100 works, of which almost half were of French origin or on French topics, a common procedure being the co-publishing of French and English versions. Fiction at this time represented virtually half his output, much of it in translation, with the other main components being memoirs and travel literature. From 1810 lists feature more works by indigenous novelists, notable titles including Charles Robert Maturin's 'The Milesian Chief' (1812), commissioned for $80, Eaton Stannard Barrett's 'The Heroine' (1813), a parody of the Gothic, and Lady Caroline Lamb's 'Glenarvon' (1816), with scandalous matter relating to Lord Byron. Colburn's first 'big-name' author, however, was Sydney, Lady Morgan, to whom he paid $550 for the copyright of 'O'Donnel: a National Tale' (1814), which sold rapidly. The same author's 'France' (1817), for which Colburn offered $1000, was well calculated to satisfy public interest in the wake of the Napoleonic war, and subsequent high payments helped retain Lady Morgan's services well into the next decade. 
In 1814 Colburn joined Frederic Shoberl to found the 'New Monthly Magazine and Universal Register', originally projected as a counter to the alleged Jacobin tendencies of Richard Phillips's 'Monthly Magazine'. Among its early editors were Dr John Watkins and Alaric Watts. A new series was begun on 1 January 1821, as the 'New Monthly Magazine and Literary Journal', under the editorship of Thomas Campbell, the poet, whose contract stipulated a salary of $500, though much of the practical work was carried out by Cyrus Redding, who resigned shortly before Campbell himself late in 1830. With the journal's literary and critical emphasis now established, other high-profile editors brought in were Edward Bulwer-Lytton (1831-3), Theodore Hook (1837-41), and Thomas Hood (1841-3), though ultimate control over the magazine rested with Colburn and his closest associates. The proprietorship was eventually sold to William Harrison Ainsworth in 1845 for $2500. In 1817 Colburn also set up the 'Literary Gazette', an innovatory weekly literary review, which enjoyed a rapid success. After six months a third share was bought by William Jerdan, who became editor, and another third was taken by the publishers Longmans. Colburn's barely disguised manipulation of these journals, and others, for his own purposes soon helped gain him an adverse reputation for 'puffing' his own books. When Jerdan proved resistant, Colburn's response was to purchase a half-share in 'The Athenaeum', which gingerly acknowledged his involvement in its first issue in 1828. Other Colburn journals included the satirical 'John Bull' (founded in 1820) and the 'Court Journal' and 'United Service Journal', both from 1829. 
Colburn disposed of his circulating library to Saunders and Otley in 1824, moving to New Burlington Street, from where he concentrated on his publishing activities. His pioneering issue of 'Memoirs of John Evelyn' (1818) was followed in 1825 by a similar publication based on the newly deciphered diary of Samuel Pepys. Colburn was also the publisher of Burke's 'Peerage' and its various issues from 1826. Most common among his expanding lists between 1825 and 1829, however, were works of fiction. Colburn deliberately cultivated authors of social note, especially those claiming aristocratic credentials. Theodore Hook was initially offered $600 for his novel 'Sayings and Doings' (1824), the success of which led to a bonus of $350 and two further series (1825, 1828). At the time of the financial 'crash' in the book trade of 1826, Colburn unlike most rivals continued to expand, more than doubling his output of fiction in that year. During the later 1820s works issued from New Burlington Street set the mould for several new modes. Three new-style fashionable novels -- Robert Plumer Ward's 'Tremaine' (1825), 'Matilda' (1825) by Constantine Henry Phipps, later marquess of Normanby, and Thomas Henry Lister's 'Granby' (1826) -- triggered a craze for 'silver fork' fiction, which also involved female authors published by Colburn, such as Lady Charlotte Bury. Other modes developed through Colburn were the military-nautical novel, with titles such as Frederick Marryat's 'The Naval Officer' (1829), and a new brand of historical fiction by authors such as Horace Smith and G. P. R. James. Colburn published nearly half the total of new novels bearing 1829 imprints, the large majority being in three volumes and set at the premium price of 31's'. 6died 
In September 1829 Colburn entered into partnership with Richard Bentley (1794-1871), the printer, the terms of the agreement stating that Colburn should receive three-fifths of profits, with Bentley undertaking the day-to-day running of the concern. One noteworthy product of the enterprise was the series 'Colburn and Bentley's Standard Novels', which offered single-volume copies of recent fiction at 6's'., commencing with James Fenimore Cooper's 'The Pilot' in February 1831. This inaugurated the later, Victorian, practice of following expensive first editions with cheap reprints, and the first nineteen monthly issues of the series carried Colburn's and Bentley's joint imprint until the breakdown of the partnership in 1832. In an atmosphere of financial confusion and personal distrust, Bentley agreed to pay $4000 for his release, with Colburn pledging not to publish new books himself within 20 miles of London. Colburn nevertheless proved congenitally unfitted for semi-retirement: his series 'Colburn's Modern Novelists', consisting of unsold sheets of earlier novels, was promoted as if new, and in 1835 he set up as a publisher from Windsor, just outside the statutory limit. By an agreement with Bentley in June 1836, Colburn paid $3500 to be released from his pledge, setting up at new premises in central London at Great Marlborough Street. Often vying directly with Bentley, he published in this later period novels by Benjamin Disraeli, Catherine Gore, and Frances Trollope, as well as some profitable non-fiction, such as Agnes and Elizabeth Strickland's 'Lives of the Queens of England' (1840-48) and Eliot Warburton's travel book 'The Crescent and the Cross' (1845). 
Colburn's first marriage, reportedly to the keeper of a small circulating library near Oxford Street who later died through drink, remained obscure to contemporary observers. On 2 March 1841 he married Eliza Anne, only daughter of Captain Crosbie RN. They had no children. Colburn retired in 1853, handing over his business to Hurst and Blackett, though retaining some of his key copyrights, which were later (May 1857) auctioned for 'about $14,000' ('N&Q', 2nd ser., 75.458-9). He died at his home at 14 Bryanston Square, London, on 16 August 1855, his wife surviving him. 
Notwithstanding his invasiveness in the publishing world, no single clear image of Colburn has survived. Contemporary accounts mention his shortness in stature as well as his bustling manner and indecisiveness, though Bentley for one felt this last attribute was calculated. While his promotion methods brought protests from rival publishers, and provoked numerous satirical attacks, Colburn's practice anticipated aspects of modern high-pressure advertising. His output alone makes him one of the most significant publishers of his period, and his sponsorship of publications such as the Evelyn and Pepys diaries points to more than just a mercenary literary concern. 


@@@@@


doc= 5837


Colby, Thomas Frederick (1784-1852), surveyor and army officer, was the eldest child of Major Thomas Colby (died 1813), Royal Marines, and his wife, Cornelia Hadden, sister of Major-General John Murray Hadden, Royal Artillery, surveyor-general of the ordnance. He was born in the parish of St Margaret, Rochester, on 1 September 1784, brought up by his father's sisters at the family home, Rhos-y-gilwen, near Newcastle Emlyn, Carmarthenshire, and educated at school in Northfleet, Kent, and at the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich. At sixteen he was commissioned into the Royal Engineers, in which he was to serve for the rest of his life. As a cadet Colby attracted the notice of William Mudge, superintendent of the Ordnance Survey, who in 1802 asked that Colby be attached permanently to the survey. This granted, Mudge came increasingly to rely on Colby, whose work he admired and whom he found sympathetic. 
Colby's first duties were to help Mudge measure an arc of the meridian between Dunnose, Isle of Wight, and Clifton, south Yorkshire. In December 1803, when on duty at Liskeard, Colby was badly wounded when an overloaded pistol accidentally went off. His left hand had to be amputated at the wrist, his face was very badly scarred, and fragments lodged in his skull. Helped by youth, the care of friends, and the surgeons' reluctance to attempt further operations, Colby recovered and was able to return to active duties. As was normal, he divided his time between fieldwork in the summer and computing results and superintending the construction and engraving of maps in the Tower of London in the winter. He and Mudge published an account of their progress in 'An Account of the Trigonometrical Survey... 1800-1809' (1811). In July 1809 Mudge was appointed lieutenant-governor of the Woolwich Academy and Colby became chief executive officer of the survey. 
From 1813 to 1817 Colby was engaged in extending the measurement of the meridional line between Dunnose and Clifton into Scotland, in combination with a geological survey under John McCulloch. Colby was helped by James Gardner, but carried out much work himself. Because of Mudge's ill health Colby took charge of a visit to Shetland by Jean-Baptiste Biot who had been deputed by the Bureau des Longitudes to make pendulum and other observations there in connection with the extension of the arc of the meridian from the Balearic Islands, through France, and thence through England to Shetland. However, Biot's and Colby's intense mutual dislike resulted in British observations being made on Balta and French on Unst; this defeated the political and scientific objectives of the enterprise which were to demonstrate Anglo-French co-operation and compare results obtained using the Ramsden zenith sector with those obtained using the French repeating circle. Colby, however, afterwards accompanied Mudge and his son to Dunkirk and took part in the observations made, in conjunction with Biot and J. F. D. Arago, with Ramsden's sector, which was set up in Dunkirk arsenal. Colby was again in Scotland in 1819, when his extraordinary activity is evident from his having covered on foot more than 1000 miles in mountainous terrain in forty-five days. 
In 1820 Mudge died and Colby took the unusual step of writing to the duke of Wellington, then master-general of the ordnance, to press his case for appointment as superintendent of the survey. He was successful and was appointed that year. He immediately set about addressing problems: he instituted changes that led to an increase in sales of previously very slow-selling maps and, by ruthlessly rejecting sub-standard work and that done by unauthorized assistants, raised standards appreciably. In 1820 he was appointed to the board of longitude, on which he served until its dissolution in 1828. In 1821 he was again employed in Scotland and in 1821-3 was deputed by the Royal Society, with Captain Henry Kater, to work with the astronomers Arago and Matthieu of the Academie des Sciences to verify observations made forty years earlier connecting the triangulations of England and France. For cross-channel observations, Fresnel lamps with compound lenses 3 feet in diameter were used, and Colby's description of them influenced Robert Stevenson to adopt them in British lighthouses. 
In 1824 a survey of Ireland at a scale of 6 inches to the mile was ordered, to allow the valuation of property so that the inequitable system of land taxation could be reformed. Colby was put in charge of the survey while continuing to be responsible for work on the British mainland. A comprehensive system of primary, secondary, and minor triangulation was necessary for the precise fixing of property boundaries. Colby determined to put the work under direct official supervision, instead of contracting the work out to civil surveyors as was often done in England. He obtained approval for raising three companies of sappers and miners to be trained in survey duties. The Irish survey was begun with a small party of sappers on Divis Mountain near Belfast in 1825. As the work progressed Colby perfected a system of checks which allowed the employment of Irish labourers on routine tasks. Dissatisfied with previously used instruments, Colby designed and perfected through experiment his compensation bar, using which a base-line 8 miles long was measured under his supervision in 1827-8 and later described in 'An Account of the Measurement of the Lough Foyle Base' (1847). Colby was helped by Thomas Drummond, whose family claimed that the invention was his. Two of Colby's 3 foot compensation bars were used by the parliamentary committee to redefine the yard after the original was destroyed by fire in 1834. Colby held the view (later widely accepted) that national survey research could be extended to produce memoirs on the place names, geology, natural history, antiquities, and other features of the country. Sadly his ideas were overruled by financial considerations after the publication of one Irish memoir. Lack of trained men slowed progress in Ireland but Colby managed to resist attempts to make him adopt quicker but less accurate methods. 
In 1828 Colby married Elizabeth Hester Boyd, second daughter of Archibald Boyd of Londonderry, treasurer of that county; they had four sons and three daughters. After their marriage Colby and his wife moved from London to Dublin, but the family returned to London in 1838 and then went to Southampton when the Ordnance Survey moved there in 1842. 
Under Colby's superintendence in May 1833 the first Irish county map -- Londonderry, in fifty sheets -- was published. Other maps were published in quick succession with 2 or 3 million acres being published annually, until by completion in 1847 nearly 2000 sheets had been published of maps whose detail, accuracy, and pleasing appearance represented a cartographic achievement of world importance. The work had employed thousands of people and cost $720,000. Colby consistently and considerably exceeded his annual budget so as to maintain progress, for some time forgoing his salary, which he was unable later to recover. His insistence on rigorous if expensive methods meant that the resultant maps could be used to draw boundaries for poor-law assessment and valuation as well as for general valuation, the compilation of annual agricultural returns, the census, the sale of property, land improvement, and general engineering works. In addition a full series of tidal observations, later commended by the astronomer royal, were made under Colby's direction at stations around Ireland. In Ireland Colby built up from virtually nothing an unrivalled topographical corpus. He and Thomas Larcom also introduced electrotyping (whereby maps can be reproduced from duplicate plates without wearing out the original) and contour lines. 
In 1833, while the Irish survey was still in progress, Colby was ordered to work with Henry De la Beche to prepare a geological map of the west of England. The Ordnance Survey was to finance the project and engrave the maps and De la Beche to supply geological information -- an arrangement which continued until 1845. Colby moved to the mainland in 1838, leaving the Irish survey in the hands of Thomas Larcom, and became involved in the 'battle of the scales'. In 1840, after various scientific bodies in England and Scotland had pointed to the advantages of a 6 inch survey on the Irish pattern, the government agreed that the six unsurveyed counties in the north of England and the whole of Scotland should be surveyed and mapped at the scale of 6 inches to the mile, while the 1 inch map was published for the rest of England. As men involved on the Irish survey completed their work, they were transferred to England and some thence to Scotland. The work was moving very slowly when, in November 1846, Colby was promoted major-general; in accordance with the rules of the service he retired from his survey post the following April. 
In retirement Colby devoted himself to the education of his sons, living for some time in Bonn. He died unexpectedly at New Brighton, near Birkenhead, on 9 October 1852. His widow was awarded a life pension by the government. Colby was a knight of Denmark (a distinction conferred in recognition of help given by the Ordnance Survey to Danish geodesists under Heinrich Schumacher), a fellow of the Royal societies of Edinburgh and London, LLD of the University of Aberdeen, and a member of various learned societies. Living in London and having some private means he took a keen interest in science. In appearance Colby was short and the best likeness of him is said to be the bust in the Ordnance Survey office in Southampton. He was extremely dexterous in using instruments, despite having lost one hand. He could be difficult to work with and fell out with several colleagues, one of whom, his biographer, Portlock, none the less described him as 'gentle and kind as a father'. He was an energetic and active participant in all the work he supervised and the high standards on which he insisted make his superintendence of the survey a noteworthy period in its history. 


@@@@@


doc= 5838


Colcu ua Duinechda (d. 796), 'scriba' and probably bishop of Clonmacnoise, whose feast day was 20 February. He has been identified with the Colcu who was Alcuin's correspondent and teacher of Alcuin's pupil, Joseph Scottus, but this is improbable: Alcuin's friend was evidently resident in England. The martyrology of Donegal ascribes to him 'the kind of prayer that is called the Broom of Devotion' (Scuab Crabhaidh), referring to the litanies of Jesus (nos. 4 and 5 in Plummer's 'Irish litanies'). His inclusion in the martyrology of Tallaght suggests that he was venerated by the Ceili De reformers of the late eighth century, although they had little time for many of the wealthier and more secularized 'old churches'; he may, therefore, be the Colcu referred to, in terms of respect, in 'The monastery of Tallaght'. Such houses as Clonmacnoise were probably tending to divide between an abbatial administration, set upon defending and expanding the material interests of the monastery, and the 'scribae' (leading scriptural scholars), anchorites, and bishops whose concerns were more spiritual. Yet the split was not complete, for some abbots were also venerated for their religious manner of life and scholarship. 


@@@@@


doc= 5839


Colclough, John Henry (1769/70-1798), Irish nationalist, was the son of Thomas Francis Colclough, a successful merchant at Wexford, of Ballyteigue Castle, near Kilmore Quay, co. Wexford. Though collateral to the Colcloughs of Tintern Abbey, the details of his immediate family are so obscure that his mother eludes identification. Arising out of his Roman Catholicism, he went abroad to train as a doctor, following which he married Elizabeth Berry. 
On his return to co. Wexford, Colclough joined the United Irishmen, and though his precise involvement remains obscure he was, in his own words, one of 'the principal' activists (Madden, 4.496). His prominence is affirmed by the suggestion that he should become secretary to a proposed county committee in 1797. The committee was never established, but Colclough's public profile and Jonah Barrington's prophecy, arising out of a sequence of social encounters in April 1798, that he would die on the gallows has given the impression that he was more hardline than was in fact the case. Significantly, Colclough did not hold a military office in the United Irish organization. At the same time, his arrest, along with Bagenal Harvey and Edward Fitzgerald of Newpark, on 27 May, and his imprisonment in Wexford, impeded the rising in the south of the county. The success of the insurgent armies elsewhere ensured Wexford town soon came under threat, arising out of which the garrison directed Fitzgerald and Colclough on 29 May to go to the rebel camp at Vinegar Hill to request them to disperse. The fact that Colclough undertook this unusual request, that he did not follow the example of Edward Fitzgerald and stay with the insurgents once he had delivered the message, and that he sought, following his return to Wexford with the insurgents' reply calling upon the town garrison to surrender, to persuade United Irish units in the areas of Bargy and Forth not to join the rising, is consonant with his later claim that he was not persuaded of the wisdom of rebellion. 
The capture of Wexford town on 30 May, however, left Colclough with little option but to join in military activity and he took his place with the leaders of the insurgent army that marched westward out of the town on 31 May. Control of New Ross was a key strategic object if the insurgents were not to be hemmed in by the gathering forces of the crown, but the units commanded by Colclough performed badly under fire and their abandonment of their position on 5 June contributed to the costly failure to take the town. Colclough's preference at this point was to sue for peace but the authorities were uninterested. He redeemed his military reputation by commanding the insurgents who almost broke through the lines of General Sir John Moore at Goff's Bridge on 20 June; realizing that military defeat was only a matter of time once the main insurgent army was defeated at Vinegar Hill a day later, he fled Wexford and took refuge on the Saltee Islands. Captured and taken to Wexford town a few days later, Colclough was tried by court martial, found guilty of involvement in the battle of New Ross, and hanged on Wexford Bridge on 28 June. He was in his twenty-ninth year, and he was buried in St Patrick's churchyard in Wexford. His wife survived him. It has been stated that he did not expect the sentence to be imposed. Certainly, his salute to 'king and constitution' (Madden, 4.496) at the gallows sustains the impression that he was never entirely committed to the rebellion. 


@@@@@


doc= 5840


Colden, Cadwallader (1689-1776), historian and colonial official, was born on 7 February 1689 in Enniscorthy, co. Wexford, Ireland, the eldest child of the Revd Alexander Colden (1654-1738), Presbyterian minister, and Janet Hughes (1662?-1731). His parents were Scottish and the family returned to Scotland the following year. Cadwallader was groomed for the Church of Scotland ministry by his father and studied at Edinburgh University, from where he graduated MA in April 1705. He decided not to follow the family clerical tradition, however, and went on to pursue medical training in London. He lacked the financial resources to establish his own medical practice in the capital and chose to move to the American colonies in 1710. Colden was assisted by his aunt Elizabeth Hill in Philadelphia, where he established himself as a merchant and physician. He returned briefly to Scotland in 1715 and married Alice Chrystie (died 1762) of Kelso on 11 November. 
Colden returned to Philadelphia after his marriage and then moved to New York in 1718 at the invitation of its Scottish governor, Robert Hunter, and settled there for the remainder of his long life. He was appointed surveyor-general of New York in 1720 and was appointed also to the province's council in 1722. Colden demonstrated an intense commitment to his belief in the importance of sound government in the colonies from the very beginning of his public career, and he shared these political principles with fellow Scots in America, such as Archibald Kennedy and James Alexander in New York and William Douglass in Massachusetts. Colden's writings, both private and public, reveal his acquaintance with a wide range of classical and contemporary thinkers. He sought to apply this learning to his analysis of the nature and function of imperial and colonial constitutional relations. Colden's thought and deeds were shaped by his provincial experience on the fringes of the first British empire. He became a defender of metropolitan and executive authority in the colonies because he felt that this was the only solution for the problems of local factionalism and narrow economic self-interest, which in his view jeopardized the public good. A clear line can be traced in Colden's political philosophy from his examination of the strategic position of New York in the 1720s -- which he believed to be endangered by the fur trade between merchants in his province and those in French Canada, which resulted in the alienation of the American Indian allies of the British -- to his staunch upholding of royal authority in the political crises of the 1760s and 1770s. Colden maintained, on the basis of his interpretation of the history of North America, and the performance of other empires that the real interests of the colonists could be guaranteed only by an impartial government in London. 
Colden has come to be acknowledged by historians as one of the leading intellectuals of colonial British America. His interests ranged widely across the sciences and the humanities, and this is reflected in his correspondence with such luminaries as Benjamin Franklin and Linnaeus (who named the plant 'Coldenia' after him). Colden published a number of works in the British Isles, the European continent, and North America, which ranged from an attempt to modify Newtonian natural philosophy in 'The Principles of Action in Matter' (1751) to 'The History of the Five Indian Nations' (first published in New York in 1727, then expanded in subsequent editions in London and New York from 1747). His history of the Iroquois, or Five Nations, which built upon the earlier accounts of French analysts, is perhaps his most interesting achievement for later readers in that it demonstrated that his imperialism was the product of a deep engagement with the colonial situation. He displayed a genuine admiration for the patriotism of the Iroquois, which he extolled in the language of civic humanism and which he contrasted with the corruption of both colonial and metropolitan Britons. This fascination with Amerindian liberty and customs appears to have influenced other Scots such as Adam Ferguson and Tobias Smollett, who both drew on Colden's history in their own works. 
Colden's forceful opinions and personality meant that he was the target of a great deal of hostility in New York. He alienated leading figures in New York political society during his long participation in the bitter and rumbustious politics of the colony. He also attracted popular opprobrium during the 'Stamp Act' crisis and the agitation that accompanied the American War of Independence, due to his position as lieutenant-governor of the province and his stout defence of the imperial government. Colden first led the government of New York as senior councillor in 1760 and was lieutenant-governor in 1761, 1763-5, 1769-70, and 1774-5. Colden died at Spring Hill, his estate in Flushing, Long Island, New York, on 20 September 1776. 


@@@@@


doc= 5841


Coldingham, Geoffrey of (d. c.1215), Benedictine monk, chronicler, and probably hagiographer, is described as sacrist of Coldingham Priory, Berwickshire, one of Durham Cathedral priory's dependent cells, in the rubric that heads three of the four fourteenth-century copies of the portion of the Durham chronicle attributed to him. In this he followed a tradition established during the twelfth century, of adding to the work of Symeon of Durham, whose 'Libellus de exordio Dunelmensis ecclesiae' provides an account of the see from its origins on Lindisfarne down to 1096. Geoffrey maintained the pattern set in the previous anonymous continuations, which were mainly structured as accounts of successive bishops of Durham, and so in his work, which begins at the death of Bishop William de Ste Barbe in 1152, the latter's successor, Hugh du Puiset (died 1195), and his dealings with Durham's monastic community figure very prominently. As a writer of limited ambitions his significance derives essentially from Durham's importance as a major centre of power in the far north of England. His chronicle continues to the abortive election of Morgan as bishop in 1215, a strange point at which to break off, given that the royal chancellor, Richard Marsh (died 1226), was successfully elected in 1217. In the only older copy (Durham Cathedral Library, MS A.IV.36), which dates from the early thirteenth century, the opening was rehandled to graft it onto the previous portion of the chronicle, so excluding any rubric; this copy ends abruptly with the coronation of King John in 1199. It is noticeable that the portion thus omitted is less exclusively devoted to purely local affairs than the earlier part. 
Among the monks who joined the Durham community during the last quarter of the twelfth century there were four called Geoffrey. None the less it is very likely that two works of local hagiography written by Geoffrey at the same time as the chronicle were the work of the chronicler. The prefatory letter to the life of Bartholomew of Farne (died 1193), addressed to Prior Bertram of Durham (1189-1213) and the Durham monks, identifies the author as Geoffrey, a fellow servant; this work is the sole source of concrete information about Bartholomew. It is significant that it records Bartholomew's special affection for certain monks from Coldingham who attended his deathbed in 1192; Geoffrey may well have been among them. Similarly the prefatory letter to a life of Godric of Finchale, addressed to Prior Thomas and the brethren of Durham's cell at Finchale, just outside the city, identifies the author as Geoffrey, a fellow servant of the Lord. Thomas was prior at Finchale from 1196, according to Geoffrey's chronicle; a successor occurs by 1212. The author records that as a boy he had encountered the aged Godric, who died in 1170. The work is primarily an abbreviation of the much longer work by Reginald, but also includes some of the materials collected by Prior Germanus (died 'c'.1189). 


@@@@@


doc= 5842


Coldock, Francis (1530/31-1603), bookseller, 'by birth a gentleman' (so runs his widow's monument), was apprenticed to William Bonham on 13 October 1556, but may have already served some years before then. He was made free of the Stationers' Company on 2 December 1557 and began to take apprentices on 6 July 1558. He served as under-warden in 1580 and 1582 and as upper warden in 1587 and 1588, and was twice master, in 1591 and 1595. 
The first reference to Coldock in the Stationers' register is for Bishop Bale's 'Declaration of E. Bonner's Articles' in 1561, which was printed for him by J. Tisdall. In the same year Coldock was fined 2's'. 'for that he ded revyle Thomas Hackett with unsemely wordes' (Arber, 'Regs. Stationers', 183), as well as on other occasions for keeping open on St Luke's day and during sermon time. He was taken into the Stationers' Company livery on 29 June 1570, and became one of the largest dealers in books in London. In 1577 he was one of those who signed the petition setting forth their grievances from the various book monopolies, presented by the stationers and printers to Queen Elizabeth. He first had a shop in Lombard Street, 'over agaynste the Cardinalles hatte', and afterwards in St Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Green Dragon. He was a benefactor to the Stationers' Company, presenting on 4 August 1589 'a spoone gilt poiz. 3 oz. 3s. or thereaboutes with his name on it', on being made warden, and in 1591 'a silver college pot' on being made master. He died on 13 January 1603 aged seventy-two, and was buried in the vault of St Faith, in the crypt of St Paul's. His will, dated 3 September 1602, left equal portions of his estate to his wife and his daughter Joan, who had married the bookseller William Ponsonby. 
On Coldock's widow's monument in the church of St Andrew Undershaft is this inscription: 'Near... lieth Alice Byng, in a vault with her father, Simon Burton. She had three husbands, all bachelors and stationers. Her first was Richard Waterson, by him she had a son. Next him was Francis Coldock, by birth a gentleman; he bare all the offices in the company, and had issue two daughters, Joane and Anne, with whom she lived forty years. Lastly, Isaac Byng, gent., who died master of his company. She died the 21st day of May A.D. 1616, aged 73 yrs. 5 months and 25 days. (J. Stow, 'A Survey of London', ed. J. Strype, 1754, 1.400)' 



@@@@@


doc= 5843


Coldstream, John (1806-1863), physician, only son of Robert Coldstream, merchant, and his wife, Elizabeth Phillips, daughter of John Phillips of Stobcross, Glasgow, was born at Leith on 19 March 1806. After attending Edinburgh high school, he continued his studies at the University of Edinburgh, where he graduated MD in 1827. That year he also took his diploma at the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh and proceeded to Paris to continue his medical education. In 1829 he settled down as a practitioner in Leith with Dr Charles Anderson, to whom he had been apprenticed when he began his medical studies. Anderson was an eminent practitioner in Leith and one of the founders of the Wernerian Society, of which Coldstream became a member on 9 January 1830. 
Coldstream was considered to have been so 'devoted to both Christianity and natural science' that 'these subjects seem to have engaged his energies more than did medicine' (Boyd, 522). He took an early interest in 'Bible' and missionary societies, and in 1822 he wrote the report of the Leith Juvenile Bible Society. For the rest of his life he remained a deeply religious man. 
Coldstream also gained a great love of natural history early in his life. On 18 March 1823 he was elected as a member of the Plinian Society, and he acted as secretary and treasurer that same year. He was chosen as one of the society's presidents in 1824 and 1825. In 1828, having become so well known in the field of natural history, he was offered the post of assistant in the Natural History Institution at Portsmouth, which he declined. On 7 May 1835 Coldstream married Margaret Menzies, the youngest daughter of the Revd William Menzies of Lanark. They were to have ten children. 
About 1840 the subject of medical missions began to occupy Coldstream's attention. With his friend Benjamin Bell he became associate secretary of the Medical Missionary Society. He was elected a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians in 1845, but scarcely took any part in its proceedings. In October 1846 he helped to establish at Leith a hospital for the sick poor; however, the following year he moved to York Place, Edinburgh, his weak health making him unable to cope with the workload of his practice at Leith. He was instrumental in the establishment in 1855 of the Home and School for Invalid and Imbecile Children, in Grayfield Square, Edinburgh. He was almost a daily visitor at this home for nearly five years. In September 1857 he went to Berlin to attend the meeting of the Evangelical Alliance in order to bring to its notice the cause of medical missions. During the winter of 1858-9 Coldstream first became ill with an organic disease of the stomach which eventually proved fatal. However, he was well enough to deliver a course of lectures on ethnography in the winter of 1859-60. After this the state of his health obliged him to move about from place to place. 
Coldstream was a 'complex man with a high intellect and enquiring mind' (Boyd, 524). He wrote widely on a variety of medical, scientific, and religious subjects, presenting many papers to scholarly meetings and contributing to the transactions of the Plinian Society, the Wernerian Society, the Royal Medical Society, and the Edinburgh Medical and Surgical Society, among others. Of his works, 'On the periodicity of disease as connected with sol-lunar influences' (1827) and 'On a case of catalepsy' (1854), both in the 'Edinburgh Medical and Surgical Journal', are of particular interest. Coldstream died at his home, Irthing House, near Carlisle, on 17 September 1863. 


@@@@@


doc= 5844


Coldwell, John (c.1535-1596), bishop of Salisbury, was born in Faversham, the elder son of Robert Coldwell, gentleman of that town, and his wife, Rycharden Thurston of Eastling, Kent. In 1560 John Coldwell became the lessee of the ancient hospital of the Maison Dieu in Ospringe, on the outskirts of Faversham. It was owned by St John's College, Cambridge, where he had matriculated in 1551, when he was probably in his middle to late teens, and graduated BA in 1555. He proceeded MA in 1558 and was admitted to the fellowship in the same year. In 1564 he became a doctor of medicine, practising for some years in Kent (he corresponded with a well-known local surgeon, John Hall of Maidstone). Coldwell was ordained deacon in London in 1569 and became chaplain to Archbishop Matthew Parker, and perhaps also his personal physician. He held two livings, both in Kent: he was instituted rector of Tunstall on 13 June 1572, and rector of Saltwood with Hythe in November 1582. In July 1571 he was collated to the archdeaconry of Chichester, but had resigned by 14 May 1575. On the recommendation of Archbishop Grindal he was installed dean of Rochester on 26 September 1581, a position he held for ten years. 
When John Piers, bishop of Salisbury, was translated to York early in 1589, Coldwell was promised the vacant see by Lord Burghley. He was not consecrated, however, until 26 December 1591. The delay was caused by manoeuvres at court, centring on a rival candidate (John Thornborough, who had the support of Sir Francis Walsingham) and, still more, on Sir Walter Ralegh's determination to secure the manor of Sherborne, the most valuable property of the see. At the end of August 1590 Coldwell wrote to Burghley expressing anxiety, but the hold-up continued, and he only secured his elevation by promising Ralegh a ninety-nine-year lease. The temporalities were restored on 14 January 1592, and within a week the dean and chapter were being required by the crown to confirm Coldwell's lease to Ralegh of the Sherborne estate. 
Coldwell was enthroned, and installed as prebendary of Potterne, on 3 January 1592. He subsequently faced further demands from Ralegh for leases of episcopal manors, and to add to his difficulties he also inherited a running battle with the citizens of Salisbury arising from the bishop's lordship over the city, laid out on episcopal land by Bishop Poor in the early thirteenth century. The bishop reserved to himself the profits of fairs and markets and significant legal powers. Particularly resented was the fact that the mayor had to take his oath of office before the bishop or one of his officials, emphasizing the city's subservience and frustrating the citizens' ambitions for the freedom implicit in a charter of incorporation. The bishop's overlordship had been confirmed by letters patent in 1472, and again by a charter granted to Bishop Jewel in 1561. Nevertheless by 1591 the citizens were once more agitating for a charter, and although Coldwell seems to have been conciliatory at first, in 1593 they obtained writs of 'quo warranto' against him, accompanied by a list of complaints against the bishop and his officers. Allegations of assault on mayoral officials and citizens suggest that the bishop's men could indeed be brutal and arbitrary. However, their differences remained unresolved during Coldwell's lifetime, and it was only under his successor, Henry Cotton, that a more conciliatory relationship was established, with the city obtaining its charter in 1612. 
Coldwell's difficulties with the city administration did not prevent his being an active and effective bishop, carrying out diocesan business to within a month of his death. On 13 June 1593 he held a visitation of his cathedral, walking there through his private garden because of an outbreak of plague which had forced many people to flee the city. Its record, preserved in his register, reveals considerable slackness. Ministers and others did not come to church as diligently as they ought; there was some default in keeping the preaching turns; vicars-choral had been admitted with a test of 'their ability and sufficiency in voices and knowledge'; holy communion was satisfactory 'saving for the provision of bread and wine, there is default in the treasurer, which doth not supply it as he ought to do'. The cathedral fabric showed 'some decays, which are yearly amended as we may', and 'the church and choir is not decently kept for lack of sweeping, nor the clock duly kept, neither the bells rung to service as they should be' (Salisbury Cathedral Library, chapter act book 16, fols. 24-30). It is not known whether matters improved subsequently. 
Coldwell was the first bishop of Salisbury to be married. With his first wife, Jane, daughter of Walter Henley of Lancashire, gentleman, he had five sons and a daughter. There were no children of his second marriage, to Clare, daughter of John Toke of Great Chart, Kent, esquire, and widow of Nicholas Moore of Elham, Kent, gentleman. He left no writings except a few letters. He died, at Salisbury, on 14 October 1596, in such poverty, according to Sir John Harington, that he had to be buried 'suddenly and secretly' in the grave that had once been Bishop Wyvil's in Salisbury Cathedral (Cassan, 82). No will survives. Administration of his goods was granted to his son Charles. 


@@@@@


doc= 5845


Cole, Abdiah (fl. 1602-1664), physician, was a prolific translator of medical books, of whose career little is known. He must have been born late in the sixteenth century, and is probably the Abdiah Cole of Yorkshire admitted as a scholar at Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1602, who graduated BA in 1604 and MA in 1607, was a fellow of Queens' College, Cambridge, from 1611 to 1618, and graduated BD in 1616. He was incorporated at Oxford in 1611 and was instituted as rector of Ashington with Buncton, Sussex, in 1615 but was deprived for simony in 1619. He apparently took up medicine about 1612, since he is described on the title page of his revised edition of Nicholas Culpeper's 'Pharmacopoeia Londinensis' (1661) as having 'practised physick forty-nine years'. He appears to have passed the middle part of his life abroad, since he is said on the same title page to have 'lived above thirty years out of his own country', and to have 'seen the practice of France, Italy, Germany, Turkey and the Indies'. In the preface to his translation of Lazare Riviere's 'The Practice of Physick' (1655) he is said to have spent 'twenty-nine years in the service of three of the greatest princes in Europe'. He describes himself as 'doctor of physick and the liberal arts', but where he obtained this degree is unknown. He did not belong to the College of Physicians. In addition to the above-mentioned edition of Culpeper's 'Pharmacopoeia Londinensis', his name is associated with Culpeper's in numerous translations of standard continental medical works published between 1655 and 1664 purporting to have been originally written by Culpeper and left unpublished at his death in 1654. Cole's role was, therefore, presumably largely editorial. The fact that all the works were printed and sold by Peter Cole suggests a possible relationship, but as he was a native of Suffolk this seems doubtful, if the identification of Abdiah Cole as a Yorkshireman is correct. To complicate matters further several of the title pages also carry the name or initials of William Rowland who, in his translation of Johann Schroder's 'The Compleat Chymical Dispensatory' (1669), claimed to have translated all the authors ascribed jointly to Culpeper and Cole. The works formed part of a series entitled 'The Rationall Physitian's Library' or 'The Physitian's Library', which eventually extended to some thirty titles, though Cole was not involved in all of them. The authors in whose work he had -- or was alleged to have had -- a hand were Thomas Bartholin, Jean Fernel, Jan Jonston, Felix Platter, Lazare Riviere, Martin Ruland, and Daniel Sennert. The only translation in which his name appears unaccompanied is Santorio Santorio's 'A New Art of Physick' (1663). A portrait showing Cole in advanced age and with a furred doctor's gown appears with portraits of Riviere, Culpeper, and Rowland on the frontispiece (engraved by Thomas Cross) to Riviere's 'The Practice of Physick' (1655). 


@@@@@


doc= 5846


Cole, Charles Nalson (1722/3-1804), lawyer, was the son of Charles Cole, rector of North Crowley, Buckinghamshire, and grandson of an apothecary of Ely. He was educated at St John's College, Cambridge, which he left after taking his BA in 1743, and became a student of the Inner Temple, where he was called to the bar. 
Although not a practising barrister, Cole became registrar of the Bedford Level corporation and published 'A collection of laws which form the constitution of the Bedford Level corporation, with an introductory history thereof' (1761). He also prepared the second edition of Sir William Dugdale's 'History of imbanking and drayning of divers fenns and marshes, both in foreign parts and in this kingdom' (1772). Cole was a long-standing friend of the writer Soame Jenyns and became his literary executor after his death. Three years later Cole's edition of the 'Works of Soame Jenyns' appeared, with a sketch of his life. He died in Edward Street, Cavendish Square, London, on 18 December 1804, aged eighty-one. 


@@@@@


doc= 5847


Cole, Sir Christopher (1770-1836), naval officer and politician, born at Marazion in Cornwall on 10 June 1770, was the sixth and youngest son of Humphrey Cole of Marazion and his wife, Phillis, daughter of Francis Maugham. He entered the navy in 1780 as midshipman on the 'Royal Oak' (Sir Digby Dent), where his second brother, John Cole (afterwards rector of Exeter College, Oxford), was chaplain. In the same year he was moved to the 'Raisonnable' and he later served in the 'Russell' and the 'Princessa', flagship of Sir Francis Samuel Drake. The 'Princessa' formed part of Sir Samuel Hood's fleet in the actions off Martinique and the Chesapeake on 29 April and 5 September 1781. She was also present at Hood's manoeuvres off St Kitts in January and February 1782, and in Admiral Sir George Rodney's battles of 9 and 12 April. 
At the peace of 1783 Cole joined the 'Trepassey' (12 guns), commanded by his brother Captain Francis Cole, and accompanied him from the West Indies to Halifax, where he moved into the sloop 'Atalante', under Captain Thomas Foley, where he remained until 1785. In the following year he proceeded to Newfoundland in the 'Winchelsea' (32 guns), under his idol and fellow Cornishman Edward Pellew. In this vessel he remained until 1789, when, in consequence of the recommendation of Sir Francis Samuel Drake, he was placed on the 'Crown' (64 guns), under Commodore William Cornwallis, with whom he proceeded to the East Indies. 
On 18 September 1793 Cole was promoted lieutenant, and in October 1794 he was appointed first lieutenant of the 'Cerberus', a new 32-gun frigate, at the particular request of the captain, John Drew. In the following year he joined the 'Sanspareil' (80 guns), bearing the flag of Lord Hugh Seymour. In 1799 he accompanied Seymour to the West Indies as his flag-lieutenant. Having been promoted to commander on 30 January 1800, Cole was, on the surrender of Surinam in August 1800, appointed commander of one of the prizes, the 'Hussar', a corvette of 20 guns, which was renamed the 'Surinam'. In this command he distinguished himself by his activity in pursuing privateers and by his care for his men's health, which Seymour made the subject of an official recommendation to the Admiralty. He gained the good opinion of Seymour's successor, Sir John Thomas Duckworth, who promoted him into his flagship, the 'Leviathan' (74 guns), and afterwards to command the frigate 'Southampton'. His post commission was confirmed by the Admiralty on 20 April 1802. 
After the peace of Amiens in 1802, the 'Southampton' was ordered home and paid off in September. In June 1804 Cole was appointed to the 'Culloden' (74 guns), the flagship of his old friend and commander Sir Edward Pellew, who had been appointed commander-in-chief in the East Indies. On 25 September 1806 he captured the French corvette the 'Emilien', and on 27 November assisted the destruction of thirty Dutch vessels in the Batavia Roads. However, during this period, relations with Pellew suffered a complete breakdown. In March 1807 Cole was transferred from the flagship to the temporary command of the frigate HMS 'Salsette', subsequently renamed the 'Doris'. There followed a long and tortuous correspondence in which Cole pressed his claims both with Pellew and directly with the Admiralty for a permanent appointment in a vessel of equal or superior rate. In April 1808, in command of the 'Doris' and two other frigates, he escorted Colonel John Malcolm to Bushehr on his mission to the Persian court, and remained at Bushehr to protect the embassy. On his return he received the thanks of the governor-general in council and a present of $500. Yet such was the state of relations with Pellew that Cole found himself facing a letter of censure for quitting his post in the Persian Gulf without orders. During 1808 and 1809 he cruised in the straits of Malacca and the China seas. On the arrival of the news of the political changes in Spain, he was dispatched by Pellew's successor, Rear-Admiral Drury, to conciliate the governor of the Philippines, in which he was successful. 
In 1810 Cole was moved at his own request into the 'Caroline' (36 guns), and was soon after dispatched to relieve the garrison at Amboyna in command of a small squadron: the 'Caroline', the 'Piemontaise' (38 guns), the 18-gun brig sloop 'Barracouta', and the transport brig 'Mandarin'. He left Madras on 10 May and arrived on 30 May at Prince of Wales Island, where he decided to make a daring raid to capture Neira, the chief of the Banda Islands. With less than 200 men he captured the island and its garrison of nearly 700 Dutch troops on 10 August. On his return to India, Cole received the thanks of the governor-general in council, the commander-in-chief, and the lords of the Admiralty. He was awarded a medal by the Admiralty, and his action was the subject of a public order from the governor-general to the three presidencies. In the House of Commons Spencer Perceval described the enterprise as 'an exploit to be classed with the boldest darings in the days of chivalry'. 
In 1811 Cole joined Drury on the Malabar coast, where an expedition against Java was being prepared. On the death of Drury, Cole was left in command for some months until the arrival of Captain William Robert Broughton. The expedition sailed in June and, on its arrival at Java, Cole again distinguished himself by promptly landing troops on his own responsibility before the enemy was prepared, thus avoiding considerable loss. In 1812 the 'Caroline' was paid off, and on 29 May Cole was knighted and presented with a sword by his crew. On 10 June he received an honorary DCL from Oxford University, and subsequently was presented with a piece of plate of the value of 300 guineas by the East India Company. 
Early in 1813 Cole was appointed to the 'Rippon', a new vessel of 74 guns. He continued cruising in the channel until the end of 1814, when he was put out of commission. On 2 January 1815 he was nominated KCB. He also received Austrian and Russian orders. On 28 April 1815 he married Lady Mary Lucy Talbot (died 3 Feb 1855), to whom he had long been attached; she was the daughter of Henry Thomas Fox-Strangways, second earl of Ilchester, and widow of Thomas Mansel Talbot (died 1813) of Margam Park, Glamorgan; they had no children. Talbot had had a considerable interest in Glamorgan (the estate was held in trust for his young heir, Christopher Talbot) and this was the cause of Cole's entry into parliament. Invited by leading county interests, on 6 December 1817 'the conqueror of Banda' was elected, unopposed, MP for Glamorgan. He did not sit in the parliament that met in 1818, but he was again elected on 16 March 1820, and retained the seat until 1830. An independent, he made no mark in the Commons. In 1830 he made way for his stepson Christopher Talbot. In July 1821 he was elected deputy grand master of the freemasons of south Wales. In 1828 he was appointed to command the yacht 'Royal Sovereign', and in 1830 he was nominated colonel of marines. Cole lived at Killay, and died there on 24 August 1836. 


@@@@@


doc= 5848


Cole, Sir (Galbraith) Lowry (1772-1842), army officer and colonial governor, the second son of William Willoughby Cole, first earl of Enniskillen (1736-1803), and his wife, Anne (1742-1802), the daughter of Galbraith Lowry Corry, of Ahenis, co. Tipperary, and the sister of the first earl of Belmore, was born in Dublin on 1 May 1772. He entered the army as a cornet in the 12th light dragoons on 31 March 1787. While he was at the University of Stuttgart furthering his military studies, a lieutenancy in the 5th dragoon guards was purchased for him on 31 May 1791. He became successively captain in the 70th regiment in 1792 and major in the 86th in 1793. 
On his way to his new regiment Cole joined Sir John Jervis and Sir Charles Grey as a volunteer for the attack on Martinique on 24 March 1794. He was then attached to Sir Charles Grey's personal staff as aide-de-camp and was present at the reduction of Guadeloupe and St Lucia. On 26 November 1794 he was promoted lieutenant-colonel. Cole then again went on staff service, and acted as deputy adjutant-general in Ireland, as aide-de-camp to Lord Carhampton, the commander-in-chief in Ireland in 1797, and as military secretary to General Lord Hutchinson in Egypt. In 1797 he was returned to the Irish House of Commons for Enniskillen, and sat until January 1800 -- retiring before the Anglo-Irish union. On 1 January 1801 he was promoted colonel and appointed to command the regiment with which his family was associated, the 27th Inniskillings; he assumed the command at Malta in 1805. From Malta he proceeded to Sicily and commanded his own regiment and a battalion of grenadiers as brigadier-general. He was second in command at the battle of Maida on 4 July 1806. It is true that the chief credit of that victory rests with Brigadier-General Kempt and with Colonel Ross but a mistake on Cole's part would have imperilled the success they had gained. He was promoted major-general on 25 April 1808, but left Sicily in the summer of 1809 on account of differences with Sir John Stuart, the commander-in-chief. 
Cole asked to be sent to the Peninsula, and on arriving there was posted to command the 4th division in 1809. This famous 4th division was always coupled with the 3rd and the light divisions by Wellington as his three best divisions. Cole had every qualification for a good general of division, especially obedience to the commander-in-chief. At the battle of Busaco the 4th division did not come into action at all, but in the following year it showed its strength at Albuera. After Marshal Massena had been driven out of Portugal the 2nd and 4th divisions were detached to the south of the Tagus under Marshal Beresford to make an attack on Badajoz. On the way Cole was left to reduce the small fortress of Olivenca, which surrendered to him on 15 April 1811. He then assisted at the first siege of Badajoz, and when Beresford advanced to form a junction with Blake's Spanish army and prepared to fight Marshal Soult, who was coming up from Andalusia to relieve Badajoz, Cole was left behind to cover the advance and destroy the siege material. There is some dispute whether Cole of his own volition ordered the advance of his fusilier brigade at Albuera to counter the commanding position that Soult had won on Beresford's right, owing to the confusion in the 2nd division. But Cole's decision to send forward the fusiliers saved the day, though at a fearful loss: one of the three colonels of the brigade, Sir W. Myers, was killed; the other two, Blakeney and Ellis, and Cole himself, were wounded. Cole, however, rejoined his division in July 1811, but left it again the following December to take his seat in the House of Commons, to which he had been elected in 1803 as MP for County Fermanagh. He thus missed the sieges of Ciudad Rodrigo and Badajoz, where Sir Charles Colville commanded the 4th division, but rejoined the army in June 1812 in time to be present at the great battle of Salamanca in the following month. In that battle Cole's division was posted on the extreme left of the position opposite to the French hill of the two known as the Arapiles, and for a moment the defeat of his Portuguese brigade under Pack made the day doubtful until the hill was carried by the 6th division under Major-General Henry Clinton. In the attack Cole was shot through the body. However, he soon rejoined his division at Madrid, and later covered the retreat from there. 
In winter quarters Cole made himself very popular, especially for the excellence of his dinners. On 5 March 1813 Wellington invested Cole with the Order of the Bath. At the battle of Vitoria the 4th division acted on the right centre and did not bear any special part, though Cole was mentioned in dispatches. But in the series of battles known as the battles of the Pyrenees the 4th division played a very great part indeed, especially in the combat at Roncesvalles, when its hard fighting gave time for Wellington to concentrate on Sorauren. At the battle of the Nivelle the 4th division, under Cole, together with the 7th, carried the Sarre redoubt, at the Nive it was in reserve, at Orthes it carried the village of St Boes, the key of the enemy's position, and at Toulouse it was the 4th and 6th divisions, under the command of Beresford, which carried the height of Calvinet and repaired the mischief done by the flight of the Spaniards. On the conclusion of peace Cole received the order of the Tower and Sword of Portugal and a gold cross with four clasps. He had also been promoted lieutenant-general on 4 June 1813. 
When Napoleon escaped from Elba, the duke of Wellington at once asked for Cole as one of his generals of division in Belgium. But on 15 June 1815 Cole married Lady Frances Harris (died 1847), the second daughter of the first earl of Malmesbury, and so missed the final victory of Wellington at Waterloo. On 15 August, however, Cole joined the army of occupation in France, and commanded the 2nd division until the final evacuation of France in November 1818. 
In 1823 Cole resigned his seat in the House of Commons, which he had held for twenty years, on being appointed governor of Mauritius. Here he solidly managed the challenges of a conquered colony where the population was stratified into the French plantocracy, 'free persons of colour', and slaves. Not without difficulty, he presided over the amelioration of slave conditions, the institution of a council of advice, and the improvement of educational opportunities. It proved a suitable apprenticeship for his transfer in September 1828 to the Cape of Good Hope. 
Cole was one of the few successful Cape governors. Although he did not solve the frontier problem, he firmly enforced meliorative slave measures, improved communications by building the 'Sir Lowry's Pass' into the interior, and promoted the municipal boards, which were successfully established shortly after his retirement. When he left in August 1833 the 'South African Commercial Advertiser' praised his qualities of 'simple honesty of heart and sterling integrity of purpose'. 
Cole then returned to England, and settled at Highfield Park, near Hartford Bridge, Hampshire, where he died suddenly on 4 October 1842. He had been promoted full general in 1830 and was governor of Gravesend and Tilbury from 1818 until his death. He was buried in the family vault at Enniskillen, and a column more than 100 feet high with his statue on it was erected on the Fort Hill near that city. The eldest of Cole's three sons and four daughters, Colonel Arthur Lowry Cole CB commanded the 17th regiment throughout the Crimean War. 


@@@@@


doc= 5849


Cole, George (1810-1883), landscape and animal painter, was born on 15 January 1810 in London, the second child and only son of James Cole (1772-1847) and Elizabeth Parker (died 1819). Information about his early life is scanty: according to his grandson, Rex Vicat Cole, George Cole's father dissipated a fortune, and the boy began his life with no formal education as a ship's painter at Portsmouth. In another much repeated anecdote, recorded in the 'Dictionary of National Biography', he is at Wombwell's menagerie executing a canvas, measuring 20 feet by 20, of a tiger hunt in the jungle. 
Cole's marriage in 1831 to Eliza Vicat (died 1883), daughter of George and Catherine Vicat of Cosham, who were a Portsmouth Huguenot family, may have provided a starting point for his social and professional ascent. He was self-taught in art, and his surviving work from the 1840s includes portraits of individuals and, especially, of horses and dogs. He began to exhibit in London in 1838 and during the following decade experimented with a variety of genres, including animal painting, in which he gained considerable expertise, aiming to emulate Edwin Landseer and Thomas Sidney Cooper. He also produced a skilful 'Still Life with Pheasant' (1847, City Art Gallery, Southampton) and a history painting, 'Don Quixote and Sancho Panza' (exh. British Institution, 1840; photograph Courtauld Inst., Witt Library), which was much, though not always favourably, noticed. 
By 1850 Cole had begun to concentrate on landscape, drawing on Dutch precedents for compositions such as 'London Road, Portsdown' (1847, Portsmouth City Museum and Art Gallery). Working alongside him in the early 1850s was George Vicat Cole (1833-1893), the eldest of Cole's five children, who later became a more eminent artist than his father. In search of sketching grounds they visited the river valleys of the Wye, Teign, and Dart and, in 1851 or 1852, the Moselle. While the father undoubtedly instructed the son, it seems likely that the influence of Pre-Raphaelitism, absorbed more fully by the younger artist, was transmitted through his work to the father. After a temporary estrangement in 1855 the two never worked together again. George Cole's landscapes of the later 1850s are, however, less formulaic than his early works and are often a combination of rustic genre subjects with carefully observed landscape, as in 'Landscape and Cattle' (1858, Russell-Cotes Art Gallery and Museum, Bournemouth). 
By 1852 Cole was confident enough to sell up and move to London. After three years at 2 Lewes Place, Fulham, he made his home and studio at 2 Kensington Crescent. Subsequently, after a decade of conspicuous financial success, he purchased the larger house next door, no. 1, in 1863, as well as a country residence, Coombe Lodge, near Liss in Hampshire. In a series of richly coloured and detailed landscapes on large canvases executed during the 1860s and 1870s, Cole created an idealized version of the Hampshire moorlands and agricultural landscape; examples include 'Fern Carting, Harting Coombe' (1873, Russell-Cotes Art Gallery and Museum, Bournemouth). Cattle continued to play an important role in his compositions, and he specialized in the depiction of river scenery with cows watering, including, for example, 'Windsor Castle' (1876, exh. RA, 1878; Anglesey Abbey). Reassuring in their presentation of a seemingly timeless Englishness, these images were eagerly purchased by Victorian collectors. 
Although he exhibited sixteen works at the Royal Academy, Cole's work formed a mainstay of the exhibitions of the Society of British Artists at Suffolk Street, where he exhibited 209 paintings from 1838 until his death in 1883. He was elected a member in 1850, became auditor in 1856, and vice-president in 1867. He was also awarded a medal for a harvesting scene in 1864 by the Society for the Encouragement of the Fine Arts. While, at his best, he was capable of sophisticated effects, the sheer volume of his production of smaller works, sold directly to dealers such as Thomas McLean and Arthur Tooth, inevitably led to a lowering of standards. His annual income rose from $842 in 1858 to $2580 in 1873. 
A collector of topographical literature and an autodidact, Cole was reputed to know the works of Shakespeare by heart. Robert Chignell, the biographer of George Vicat Cole, saw the older painter as an exemplar of self-help: 'one who began with nothing', he had achieved success through 'great capabilities and force of character' (Chignell, 40). George Cole died on 7 September 1883 at his home at 1 Kensington Crescent and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery, London. Of his other children, Alfred Benjamin Cole was also an artist. 


@@@@@


doc= 5850


Cole, George Vicat (1833-1893), landscape painter, was born in Portsmouth on 17 April 1833, eldest of five children of the landscape painter George Cole (1810-1883) and Eliza Vicat (died 1883). Initially exhibiting as 'George Cole, junior', from the mid-1850s he adopted his mother's French Huguenot maiden name to distinguish his name from that of his father. Later in life the younger Cole dropped 'George' altogether, using 'Vicat' (pronounced with a long 'i') as his first name. As a boy Cole was taught by his father and accompanied the older painter on journeys round country houses, where they would paint portraits of the owners, their horses, and dogs. He also made copies of prints after works of Turner and David Cox. Father and son took sketching tours together, in England, Wales, and also to the Moselle. In 1852 George Cole sold up in Portsmouth and moved to Fulham; among the auction lots were twenty-seven works by the younger artist. 1852 saw Cole's work exhibited in London for the first time: 'View from Ranmore Common' was favourably hung at the British Institution galleries and sold for $21. At the time of his twentieth birthday, in 1853, two of his works were accepted for exhibition at the Royal Academy. 
After a quarrel with his father in 1855, Cole rented rooms in Torriano Villas, Camden, and, on 7 November 1856, married Mary Ann Chignell (died 1915), daughter of a wealthy Hampshire tradesman. The years 1857-9 were spent at the picturesque village of Albury in Surrey, where Cole, his wife, and the first of three daughters (Mary Blanche, born in 1858) were joined by the painter Benjamin Williams Leader. Cole's breakthrough came with 'Harvest Time, Painted at Hombury Hill, Surrey' (1860; Bristol City Art Gallery), a large canvas completed in the open air, strongly influenced by the Pre-Raphaelites. The Society of Arts awarded Cole a silver medal for the work. In 1861 Cole moved to 19 Gloucester Road, Kensington, travelling annually in search of subject matter. In 1863 he resigned from the Society of British Artists in order to seek election as a Royal Academician. His works from this period, such as 'Springtime' (1865; Manchester City Art Galleries), espouse a brilliantly detailed and highly coloured Pre-Raphaelite realism. His work increasingly concentrated on Surrey landscapes: 'Summer's Golden Crown' returned to a harvest subject with conspicuous success at the Royal Academy in 1866 and the Paris Universal Exhibition of 1867. Cole's style broadened in the late 1860s: the dramatic 'A Pause in the Storm at Sunset' (exh. RA, 1869) impressed public and critics alike. In January 1870 he was elected an associate of the Royal Academy, and from that time rarely exhibited his work in any other forum. 
Assured of financial, if not always critical, success, Cole moved in 1874 to Little Campden House, an elegant early eighteenth-century mansion in Kensington. In the large studio he pursued his interest in science, also fitting automatic gates and an early telephone. His biographer, Robert Chignell, describes Cole's 'fine head, with handsome clearly-marked features... set on a well-knit form of about 5 feet 7 inches in height' (Chignell, 1.3). His character was quiet and reserved, though he was described by the landscape painter B. W. Leader as 'most good-tempered, liberal and hospitable, fond of a joke' (ibid., 3.141). Both at his home and on his Thames steam launch, 'The Blanche', he entertained a circle of friends which included Frederic Leighton, John Everett Millais, and many other leading artists, notably Edward Linley Sambourne who referred to the group as 'the Calithrumpkins' (Cole papers). 
Cole continued to produce a series of large exhibition landscapes of Surrey and Sussex subjects through the 1870s, but expanded his range with 'Richmond Hill' (exh. RA, 1875) and 'The Alps at Rosenlaui' (exh. RA, 1878). After his election to the status of full academician, in 1880, he worked exclusively on a series of major paintings of the Thames from its source to the sea, commissioned by the dealer William Agnew. During these years he became a well-known figure on the river, often painting from his steam launch. After a series of rural scenes, he surprised his public in 1888 with a grandiose canvas, 'The Pool of London' (exh. RA, 1888; Tate collection), in which smoke and cloud at sunset part to reveal the dome of St Paul's Cathedral. Dramatic and painterly, it betrays none of the precise naturalism that had distinguished his earliest work. 'The Pool of London' was purchased for $2000 under the terms of the Chantrey Bequest. W. E. Gladstone later wrote to Cole's biographer, Robert Chignell, expressing his admiration for the work. 
Vicat Cole's work, like that of his father, George Cole, is variable in quality, but he was able at his best to produce landscapes exactly suited to the demands of the mid-Victorian public. Despite the lavish tributes paid by Leighton and others after he died at his home in Kensington on 6 April 1893, his work soon came to seem outmoded. He was buried at Kensal Green cemetery, London. Robert Chignell's lavish three-volume biography, published in 1896, provides reproductions of a large number of his works. His son, Reginald George Vicat Cole (1870-1940), who assisted his father in the early 1890s, became a landscape painter, author, and teacher. 


@@@@@


doc= 5851


Cole, Henry (1504/5-1579/80), dean of St Paul's and religious controversialist, was born at Godshill, Isle of Wight. He entered Winchester College in 1519 at the age of fourteen, and was admitted to New College, Oxford, on 26 October 1521, becoming a fellow exactly two years later, and retaining his fellowship until 1540. Cole took his BCL on 3 March 1530 and was incepted as DCL in July 1540. In the interval he studied law in Padua and perhaps Greek. Although Cole's formal patron was Dr William Knight he became close enough to Reginald Pole to have known about the latter's 'Pro ecclesiasticae unitatis defensione', a fierce attack on Henry VIII which was completed in 1536, and told Thomas Starkey that Pole had changed his mind about papal authority while writing it. Cole accompanied Pole on his first (abortive) legation towards England in 1537 before they parted company in Paris. Returning to England, Cole became sub-warden of New College in March 1538, and, more importantly, by April had written a treatise on general councils defending Henry VIII's attack on the council of Mantua-Vicenza of 1537-8. Cole argued that the pope was not head of the council, that not even a council could determine things indifferent, and concluded that it would be easier 'to make a new head than to reform the old' (BL, Hatfield MS 46, fol. 75'r'). 
Cole's first major benefice was Pole's old prebend of Yetminster secunda in Salisbury Cathedral (installed 30 September 1539), and he was collated to the rectory of Chelmsford, Essex, on 11 September 1540 (vacated by March 1548). Three prebends of St Paul's in succession followed: Holborn (1540-41); Sneating (1541 to before 22 March 1542); and Wenlocksbarn (1542 to 29 May 1559). Also in 1540 Cole was admitted to the College of Advocates. On 25 March 1542 he was ordained priest and on 4 October was elected warden of New College. He was the bishop of London's chancellor by 1543 at the time of the prebendaries' plot against Archbishop Cranmer, who suspected Cole of involvement in it. In early December Cole was arrested on the grounds of his association with Reginald Pole, now a cardinal, who had been attainted with other members of his family in 1539, but was pardoned on 24 April 1544 for all dealings with Pole and with the latter's agent, Michael Throckmorton. The pardon granted to one John Bekinsaw on 6 May following stated that Cole had sent Pole medicine and arranged a secret signal with Bekinsaw to let him know what happened to Pole following his departure from Flanders, presumably in 1537. Stephen Vaughan's report in January 1545 that Cole had been seen in Italy on his way to Rome cannot be accurate, since on 4 July following he personally surrendered a property of his college to the king, but it is of a piece with the attack on Cole as a popish traitor, 'one of Poolys ryght scolars', made by Vaughan's colleague Henry Brinklow in his 'Complaynt of Roderyck Mors' ('Brinklow's Complaynt', 61). 
New College presented Cole to the rectory of Newton Longville on 16 May 1545 (vacated 1552), although he was not installed until three days after he had been dispensed on 11 September to hold an additional benefice. In 1550 the sub-warden and fellows tried to oust Cole, and were ordered in October not to proceed without royal licence. It may be that Cole had been imprisoned in the interval, for in August 1551 the sheriff of London was paid for keeping Cole and two of his servants for fifteen months. In January 1551 the privy council committed Cole's case to trial, and on 16 April he was forced to resign his wardenship. He was replaced by Ralph Skinner, a sound evangelical. Yet three days later Cole was allowed to proceed BTh and DTh 'without any exercise done for it' (Emden, 'Oxf.', 4.128). These episodes leave Cole's religious opinions under Edward VI unclear. According to John Jewel, Cole came 'to the church... and heard the common prayers... ministered, and received the communion' ('Works', 1.61), assertions Cole did not dispute. Lawrence Humphrey later embroidered them in his 'Joannis Juelli... vita' (1573), emphasizing that Cole had preached obedience to Edward during the western rebellion of 1549. Nicholas Sander, by contrast, claimed that Cole had confessed his faith through resigning his benefices. On 25 October 1553 Cole became archdeacon of Ely, suggesting that Mary found him a reliable Catholic, and giving weight to Sander's interpretation. In 1553-4 he served on commissions to restore bishops Bonner and Tunstall, and at about the time of his participation in the disputation with Latimer and Ridley at Oxford on 17-18 April 1554, became canon and ninth prebendary of Westminster (presented 10 April, installed 21 April, held to 26 September 1556). On 13 July 1554 he was appointed provost of Eton (vacated by 5 July 1559), and was prolocutor of convocation in that year. On 17 March 1555 he brought word to Cranmer that there was no further hope for him. 
Cole played a central role in the events immediately before Cranmer's execution on 21 March, above all by preaching a legally inventive sermon in the university church. In it Cole gave three reasons why Cranmer, although a repentant sinner, nevertheless had to die: the nullification of Henry's first marriage; heresy, 'of which he had been a most carnal defender' (Foxe, 1885); and in order to balance John Fisher's death. In summer 1556 Cole was one of Pole's visitors of Oxford, and he probably took a hand in revising the university's statutes. On 11 December 1556 he was elected dean of St Paul's, and then on the 29th was appointed to a commission to recover ex-monastic documents. Two days later he was entrusted with another important case, when Pole assigned him to investigate how the Drapers' Company of London was handling a bequest. On 1 January 1558 Cole received yet another appointment, becoming a member of a commission charged to survey the state of the church's finances, and was also ordered to help collect the clerical subsidy. On 8 February he received a commission to act against heresy and seditious books (he had already received a licence to read heretical works on 13 July 1555), which he immediately put to use in the visitation of Cambridge, where he was incorporated DTh on 16 February 1557. On 28 August Pole made him his archiepiscopal vicar-general, and on 1 October dean of arches, at which time he was apparently also acting as commissary of the prerogative court of Canterbury. On 16 November he and Dr Thomas Martin (a lawyer who had been Bishop Gardiner's chancellor) received a commission to burn anti-papal writings, and on 1 December Cole witnessed the installation of Sir Thomas Tresham as prior of the knights of St John of Jerusalem. 
Cole figured prominently in the convocation of 1558, submitting to it a plan for the redistribution of ecclesiastical revenues. Pole collated him to the rectory of Wrotham, Kent, on 6 July 1558. Two weeks later he received orders to visit All Souls. Either the difficulties were too great, or he proved unexpectedly incompetent, for Nicholas Harpsfield, who had by then replaced Cole as dean of arches, revisited the college in November, perhaps simply because Cole failed to turn over the records of his visitation. Cole's replacement by Harpsfield reflected a realignment of Canterbury administration, since Cole moved by 4 November to be commissary of the prerogative court there. Robert Ware, writing in the second half of the seventeenth century, but citing the manuscripts of Richard Boyle, earl of Cork, and Sir James Ware, as well as the authority of Archbishop James Usher and others, and giving substantial amounts of circumstantial evidence, claimed that Mary, in October 1558, had sent Cole on a mission against heresy in Ireland. While waiting to embark from Chester his landlady, concerned for her brother in Dublin, substituted for Cole's commission a pack of cards, knave of clubs uppermost. When Cole arrived in Dublin and presented his 'commission', the deputy, the earl of Sussex, sent him back for a new one, remarking that 'we will shuffle the cards in the meanwhile' (Ware, 22-3). The episode was retold in doggerel verse by one Peregrine Wilton in 'Blackwood's Magazine', 25 (1829), 153-8. Queen Mary's death soon afterwards ended Cole's concern with Ireland. Cole was one of the supervisors of Pole's will, however, and continued to be commissary of the prerogative court of Canterbury until some time in 1559. 
After Elizabeth's accession Cole took the leading role for the Catholic side at the Westminster conference in March 1559. Sander reported at length Cole's speech defending the use of Latin in worship and admitted that he was surprised by Cole's holiness. Sander described his new hero as 'most learned in both laws, philosophy and theology' and 'so abstemious in food, drink and sleep that no one would be thought to have lived in private life more happily' (Archivio Segreto Vaticano, armaria 64:28, fol. 266'v'). A version of Cole's text in English survives (Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, MS 121, fols. 183-91), and his major point concerned the necessity of unity with the whole church which vernacular worship would destroy. Cole put forward the subsidiary argument that English changed too much to be the language of divine service. Jewel contemptuously dismissed Cole's behaviour and remarks, writing to Peter Martyr that Cole, 'stamping his feet, throwing out his arms, bending sideways, snapping his fingers and raising and lowering his eyebrows by turns', had called the protestants the authors of sedition. Jewel concluded that 'I never heard anyone rave after a more solemn and school-masterly fashion' ('Works', 4.1201-2). He also accused Cole of having wrecked the meeting by refusing to abide by the agreed rules, and Cole was supposedly fined 500 marks for contempt. 
Between 29 May and 5 July 1559 Cole lost all his benefices. Perhaps seeing the end coming, probably about this time he gave sixty-three books to St John's College, Oxford. They are primarily works of theology, philosophy, and biblical commentary, and include no legal texts. In early 1560 he engaged Jewel in a controversy which set the terms of Catholic-protestant debate for most of Elizabeth's reign. Among the substantive points raised were the role of custom, the importance of argument from history, the pope's status, and the nature of the eucharist. Summoned before Elizabeth's visitors at Lambeth, Cole was committed to the Tower on 20 May 1560 -- two days after Jewel's most detailed refutation of his arguments -- and was transferred to the Fleet on 10 June. About July 1561 he was proposed as bishop of London by an English exile. By the time of his death Cole had been moved to the Wood Street compter, where he died between 4 December 1579 and 1 January 1580. Cole left his unspecified property to his executor, Humphrey Moseley, a lawyer who was also secondary of the prison, and a man whom Cole called 'my trusty and well-beloved friend' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/62, fol. 24'v'). 


@@@@@


doc= 5852


Cole, Sir Henry (1808-1882), civil servant, was born in Bath on 15 July 1808, the son of an army officer, Captain Henry Robert Cole, and his wife, Laetitia Dormer. He attended Christ's Hospital school from 1817 to 1823, and on leaving found employment as a clerk to Sir Francis Palgrave, one of the sub-commissioners at the record commission. Three years later he obtained rooms in the home of the writer, Thomas Love Peacock, whose son worked with Cole at the record commission. While living there Cole's circle of friends grew to include writers and artists, as well as young men such as John Stuart Mill and Charles Buller, who were to become known as the philosophical radicals. Cole's utilitarian connections and his employment as a civil servant were the basis for what was to be a very influential career in public service. 
The first indication that Cole was a man to be reckoned with was his successful campaign to reform the record commission. After a disagreement with his employer about his salary Cole decided that the time had come to expose the record commission as a hotbed of jobbery and corruption. He wrote articles, including two in 'The Examiner', describing the corruption and the lack of progress in achieving the aims of the commission, which had been set up to investigate the state of the public records which were housed in a number of more or less unsatisfactory buildings around London. Cole was removed from his post in 1835, and suffered a number of attacks on his honesty and character, but at the end of the resulting inquiry by a parliamentary committee he was reinstated, in 1837, and was made one of four senior assistant keepers at the re-formed record office of 1838. His career as a public servant was now at a higher level, but the rumblings about his motivation and honesty were never silenced. 
Cole was a first-rate administrator with energy and commitment and an ability to pursue his aims undeterred by opposition and criticism. His superiors at the record commission gave him leave in 1838 to assist Rowland Hill (another utilitarian) in his campaign to introduce a national prepaid postage system. Cole devised a scheme by which the Post Office circulated the reform propaganda free of charge. At that time the Post Office carried newspapers free of charge. Cole edited a weekly newspaper giving news about postal reform, the 'Post Circular', which was printed and then, because it was presented as a newspaper, distributed free of charge by the Post Office. It may be that the cheap penny post was Cole's inspiration in commissioning and publishing the first Christmas card in 1843. The card depicted a family at table making a toast. Designed by J. C. Horsley RA, it was lithographed and hand coloured, selling at the considerable price of 1's'. 
In 1845 Cole, by now an accomplished journalist, began to contribute to the 'Railway Chronicle', producing a series of railway charts and articles on railway excursions. He joined in the campaigns for the uniform narrow gauge and for separation of freight from passenger traffic. His involvement in the commercial world paid well, and Cole earned more from his journalistic activities than he did as a keeper at the record office. With his salary of $500 and his additional earnings of about $750 he was a man in comfortable circumstances. 
Cole's family life was very full. He married his cousin Marian Fairman Bond, a governess, on 28 December 1833. They had three sons and five daughters. He wrote a series of children's illustrated story books, published from 1841 as the 'Home Treasury', under the pseudonym of Felix Summerly, a name he continued to use when he began to sell 'art manufactures' in the late 1840s. His diary records time spent with his children. He was concerned that the girls as well as the boys should have an adequate education and find suitable occupations. 
It was through John Scott Russell, editor of the 'Railway Chronicle', that Cole was introduced into membership of the Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures, and Commerce in 1845. In this society Cole found the like-minded people with whom he could work to achieve reforms and improvements in almost any aspect of life, from sewage to education, industrial design to army reform. It was Cole's involvement with the society which placed him at the centre of the group which organized the Great Exhibition in 1851, where his roles were promoter, publicist, and administrator. As a council member of the Society of Arts he worked directly for its president, Prince Albert, travelling the country to promote the exhibition, and using the press to communicate as widely as possible. Once the commission for the exhibition was established Cole was seconded from the record office and appointed to a salaried position on the executive committee. He was chairman of council of the Society of Arts in 1850 and again in 1852 and continued to be a very influential member of the society throughout his life. Although he involved himself in all aspects of the management of the exhibition his primary responsibility was for the allocation of space for the 14,000 exhibitors from Britain, eleven colonies, and thirteen foreign countries. Cole was among those who fought to prevent the dismantling of the building at the end of the exhibition; the building was eventually re-erected at Sydenham. He was party to the discussions about the possible uses of the surplus funds which seemed likely to be available at the close of the exhibition. The surplus was used, together with a sum provided by the government, for the purchase of land at Brompton, just south of the exhibition site in Hyde Park. Prince Albert, as president of the commission for the exhibition, hoped that the site could be used to promote the same aims as the exhibition -- the promotion of industry and the arts. Cole was to spend the next twenty years working to make 'South Kensington' a national centre for the arts and sciences. 
From 1848 Cole had been involving himself in the schools of design which had been established under the Board of Trade in 1836. His interest in industrial design had been stimulated by the offer of prizes by the Society of Arts in 1846. Cole had designed a tea service which won a Society of Arts prize. The tea service went into mass production at the Minton factory with great success. Cole was offered the chance to lecture at the Central School of Design, declined the offer, but began to campaign for reform of the schools and to discuss with Lord Granville, president of the Board of Trade, his concerns about copyright, patent law, and the schools of design. A select committee on the schools of design was established in 1849. After the close of the Great Exhibition, Cole, who had worked closely with Granville on the executive committee, was invited to be secretary of a new government department to control the schools, the department of practical art. He provided training for women as well as men at the schools at South Kensington, and after his retirement set up the National Training School for Music and the National Training School for Cookery. 
In 1856 Cole's fledgeling department moved to the site purchased with the profits of the Great Exhibition. The first new building on the site was a temporary modular building, known as the 'Brompton Boilers', which housed the museum collections of the Central School of Design together with the collection of exhibits from the Great Exhibition which had been purchased by the Treasury at Cole's suggestion and loaned to the schools. By the time of Cole's retirement in 1873 the site housed the South Kensington Museum (later to divide into the Victoria and Albert and Science museums), the various schools of the department now called the Department of Science and Art, the Albert Hall, and the gardens of the Royal Horticultural Society. Cole, whose official responsibility was for the relatively small portion of the land which housed his department and its museums, had made himself responsible for the whole site and for making it the national centre for the arts and sciences which had been envisaged by Prince Albert. He used the device of public exhibitions which he promoted in order to justify the erection of buildings, notably that for the second Great Exhibition in 1862. He was involved in planning the Horticultural Society gardens at South Kensington and in fund-raising for the project. His determination that a large public hall suitable for exhibitions and concerts should be built at South Kensington resulted in the Albert Hall, a building opened in 1871 and used in its first few years for a series of themed international exhibitions, subsequently for a very wide variety of events, being affectionately known as 'the nation's village hall'. Cole's power within the small kingdom of South Kensington was recognized by his popular title of 'King Cole'. 
Cole cared little for his personal appearance and his untidy, portly figure was ridiculed and caricatured, notably in 'Vanity Fair' in 1871. His manner could be rather abrasive and his methods authoritarian. His civil service career ended under a cloud, when he was found to have inadequately supervised his department's less than honest accountant. Between 1876 and 1879 Cole lived in Birmingham and Manchester, and was involved with a company set up to promote a process developed by General Scott (a royal engineer employed at South Kensington in various capacities) for treating sewage. The company failed and Cole returned to London. He was created CB at the end of the Great Exhibition and was knighted in 1875. He died at his home, 96 Philbeach Gardens, Kensington, London, on 18 April 1882 and was buried in Brompton cemetery. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 5853


Cole, Humfrey (d. 1591), mathematical instrument maker and die sinker, described himself as 'a English man born in ye north' (on a map of Palestine engraved in 1572), but neither the date or place of his birth nor his parents are known. Although the form of his name varies on his signed works, 'Humfrey Cole' is the most commonly used. The circumstances of his education are unclear, but he claimed on the map to be a goldsmith, and was referred to as such on 6 September 1577 in the Goldsmiths' court minutes, when a William Sysyswithe, formerly apprentice of Robert Fyllischurche, was turned over to him in order to complete his apprenticeship. For about fifteen years Cole was active as a die sinker at the mint in the Tower, where he first appears in 1563 as the established successor to John Lawrence. Throughout his tenure his salary was $20 per annum, an amount which he claimed in 1578 to be 'lacking sufficiente maintenance for me and my family' (Ackermann, 21), although it was in addition to lodgings in the Tower and a further $3 per annum 'diett' allowance. 
This is the last evidence of Cole's employment in the mint, and he seems to have continued to sell 'Geometricall instruments in metall' at his house 'neere unto the North dore of Paules' (Worsop). Twenty-six spectacular mathematical instruments by Cole are known to have survived, all but one in public collections in the British Isles and on the continent. His work, which dates from 1568 to 1590, covered a wide time-span, including the period when he was still employed at the mint, where he paid a deputy for at least two years to do his work for half his salary. Cole was mentioned by name in the original account books of the first Frobisher voyage in 1576; he is the only one named among the makers who provided instruments for the expedition. He was also called upon when the instruments needed repair after the first journey, and again in 1578, to take part in the assay of the ore returned from Frobisher Bay, which was claimed to contain gold and silver. 
Cole's 1572 map of Palestine was for Richard Jugge's 'Bishops' Bible'. The only surviving map by Cole, it is based on an earlier map by Abraham Ortelius and appears to have served mainly as an advertisement of his engraving skills; it was probably intended to impress Elizabeth I's leading minister, Lord Burghley, who had expressed a strong interest in the mapping of England and Wales for administrative purposes. Nothing is known about Cole's family except for the name of his wife, Elizabeth, who was named as the beneficiary of an administration of 6 July 1591, issued one day after his burial, at St Gregory by Paul's, on 5 July. 


@@@@@


doc= 5854


Cole, John (1792-1848), bookseller and antiquary, was born on 3 October 1792 in Weston Favell, Northamptonshire. He was of unknown parentage, and was apprenticed to William Birdsall, a bookseller in Northampton. In 1809 he began compiling material for a history of Northampton; the work was published by Birdsall (who failed to credit Cole's authorship) in 1815. By this date Cole had also written a history of Ecton (compiled during the winter of 1813-14), which was published in 1825. In 1817 he purchased the stock and goodwill of a bookseller in Lincoln and produced his first catalogue. He married Susannah Marshall (died 1832), fourth daughter of James Marshall of Northampton, on 26 August 1817. 'The History of Lincoln and Guide to its Curiosities and Antiquities' appeared in 1818. 
After leaving Lincoln, Cole settled in Hull, before moving in 1821 to Scarborough, where he opened a bookshop and circulating library. Cole's most successful publishing activity was in Scarborough. He published over 100 small books on topographical and antiquarian subjects, especially on Northamptonshire and the area surrounding Scarborough. Most of the books were slender, in limited editions of between twenty-five and sixty copies. Joseph Brogden Baker in 'The History of Scarborough from the Earliest Date' (1882) provided William Bean's recollection of Cole's versatility as a lecturer 'on astronomy, the anatomy of costume, architecture and natural history. These several subjects are discussed in a scientific and pleasing manner. The drawings are well executed, elegant and appropriate and the specimens in natural history are interesting and costly. Mr Cole's lectures always afforded me the highest gratification.' In 1825 Cole won a share of a lottery prize and travelled to London to receive it, and while there he was able to acquire some scarce views of Scarborough by Francis Place. In 1828 he was encouraged to edit a book on household cookery as a result of purchasing a library. 'Thus have I quite unexpectedly become the editor of a cookery book, an honour to which I had not thought to aspire' (J. Cole, preface to 'The Oldfieldian Cookery Book', 1828). His one attempt at a periodical in 1824, the 'Scarborough Repository', survived for only eight issues. His wife returned to the home of her parents in Northampton, where she died on 30 July 1832. Shortly afterwards, Cole returned to Northampton with his six children. He continued publishing, writing, and lecturing on philosophy and natural history, and in June 1833 organized a commemoration in honour of the Revd James Hervey at Weston Favell, at which he lectured. Following the failure of his bookshop in Northampton's Market Square, he moved to Wellingborough in 1834 where he initially opened a shop selling hams and bacon, and then converted the premises to 'a small school, and placed geological specimens, &c. [as well as such incongruous wares as apples, bacon, and ham] in his window for sale. He was a quiet man and regarded as very eccentric because he and his sons would go out all day and return laden with wild plants, &c.... His industrious curiosity was never appreciated in Northamptonshire, where he dragged out a miserable existence. ('N&Q')' Cole's 'History of Wellingborough' was published in 1837 and was followed a year later by the 'History and Antiquities of Higham Ferrers' and his 'Annals of Rushden, Irthlingborough and Knuston'. He tried his luck as a schoolmaster in Rushden in 1837, after which he taught and lived in Polebrook (from 1840) and took the post of master of the national school at Huntingdon in 1842. 
In 1845 Cole opened his last school in Woodford, near Thrapston, Northamptonshire, where he lived in greatly reduced circumstances. 'I was informed that he was in great want and distress in the retreat I alluded to' ('N&Q'). A few titles appeared in his remaining years, including a 'Calendar of Every Day Reference for the County of Huntingdon' in 1845, but to all intents and purposes his publishing days were over. He moved to The Academy, Club Lane, where he lived until his death on 12 April 1848. He was buried in an unmarked grave in Woodford. 
Cole's main achievement is in over 100 publications which contain carefully observed descriptions of village life and houses in both Scarborough and Northamptonshire. His detailed observations are often the only description of buildings which have been demolished, and his accounts of everyday village life provide excellent source material for local historians. His tireless pertinacity in searching out the minutiae of antiquarian detail was recognized, although his publications were criticized for not being very scholarly. His topographical works are collectors' items and much sought after because of their limited editions. However, his work was repetitive, and varied in quality. He was clearly industrious and enthusiastic in his antiquarian research but he lacked business acumen and was unsuited to running a bookshop. 


@@@@@


doc= 5855


Cole, Sir Ralph, second baronet (bap. 1629, d. 1704), painter and patron of the arts, was baptized on 3 November 1629. Of his six sons, Ralph was the first surviving son and heir of Sir Nicholas Cole, first baronet (died 1669), of Brancepeth Castle, co. Durham. The founders of this family were Nicholas and Thomas Cole, sons of James Cole, smith, of Gateshead. Thomas amassed a large fortune and died in 1620; Nicholas was the father of Ralph Cole, sheriff of Newcastle upon Tyne in 1625 and mayor in 1633, who bought Brancepeth Castle. The Brancepeth estates of Charles Neville, sixth earl of Westmorland, had been sequestrated by the crown for his support of Mary, queen of Scots, during the rising of the northern earls in 1569. In 1613 James I gave Brancepeth Castle to Robert Carr, earl of Somerset, who later forfeited it by attainder, and Ralph Cole bought it in 1636. Ralph Cole was the father of Nicholas Cole of Kepier, near Durham, who was created a baronet on 15 February 1641; Sir Nicholas Cole was sheriff of Newcastle in 1633, and mayor in 1640, 1641, and 1643. He defended the town against the Scots in the civil war, and for his loyalty to the royal cause he was imprisoned and fined. He married his first wife, Mary, second daughter of Sir Thomas Liddell, bt, of Ravensworth, on 28 September 1626 and left two sons, the eldest of whom was Sir Ralph Cole. 
Sir Ralph Cole thus inherited the vast fortune of his ancestors, and spent the greater part of it on art and the patronage of artists. He reportedly took lessons in painting from Van Dyck, and is said to have retained several Italian painters in his service. He is described in a letter of 1677 as a 'very worthy ingeniouse gent: hee has furnished his house with incomparable Pictures of his drawing, and is very ingeniouse in making knives, guns, Pistols &c: & of a very courteouse behaviour' (Hake, 64). He painted portraits, subject pictures, and miniatures. A portrait of Thomas Wyndham is preserved at Petworth House, Sussex, and was engraved in mezzotint by Richard Tompson, 'c'.1677, though the mezzotint more closely resembles a painting that was sold through Christies in 1948 and might be a self-portrait. Sir Ralph Cole also engraved a portrait of Charles II in mezzotint. His own portrait was painted by Sir Peter Lely, 'c'.1675, and used to hang in Brancepeth Castle; it was engraved in mezzotint by his friend and brother dilettante Francis Place, 'c'.1677. He was twice married: first, by 1651, to Margaret (died 1657), daughter of Thomas Windham of Felbrigg, Norfolk, and widow of one Shouldham, and second to Catherine ('b'. 1637), daughter of Sir Henry Foulis, second baronet, of Ingleby Manor, Yorkshire; she died on 29 September 1704 and was buried at Brancepeth. He represented Durham city in parliament in 1675-6 and 1678, and in 1685 commanded the Durham regiment of militia. In 1674 he sold Kepier, and in 1701 he sold Brancepeth to his friend Sir Henry Bellasyse. He died on 9 August 1704 and was buried at Brancepeth. Brancepeth Castle was still furnished with his paintings when John Loveday visited it in 1732; he mentioned in particular a portrait of Dean Sudbury by Sir Ralph Cole. 
Cole had three sons, but he was succeeded by his grandson, Sir Nicholas Cole, third baronet. The family fortune having been considerably reduced, the fourth and last baronet, Sir Mark Cole, grandson of Sir Ralph, was buried at the expense of his cousin, Sir Ralph Milbanke, in 1720. 


@@@@@


doc= 5856


Cole, Thomas (c.1520-1571), Church of England clergyman, is said to have hailed from Lincolnshire. He may have been brother of both Robert and William Cole, whose early careers were inextricably confounded by earlier authorities. From the welter of conflicting data it is at least clear that Thomas studied at Oxford, where he commenced MA about 1550. 
Headmaster of Maidstone School from 1546, Cole took to preaching against the doctrine of original sin and in January 1551 was one of a group of Kent and Essex 'freewillers' arrested by the privy council. Interrogated on 3 February and apparently detained or imprisoned, he thereafter renounced his errors. On 19 February 1553 he preached before Thomas Cranmer a 'ringing defence of predestination' (MacCulloch, 531). The archbishop arranged for its publication as 'A godly and frutefull sermon, made at Maydestone the fyrste sonday in Lent, against opinions of the anabaptistes and others'. Two extended modern analyses have been published (Martin, 58-60; Penny, 69-73). 
One of those specifically exempted from the general pardon issued at Mary's coronation, Cole departed for Frankfurt. A supporter of John Knox and William Whittingham, he sat on the committee that drew up Frankfurt's 'new discipline', later used as the basis of the order of Geneva. 
Cole's career is partially explained by a hyperactive streak in his make-up, and his movements abroad, evidently multifarious, cannot be plotted with certainty. It remains unclear whether, like many who supported Knox, he finally abandoned Frankfurt for Geneva, although he certainly berated Robert Wisdom for dealing 'uncharitably' with those who chose to do so (Arber, 95). He was known to Heinrich Bullinger of Zurich and was befriended by Wolfgang Weidner of Worms. It is, however, generally accepted that it was William Cole and not Thomas who helped to prepare the Geneva 'Bible', and it has been persuasively argued (Collinson, 191-211) that he can have had no part in writing 'A Brieff Discourse off the Troubles Begonne at Franckford'. 
On Thomas Cole's return to England after Mary's death he was at once absorbed into the hierarchy of London diocese. Instituted rector of High Ongar, Essex, on 9 November 1559 at the presentation of Richard, first Lord Rich, he was collated by Edmund Grindal, bishop of London, both to the archdeaconry of Essex in early 1560 and to the prebend of Rugmere in St Paul's on the following 7 December. Meanwhile, between 20 February and 7 May he acted temporarily as Grindal's commissary in Essex and Hertfordshire. Whilst no commission survives in Matthew Parker's register he was also at this time appointed dean of Bocking, Canterbury's peculiar jurisdiction within Essex and Suffolk. Here was hyperactivity indeed. 
Cole's surviving act books indicate that his self-imposed task as archdeacon was to keep a sharp eye out for surviving Catholic sentiments and habits of worship in the parishes under his control. It was probably his vigilance in this respect which prompted the privy council in May 1564 to order an examination of a case of 'misdemeanour and contempt' against his authority ('APC', '1558-70', 145). 
Although Parker clearly contemplated some modest reform of the 1559 settlement as he prepared for the convocation of 1562-3, nothing was in the event achieved, perhaps because the lower house proved more radical than anticipated. Cole was one of thirty-four members, most of them former exiles, who proposed seven articles which, if passed and implemented, would have obviated the vestiarian controversy which divided the church during the following five years. Six more moderate articles were debated instead, failing by a single vote. From this debate Cole and others who had supported the seven articles abstained, possibly on the principle that if they subscribed to half-measures all hope of reopening the debate in the future would be lost. 
Cole's radical views did not count against him in high places, probably because he had obtained the patronage of Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester. If the diarist Henry Machyn is to be believed Cole was in 1563 considered for the deanery of Norwich and in 1564 he proceeded DTh at Cambridge as an Oxford MA of fourteen years' standing. At about the same time he preached at Windsor. 'A Godly and Learned Sermon, Made this Laste Lent before the Queenes Majestie' (1564) was an astonishingly bold performance in which he told the supreme governor to her face that princes should maintain true religion 'without any mingle mangle of their own inventions'. 
Within weeks he had incurred Parker's wrath. It came to the archbishop's attention that as dean of Bocking Cole was flouting his orders with regard to clerical vestments. Parker evidently withdrew his commission for the deanery and on 10 November transferred it to John Puysant, rector of Latchingdon. Yet meanwhile, on 13 July, Cole had been instituted to the valuable rectory of Stanford Rivers, Essex, on the crown's presentation. 
When after January 1565 Parker, ostensibly at Elizabeth's behest, intensified his drive against nonconformity, Cole was among those who orchestrated the opposition. On 20 March twenty leading nonconformists, headed by Miles Coverdale, Whittingham, Thomas Sampson, Laurence Humphrey, and Cole himself, requested the ecclesiastical commissioners to excuse them from the necessity of wearing the canonical habits. According to the endorsement they received a favourable response from Grindal, Robert Horne, bishop of Winchester, and (more surprisingly) Richard Cox, bishop of Ely, only Parker and Edmund Guest, bishop of Rochester, not being listed as 'assenting'. 
Parker noted on 7 April that, among other signs of resistance, 'Mr Cole is now at the Court in his hat and short cloak, which will overthrow all this attempt' (Bruce and Perowne, 237). Although this was to omit reference to his Cambridge doctorate 'Mr Cole' is more likely to have been Thomas than Robert or William. Always accounted an eloquent preacher, Cole appeared at Paul's Cross on 11 November 1565, delivering a diatribe against popish attire, and in March 1566 was chosen by the lord mayor and aldermen, along with Thomas Penny, to preach the city's Spital sermons. Parker was quick to veto the proposal, commenting predictably that he 'dare not adventure to commend them for comformable' (ibid., 264). A fortnight later he summarily suspended thirty-seven city ministers who refused the prescribed vestments. 
It is presumably a measure of the influence that Cole was able to wield that Parker had nevertheless restored him as dean of Bocking. At the end of March the archbishop officially instructed Cole to enforce conformity in the Essex and Suffolk peculiars. He cannot have done so in any spirit of facile optimism. Indeed, Cole merely carried the war into the countryside. On May day he preached at Chelmsford as archdeacon and shortly afterwards at Hadleigh, Suffolk, as dean of Bocking. Both sermons were inflammatory and Leicester, probably judging that he was providing Parker with too much ammunition, brought Cole to heel. Cole defended his Chelmsford sermon on the grounds that it was intended to rebut the 'impudent conceit' of Catholics ('Pepys MSS', 90). 
The vestiarian controversy in London ceased with more or less abruptness after the autumn of 1566. Cole remained dean of Bocking and archdeacon of Essex and in 1570 he was nominated dean of Salisbury. In the very act of packing up his household and travelling to Salisbury he fell ill and, as Richard Hilles later told Bullinger, died of quinsy after two days' illness. John Parkhurst, bishop of Norwich, also reporting his death, reminded Bullinger that Wolfgang Weidner had been 'fond' of Cole (Robinson, 1.256). Cole's widow, Susan (her maiden name is unknown), was granted letters of administration for his estate on 20 July 1571. Cole was probably buried in High Ongar or Stanford Rivers, Essex. 


@@@@@


doc= 5857


Cole, Thomas (1628-1697), clergyman and Independent minister, was baptized on 27 April 1628 at St Giles Cripplegate, London, the son of William Cole, gentleman. A pupil of Westminster School, he was a king's scholar in 1644 and was elected to Christ Church, Oxford, but remained at the school 'through the exigencies of war' ('Old Westminsters', 268), matriculating only on 1 February 1647, aged eighteen. He graduated BA from Christ Church on 6 November 1649, and MA on 8 July 1651, the latter degree being incorporated in Cambridge in 1653. On 15 October 1656 Cole was admitted principal of St Mary Hall, Oxford, where he acted as tutor to John Locke, but from which position he was removed in 1660. In 1659 he compounded for the first fruits of the rectory of Ewelme, Oxfordshire, but was ejected the following year. On 2 August 1660, however, he was ordained a deacon and priest, and became minister at Brampton Bryan, Herefordshire; in November 1660 Thomas Harley wrote that he had preached there, and 'the whole parish are well satisfied with him' (Cliffe, 99). Cole refused the tests laid down by the 'Act of Uniformity' of 1662, but 'appears to have deferred his resignation in order to allow his patron sufficient time to find a successor' (ibid.). 
Cole may have retained a connection with his former benefice, for in April 1666 Philip Henry was 'at Aulam, where preaches one Mr Cole affectionately and to edification' ('Diaries and Letters', 186). In that year he opened his academy at Nettlebed, Oxfordshire. The claim that Samuel Wesley, father of John Wesley, was a student there is incorrect; his later attack on Cole, and his generalizations about the poor moral tone of dissenting academies, drew chiefly on the remarks of James Bonnell, who attended as a student. Yet although Bonnell learned much 'Debauchery' from his fellow students and claimed Cole 'was too Remiss in matters of Morality and Religion', he refused to 'accuse him of anything that was ill' ('Calamy rev.', 125). In 1672 Cole tried but failed to secure a licence to preach at Henley town hall, but was licensed for other premises in the town: on 22 April as a congregational teacher at John Tyler's house and Alexander Bernard's barn, and on 16 May at his own house. 
Unfavourable political circumstances probably contributed to Cole's decision to close the academy at Nettlebed in 1674, and to move to London. There he succeeded Philip Nye as minister of the Independent congregation which at that time met at Cutlers' Hall, Cloak Lane, and was later at Tallow Chandlers' Hall, Dowgate Hill. He was also one of the ministers of the merchants' lecture at Pinners' Hall. Despite his nonconformity Cole appears to have prospered, investing substantial sums in the East India Company and purchasing landed property in Oxfordshire which formed the basis of substantial legacies to his wife, Hannah (whose surname may have been Partridge), and to a daughter-in-law, nephews, and grandchildren. 
In his last years Cole lived in Lime Street, London. He did not join the 'happy union' between presbyterians and congregationalists, and was one of three London ministers who baulked at union with those who advocated sacramental communion with the Church of England. Though elected on 13 April 1691 as a manager of the ministers' Common Fund, he attended no meetings and refused to help in the enterprise. But in 1695, after the union fell apart, he became an original manager of the Congregational Fund board. Cole also took part in the renewed theological controversy which preoccupied his wing of dissent in the early nineties; his was an unbending high Calvinism: 'a secret conversing with a covenant of works... will worm out the covenant of grace, by turning it before you are aware, into a covenant of works'. Cole regretted only that 'I have been no more vigorous and active in defending those truths' against his neonomian opponents: 'God hath made me a man of contention; but I would have all the world know, that the doctrine I have been preaching, I can comfortably die in' (Wilson, 82-3). Cole preached his last sermon before his congregation, which now met at Pinners' Hall, on 22 August 1697. He died in London on Thursday 16 September 1697, aged sixty-nine, and was buried in the upper ground of Bunhill Fields. 


@@@@@


doc= 5858


Cole, William (c.1530-1600), dean of Lincoln and college head, was born in Grantham, Lincolnshire. He was possibly the younger brother of Thomas Cole, archdeacon of Essex. Admitted at Corpus Christi College, Oxford, on 28 July 1545, William Cole graduated BA in March 1548 and is credited with a fellowship from the time of his matriculation. He proceeded MA in 1552. 
After Mary's accession Cole was among the distinguished group of Oxford scholars who sought refuge in Zurich. Early in 1554, with Robert Horne and his wife, James Pilkington, Thomas Lever, Thomas Bentham, Thomas Spencer, and Laurence Humphrey, among others, Cole petitioned the Zurich magistrates for permission to reside there and enjoy their protection 'against the violence of those... who would oppose and molest us' (Robinson, 'Original Letters', 1.752). Thereafter, with Humphrey and John Parkhurst, future bishop of Norwich, Cole was one of many who were welcomed into the household of the printer Christopher Froschover, who had been a pupil of Peter Martyr in Oxford in 1551-2. Here they lived together 'happily, like brothers', paying their way as if they were still undergraduates wherever they went ('simul fraterne & iucunde viximus, & ordinaria pensa quasi in Gymnasio quopiam persoluimus'; Humphrey, 89). 
Although also kindly received by Rudolph Gualter, Heinrich Bullinger's eventual successor as Zurich's chief pastor, Cole migrated to Frankfurt, where in the tax list of October 1556 he was rated as worth 100 florins. With John Foxe he seems to have moved on to Basel during the winter of 1556-7, but on 5 June 1557 was accepted into John Knox's congregation in Geneva, on the same day as Alice Agar, widow of Colchester, Essex, and her children Thomas, Jane, and Priscilla. On 29 November Cole became a resident of the city. Before the end of 1557 Alice Agar married Thomas Spencer (who had arrived in November 1556), while Cole married Jane Agar. No child is recorded as being baptized in Geneva before the couple's departure. 
During 1558 Cole assisted in the translation of the Geneva 'Bible'. He perhaps continued to do so for several months after Elizabeth I's accession, since his Knoxian views on church discipline and the fact that his marriage prevented him from resuming his fellowship will have given him no immediate incentive to return to England. By May 1564 he was serving as chaplain to the Merchant Adventurers in Antwerp, where Edmund Grindal, bishop of London, permitted him to follow local protestant usage. Accordingly he ignored the prayer book ceremonies and was assisted in his ministry by six elders. 
Yet his family connections finally drew Cole to Colchester, where on 20 November 1564 he was admitted burgess, without fine, as the town's common preacher. As such he was not obliged to observe the prayer book ceremonies, and perhaps for that reason did not, like Colchester's archdeacon, James Calfhill, publicly oppose Archbishop Matthew Parker's attempts to impose ritual conformity during the vestiarian controversy of 1564-6. 
In 1568, at the recommendation of Robert Horne, now bishop of Winchester and the college's visitor, Elizabeth nominated Cole to the presidency of Corpus Christi College, Oxford. The senior fellows, still conservative in their approach to Elizabeth's settlement, had no wish to have a married president imposed upon them, and when Cole arrived to take formal possession the doors were closed against him. It was necessary to obtain a royal commission, dated 21 July 1568, to secure his admittance. He was granted the degree of BD on 18 November following. 
Thereafter Cole appears to have shed much of his Knoxian austerity, becoming a modest pluralist in the process. Rector of Buscot, Berkshire, from 1571 to 1573, he resigned after institution to the college living of Lower Heyford, Oxfordshire, in 1572. On 21 September 1571 he had been collated by the dying John Jewel to the prebend of Durnford in Salisbury Cathedral, and on 10 May 1572 Horne collated him canon of the fifth prebend in Winchester Cathedral. He proceeded DTh in January 1574, and on the following 4 December was installed as prebendary of Bedford Major in Lincoln Cathedral. 
Perhaps more than most of his generation Cole's Elizabethan career was conditioned by the Marian years. He had owed his preachership in Colchester to his marriage, and his presidency to Horne, while two Genevan fellow exiles, the London merchants Edward Caunt and John Bodley, were among those who stood surety for his first fruits, for Lower Heyford and his Salisbury prebend respectively. He also remained a friend of Foxe, Parkhurst, and John Aylmer. When Gualter's son visited England in 1573 as Parkhurst's protege, Cole went out of his way to remind Gualter of the kindness he had received from him 'beyond all others', declaring that 'in mind and inclination I shall always be a Zuricher' (Robinson, 'Zurich Letters', 2.222). Given his subsequent removal to Geneva this smacks of special pleading, as does his letter the following year regretting that because young Gualter's stay in Oxford had been brief he had 'not treated him according to his merit' (ibid., 2.256). For his part young Gualter praised Cole and Laurence Humphrey, under whose tutelage at Magdalen he had placed himself, for their 'singular regard' and 'especial kindness' towards him (ibid., 2.218). 
Although he was accounted an excellent teacher, Cole's presidency was undistinguished. The college estates were incompetently administered during his tenure, and complaints reached Horne that he had defrauded the college and allowed it to fall into debt. One of Horne's informants was Simon Tripp, who wrote in April 1572 of the contention and strife among the fellowship. Tradition asserts that when Horne decreed that 'he and the college must part without more ado', Cole 'fetched a deep sigh and said, 'What, my lord, must I then eat mice at Zurich again?'' Touched, Horne bade him 'be at rest and deal honestly with the college' (Wood, 2.166). Since the story scarcely accords with the generous reception both men had received from Froschover, Bullinger, and Gualter, it should probably be discounted. Cole's later career, moreover, suggests that reports of his inefficiency were exaggerated and/or that he heeded Horne's advice. During 1577 he served as vice-chancellor, and by letters patent dated 17 May 1577 he succeeded John Aylmer, elevated to the bishopric of London, as archdeacon of Lincoln. 
From this time, if no earlier, Cole appears to have been entirely reconciled to Elizabeth's settlement of religion and showed no sympathy for the aspirations of younger nonconformists. On 28 February 1579, condoling with Gualter on the death of his son, he observed laconically of the settlement that there had been 'no change whatever' since 1559 (Robinson, 'Zurich Letters', 2.306). In September that year he became a canon residentiary at Lincoln, and perhaps for that reason resigned his stall at Winchester. In June 1580 he was excused further residence in Lincoln on the grounds that he had been summoned to attend the earls of Warwick and Leicester. By March 1581 he had also resigned his archdeaconry but retained his Lincoln and Salisbury prebends, along with Lower Heyford, until his death. 
Cole evidently approved of the three articles which John Whitgift, archbishop of Canterbury, introduced as his yardstick of conformity in late 1583. He served on a committee which on 5 February 1584 promulgated new and restrictive regulations with regard to university preaching licences. Later that year the bailiffs (joint mayors) of Colchester asked Cole to intercede with Aylmer following the suspension of their present town preacher, George Northey. Finding Aylmer inflexible, and informed that similar efforts by Walsingham, Leicester, and Warwick had all failed in council, he advised the bailiffs to abandon their suit unless Northey would subscribe Whitgift's articles 'for that opinion is very dangerous to the estate of the whole realm as I am verily persuaded' (Essex RO, Morant MS D/Y 2/5, p. 107). In March 1589 Cole expelled the radical William Hubbock from his fellowship following his imprisonment by the high commission and subsequent refusal to enter into bonds for his good behaviour. 
Aylmer unsuccessfully recommended Cole for some promotion in 1591 or 1592, and, describing him as his 'coexile' and Burghley's 'countryman and faithful wellwisher' suggested on 1 June 1592 that he might succeed John Underhill as bishop of Oxford (BL, Lansdowne MS 72, fol. 103'r'). In the event the see remained vacant until 1604. 
In 1598, when Whitgift wished to encourage John Reynolds, dean of Lincoln, to continue his writings against the Jesuits by returning him to the more congenial atmosphere of Oxford, Cole agreed to resign his presidency in exchange for the deanery. Whitgift successfully petitioned Sir Robert Cecil in September, describing Cole as 'an ancient Doctor of Divinity and an honest, learned and grave man' and the exchange as 'greatly for the benefit of the church, and for God's' ('Salisbury MSS', 8, 332). 
Elected on 28 October 1598 and installed as dean on 2 June 1599, Cole left no record in the chapter acts beyond his signature to receipts in a clear, well-formed hand. He made a brief nuncupative will on 31 August 1600, leaving a personal bequest to his daughter-in-law Elizabeth, wife of his eldest son, William, and the rest of his property to the disposal of his wife and executor, 'Joane'. He died before 14 September and was buried under the high altar of the cathedral. A monument, now destroyed, was erected in 1632 by his eldest daughter, Abigail, wife of Henry Stratford of Hawling, Gloucestershire. The epitaph was transcribed in full by Browne Willis. 
It has been assumed that Thomas Cole, fellow of Corpus from 1576 and Cole's successor at Lower Heyford, must have been his son, but Thomas gave his birthplace as Stanley, Gloucestershire, and his age as twenty-six when ordained by Aylmer in 1578. Born, therefore, while Cole was still an Edwardian fellow of Corpus, he was probably a nephew. 


@@@@@


doc= 5859


Cole, Sir William (bap. 1576, d. 1653), army officer and landowner in Ulster, was baptized on 7 October 1576 at St Mary Woolnoth, London, the only son of Emmanuel Cole ('c'.1542-1592?), a member of the Goldsmiths' Company, of St Botolph, Aldersgate, and his first wife, Margaret Ingram (died 1578), aunt of Sir Arthur Ingram. He was born into a London business family with derivation, as certified by heralds, from the gentry family of Cole of Slade in Devon. His early years and education are obscure and he did not attend either university or an inn of court. 
Cole saw military service in the Netherlands before the turn of the century and then fought in Ireland during the Nine Years' War. Present at the siege of Kinsale in 1601 and having served as a lieutenant under Captain Richard Hansard for two years, Cole was selected to carry letters to Sir Robert Cecil and the privy council in England on 13 December, with a recommendation from Sir George Carew, president of Munster, for a command of his own. From October 1603 he was in Ulster as captain of boats and barges at Ballyshannon and on Lough Erne, but with peace and then a somewhat conciliatory policy towards Ulster he sought through former lord deputy Sir George Cary, in January 1607, a recommendation from principal secretary Salisbury for a foot company in the Low Countries. However on 15 May 1607 he secured royal instructions to lord deputy Chichester to confirm this office to him, and it was granted by patent, on a reduced stipend, on 10 September following. He became constable of Enniskillen, formerly Maguire's stronghold, in April 1609 and received substantial payments for building works on the fort and castle there (which may have included the watergate) over the next few years. When the plantation in Ulster was implemented from 1610 he was well positioned to acquire a servitor's estate nearby, and shortly thereafter he purchased another estate in the neighbourhood, Portora, which had been granted to a Scottish undertaker. He subsequently acquired some additional portions of land which had been granted to restored Irish owners. 
Cole was the founder of the modern plantation town of Enniskillen, co. Fermanagh (which had over fifty new male inhabitants, English and Scottish, by 1630 and a new church), built on an island in Lough Erne and incorporated in 1613, and was granted the land designated to promote urbanization there in 1612. The town consisted of two zones or sectors, military and civil, and Cole received a grant of the fort zone in a cost cutting exercise in 1623, which integrated both under his ownership. He thus occupied a prominent position in the plantation in co. Fermanagh, and was on a number of occasions sheriff of the county and involved in the contentions of early plantation society there. Cole was knighted by lord deputy Sir Oliver St John in 1617. He married in Ireland Susanna, or Susan (died in or before 1653?), widow of Stephen Seagar, lieutenant of Dublin Castle, and daughter of John Croft of Lancashire. Cole also maintained contact with relatives in London, one of them a lawyer of the Inner Temple and official of the court of wards. In 1633 he was briefly imprisoned for his refusal to pay contributions after the end of subsidies. 
Sir William was a member of parliament for County Fermanagh both in 1634 and in 1640, and sat on various parliamentary committees, the most important that concerning the Commons' petition of remonstrance of 7 November 1640, and was on the committee sent to the king in England to present the grievances of the house. With the outbreak of the rising in 1641 (of which he had received some forewarning, passed on to the authorities in Dublin), Enniskillen was not captured, and Cole was one of those granted a commission by the king in November to raise troops to combat the rebellion. He received payments from the English parliament for the supply of his forces in 1642 and 1643. In December 1644 he was, however, accused before the committee of both kingdoms in London of partiality towards some of the Irish of co. Fermanagh, but responded that this had saved the lives of many protestants. He insisted too that he had been one of the first colonels of the British regiments in Ulster to take the oath of the solemn league and covenant, and he was in London for the trial of Connor, Lord Maguire, in February 1645. He sought substantial supplies from the committee of both houses for Irish affairs (after the battle of Benburb) in July 1646, and received a lesser amount in that and the following year. Cole's military actions during the 1640s are in some cases known: for example men of Enniskillen took part in the battle of Clones in June 1643. He also regained Crevenish Castle in co. Fermanagh after the cessation in September that year. In October 1645 Enniskilleners with others took part in a successful engagement in co. Sligo, but in November a detachment of Owen Roe O'Neill's army carried out an attack on his winter quarters on Boa Island in Lower Lough Erne, which, though this force was afterwards pursued by Cole's men, may have deterred him from taking part in a second intended intervention in Connaught. Eventually Enniskillen was seized from him by some of his own officers in March 1649 for the royalist cause, but it reverted to Commonwealth control in 1650. 
Sir William was in London again, apparently, in 1651, but died in October 1653 in Dublin, where he had relations among its growing New English population; he was buried there in the same month in St Michan's Church. He may have been predeceased by his wife, who was not mentioned in his will. His eldest son, Michael, who predeceased him, having died during the confederate wars, had about 1640 married Katherine, daughter of Sir Laurence Parsons of King's county, while his second son, John, who acquired property in co. Dublin, married Elizabeth, daughter of John Chichester of Dungannon. His daughter Mary married the Revd Robert Barclay, the Scottish born dean of Clogher (Cole's agent in London in 1643), and his elder daughter, Margaret, married Sir James Montgomery, son of the Scottish settler Sir Hugh Montgomery. Cole's descendants became earls of Enniskillen and built the mansion house Florence Court in the eighteenth century, where what is taken to be a portrait of him hangs. 


@@@@@


doc= 5860


Coles, William (1626-1662), botanist, was born at Adderbury, Oxfordshire, one of at least three sons and five daughters of John Coles. He entered New College, Oxford, in 1642, and was soon after made a postmaster of Merton College by his mother's brother, John French, senior fellow and registrar of the university. He graduated BA on 18 February 1650, having become a public notary, with the intention of following his uncle. His enthusiasm for botany developed while he was at Oxford; he afterwards resided at Putney, Surrey, where he was a friend of Dr William How, founder of the Westminster botanic garden, and 'where he became the most famous simpler or herbalist of his time' (Wood). His principal work was 'The Art of Simpling, or, An Introduction to the Knowledge and Gathering of Plants' (1656), with which was bound 'Perspicillum microcosmologicum, or, A prospective for the discovery of the lesser world, wherein man is in a compendium, theologically, philosophically, and anatomically described, and compared with the universe'. His 'Adam in Eden, or, Nature's Paradise' (1657) classified plants by the antiquated Galenic system by relating them to parts of the body, according to their supposed 'signatures'. 
At the restoration in 1660 Coles became secretary to Brian Duppa, bishop of Winchester, in whose service he died, probably at New Sarum, in 1662. 


@@@@@


doc= 5861


Cole, William (c.1622-1701), naturalist, was born in Dorset, from where his family moved to Salisbury about 1639 and thence to Southsea in 1644. Cole seems to have remained there until at least the mid-1660s; about 1668 he moved to Bristol where he obtained the post of surveyor of the customs (1671), which he retained until 1691. At Bristol, and at the small estate in Bradfield, Wiltshire, which he held in right of his wife, Anne James, he built up substantial collections of natural rarities, local and foreign, carried out experimental fieldwork, and corresponded with fellow natural philosophers. Sir Robert Southwell was an active and helpful patron, and he was also well known to Robert Hooke. He corresponded regularly with Robert Plot, John Ray, Martin Lister, John Woodward, and Edward Lhwyd. 
Cole's early researches mainly centred on botany -- particularly lichens and fungi. A letter of 30 September 1669 from him to Hooke (published in Hooke's 'Lampas', 1677) made important advances in explaining the reproduction of ferns. Thereafter Cole devoted many years to an (unsuccessful) attempt to find an experimental proof of the spontaneous generation of insects. He collected shells and fossils intensively, as well as investigating disparate subjects such as the crystalline structure of snowflakes, oysters, and the 'Murex lapillus'. He published a detailed account of specimens of the last, gathered from near Minehead, to show that they belonged to the family that produced Tyrian purple in the Roman world. 
Cole was a strong supporter of the natural history movement organized at Oxford by Robert Plot, and he presented many specimens to the new Ashmolean Museum there. From the early 1690s he engaged in protracted discussions with the university about donating to it his whole collection if the university would undertake publication of his 'Generall Natural History'. Edward Lhwyd, Plot's successor at the Ashmolean, was eager to acquire Cole's collection because it consisted only of natural things, and because Cole had been careful to record the provenance of his specimens. These numbered well over a thousand with very few duplicates. Despite dragging on for some ten years the negotiations came to no conclusion. Cole died intestate in early October 1701, and the collection was sold elsewhere. He was buried on 12 October at Bradfield. 
Although from his letters Cole emerges as a somewhat pompous, rather self-opinionated, person who could easily become tedious, he was also a very seriously committed naturalist who combined his passion for natural things with a deeply felt providentialist view of the world. His life exemplifies that interpenetration of natural theology with natural philosophy which his activities helped to establish. 


@@@@@


doc= 5862


Cole, William (1635-1716), physician, was the son of a Church of England clergyman. He matriculated at Balliol College, Oxford, on 9 December 1653, and by the late 1650s had become involved with the circle of researchers around Robert Boyle. Cole remained at Oxford until 1666, graduating BM from Gloucester Hall on 7 August 1660 and DM on 9 July 1666. While still at Oxford, about 1660, he married Jane (1638/9-1724), whose maiden name is not known; their eldest surviving daughter, also named Jane, was born about 1662. A son, William, was born in 1667 or 1668; he matriculated at Oriel College, Oxford, on 12 March 1686, aged eighteen, but nothing more is known about him. A second surviving daughter, Ann, was born about 1670. 
Upon graduation Cole moved to Worcester, where he practised as a physician. There he composed his first medical work, 'De secretione animali cogitata', published in Oxford in 1674. Secretion was a favourite topic among mechanically inclined physicians, and Cole's work reflected his training with Boyle and Thomas Willis. In his book he employed Willis's concepts of chemical fermentation and took for granted Boyle's notions of the weight and 'spring' of the air. He also cited the work of Richard Lower, another Oxford mechanical philosopher. 
Cole corresponded with Thomas Sydenham around 1680, agreeing with Sydenham's cooling regimen for smallpox. Cole did not know Sydenham personally, but both physicians were friends of John Locke. Cole's additional letter to Sydenham about hysteria elicited the latter's important essay on hypochondria and hysteria, the 'Dissertatio epistolaris ad spectatissimum doctissimumq[ue] virum Gulielmum Cole, M.D.' (1682). After a brief discussion of smallpox Sydenham offered an interpretation of hypochondria in men and hysteria in women which defined them as essentially equivalent disorders. 
In 1685 Cole published a few descriptions of clinical cases in the 'Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society', but he was never made a fellow. His next major work (and his only medical work in English) was his 'Physico-Medical Essay Concerning the Late Frequency of Apoplexies', published in 1689, in which he attributed the apparent increase in apoplexy to the severely cold winter of 1683, explaining the effects of cold on this disorder. Cole also produced a work on natural history: 'Purpura Anglicana, being a Discovery of a Shell-Fish Found on the Shores of the Severn' (1684). 
Cole moved to London in the early 1690s. He was admitted a candidate of the Royal College of Physicians on 26 June 1693 and a fellow on 25 June 1694. In 1693 he was fined $4 by the college (later remitted) for reading an anatomy lecture at Surgeons' Hall without leave. He published three works between 1693 and 1702, comprising a mechanistic explanation of the digestion, a treatise on fevers (in which he advocated the use of cinchona bark), and a description of a case of epilepsy. The latter, addressed to Dr Thomas Hobart of Cambridge, also included a discussion of insensible perspiration. 
Cole was one of a number of physicians who embraced the mechanical philosophy in the 1650s and 1660s, and his published works are in the iatromechanical vein of other authors in the group around Boyle and Willis. His works enjoyed a certain amount of popularity, and his book on secretion was reprinted several times, including an Amsterdam edition in 1698. Cole was apparently a well-liked and successful practitioner, described as 'learned without ostentation, and polite without affectation' (Munk, 'Roll', 1.510). 
Cole was named an elect of the Royal College of Physicians on 9 October 1712, but some time after that he appears to have retired to the country. He died on 12 June 1716, aged eighty-one, and was buried at the church of Allesley, near Coventry. His grave in the church includes a memorial inscription. His widow, who died in 1724 aged eighty-five, is buried beside him, as are two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 5863


Cole, William (1714-1782), antiquary, was born at the King's Arms, Bourn Bridge, in the parish of Little Abington, Cambridgeshire, on 3 August 1714 and baptized on 15 August 1714, the only son of William Cole (1671/2-1735), a prosperous gentleman farmer, and his third wife, Catherine (1682/3-1725), widow of Charles Apthorp and daughter of Theophilus Tuer of Cambridge. His father married four times: besides two daughters by his first marriage, he had by his third marriage four children, of whom William was the eldest and only boy. 
Cole was sent to live with his maternal grandmother in Cambridge at a very early age and began his schooling at a dame-school there before attending a school at Linton kept by a nonconformist minister. Sundays were passed with a relative who belonged to the Church of England so that he was spared from attending dissenting services. After a short time with the Revd Robert Butts of Saffron Walden grammar school, he was entered at Eton College in 1726 and stayed there for six years; by his own account he was idle and unhappy, was often beaten, and once ran away, yet he formed a lifelong friendship with Horace Walpole. He was admitted as a sizar at Clare College, Cambridge, on 25 January 1733, but after inheriting a comfortable income and property on his father's death he became a fellow commoner. He developed a close attachment to Thomas Western of the same college and when Western left and married, Cole migrated to King's College, the natural home of old Etonians in the university, in June 1736. He took the degrees of BA in 1737 and MA in 1740. 
Cole learned French at Cambridge from a Monsieur Herebert; in April 1736 he accompanied his elder half-brother Stephen Apthorp on a tour of Flanders, and in the following year while suffering from a bout of low spirits he travelled on his doctor's advice to Lisbon where he remained for six months, returning in May 1738. He made other visits to Normandy and again to Flanders, and in 1749 undertook a long tour to Scotland with friends and was made a freeman of the city of Glasgow. Thanks to his distant relative Lord Montfort of Horseheath he was made a deputy lieutenant of the county and justice of the peace. He kept rooms at King's until 1753 without holding a fellowship and had also a small country retreat at Haddenham in the Isle of Ely. His time during all these years was devoted to collecting historical information, especially concerning Cambridgeshire; he visited parish churches and libraries, transcribed inscriptions and registers, copied heraldic arms, and made abstracts from voluminous reading in both printed books and manuscripts. This vocation never deserted him. He was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries in November 1747. 
On 25 December 1744 Cole was ordained deacon and acted for a short while as curate to Abraham Stokes, rector of Withersfield in Suffolk. He was admitted to priest's orders in April 1745 and was made chaplain to George, earl of Kinnoul, through the kindness of his son who was MP and recorder of Cambridge. He was collated to the rectory of Hornsey in Middlesex by Bishop Thomas Sherlock in 1749 and inducted on 25 November of that year. Cole was not comfortable with the living and when he found that he was expected to reside and to pay towards work on the rectory, he at once tried to resign, although he was not able to do so until 1751. He resided little if at all and employed a curate. At about this time he had the idea of living among the English Benedictines at Paris, without converting to Catholicism, since his only ambition was 'to live retiredly and quietly, and pretty much to myself, after the monkish manner' (Cole, 'Journal', 142). The plan came to nothing when after strange negotiations in 1753 Cole was presented to the rectory of Bletchley in Buckinghamshire by Browne Willis, the eccentric antiquary. He remained there for fourteen years. 
Cole did make another trip to France to meet Walpole in Paris from October to December 1765 and began to keep a full and characteristic diary that he continued until August 1770. He again wished to retire abroad, despite Walpole's warning that if he did so his goods, including his collections, might be seized for the crown if he died in France. Such a prospect was daunting. His volumes were, he wrote to Walpole (17 March 1765): 'my only delight -- they are my wife and children -- they have been in short, my whole employ and amusement for these twenty or thirty years; and though I really and sincerely think the greatest part of them stuff and trash, and deserve no other treatment than the fire, yet the collections which I have made towards an 'History of Cambridgeshire', the chief points in view of them, with an oblique or transient view of an 'Athenae Cantabrigienses', will be of singular use to any one who will have more patience and perseverance than I am master of to put the materials together. (Walpole, 'Corr.', 1.92)' The trip to Paris did not tempt Cole to move; too many aspects of French life from the habits of the people to what he considered irreligious thinking offended him. He had, however, many close Catholic friends such as Alban Butler and time after time in his writings he insisted robustly that the Church of England had more to fear from its own temporizing and the influence of dissent, to which he had a rooted aversion, than from Roman Catholicism, to which he was as strongly attracted. He believed he had little of a priestly calling, and yet performed his duties conscientiously according to his lights and the standards of the times, was hospitable and charitable, and did not forget the dignity of his office and the respect due to it. Although a high tory by principle he took little part in politics lest they should estrange him from his friends, claiming that 'I have all my life lived and acted with the Whigs, who were my friends, though perhaps might not always wish them success' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 2.86). His inherited means allowed a measure of independence and aloofness from preferment-hunting, though he sometimes worried about his income and was not rich when he died. 
Cole did not approve of a married clergy and his relations with women were those of a confirmed bachelor, sociable enough and occasionally mildly flirtatious within safe limits, for although he could appraise a good-looking woman, there is no trace of his desiring a close or physical intimacy with any. His deep friendships were with men, and his domestic comfort and routine were attended to by several servants of whom the chief was Tom Wood, the general factotum of the household, who entered his service as a boy about 1760 and remained with his master until he died. Cole's affection for and care of him are plain in his diary. Tom was kept busy and was occasionally scolded, but his health and education were not neglected. He was one of Cole's executors and was remembered in his will. 
Cole resigned the living at Bletchley as a point of honour in 1767 in favour of Willis's grandson, and after weighing several alternatives accepted the curacy of Waterbeach and a meagre income of $20 a year from his friend and fellow antiquary Robert Masters. Both had strong characters and were soon at loggerheads so that, using the excuse of the wetness of the place, Cole moved in 1770 to Milton 3 miles from Cambridge where he remained until his death, declining other offers of a church living until he was presented by Eton College to the vicarage of Burnham in Buckinghamshire. He was instituted there on 10 June 1774 but continued to live at Milton. 
Cole's return to Cambridgeshire in 1767 and his hasty resignation from the curacy at Waterbeach allowed him to resume his studies with increased zeal. He possessed over fifty large volumes of his collections when he settled at Milton and compiled as many more before the end of his life. He continued to add to his own stores and to annotate and cross-reference what he had written earlier, and make the contents of his books accessible through a series of indexes. Besides armorial bearings his collections contain many sketches of churches and other buildings, crudely but faithfully drawn. He was entrusted with unique manuscripts to study at home, as, for example, Thomas Baker's history of St John's College which he transcribed and annotated in only six weeks during 1777. His correspondence was vast and, since he kept copies of letters sent and received, his importance in supplying information and corrections for works published or in progress is evident and considerable. There was little that did not interest him, but Roman Britain did not. Except when prevented by illness he also regularly met resident Cambridge scholars such as Richard Farmer, master of Emmanuel College, and James Essex, the preferred architect of Georgian Cambridge. He was at the centre of a web of scholarly communication and in his own line was one of the most learned men of the eighteenth century and the most industrious historian that Cambridgeshire had before William Mortlock Palmer in the twentieth century. There can have been few days when he did not put pen to paper and his speed, accuracy, and legibility are remarkable. Among those with whom he corresponded and exchanged intelligence and favours were Horace Walpole, Thomas Gray, Michael Lort, Richard Gough, Thomas Pennant, Thomas Phillips, James Granger, and John Nichols. He was a member of the Benedictines, a group of antiquaries connected with Corpus Christi College, which included James Nasmith and Robert Masters. 
A disinclination to publish was one of Cole's marked idiosyncrasies. He defended it on the ground that in future others would benefit 'who have not had the drudgery to collect, but have all ready to their hands' (Cooper, 'Ath. Cantab.', 1.vi). His materials have been routinely consulted and used (not always with acknowledgement) by historians, and they remain of value especially as a witness to lost records and buildings and as a repository of genealogical facts. He revised Browne Willis's manuscript history of two Buckinghamshire hundreds, as their author had asked, but seems to have made no attempt to print it, and shortly before his own death intended to give it to John Nichols. He wrote three short pieces in volume 47 of the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (1777) -- on corrections to Hawkins's 'History of Music', 'Origin of 'Old Nick'', and 'Saint whose emblems are naked boys in a tub' -- and 'Some observations on the horns given by Henry I to the cathedral of Carlisle' ('Archaeologia', 5, 1779, 340-45). Cole often aided others in their researches. His earliest contribution appears to have been notes for Zachary Grey's edition of 'Hudibras' in the 1740s; he gave A. C. Ducarel suggestions for his 'Tour through Normandy' (1754) and a large amount of material for his unpublished 'Account of Doctors' Commons'. The principal authors whom he helped were James Bentham, for his 'History of Ely Cathedral' (1771), James Granger, for his 'Biographical History of England' (1775), Richard Gough, for his 'British Topography' (1780) and other works, and John Nichols, for many of his works. He supplied an account of the school of Pythagoras at Cambridge to Francis Grose for his 'Antiquities of England and Wales' and materials for several of Walpole's books, especially the second edition of his 'Anecdotes of Paintings in England'. A list of works to which Cole contributed may be found in the Yale edition of his letters to Walpole (Walpole, 'Corr.', 2.376-7), to which should be added his notes on Wood's 'Athenae Oxonienses' which were used by Philip Bliss for his edition of 1813. 
While free in sharing his knowledge Cole was anxious that few should examine his manuscripts; an exception was Walpole, to whom he lent the four volumes of his 'History of King's College' in 1777 with a warning that 'through life, I have never disguised artfully my opinions, and as my books were my trusty friends who had engaged never to speak till twenty years after my departure, I always without guile entrusted them with my most secret thoughts' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 2.42). He was troubled to know where to leave his manuscripts and changed his mind more than once. To give them to King's College would be like throwing them in a horse-pond since its members had only contempt for non-classical studies. In the end, in his will written four days before his death, he bequeathed them all to the British Museum with the stipulation that they were not to be looked into for twenty years after his death. His loose papers and letters were also to be gathered up, for: 'such papers are valuable when time has impressed his fingers on them. It is also my wish that no persons except my executors may be admitted into my study until all the letters and loose papers are sorted and locked up with my manuscripts. (Palmer, 'William Cole', 29)' Cole's manuscripts form a discontinuous series of 115 large volumes among the additional manuscripts of the British Library. An official catalogue was printed in 1849, and an alphabetical index of their contents, with curious juxtapositions, was published in 1912 by G. J. Gray. Volume 17, thought to contain a history of Queens' College, Cambridge, is missing, and there are other strays, such as a history of the parish of Fen Ditton now in Cambridge University Library, and a ten-page index to the life compiled by Gray in a fit of the gout on 16 May 1775 is now at Yale. Three catalogues of his library exist. He parted with about six hundred printed books, mostly classics and divinity, to a London bookseller, Benjamin White, when he left Bletchley in 1767; the remainder were dispersed by White after Cole's death intermixed with those of another collector, Charles Hedges. The sale catalogue of their combined libraries and other materials, dated February 1784, records almost 9000 volumes. Some of Cole's books were annotated by him and survive in the British Library and elsewhere. His prints, of which there were more than three thousand, were also dispersed together with the collection of stained glass which he built up to be one of the largest in private hands. 
From 1769 Cole was increasingly a martyr to gout and other ailments, badly overweight for his medium height, and lame. At the end of 1782 he became seriously ill and died on 16 December in Milton. He was buried on 22 December in St Clement's Church in Cambridge, his grandmother's place of worship, and left money towards the building of the spire. When it was done almost forty years later the words 'Deum Cole' were displayed on it; they were wrongly said to have been his motto. 
Cole's reputation has undergone several changes. Among many of his contemporaries he was well regarded for his learning, though they were alive to his singularities and prejudices which he took no trouble to disguise. 'With all his oddities', Michael Lort wrote just after his death, 'he was a worthy and valuable man' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 16.201). The terms of his will naturally caused alarm and defensiveness. Robert Masters, who did not live to see the manuscripts opened, supposed that the blending of personal scandal with his other collections would probably cause his work to sink into oblivion. Egerton Brydges, who printed extracts from Cole in his 'Restituta', described him as a known 'gossip' many of whose biographical notes 'consist of scarcely any thing but tattle' (Brydges, 4.242). Access to his original manuscripts after 1802 and the publication of parts of his correspondence, especially by John Nichols in 'Literary Anecdotes' and 'Illustrations', revealed Cole's foibles and inconsistencies plainly and made him at once a figure of fun and morally reprehensible by the severer standards and increasing delicacies of the nineteenth century. Isaac D'Israeli patronized him; J. J. Smith observed that 'his style is rude and free to licentiousness' (Smith, 1.153); to C. H. Cooper he had the industry of Anthony Wood 'without his common sense' and his prejudices 'are simply ridiculous' (Cooper, 'Ath. Cantab.', 1.vi). A later generation observed more favourably how 'he took a lively interest in all that was passing around him' and left 'an invaluable storehouse of information' (Willis and Clark, 1.xcvi). The publication of two volumes of his diaries in 1931, edited by F. G. Stokes and with introductions by Helen Waddell, brought Cole before a much wider public who found their vivid and immediate manner attractive. They exemplify and justify Cole's own view that 'anecdotes of men of learning and character, notices of customs and manners, are not only amusing, but instructive of the usages of early ages, and of our country and ancestors' (Brydges, 3.39). W. M. Palmer's 'William Cole of Milton' (1935), which includes an edition of Cole's parochial notes and church drawings for Cambridgeshire, and two elaborate volumes of Walpole's correspondence with Cole issued by the University of Yale in 1937 were well received, and Virginia Woolf took Cole and Walpole as the subject of an essay which has been reprinted several times. Cole became not simply of interest to academic scholarship and historiography: because of his individual qualities and distinctive expression he is numbered among the more entertaining and informative English letter writers and diarists. Indeed in a series of pastiche letters in 'Notes and Queries' between 1946 and 1948 he was reborn as a fictional character. 


@@@@@


doc= 5864


Cole, William (1753-1806), Church of England clergyman, was born at Mersham, Kent, on 8 December 1753. The names of his parents are not recorded, but his education was much assisted by a friend of his mother's, John Chapman (bap. 1705, d. 1784), archdeacon of Sudbury and rector of Mersham. Cole's obituary in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' may suggest that he was Chapman's son. He was sent to Ashford School, then to a private school at Bierton, near Aylesbury, Buckinghamshire. He was admitted as a king's scholar at Eton College in 1766, and he was there a favourite of the headmaster, Dr John Foster. On 11 August 1773 he was made scholar of King's College, Cambridge, where he was a fellow from 1776 to 1781. He graduated BA in 1778 and proceeded MA in 1781. 
In 1777 Cole returned to Eton as an assistant master but was dogged by ill health, having ruptured a blood vessel in his lungs as an undergraduate. On 14 March 1779 he was ordained priest by Edmund Keene, bishop of Ely. He resigned from Eton for health reasons in 1780 and became tutor to George Spencer, marquess of Blandford, and Lord Henry Spencer, the sons of George Spencer, fourth duke of Marlborough, to whom he became chaplain. He dedicated his 'Oratio de ridiculo' to the duke -- the work won the first of Sir William Browne's medals at Cambridge University. This was printed along with some Latin verse in 1780. Cole later published several sermons, and wrote the Latin preface to 'Gemmarum antiquarum delectus', an account of Marlborough's collection of antiquities published in two volumes in 1780 and 1791. In 1781 he was inducted to the rectory of Waddesdon (first portion), Buckinghamshire, on the presentation of the duke of Marlborough, but resigned it in 1788 when collated to the rectory of his birthplace, Mersham, by John Moore, archbishop of Canterbury. He held the rectory until his death. In 1792 he was appointed prebendary of Westminster and in 1795 received the degree of DD by the archbishop's diploma during the visitation of the diocese of Canterbury. In 1795 he married Mary, second daughter of the legal authority Sir William Blackstone; they had no children. In 1796 he was presented to the vicarage of Shoreham, Kent, by the dean and chapter of Westminster. Following several years of ill health, Cole died on 25 September 1806, and was buried in the north aisle of Westminster Abbey on 4 October. 


@@@@@


doc= 5865


Cole, William (bap. 1757, d. 1812), Church of England clergyman and writer, was baptized at Attleborough, Norfolk, on 17 March 1757, the eldest son of the Revd Denny Cole (died 1790) of Sudbury, and afterwards of Wickham Market, Suffolk, and his wife, Anne. He was educated at Eton College and went up to King's College, Cambridge, in 1775; he graduated BA in 1780, and proceeded MA in 1783. He was elected to a fellowship of King's, which he held until 1788. Cole was ordained deacon on 6 June 1784, and priest on 12 March 1786. He was subsequently instituted to the vicarage of Broad Chalke in Wiltshire, on the presentation of his college, which he held from 1788 to 1812. For several years he resided at Yoxford, Suffolk, and had the curacy of Theberton in that neighbourhood. Cole subsequently moved to London, where he officiated at a chapel near his residence in Baker Street, Portman Square, where he died in December 1812. 
Cole wrote a number of literary works. 'A Key to the Psalms' (1788) provided an easy introduction to the language and allusions of the 'Psalms'. A poem entitled 'To the Feeling Heart: Exalted Affection, or, Sophia Pringle' appeared in 1789. His novel 'The Contradiction' was published in 1796. 


@@@@@


doc= 5866


Colebrooke, Henry Thomas (1765-1837), administrator in India and scholar, was born in London on 15 June 1765, youngest son of Sir George Colebrooke, second baronet (1729-1809), banker and for four years chairman of the East India Company (1769-73), and his wife, Mary, daughter of Patrick Gaynor of Antigua. When Henry was twelve, his father was ruined and went to live in France for several years. Nevertheless, he used his connections to gain employment for his two youngest sons with the East India Company, and Henry was appointed a writer. Henry was educated by a tutor at home in London but only until he was fifteen. He evidently excelled both in languages and in mathematics, but appears to have been largely self-taught. A sister remembered that as a boy he showed interest in joining the church, but no such inclination is discernible in what is known of his adult life. 
Colebrooke set sail for India in 1782 and reached Calcutta in 1783. On arrival in India he had to wait three years for a post. In 1786 he was appointed assistant collector in Tirhut; in 1789 he was transferred to the same post in Purnea; in 1793 he was transferred to Nator. In 1794, on the death of Sir William Jones, he took over the responsibility for making a digest of Hindu law, and this led to his transfer to the judicial branch of the company's service. In 1795 he was appointed magistrate in Mirzapur, near Benares. In 1798 he was temporarily moved to the diplomatic service and appointed resident at Nagpur; he arrived there in March 1799. His mission was to talk the raja of Berar into concluding a treaty with the British. He stayed two years but political shifts elsewhere in India rendered his mission hopeless; nevertheless, Lord Wellesley, the governor-general, congratulated him on his efforts. Soon after his return to Mirzapur in 1801 he was transferred to Calcutta as one of the first members of the superior court of appeal; in 1805 he headed it as chief justice. 
In 1807 Colebrooke was at last promoted to a seat on the supreme council. He held this position for the usual five years under Lord Minto's administration, but left it in disfavour with the company's directors in London. He returned for six months to the superior court of appeal and was then appointed a member of the board of revenue. He left India for England in December 1814. 
In 1810 in Calcutta he met and married Elizabeth Wilkinson (1784/5-1814). He intended to retire with her to England as soon as possible, but was delayed by litigation. The couple had three sons, of whom one died in infancy; then, in October 1814, his wife died at the age of twenty-nine, and he returned to England alone. He also had a daughter and a son before he married; who their mother was is not recorded. The only son to survive him, and to marry, was Sir Thomas Edward Colebrooke, who became his biographer. Quotations below are from that biography, 'The Life of H. T. Colebrooke' (1873); its bibliography lists Colebrooke's publications. 
His son justly remarks that Colebrooke's life 'was noted for the pursuit of severe and abstract studies, rarely exceeded by the resident at an University or the inmate of a cloister' (Colebrooke, 12). The learning Colebrooke acquired and the publications he produced in the interstices of an extremely busy career, pursued under the rigours of the Indian climate, seem quite beyond the scope of what a comfortable professional academic might achieve in the late twentieth century. What the son's assessment omits, however, is the sheer breadth of Colebrooke's interests and knowledge. With his pre-eminence in 'abstract studies' he combined expertise on many practical topics; indeed, perhaps only the visual arts were missing from his repertoire. Though it is his contributions to the humanities which have been the most enduring, he probably devoted as much attention to science, technology, and realia. 
A historian is bound to see Colebrooke as a kind of successor to the orientalist Sir William Jones. He arrived in Calcutta the year before Jones and others founded the Asiatic Society of Bengal. He published twenty papers in 'Asiatic Researches', the journal of that society, and became its president in 1807. Back in Britain he took the lead in founding the parallel society in London. Like Jones, he became involved in studying, and trying to codify, Hindu (Brahmanical) law because he had to apply it in court. Also like Jones, his political opinions were strongly liberal. Both men purchased property in America with the idea of retiring to a freer political climate than that of Britain -- though neither achieved that goal. Equally impressive in their intellectual range, both are now remembered primarily for their Indology. Max Muller called Colebrooke 'founder and father of the Sanskrit scholarship in Europe'. Colebrooke's son has admirably summarized both how they complement each other and why his father remained the less well known. Jones was 'imaginative and inventive, powerful in illustration, always eager to trace analogies', so that his writings are 'attractive as well as instructive'. Colebrooke aimed, by contrast, 'to examine and record facts with the rigour of a student of physical science, and to lay down the results of [his] inquiries with a method necessarily dry, but affording a storehouse of important observations for future students. Mr. Colebrooke's comments, or general remarks, are few but weighty, and put forward with a caution that may be regarded as excessive, and render his writings unattractive to the general reader. (Colebrooke, 235)' The torch which Colebrooke received from Jones he passed on to Horace Hayman Wilson. In 1827 Colebrooke wrote to Wilson (who was still in India): 'Careless and indifferent as our countrymen are, I think, nevertheless, you and I may derive more complacent feelings from the reflection that, following the footsteps of Sir W. Jones, we have, with so little aid of collaborators, and so little encouragement, opened nearly every avenue, and left it to foreigners, who are taking up the clue we have furnished, to complete the outline of what we have sketched. It is some gratification to natural pride that the opportunity which the English have enjoyed has not been wholly unemployed.' On Colebrooke's death Wilson succeeded him as director of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland. 
The first book Colebrooke wrote (though not alone) was privately printed in 1795 as 'Remarks on the Present State of Husbandry and Commerce in Bengal'. Because of his support for free trade it could not then be published in London; when William Pitt had read it, Colebrooke was told he was lucky not to be dismissed from the service. But his part of the book was later recognized as a mine of information and republished. Another early publication was an article 'On Indian weights and measures'. 'Every branch of natural history attracted him, and he would say that the wonders revealed by the microscope were far more interesting than those of the telescope' (Colebrooke, 266). To see this remark in perspective one must be aware that Colebrooke became the second president of the Astronomical Society in 1824, succeeding Sir William Herschel. After retirement he even had his own chemical laboratory. In India he published articles on the gayal and 'On olibanum, or frankincense', and collected minerals and botanical specimens. In botany, 'an especially favourite study', he annotated Jones's posthumously published treatise on Indian plants, and a genus of Didynamia Gymnospermia was named 'Colebrookia' in his honour. 
Colebrooke took a keen interest in the exploration and surveying of the Himalayas, which he liked to call 'my mountains'. Jones had already written that they were the highest mountains in the world; Colebrooke estimated their height at 26,000 feet and asked for this to be checked. He corresponded with Lieutenant Webb, who had established that the Ganges rose in India (not, as previously thought, in Tibet), and in 1810 communicated this discovery to the Asiatic Society of Bengal. After leaving India he also published a paper on the height of the snow line, as well as papers on topics in oceanography, geology, and climatology. 
His son wrote: 'Nothing came amiss to him; he amassed a large store of miscellaneous information, so that those who, in later life, sought for works to amuse him, were often impressed with the extent of his reading in lighter literature. On two occasions in India... he applied himself to the surgeon's library, and acquired a very creditable knowledge of the general principles of surgery and medicine. (Colebrooke, 265)' 

It was Colebrooke's interest in mathematics and astronomy, his son claims, that gave him the initial impetus to learn Sanskrit. In a letter to his father in 1786 he writes, 'What leisure I find for study shall be given to Arabic, by which alone an accurate knowledge of Persian can be obtained', but in another letter shortly afterwards he reveals detailed knowledge of not only Arabic but also Sanskrit modes of time-reckoning. In 1807 he published 'On the Indian and Arabic Divisions of the Zodiac'; in 1816 'On the notions of the Hindu astronomers concerning the precession of the equinoxes and motions of the planets'. Most of his knowledge of Sanskrit astronomy ('jyotihshastra'), however, remained unpublished, and has to be gleaned from his annotations on the Sanskrit manuscripts in the field which are now in the British Library. Colebrooke's study of Indian mathematics is his most enduring achievement; his editions and translations of Sanskrit mathematical works remain fundamental for any student of the subject. 
In 1801 he was appointed honorary professor of Hindu law and Sanskrit at Fort William College, recently established in Calcutta. He did not teach, but examined in Sanskrit, Persian, Hindi, and Bengali. The author of an Arabic grammar, Lieutenant Baillie, repeatedly thanked Colebrooke for advice and assistance. Colebrooke initiated an imaginative but unsuccessful project to assemble vocabularies of all the languages spoken between Persia and China. His most impressive linguistic enterprise, however, was his 'Grammar of the Sanscrit Language', vol. 1 (1805, though a rare shorter version appeared in 1804), the first European work to be based on the indigenous linguistic tradition. William Jones had said that Panini's grammar, the root of that tradition, was 'so abstruse as to require the lucubration of many years before it can be perfectly understood' (Colebrooke, 193). Colebrooke supplied that lucubration. His preface showed that he appreciated the unique importance of Panini for the study of Sanskrit and its culture. Unfortunately he never finished the second volume, being discouraged by the greater popularity of the simpler grammars which were being published on the Latin model familiar to Europeans. Nevertheless, Colebrooke's volume stands as a monument marking the beginning of the study of traditional Sanskrit linguistics ('vyakarana') by non-Indians, and in due course that study was to bring 'vyakarana' into the global development of linguistics. 
Colebrooke had published for the first time two Sanskrit lexicons, Hemacandra's 'Abhidhana cintamani' and the 'Amarakosa'. In 'On the Sanscrit and Pracrit Languages' he traced the history of what are nowadays known as the Indo-Aryan languages. His long article 'On Sanscrit and Pracrit poetry', with its 'Synoptical tables of Indian prosody', is a compilation of information on metrics from Vedic to medieval literature which has yet to be surpassed. This article alone contains, albeit with Colebrooke's typical condensation, as much material as one would hope to find in a modern doctoral dissertation. He took considerable interest in Indian history, and five published papers concern inscriptions. 
Jones had proposed to compile a digest of both Hindu and Muslim law, but when he died in 1794 all that existed of this enterprise was a voluminous compilation in Sanskrit by a pandit, Jagannatha, of Brahman law on inheritance and contract. Colebrooke undertook to translate this into English and hoped to do so in six months, working part-time; in fact it took him two years and was published (in 1798) in four volumes. In 1801, when he joined the superior court of appeal, he had the court's decisions embodied in reports. He published further books on inheritance in 1810 and on contracts in 1818. He wrote in 1822 that he had prepared a 'Supplementary Digest' in Sanskrit and English, but found it 'very little called for'. The only publication to result from this work was his essay 'On Hindu courts of justice' (1828), the last Indological work published during his lifetime. He corresponded often and at length with Sir Thomas Strange, chief justice at Madras, about the latter's book on Hindu law, and many of his remarks are included in it. 
Colebrooke did great pioneer work on ancient Indian religion and philosophy. He wrote on all the major classical schools of Indian philosophy, though his translation of the 'Samkhya karika' was published after his death. He published an article (long enough to be called a monograph) on the Vedas (1805), and a series of three articles (1798-1801) entitled 'On the religious ceremonies of the Hindus, and of the brahmins especially'. Astonishingly, in the same period he published 'On the origin and peculiar tenets of certain Mohammedan sects' (1801). His earliest published article (1795) was 'On the duties of a faithful Hindu widow'. It quotes Sanskrit texts on a widow's duty to be burnt with her husband's body, adding that this was rarely done. When he was on the supreme council the government considered for the first time whether to suppress the custom: Colebrooke advised that to forbid it would be counter-productive and favoured regulation to ensure that the widow acted voluntarily. 
His 'Observation on the sect of Jains' (1807) was the first significant contribution ever made by a non-Indian to knowledge of that religion; it is based on original Prakrit texts. Unlike his predecessors, he clearly distinguished Jainism from Buddhism, and speculated intelligently, albeit incorrectly, on the relation between them. Though he never devoted a publication to Buddhism, he was planning to do so in 1804, when he wrote to his father: 'I have lately obtained a considerable addition of authentic and important information on the religion and mythology of the Buddhists. Everything relative to a religion, which has spread even more widely than the Christian or the Mahomedan faiths, is particularly interesting' (Colebrooke, 217). He later refuted the theory that Buddhism had preceded Brahmanism, showing that Vedic literature was pre-Buddhist. 
Colebrooke was the individual who played the greatest part in founding and establishing the (later Royal) Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland. He took the chair at all the preliminary meetings; the first, on 9 January 1823, was held at his house. It was evidently felt that the president should be someone of higher rank and greater influence; but it was unanimously decided to appoint, immediately below the president, a director, 'under whose particular care and protection Asiatic literature should be placed'. In this capacity Colebrooke was 'called to the chair' at the society's first general meeting on 15 March 1823. In his address he said that England had a special mission to repay a debt of gratitude to India. For the next three years he presided at most meetings both of the society and of its governing council; evidently it was he who really ran the society. His failing eyesight then limited his activity, but he remained director until his death. In 1824 he presented the society with drawings of Indian objects ranging from musical instruments to agricultural implements. 
He had already presented, in 1819, his collection of 2749 Indian manuscripts to the library of the East India Company (later the India Office Library, now part of the British Library). This must at the time have been the largest collection of Indian manuscripts outside India. The vast majority of the manuscripts were in Sanskrit, but Prakrit, Hindi, Gujarati, Marathi, Punjabi, and Bengali were also represented. In recognition of this generosity the directors of the company commissioned from F. L. Chantrey a bust of Colebrooke which still stands in the library. The India Office Library was also indirectly benefited by Colebrooke when it inherited the library of Fort William College, Calcutta, which he had done much to form. 
Colebrooke was 'small and spare in person' (Colebrooke, 383). Before his retirement he seems to have enjoyed good health. He was a strong walker, and when young was fond of hunting and other outdoor pursuits. To his son he appeared kind and yet rather formidable, perhaps with more intelligence than common sense. He enjoyed poetry and imaginative literature, but 'Tragic tales affected him so painfully that he generally shunned them' (ibid., 265). Though he had no small talk, he had an attractive dry wit: 'The Brahmins not inelegantly remarked of the occultation yesterday, that it was the emblem of the meeting between the Raja and his mother, which was, by the bye, to have taken place yesterday, but it did not; so that, it should seem, the planets were not informed of the postponement early enough' (ibid., 166). 
Colebrooke's life was perhaps not very happy. In his early years in India he longed to leave; a free-trader employed by the East India Company was a misfit. On the supreme council he lost favour because he was associated with a decision to postpone remittances to London, after the heavy costs of a campaign against Java, and because he had favoured the unsuccessful attempt to institute a house tax in large towns. Never decorated, he felt unjustly treated. Anxious about money, he lost much of what he had made in India through unwise speculation; he bought land in the Cape of Good Hope and spent nearly a year there (1821-2) but lost his investment. His health declined with his finances. His eyesight worsened and in 1829 he went completely blind. He then had terrible back pains. Between 1822 and 1834 he keenly suffered the deaths of two nieces to whom he was guardian and two sons, all as young adults. For the last three years he was bedridden. He died in London of influenza, or its after-effects, on 10 March 1837. 


@@@@@


doc= 5867


Colebrooke, Sir William Macbean George (1787-1870), army officer and colonial governor, was the son of Colonel Paulet Welbore Colebrooke RA (died 28 Sept 1816) and his wife, Mary, the daughter of Major-General Grant. He was educated at the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, and entered the Royal Artillery as a second lieutenant on 17 August 1803. 
In 1805 Colebrooke was ordered to the East Indies -- first to Ceylon, then in 1806 to Malabar, then in 1807 back to Ceylon. He went to India in 1809, served with the field army, and became a captain on 27 September 1810. He next served in Java, and was wounded in the operations against the Dutch in 1811; he stayed on under the British occupation, became deputy quartermaster-general in 1813, and was promoted major on 1 June 1813. He was sent as political agent and commissioner to Palembong in Sumatra, and to Bengal in 1814. He resumed his old duties in Java in 1815, and was ordered to India on the conclusion of peace and the restoration of Java to the Dutch on 19 August 1816. He served through the Anglo-Maratha War of 1817-18, and accompanied the expedition to the Persian Gulf in 1818. In 1820 he married Emma Sophia (died 1851), the daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel Robert Colebrooke (died 1808), surveyor-general of Bengal. 
Colebrooke returned to England in 1821. From 1822 to 1832 he was a commissioner of the long and elaborate 'Eastern inquiry' into the administration and revenues of Ceylon, and he resided there from 1829 to 1831. His fellow commissioner Charles Hay Cameron investigated the judicial system. Following his return to England Colebrooke submitted four reports recommending major reforms in Ceylon, which were largely implemented. In 1834 he became KH and on 9 September of that year was appointed lieutenant-governor of the Bahamas. He arrived at Nassau via Jamaica on 26 February 1835 and made his first speech to the assembly on 7 April. During his administration slavery gave way to the apprenticeship system prior to its final abolition, and Colebrooke was well informed of the problems which confronted him. 
On 13 February 1837, while on leave in England, Colebrooke was gazetted as governor of the Leeward Islands. He was knighted on 31 March 1837. He assumed the government of Antigua and the other islands on 11 May 1837; one of his earliest official acts was the proclamation of Queen Victoria. In this government, as in the Bahamas, he was anxious to improve education and reform prison discipline; he also urged the restoration of the old general council of the Leewards, which had last met in 1798. On 25 July 1840 he left Antigua for Liverpool, and after an extended leave was on 26 March 1841 made lieutenant-governor of New Brunswick. His attempts to reform the political system and create municipal institutions were thwarted by the provincial oligarchy. The question of the Maine boundary was then the chief public matter affecting the colony; Colebrooke's suggestion of a special scheme for colonization had no practical results. On 9 November 1846 he became colonel in the army, and on 27 November 1847 he was gazetted to British Guiana. However, he never took up the appointment, but proceeded instead on 11 August 1848 as governor to Barbados, where he also administered the Windward Islands. He continued his special interest in the suppression of crime and the improvement of the prisons, and his suggestions for a federation of all the Windward Islands foreshadowed much later proposals. In 1854 imperial troops were withdrawn from the smaller islands, but the island group remained peaceful and Colebrooke was well regarded by the people of Barbados. He became major-general on 20 June 1854. 
In January 1856 Colebrooke relinquished his office and returned to England. He was promoted lieutenant-general on 16 January 1859 and general on 26 December 1865, and he was colonel commanding the Royal Artillery from 25 September 1859 until his death. He lived at Iver House, Salt Hill, near Slough, Buckinghamshire, where he died on 6 February 1870. 


@@@@@


doc= 5868


Colechurch, Peter of (d. 1205), organizer of the rebuilding of London Bridge, was priest of the London parish of St Mary Colechurch (probably named after a local market for charcoal), where St Thomas of Canterbury had been born. Peter is recorded as having in 1176 begun 'the stone bridge of London', and in later centuries was identified as its architect. His true role, however, was that of fund-raiser (with a group of collectors), warden ('custos') of the work, and steward ('procurator') of the fraternity responsible for the estate, existing by 'c'.1190, which was devoted to the upkeep of the bridge. He is the chief witness to what are virtually identical documents drawn up for separate members of the powerful Blunt family, for whom he may regularly have performed legal services. He perhaps had a wide reputation as a man of affairs. His association with St Thomas was important, for the bridge was the most powerful symbol of the connection between London and Canterbury, and the work was in progress at a time when the citizens of London were adopting the martyr as their patron. In 1179/80 at least five guilds in the city were devoted to the bridge. The earlier bridge appears to have been built partly in stone, but under Peter there began the programme, probably completed soon after 1212, of reconstructing it entirely as a series of stone arches. His powers may have been failing by 1202, when Isenbert of Saintes was recommended to have care of the project and it was intended to erect houses for rent on the bridge. After his death in 1205, Peter's body was buried in the chapel on the bridge dedicated to St Thomas. Bones reputed to be his were removed from the undercroft of the chapel in 1832, and are now in the Museum of London. His seal (engraved 'Sigillum Petri Sacerdotis Pontis Londoniarum') shows a priest celebrating mass at a small altar. 


@@@@@


doc= 5869


Coleman, Charles (d. 1664), musician and composer, was possibly the son of Clare Coleman (died 1641), described at her burial in 1641 as 'an ancient widow gentlewoman' (Ashbee and Lasocki, 273). He first appears singing the part of Hymen in 'Cupid's Banishment', a masque by Robert White put on at Greenwich on 4 May 1617. By 27 February 1620, when the registers of St Andrew's, Holborn, London, record the baptism of his eldest son, Charles (died 1645), 'in Churchyard Alley in Fetter Lane', he had married. Two further children, Edward Coleman and Alice (died 1627), were baptized in 1622 and 1624. 
Exactly when Coleman became one of the king's musicians is not known, but he was listed among the lutes and voices at the funeral of James I in 1625. He took part in James Shirley's inns of court masque 'The Triumph of Peace' (1634) as both singer and instrumentalist, and wrote the music for 'The King and Queen's Entertainment at Richmond', presented by Prince Charles on 12 September 1636. 
According to Lucy Hutchinson (wife of the regicide John Hutchinson, whose music master he was) Coleman had a house in Richmond-on-Thames. She relates how 'the man being a skilful composer in music, the King's musicians often met at his house to practise new airs and prepare them for the king; and divers of the gentlemen and ladies that were affected with music, came thither to hear; others that were not took that pretense to entertain themselves with the company. (Ashbee and Lasocki, 271)' It was probably through Colonel Hutchinson's influence that Cambridge University awarded Coleman the MusD degree on 2 July 1651. John Playford lists him among London teachers 'For the Voyce or Viole' ('A Musicall Banquet', 1651), and he was sufficiently well known for Lodewijck Huygens -- who calls him 'a famous musician' -- to pay him a visit on 12 March 1652 while in London. Not finding him at home, he saw instead his wife, pronounced 'a pretty woman'; this must have been Grace, almost certainly his second wife, mother of his younger children Charles (died 1694), Regina ('bap'. 1650), and Grace. 
Coleman was one of the leading composers of his time. Though not a prolific songwriter, a number of his songs were published in John Playford's 'Select Musical Ayres and Dialogues' (1652, 1653, 1659, etc.) and survive in manuscript, notably in Lambeth Palace Library, MS 1041, which once belonged to Lady Anne Blount, daughter of the earl of Newport, and whose music master he may thus have been in the early 1650s. They are musically more advanced than those of his most famous contemporary Henry Lawes; among the best are 'Wake, my Adonis, do not cry' from Cartwright's 'The Lady Errant' (thought to have been performed at Oxford early in the civil war) and the dialogue 'Did you not once Lucinda vow' from 'The King and Queen's Entertainment'. A half-dozen viol fantasias of five and six parts are extant (the latter dating from before 1625), as are more than 250 consort airs, mostly arranged in suites. These show him as a close runner-up to John Jenkins and William Lawes, both as to quantity and quality. Many were published in Playford's 'A Musicall Banquet' (1651), 'Court Ayres' (1655), and 'Courtly Masquing Ayres' (1662), but many more remain in manuscript (BL, London; Bodl. Oxf. and Christ Church library, Oxford; also Dublin, New York, etc.). At least twenty-six airs for lyra viol are known from editions of Playford's 'Musick's Recreation on the Lyra-Viol' (1652, 1661, etc.) and various manuscripts. Coleman also wrote instrumental music for Davenant's 'First Dayes Entertainment at Rutland-House' (1656) and 'The Siege of Rhodes' (1656). 
Despite his anti-royalist connections Coleman set Shirley's 'Ode upon the Happy Return of King Charles to his Languishing Nation' at the Restoration, though the music does not survive. In due course he was reappointed to his place in the King's Musick 'for the viall, among the lutes and voices' at a salary of $40 per annum with $20 for strings and livery of $16. 2's'. 6died In November 1662, on the death of Henry Lawes, he was appointed composer to the king, with a further $40 per annum. 
Coleman died at his house in Churchyard Alley, Fetter Lane, and was buried in St Andrew's, Holborn, on 8 July 1664. His will, dated 2 July, was proved by his wife Grace on 16 July; in it he refers to himself as 'an Antient man' and mentions his children Charles (who succeeded to his place in the 'lutes and voices'), Regina, and Grace. 


@@@@@


doc= 5870


Coleman, Edward (bap. 1622, d. 1669), singer and composer, was baptized on 27 April 1622 at St Andrew's, Holborn, London. He was the second of seven children born to the viol player and composer Charles Coleman (d. 1664) and his wife, Grace. He first comes to notice in John Playford's list in 'A Musicall Banquet' (1651) of teachers 'for the Voyce or Viole'. He is, in fact, praised as Susanna Perwich's singing teacher in John Batchiler's 'The Virgins Pattern' (1661), where he is described as having 'rare abilities in 'singing''. He sang in 'The First Dayes Entertainment at Rutland House' in May 1656. An anonymous report on the 'Entertainment' noted that 'the Singers were Capt. Cooke, Ned Coleman and his wife, another wooman and other inconsiderable voyces'. Coleman was to have taken the role of Alphonso in 'The Siege of Rhodes' the following September. That production appears to have been thwarted at the last minute by an order from Cromwell for all those who had fought on the royalist side in the civil war (thus including William Davenant, who was both author and impresario) to leave London by 6 September. 'The Siege of Rhodes' was eventually performed at the Cockpit in April-May 1659, but with a double cast; Coleman shared his role with Roger Hill. This first English opera was something of a family affair: Edward's father composed the instrumental music (with George Hudson), while his wife, Catherine Ferrabosco ('bap'. 1623), sang the part of Ianthe. 
Edward Coleman's earliest known composition is the song 'The Glories of our Birth and State', which was written for James Shirley's 'Contention of Ajax and Ulysses', performed at Shirley's school at some time before its publication in 1659. (Coleman's song did not appear in print until 1667, in Playford's 'The Musical Companion', but was then reprinted in various anthologies up to 1680.) A number of his songs are included in the first volume of Playford's 'Select Musicall Ayres and Dialogues' (1653). 
At the Restoration, Coleman took up two positions in the court musical establishment. He became a gentleman of the Chapel Royal and was appointed to the 'private musick in ordinary... in the place of John Lanier for a voyce'. Since Coleman's place was taken after his death by the countertenor William Turner, we may assume that he too was a countertenor. He was listed among the gentlemen of the Chapel Royal who sang at the coronation of Charles II on St George's day (23 April) 1661. Like so many of the court musicians, Coleman seems to have got into financial difficulties as a consequence of the late payment of salaries. There were two instances, in 1662 and 1663, of his assigning sums due to him from the exchequer to creditors, and the administration of his will was granted to another. 
The only description of Coleman's singing comes from Pepys, and it is not particularly flattering. In the last few months of 1665 Catherine and Edward Coleman were frequent visitors at Pepys's house at Greenwich (where he had gone to escape the plague). Pepys noted in his diary on 8 November 'the best company for Musique I ever was in in my life... I have never lived so merrily... as I have done this plague-time, by... the acquaintance of... Coleman and her husband.' But his entry ten days earlier had been less enthusiastic about Coleman's voice -- and his manners: 'By and by, I back again home, and there find him [Thomas Hill] return[ed] with Mr. Coleman (his wife being ill) and Mr. [Nicholas] Laneare -- with whom, with their Lute, we had excellent company and good singing till midnight, and a good supper I did give them. But Coleman's voice is quite spoiled; and when he begins to be drunk, he is excellent company, but afterward troublesome and impertinent.' The Chapel Royal's book of remembrance records that Coleman died at Greenwich on 29 August 1669. 


@@@@@


doc= 5871


Colman, Edward (1636-1678), courtier, was born on 17 May 1636 at Brent Eleigh, Suffolk, the second of five children and only son of Thomas Colman (died 1661), vicar of Brent Eleigh and later rector of Thorpe Morieux, and his wife, Margaret (died 1680), daughter of Philip Wilson of Bocking, Essex. He matriculated at Trinity College, Cambridge, on 16 October 1651, and graduated BA in 1656 and MA in 1659. He entered royal service as a gentleman pensioner to the king on 28 June 1661. At some point between 1664 and 1667 he married his first cousin, Mary Orme ('b'. 'c'.1640, died after 1678), daughter of his late aunt, Jane Colman, and her husband, Simon Orme of Goldhanger, Essex. This marriage probably produced no children. 
Colman converted to Roman Catholicism in the early 1660s, and few advocates of the Catholic cause in late seventeenth-century England were as charismatic as he. Several highly publicized conversions were credited to his influence, and it can even be speculated that he may have played some part in that of James, duke of York (later James II). York's belief that the Catholic church would make headway in England only by supporting a policy of religious toleration echoed Colman's own views. What is certain is that he was associated with York by the early 1670s (probably, in the first instance, because his cousin Richard Colman, MP for Salisbury, was related to the Hydes, York's kin by marriage), and in 1673 York appointed him as secretary to his second wife, Mary of Modena. 
During the mid-1670s Colman conducted what was arguably an independent foreign policy on behalf of the duke of York. A visit by him to Cardinal Falconieri in Brussels in spring 1674 was an unsuccessful attempt to make indirect contact with the papal court. He was more persistent in cultivating several members of the French court, most notably the king's confessors, Jean Ferrier and Francois de la Chaise. However, it would appear that none of those in France with whom he corresponded thought the matter of sufficient importance to require the attention of Louis XIV. The exact extent of York's knowledge of these negotiations was never established: he knew a great deal about what Colman was up to and he was probably less than truthful when he later claimed that he had 'oft forwarn'd him [Colman] to be careful how he carryd himself, not to be so busy and meddlesome' ('Life of James the Second', 1.533-4). Their principal aim throughout was to obtain subsidies to reduce Charles II's dependence on parliament at a time when further legislation against Catholics seemed likely. No money was forthcoming and, when a French subsidy was eventually secured, it was through the efforts of the king and his own advisers. The lord treasurer, Thomas Osborne, earl of Danby, and the bishop of London, Henry Compton, came to view Colman as a dangerous influence on York and so plotted to remove him. They succeeded in getting him dismissed as the duchess's secretary in late 1676 after he was caught leaking naval intelligence in a newsletter. His activities thereafter on behalf of York are more shadowy, but he did receive substantial sums of money from Barrillon, the French ambassador, which he may have disbursed as bribes to MPs. 
As one of the most prominent lay Catholics in York's circle, it was unsurprising that Colman should figure in the elaborate fantasy plot dreamed up by Titus Oates and his associates in autumn 1678. According to Oates, Colman was to become secretary of state once the murder of Charles II had paved the way for York's accession. This detail may have been added by Oates only when he expanded on his original claims at his second meeting with Sir Edmund Berry Godfrey on 28 September. It later emerged that Godfrey got in touch with Colman immediately after that meeting, presumably so that York could be warned of the extent of Oates's new allegations. On 29 September 1678, the day after Oates was questioned by the privy council, officials raided Colman's house on the south side of Dean's Yard, Westminster. The search failed to find him, but did uncover a hidden cache of letters documenting his secret negotiations. The following day Colman, who may not have realized that the letters had been discovered, gave himself up and appeared before the privy council. His decision to come forward impressed the council and, at that stage, they were inclined to believe him. Their mood changed as soon as the decoding of the letters began. Taken out of context, much of what they contained could be interpreted as evidence of a Catholic plot, and there was a strong case for saying that the notorious letter of 29 September 1675 to de la Chaise did violate the anti-Catholic statutes then in force. 
Colman stood trial for treason in king's bench on 27 November, by which time Godfrey's murder had reinforced Oates's apparent credibility. Colman's conduct in court was considered 'very temperate' ('Ormonde MSS', 4.481), and he was sharp enough to expose several factual errors in Oates's evidence. The jury took less than a quarter of an hour to reach their guilty verdict. The death sentence was carried out at Tyburn on 3 December 1678, with Colman holding out to the very end the hope that York would obtain a last minute pardon for him. After he had been hanged, drawn, and quartered, his body was buried on unconsecrated ground next to St Giles-in-the-Fields. His wife, who survived him, is believed to have committed suicide several years later. Colman was beatified as one of the English martyrs by Pope Pius XI in 1929. 


@@@@@


doc= 5872


Coleman, Thomas (1597/8-1646), Church of England clergyman, was born in Oxford. On 28 April 1615, aged seventeen, he matriculated from Magdalen Hall, Oxford, from where he graduated BA on 10 June 1618 and proceeded MA on 6 July 1621. Appointed rector of Blyton, Lincolnshire, in 1623 by Sir John Wray, at an unknown date he married Elizabeth, whose surname was quite probably Burton and who almost certainly came from a local family. Nothing is known of Coleman's ministry there. 
In 1642 Coleman left for London, claiming that he had been persecuted by royalists. On 7 March 1642 the House of Commons voted not to make him lecturer of St Giles-in-the-Fields, London, though it named him to the Westminster assembly on 23 April and appointed him rector of St Peter Cornhill, after William Fairfax had been sequestrated in 1643. In August that year the committee for plundered ministers had explicitly requested that he be appointed to a living in London or Hertfordshire. His fast sermon to the House of Commons on 30 August was published as 'The Christians Course and Complaint' (1643), with an epistle that urged MPs to maintain the purity of religion and denounced burdensome impositions, illegal monopolies, inordinate delays between parliaments, and infringements on liberty. He preached on 29 September at St Margaret's, Westminster, when those present took the covenant; published as 'The Hearts Ingagement' (1643), his address responded to objections to the oath. After the royalists failed to capture Hull, Coleman described the siege in 'Huls Pillar of Providence Erected' (1644), attributing the city's deliverance to divine providence. On 12 September 1644 he preached another fast sermon to both houses of parliament, encouraging them to persevere in the war despite the terrible things that God's corrective rod might inflict on them; the sermon was published as 'Gods Unusuall Answer to a Solemne Fast' (1644). 
Coleman ignited a controversy by his fast sermon 'Hopes Deferred and Dashed' (1645) to the House of Commons on 30 July 1645 in which he called for unity in the church by establishing as few things as possible on a 'jure divino' basis, requiring clear scriptural support for all precepts espoused as divine, limiting the burden of government on ministers to what Christ designated, and recognizing that a Christian magistrate is a governor in the church. Prelacy, in his judgement, was 'the Grand-causer' of the civil war (p. 33), and he favoured presbyterian polity, although of an Erastian rather than a Scottish form. Although his views of independency were mixed he opposed gathered churches because of their inability to provide adequate support to clergy and their willingness to permit the unlearned to become ministers. His assertion that Scottish commissioners and Independents hindered unity so offended the former that he had to apologize on 1 August. Unsatisfied, George Gillespie attacked him in an appendix to 'A Sermon' (1645) in which he averred that Coleman's proposed cure for disunity was worse than the disease and struck at the root of ecclesiastical government. Other Scottish ministers joined Gillespie in defending the church's unimpeded power to excommunicate against Coleman's Erastian position, and Adoniram Byfield, another member of the assembly, charged Coleman with slighting that body and 'our Sister churches' in 'A Brief View of Mr. Coleman his New-Modell of Church Government' (1645). 
In 'A Brotherly Examination Re-Examined' (1646) Coleman responded to Gillespie, reiterating his preference for presbyterian polity but insisting on parliament's right to establish the church government it considers best. Replying in 'Nihil respondes' ('1645'), Gillespie accused Coleman of propagating doctrine repugnant to the solemn league and covenant and treating parliament and the assembly derogatorily. Coleman defended himself against Gillespie and Byfield in 'Male dicis maledicis' (1646), in part by insisting that his views essentially accorded with Byfield's. Gillespie retorted, accusing Coleman in 'Male audis' (1646) of having wronged the Church of Scotland and opposed the word of God, the solemn league and covenant, and parliamentary ordinances. 
Coleman was not without supporters. A skilled Hebraist, he was known as Rabbi Coleman. The most prominent Erastian pamphleteer, he enjoyed the respect of Thomas Case, Thomas Edwards, Thomas Fuller, Lewis du Moulin, and Richard Baxter despite their differences of opinion. On 2 October 1645 he preached a thanksgiving sermon to the House of Commons, later that year he was invited to become the minister at St Bride's, Fleet Street (though he declined), and in March 1646 Robert Baillie complained about his influence with attorneys in the House of Commons. At that time Coleman was translating the writings of Erastus on excommunication, but on 18 March he was stricken with a fever, and four or five days later, according to Baillie, Coleman died in London as a consequence of divine judgment; he was buried in the chancel at St Peter Cornhill on 30 March. His widow retired to Blyton, where, on 7 February 1652, she made a will leaving property to her nephews and nieces in the Burton family; it was proved on 26 September 1653. 


@@@@@


doc= 5873


Coleman, William Higgins (c.1816-1863), botanist, was born in Middlesex, the son of John Coleman and his wife, Constance. Following early education at the Blue Coat School, Hertford, he went in February 1832 to St John's College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1836 and MA in 1838. He was ordained deacon and priest at Lincoln in 1840. During his sojourn at Cambridge Coleman became a compulsive compiler of floristic lists, and in 1839 discovered the great pignut, 'Bunium bulbocastanum' L., a species new to the British Isles. In the summer of 1836 he obtained a scholastic post near East Grinstead, Sussex, where he remained for six months. There he produced his best-known plant list, the manuscript of which was edited by T. C. G. Rich and published in 1994 under the title 'W. H. Coleman's Flora of East Grinstead (1836)'. During 1837 Coleman moved to Essex, where he taught at Dedham grammar school, returning to Hertford in the following year and possibly becoming a master at Christ's Hospital, Hertford. 
In 1841, in association with the Revd Richard Holden Webb (1806-1880), the compilation of a flora of Hertfordshire was announced. In the survey that followed Coleman recognized the specific status of the river water-dropwort 'Oenanthe fluviatilis', and identified the hybrid sedge 'Carex boenninghauseniana' Weihe as new to the British flora. During 1847 he was teaching in Ashby-de-la-Zouch, Leicestershire, and in 1849 moved to Dunster, Somerset. Meanwhile, Webb had published the first part of 'Flora Hertfordiensis', citing Coleman as the senior co-author. The book contained innovations which were utilized by later local flora writers and set a new standard for the geographical study of British plants. 
Back in Leicestershire and with the aid of the Revd Andrew Bloxam (1801-1878) Coleman studied the critical genus 'Rubus' (which includes blackberries and raspberries) as well as the floristics of the county. Coleman remained unmarried and died at Burton upon Trent, Staffordshire, on 12 September 1863. His manuscript (with Bloxam) 'Flora Leicestrensis' passed to his friend Edwin Brown (1818-1876), and thence to the Leicester Museum. 


@@@@@


doc= 5874


Frances Ellen Colenso (1849-1887) was born on 30 May 1849 at Forncett, also in Norfolk. The youngest child of the family, Agnes Mary (1855-1932), became Harriette's lifelong stalwart supporter; her brothers Robert John (1850-1926) and Francis Ernest (Frank) Colenso, (1852-1910) became a doctor and an actuary respectively. Both settled in England, but Frank continued to give unstinting support to his sisters in their controversies. 


@@@@@


doc= 5875


Colenso, John William (1814-1883), bishop of Natal, was born at St Austell, Cornwall, on 24 January 1814, the eldest child of John William Colenso, mineral agent for part of the duchy of Cornwall. Originally dissenters, his parents and their four children became members of the Church of England in his adolescence. For four years he attended the mathematical and classical school in St Austell. His mother, whose maiden name was Blackmore, died when he was fifteen and at about the same time a tin mine in which his father had an interest was flooded by the sea. This appears to have ended his formal schooling for he was obliged, in order to help the family finances, to accept employment as an usher at a Dartmouth school. He seems already to have made up his mind that he wished to be ordained and he was also showing a marked talent for mathematics. He was able, after private preparation, to enter St John's College, Cambridge, as a sizar on 22 May 1832, at the age of eighteen. Supporting himself by private teaching and what he could earn in the way of prizes and exhibitions, and with some small financial assistance from his mother's family, his life at Cambridge was hard and lonely but academically successful. He was second wrangler and Smith's prizeman in 1836, and was elected to a fellowship in the college in March 1837. 
Colenso was appointed mathematics tutor at Harrow School in 1838 and was ordained in 1839. In material terms this, too, was a period of hardship and financial stringency. The school was in a less than buoyant state and, though Colenso ran a boarding-house, usually a source of additional income for an assistant master, his house was destroyed by fire and he was soon several thousand pounds in debt, which hung over him for years. He returned to St John's College from 1842 to 1846 and from Cambridge published two textbooks, one on algebra in 1841 and one on arithmetic in 1843. Colenso's 'Arithmetic', in particular, was a considerable success and earned him substantial royalties. He married on 8 January 1846 (Sarah) Frances (1816-1893), daughter of Robert Bunyon of Highgate, head of the London office of the Norwich Union insurance company. Marriage necessitated resigning his fellowship, but his wife's family obtained for him the living of Forncett St Mary in Norfolk in the same year. The conscientious performance of his parochial duties in this quite small parish still left him time to coach pupils in mathematics and to edit the journal of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel. 
Colenso had been brought up an earnest evangelical, but had begun to question some of the doctrines usually associated with that tradition. Before his marriage, his future wife had introduced him to Frederick Denison Maurice, whose ideas were to influence him profoundly. A belief in the universal fatherhood of God and the unity of all humanity, together with doubts about 'the endlessness of future punishment', began to characterize his preaching. He does not appear, however, at this stage in his life, to have regarded the 'Bible' as other than literally true. In 1853, just as he was planning the publication of a volume of sermons to be dedicated to Maurice (which was to earn the sharp disapproval of the evangelical 'Record'), his interest in missions brought him to the notice of Bishop Robert Gray of Cape Town, whose diocese was being divided and who was looking for potential bishops for two new sees. In April 1853 Colenso accepted the offer of the bishopric of Natal. Having been issued with royal letters patent, he was consecrated on 30 November, St Andrew's day, of that year and sailed for Natal almost immediately. His plan was to acquire as much information as possible so that he could return to England to raise money and recruit workers. On his return he published 'Ten Weeks in Natal' (1855), setting out his impressions and his plans for the future, and also dealing with certain fundamental missionary principles on which he began to earn a reputation for unorthodoxy. He argued, for instance, that polygamy (which he disliked) was not incompatible with Christian morality. 
In May 1855 Colenso arrived in Natal with his wife and children and a number of workers for the new diocese. His first task was to establish his headquarters at Bishopstowe, 6 miles east of Pietermaritzburg. Unfailingly energetic, by 1857 he had completed the cathedral in Pietermaritzburg and churches in Durban and Richmond, and within seven years of his arrival he had opened four mission stations in Natal and one in Zululand. And he had soon learned enough of the Zulu language to be able to teach and confirm. 
Colenso from the first regarded the indigenous people, who called him Sobantu ('father of the people'), as his chief responsibility. He chose to live outside the capital of the colony so that his home at Bishopstowe could also be his chief mission station, Ekukanyeni. With white colonists he was less patient and less popular. Because he tried to do away with pew rents and to insist on strict observance of the provisions of the 'Book of Common Prayer', he was attacked as a ritualist and his effigy was burnt in the market square in Durban. The leading clergyman in Natal before the bishop's arrival was James Green, dean of Pietermaritzburg, who was an advanced Tractarian and, from the first, bitterly critical of Colenso's broad-church opinions. 
The bishop was able, as early as 1855, to publish an elementary Zulu grammar and, four years later, an abridgement entitled 'First Steps in Zulu'. His linguistic ability was also put to work in translating the whole of the 'New Testament', several books of the 'Old Testament', and much of the 'Book of Common Prayer', while his 'Three Native Accounts of a Visit of the Bishop of Natal' (1860) made available Zulu texts, with grammatical notes and an English translation. His 'Zulu-English Dictionary' (1861) was a substantial volume with more than 10,000 entries. Most of these works were printed, under his direction, on his own press at Ekukanyeni. 
In presenting Christianity to the indigenous people Colenso was not prepared to deny or ignore the findings of natural scientists. When questioned by Zulu converts, he admitted that much of the 'Old Testament' was not factually true. Even more important, he came increasingly to feel that he could not present 'Old Testament' accounts of massacres as if these were in accordance with the will of God, while telling his African hearers that battle and murder were immoral. He began to believe that the supposed acts of God as presented by some 'Old Testament' texts were little better than the savageries committed during the Indian mutiny of 1857-8. It was this moral difficulty that first kindled his interest in biblical criticism. Because the questions of his converts played some part in the process, too, his opponents joked that, having gone to convert the heathen, the bishop had in fact been converted by them. However, 'conversion', as understood by most missionaries, played a small part in Colenso's vocation. He desired to Christianize Zulu culture rather than to remove individuals from their traditional 'heathen' way of life. He maintained his attitude on polygamy, agreeing with Theophilus Shepstone (1817-1893), secretary for native affairs in the colonial administration, that to insist on monogamy for Christian converts would, by putting aside other wives and calling the status of their children in question, entail the worse evil of destabilizing traditional society. 
Colenso published a commentary on 'Romans' in 1861 which stressed God's love for all mankind and insisted that his purpose was to destroy sin rather than punish it. This tendency to universalism was thought to contradict the 'Thirty-Nine Articles', and its implications for his sacramental theology were particularly unacceptable to the Tractarian clergy. The first volume of the bishop's 'Pentateuch and the Book of Joshua Critically Examined' was published in 1862. It was typical of his immense and disciplined energy that he produced it, after reading all the works of German biblical scholarship on which he could lay his hands, in a matter of a few months. Kurtz and Hengstenberg seemed to him dishonest; Ewald's erudition impressed him; but Bleek and De Wette he thought nearest the truth. The technique he employed in applying critical methods to the first six books of the 'Bible' was one which he would later use to great effect in attacking colonial government publications: if one could demonstrate that allegedly factual statements were untrue, one need not be bound by any principles said to be founded on them. If, for example, one could show that the Israelites could not possibly have camped in one place in the desert, as described in 'Exodus', without being buried under a mound of dung produced by their flocks and herds, then the text (since it was mistaken) could not be the product of divine direction and therefore one need not believe that God had commended some cruel atrocity. Unfortunately the first volume was chiefly concerned with the negative and destructive part of this programme. In comparison with some of the German critics, Colenso was moderate. He made no great contribution to the advance of scholarship, though it is possible that he influenced Abraham Kuenen (1828-1891) in his identification of P as the latest of the Pentateuchal sources and played some part in the growing consensus that 'Deuteronomy' was Josiah's law book. Modern scholars inevitably regard Colenso's work as outdated and, while some some historians have treated him as little more than a figure of fun, others regard his critical writings as not insignificant. At the time this work gave great offence, alienating even F. D. Maurice and E. H. Browne, who had both previously been his friends. (The later volumes were a constructive reassessment of the 'Hexateuch' in the light of developing scholarship, but were largely unread and unremembered. The seventh and final volume did not appear until 1879.) 
Bishop Gray, who had been created metropolitan by royal letters patent when his diocese was divided, was in the process of developing a synodical structure for the Anglican church in South Africa, including ecclesiastical courts for the new province. In this process Colenso had played a full part, but he was now delated for heresy before the metropolitan's court for teaching contained in his commentary on 'Romans' and in 'Pentateuch and... Joshua'. Gray sat, with two other bishops as assessors, found Colenso guilty, and deposed him from office on 16 December 1863. Colenso appeared by proxy, but only to protest against the court's jurisdiction. When he ignored its sentence, he was formally excommunicated. Gray had already been involved in an attempt to exercise ecclesiastical discipline over a clergyman in his diocese, and it rapidly became clear that his letters patent conferred on him no coercive jurisdiction. On Colenso's seeking redress from the civil courts by means of a petition to the crown, the sentence was set aside in 1865 by the judicial committee of the privy council, which held that the letters patent of both bishops were void since the Cape and Natal each possessed its own legislature. Nor did Colenso's oath of canonical obedience give the metropolitan any authority to depose him, since the letters patent were held, despite their invalidity, to have created ecclesiastical persons who could not be unmade except by the crown. In addition, because the letters patent could not confer jurisdiction, Colenso ought not to have taken an oath of obedience to a metropolitan who had no legal authority to demand it. 
Gray and his supporters believed passionately that the church must be free from interference by the civil courts and achieved the passage of a constitution for the 'Church of the Province of South Africa' which enshrined this. In Natal it was regarded by many as an attempt to create a church different from the Church of England. However a new bishop, W. K. Macrorie, was appointed under this constitution and consecrated in Cape Town, without royal mandate, as 'bishop of Maritzburg' on 25 January 1869. Schism in Natal was inevitable and was to continue until after Colenso's death. A majority of the English bishops agreed to inhibit Colenso from officiating in their dioceses, but more liberal opinion supported him, and Dean Stanley was to invite him to preach in Westminster Abbey. In Pietermaritzburg, Green and his supporters used every device possible to exclude Colenso from the churches, but the bishop's preaching -- and his notoriety -- drew crowds to his services and the courts supported his right to use the buildings. 
The master of the rolls, Lord Romilly, in a judgment of November 1866, pronounced Colenso to be entitled to all the property of the see. The case is cited as 'Bishop of Natal v. Gladstone and others', W. E. Gladstone being the treasurer of the Colonial Bishopricks Fund which was threatening to withhold from Colenso the income from the endowment of the diocese. In the eyes of the law he was bishop of Natal, and some two-thirds of the laity forgot their earlier suspicions of his 'popery' and supported him. The supreme court of the colony confirmed him in the possession of all land and buildings granted, donated, or bought for 'the Church of England', including all save one mission station. Macrorie and his adherents were obliged to build a new cathedral and churches, but had the support of almost all the original clergy and of the English missionary societies. Colenso's greatest difficulty lay in finding suitable clergymen: most of those who went to join him turned out to be misfits, indolent, or undesirable. 
Colenso's position was weakened by hostility arising from his active championship of the Hlubi chief Langalibalele, and subsequently of the Zulu king Cetewayo. The bishop had always taken more than a passing interest in, and through his friendship with Shepstone had involved himself with, the colony's policies regarding the indigenous people. Langalibalele's offence was that in 1873 he ignored a summons to account for the failure of many of his Hlubi tribesmen to register firearms procured at the diamond fields. He had subsequently withdrawn to Basutoland, after a skirmish in which half a dozen colonial auxiliaries were killed. He was handed over to the authorities and tried, in accordance with the principles of indirect rule, under what purported to be 'native custom', in a court presided over by Lieutenant-Governor Pine as 'supreme chief'. Colenso was appalled by the procedures of this court, under which the tribal assessors gave their verdict on the first day, evidence was heard on the second, and the accused was permitted counsel on the third. The sentence was transportation to the Cape. Not only the rebel Hlubi but the neighbouring Ngwe (Putili) people suffered confiscation of land and cattle or were compelled to work on colonists' farms. Colenso at once denounced the injustice of these harshly punitive measures, offending Shepstone (who claimed to be 'the humane ruler of these natives'; Uys, 104), and campaigned in England for the imperial government to intervene. The breach with Shepstone was further widened by accusations of earlier treachery against a tribal chief made by the bishop against Shepstone's brother. In London, Lord Carnarvon, the new colonial secretary, heard the bishop, recalled Pine, and insisted on mitigation of the sentences. Many colonists in Natal turned against Colenso once more, and he became the target for much abuse. 
When the Anglo-Zulu War broke out in 1879 Colenso contended that it had been precipitated by Sir Bartle Frere, the high commissioner, and that Cetewayo's strategy, when the British troops had first entered Zululand, had been purely defensive. He published a series of pamphlets sharply critical of Frere's Zulu policy and after the conclusion of the war did everything he could to put the deposed and exiled Zulu king's case in Britain. It was partly through his intervention that Cetewayo was invited to London in 1882 and received by Queen Victoria. The bishop had been made a member of the Natal native affairs commission in the previous year but, because he encouraged the Zulu people to resist government pressure, he was suspected by the Colonial Office as well as local officials of fomenting rebellion and riot. He was vilified in the Natal newspapers and became a very lonely and isolated figure. He died at Bishopstowe on 20 July 1883 and was buried in his cathedral. 
Perhaps because of their isolation, Colenso's family was a very united one. Of the bishop's five children, one son (Frank Colenso) and his three unmarried daughters (Harriette Emily Colenso, Frances, and Agnes) were committed to continuing their father's struggle for the rights of the indigenous people. His wife, who died on 23 December 1893, was an intelligent and gifted woman and an accomplished amateur water-colourist. She seems to have chosen deliberately to avoid Natal society, preferring to worship in the mission church rather than in the cathedral. She was well educated and was a friend of F. D. Maurice even before her marriage to Colenso; she maintained a regular correspondence for more than a decade with Lady Lyell, the wife of the eminent geologist Sir Charles Lyell. She supported her husband unreservedly, though quietly and from behind the scenes, and was responsible for seeing that G. W. Cox, the bishop's biographer, received such material as would put Colenso in the best possible light. 


@@@@@


doc= 5876


Colepeper, John, first Baron Colepeper (bap. 1600, d. 1660), politician, was born at Wigsell Manor in Salehurst, Sussex, and baptized at Salehurst on 17 August 1600. He was the second but eldest surviving son of Thomas Colepeper (died 1613) and Anne Slaney (died 1602), and nephew of Mary Weld, Lady Weld. He may have studied at Peterhouse, Cambridge (1611), and at Hart Hall, Oxford (1616), as well as at the Middle Temple (1617). It seems that he then saw military service abroad; he was knighted on 14 January 1621. After his first marriage, to Philippa Snelling (died 1630) on 29 October 1628, he settled at Hollingbourne in Kent and was a justice of the peace in Kent by 1638. After Philippa's death in the autumn of 1630 he married his cousin, Judith Colepeper ('bap'. 1606, died 1691?), on 12 January 1631. 
Colepeper represented Rye, Sussex, in the Short Parliament and Kent in the Long Parliament. On 9 November 1640 he presented a petition from Kent and made a lengthy statement of the 'grievances of the Church and Common-wealth'. The most important of these he listed as 'the greater increase of papists', 'the obtruding and countenancing of many divers new ceremonies in matters of religion', 'the new canons', 'military charges', 'the heavy Tax of ship-mony', and lastly the monopolists, 'the leeches that have suck'd the Common-wealth' ('Sir John Culpeper his Speech in Parliament Concerning the Grievances of the Church and Common-Wealth', 1641, 1-4). On 1 December he urged 'that an act may bee drawen against the growth of poperie' ('Journal', ed. Notestein, 91). On 8 February 1641 he strongly opposed the committing of the London root-and-branch petition, and the previous week had referred to bishops as 'maine columnes of the realme' (ibid., 315). He supported the attainder of Strafford and when, on 3 May, the first army plot was revealed to the Commons, he immediately moved 'for the remonstrance and peticon of rights to be forthwith read, and then to goe to the lordes and by that we may try the effeccon of the kinge' (diary of Sir Simonds D'Ewes, BL, Harleian MS 477, fol. 28'r'). 
Colepeper's desire to preserve episcopacy was again evident on 11 June when he moved that the statement in the preamble to the root-and-branch bill that 'the present government of the Church had been by long experience an hinderance to the full reformation of religion and to the civill state' be rephrased 'by late experience'. He believed that 'the grievances had growne from the abuse of the goverment and not from the goverment it selfe' (diary of Sir Simonds D'Ewes, BL, Harleian MS 164, fol. 217'r'). He was appalled at the growing threat of popular violence against the church during the summer of 1641, and on 1 September brought forward a resolution in defence of the prayer book. Throughout the summer and autumn he gradually drew closer to Charles I, whom he regarded as less of a danger to existing constitutional and ecclesiastical structures than his leading opponents. Colepeper advocated a grant to the king of tonnage and poundage for three years and worked intensively to get this passed before the debate on episcopacy was concluded, in the belief that this might enable Charles to dissolve the parliament. His strategy was linked to a proposal for a new book of rates, but this was abandoned as financially unworkable. 
In November Colepeper protested against the grand remonstrance, arguing that 'all remonstrances should bee addressed to the king and not to the people, because hee only can redresse our greevances' (H. Verney, ed., 'Notes of Proceedings in the Long Parliament... by Sir Ralph Verney', CS, 1st ser., 31, 1845, 122). He similarly opposed the militia ordinance on the grounds that it would 'take the King's lawfull power from him' ('Journal', ed. Coates, 303). On 2 January 1642 Charles appointed Colepeper a privy councillor and chancellor of the exchequer. Colepeper remained deeply committed to constitutional propriety and was embarrassed when the king, without his knowledge, attempted to arrest five members of the Commons and one member of the Lords on 4 January 1642. A desire to prove the king's integrity probably explains why he advised Charles to assent to the 'Bishops Exclusion Bill' and the 'Impressment Bill'. When, on 1 April, Sir Peter Wentworth queried whether Charles could be trusted any longer, Colepeper 'wondered that any man should dare to speak such language within these walls' (Coates, Young, and Snow, 2.115). On 19 May he acted as a teller against a clause that the king's oath bound him to accept bills passed by both houses for the good of the kingdom. Later that month Colepeper, who had earlier advised Charles to remove to the north of England, joined the king at York. 
During the months immediately preceding the outbreak of the civil war Colepeper regularly collaborated with Falkland and Hyde in drafting the king's responses to the houses' messages and declarations. This polemical activity proved highly effective and culminated in the king's 'Answer to the XIX Propositions', which he and Falkland composed in June 1642. This presented a classic defence of royal government within the law, and asserted that the houses' terms formed 'a great chain... by which our just, antient, regal power is endeavour'd to be fetch'd down to the ground'; they thus directly threatened 'the antient, equal, happy, well-poised, and never enough commended constitution of the government of this kingdom'. The 'Answer' argued that a 'regulated monarchy' was essential to 'preserve the laws in their force, and the subjects in their liberties and properties' and this commitment extended to preserving the existing features of the church 'as they are here established by law' (J. Rushworth, 'Historical Collections of Private Passages of State', 8 vols., 1680-1701, 4.725-35). 
Three days after the king raised his standard at Nottingham he reluctantly agreed to send Colepeper, together with the earls of Southampton and Dorset and Sir William Uvedale, to inform the houses of his 'constant and earnest care to preserve the public peace' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 2.304). However, although the four were permitted to deliver this message, the houses ordered them to withdraw from London immediately. Colepeper charged with Prince Rupert at the battle of Edgehill and was among those who urged the king to stand his ground. He was installed as master of the rolls on 28 January 1643, and his reluctance to surrender the chancellorship of the exchequer until 22 February caused a rift with Hyde, who had been promised the office. Colepeper sat in the Oxford parliament and soon found himself at odds with more hardline royalists over whether to pursue further talks with the houses. In the king's council he likewise urged that propositions be sent to Westminster. This did not endear him to more hawkish figures such as Digby and Prince Rupert, and there was considerable resentment at his creation as Baron Colepeper of Thoresway on 21 October 1644. 
Colepeper served as one of the king's commissioners at the treaty of Uxbridge (January-February 1645). The following March, Charles appointed him to the prince of Wales's council, together with Hyde, and sent them to the west of England. Hyde, Colepeper, and the rest of the prince's council moved to Jersey in mid-April 1646, but when the prince set sail for France on 26 June Colepeper alone accompanied him. Throughout the mid-1640s Colepeper hoped to secure aid from Scotland, and to this end was prepared to make greater religious concessions than Hyde, and many other royalists, could accept. In September 1646, writing jointly with Henry Jermyn, he denied that episcopacy was 'jure divino exclusive', and together they told the king that 'the question in short is whether you will chuse to be a King of Presbitery or no King' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Clarendon 91, fols. 35'v'-36'r'). Such views prompted Hyde to beg him not to let 'the landmarkes bee removed, nor pillars upon which the fabrique relyes bee taken away' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Clarendon 29, fol. 55'v'), while the king 'never... much esteemed' Colepeper 'in religion' (Bruce, 30), and even told Sir William Davenant that he thought 'Culpeper had no religion' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 4.206). Equally, in another letter written jointly with Jermyn, Colepeper urged the king not to sacrifice his military powers, arguing that 'if you part with the militia, and place [it] in the Parlament as is desyred you will thereby consent to change monarchy into aristocracy' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Clarendon 91, fol. 36'r'). By this time Colepeper had suffered considerably for his royalist allegiance. On 22 January 1644 he was formally disabled, as a royalist, from sitting in parliament, and on 9 February the Commons ordered that Colepeper's estate was to be sequestrated and his goods sold. On 28 July 1644 the committee of the advance of money assessed him at $2000. 
During the summer and autumn of 1647 Colepeper encouraged Sir John Berkeley's mission to England to promote negotiations between the king and the army. The following year, when part of the parliamentarian fleet revolted, Colepeper accompanied the prince to sea and was widely blamed for the failure of the expedition to achieve anything. After the prince and Colepeper returned to The Hague the latter's long-standing animosity with Prince Rupert flared up again. He vehemently opposed Rupert's nomination of Sir Robert Walsh as an agent for the sale of prize goods, and during one council meeting even threatened to fight Rupert. A few days later, on 23 October 1648, Walsh violently attacked Colepeper in the streets and was banished from court. 
After the execution of Charles I, royal counsels were for a while dominated by the 'Louvre' group, of which Colepeper, Jermyn, and Henrietta Maria were the most prominent members. Colepeper remained particularly keen to promote a rapprochement with the Scots, although he was anxious to secure alliances with other powers as well. He was deeply offended not to be chosen as ambassador to Spain in the spring of 1649, and the following year he was dispatched to Moscow to borrow money from the tsar. This mission proved highly successful. He was feted in Moscow -- one meal consisted of a hundred dishes of meat -- and returned triumphantly in July 1650 with a loan of 20,000 roubles in corn and furs. However, with the king's defeat at Worcester the pro-Scottish activism of the Louvre group was discredited and thereafter its influence began to decline. 
In the summer of 1652 Colepeper was sent to the Netherlands, then at war with the English Commonwealth, in the hope of securing armed assistance but by this time much of his influence as a royal counsellor had been eroded. An attempt to resurrect links with Scotland in May 1654 proved abortive, and a further symptom of his dwindling power came the following October when he urged Lord Percy 'to come to the King's Court for he needs helpe' (Warner, 2.113). From the mid-1650s onwards Colepeper was a much more marginal figure, and in April 1655 he professed himself 'a great stranger to all busines, especially designes in England, and was very seldom' at court (ibid., 2.252). The treaty of August 1654 between Cromwell and Mazarin required Colepeper's expulsion from French territory, and he apparently spent the rest of his exile in Flanders. 
A few days after Cromwell's death Colepeper advised Hyde 'not [to] be over hasty in doing any thing in England' and warned him against a premature move which would 'only serve to unite our ennemyes'. Then followed this remarkably prescient passage: 'The person that my eye is cheefly on, as able alone to restore the King, and not absolutely avers to it, neither in his principles nor in his affections... is Monke, who commandeth absolutely at his devotion a better army... then that in England is, and in the King's quarrell can bringe with him the strength of Scotland, and soe protect the northerne countyes that he cannot faile of them in his march, the reputation whereof (if he declare) will as much give the will to the appearing of the King's party in the rest of England, as the drawing the army from the southerne, westerne and easterne countyes will give them the meanes to appeare in armes. Thus the worke will be certainly donne in spight of all opposition that can be apprehended, and the gaining of one man will alone make sure worke of the whole. (Bodl. Oxf., MS Clarendon 58, fols. 345'v'-346'v')' Colepeper thus predicted with astonishing accuracy the chain of events which would lead to Charles II's restoration nearly two years later, and it was arguably the shrewdest insight of his political career. 
Throughout the 1650s Colepeper's relationship with Hyde remained distinctly uneven. After the Restoration, Hyde claimed that although they were 'not thought to have the greatest kindness for each other, yet he knew he could agree with no other man so well in business, and was very unwilling [Colepeper] should be from the person of the King' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 5.37). Hyde described him as 'a man of great parts, a very sharp and present wit, and an universal understanding' ('Life of... Clarendon', 1.319). However, contemporaries frequently remarked on Hyde's poor relations with Colepeper; Lord Hatton for example thought Colepeper 'a sworne enemy to Sir E[dward] H[yde] even to death' ('Nicholas Papers', 2.101). Yet by the later 1650s they appear to have been on increasingly friendly terms and in January 1658 Colepeper warmly congratulated Hyde on his appointment as lord chancellor. Both were agreed in opposing any plans for premature royalist insurrections within England. This did not, however, preclude negotiations with the French and Spanish monarchs, and in the autumn of 1659 Colepeper journeyed to Spain in a bid to gain some advantage for Charles from the treaty of the Pyrenees: he kept Hyde closely briefed throughout that trip. This growing closeness was reflected in Colepeper's appointment as chancellor of the exchequer in June 1660. However, he died only weeks later on 11 July, probably in London, and was buried at Hollingbourne. His estates were subsequently restored by a private act of parliament. 
Hyde left a colourful portrait of Colepeper as of 'a rough nature, a hot head, and of great courage; which had engaged him in many quarrels and duels... a man of sharpness of parts, and volubility of language' ('Life of... Clarendon', 1.106). This accords with Sir Philip Warwick's statement that Colepeper 'had an eagerness or ferocity, that made him less sociable than his other collegues' (Warwick, 195). In matters of religion, Clarendon thought Colepeper: 'very indifferent; but more inclined to what was established, to avoid the accidents which commonly attend a change, without any motives from his conscience; which yet he kept to himself; and was well content to have it believed that the activity proceeded from thence. ('Life of... Clarendon', 1.107)' This subtly nuanced account catches both the lack of an unshakeable conscientious commitment to the Church of England that both Hyde and the king had lamented in Colepeper during the later 1640s, and also the visceral attachment to established institutions that was characteristic of so many royalists. 


@@@@@


doc= 5877


Colepeper, Thomas (1637-1708), soldier and engineer, was born on Christmas day 1637 in Kent, possibly in either Dover or Hackington, the son of Sir Thomas Colepeper (1598-1643), governor of Dover Castle, and his wife, Barbara (1599-1643), daughter of Robert Sidney, first earl of Leicester. Sir Thomas was Lady Colepeper's second husband; her first was Thomas Smythe, first Viscount Strangford, with whom she had other children. It was to the Smythe household that Thomas went when in 1643 he was orphaned. What formal education he received seems to have been at home, where he was trained as a steward for his family estate at Stanford. Whatever the actual nature of his education, Colepeper possessed a formidable intellectual curiosity, and in later life he displayed remarkable energy in scientific pursuits. 
With his half-brother Philip, second Viscount Strangford, the young Colepeper joined the royalist underground. From 1658 he claimed to be a colonel in the royal service, though he may never have actually been commissioned. Nevertheless, the council of state knew of his royalist connections, and in July 1659 ordered his appearance. He was arrested at Canterbury and sent as a prisoner to the Gatehouse in Westminster in early August. The council granted him bail of $3000 on 26 September 1659. 
Like so many who devoted themselves to the Restoration, Colepeper received meagre rewards. In 1663 he claimed a grant from the Loyal and Indigent Officer's Fund, but whether he ever received one is unknown. By this time he was much in need of assistance, for his attempt to ally himself with a noble family had gone awry. About 1662 he eloped and married Frances (1638-1698), the youngest daughter of Lord Frescheville, who then refused to make her a settlement. Father and son-in-law were ultimately reconciled, but Frescheville never gave his daughter a fortune. The $300 annuity he granted her after his death in 1682 would have done little to rescue the struggling Colepeper, who had, by 1675, already sold the family estate. In any event Lord Frescheville's own estate was so heavily encumbered that it is doubtful that the annuity was regularly paid. 
Colepeper's embarrassed circumstances compelled him to live by his wits and the exercise of his scientific imagination. In February 1665 he and several others petitioned the crown for a grant of marshland they planned to drain on the Lancashire coast. By September 1665 he had gained a foothold in the royal service as a gun-founder. His scientific interests led to his election to the Royal Society on 28 May 1668, not long after the crown granted him a patent for an iron hearth. In 1675 he was appointed engineer in the Ordnance office at an annual salary of $100; his work in the Ordnance office led to the invention of a grenade launcher in 1681. 
Colepeper's fertile mind was, unfortunately, joined with a hot temper, and he wrecked his career as a military engineer by a rash act in the summer of 1685. On 9 July, standing near James II's bedchamber door, he met William Cavendish, fourth earl of Devonshire. The two men had a troubled relationship, inspired primarily by Colepeper's unreasonable belief that his wife should have inherited lands that Lord Frescheville sold to Devonshire's family shortly before his death. Bitter lawsuits ensued. Added to this was political animosity: Colepeper rudely demanded to know what 'an excluder' was doing at court. Devonshire, while whiggishly inclined, had in fact not been an avowed exclusionist, and gave Colepeper the lie. The result was a brawl conducted in full view of the king. Colepeper was not only bested by Devonshire, who knocked him to the floor, but also imprisoned by the king's command. On 20 July he was tried in the court of the verge of the palace, and received a savage sentence: the loss of his right hand, a fine of $1000, and life imprisonment. Under the circumstances, the royal order to sack him from the Ordnance office nine days later was no more than a minor inconvenience. Luckily, he did not suffer the full rigour of the law. His wife threw herself into his cause, and, with the help of the earl of Danby, secured his pardon. In December 1686 he petitioned James for the restoration of his place, though without success. In April the following year he had another altercation with Devonshire, who challenged him in the king's presence. Colepeper had learned his lesson, and refused the challenge; Devonshire was arrested and ultimately fined $30,000, which he never paid, and was in his turn pardoned by William III. The choleric earl assaulted Colepeper yet again in 1697, though in this case neither man was prosecuted. Colepeper, now in his sixtieth year, was, however, badly beaten. 
By the time of Devonshire's last attack, Colepeper was declining into a destitute, if frenetic, old age. His penchant for invention never left him, but it never rewarded him with anything like the fame and riches he thought his due. In May 1688 he received a patent for a 'new water engine'. During William III's reign he proposed a comprehensive scheme which he guaranteed would make the king Europe's most powerful sovereign by, among other things, allowing royal naval vessels to be used as fire ships without actually burning, making all of the king's fortresses impregnable, and raising, at his own expense, a force of 12,000 men for the crown. None of these boons was taken up. Following his wife's death in December 1698 and the loss of her annuity -- if it was paid at all -- he sank further into poverty. 
But Colepeper was fundamentally an optimist, and he never ceased hoping for better things. He compiled many volumes of evidence to prove his right to the Frescheville title, which availed him nothing, but reveal his quarrelsome and petulant nature. Only two months before his death he was writing to the king of Prussia, offering his services and claiming to have 'discovered' longitude. He died in his rented lodgings in Westminster in December 1708, and was buried at St Margaret's Church there on 28 December. 


@@@@@


doc= 5878


Colepeper, William (d. 1726), poet and local politician, was the eldest son of Sir Thomas Colepeper, third baronet (1656?-1723), of Prevton Hall, near Maidstone, Kent, an MP. Nothing is known of his education and early life. He was involved in a trial in February 1701 before Chief Justice Holt in which certain people were fined for attempting to injure him. Colepeper claimed that an attempt had been made on his life on the instruction of Sir George Rook, with whom he had quarrelled. On 8 May of the same year he was one of five gentlemen who delivered a petition to the House of Commons from the deputy lieutenants, justices, and grand jurors of Kent. Colepeper, who was chairman of the quarter sessions at Maidstone, had been responsible for drawing up the petition, which requested that the house turned their loyal addresses into bills of supply. It was voted insolent and seditious and the five were ordered into the custody of the serjeant-at-arms and kept prisoners at the gatehouse until the end of the session. 
Colepeper also wrote poetry, and was the author of 'A Heroick Poem upon the King' (1694), 'A Poem to the Lady Duty', and 'Poem to the Revd John Brandreth', included in 'Miscellaneous Poems and Translations by Several Hands' (1726), published by Richard Savage. He was married to Elizabeth Gill, with whom he had three sons and three daughters. 


