@@@@@


doc= 41100


Asquith, Raymond (1878-1916), scholar and army officer, was born on 6 November 1878 in John Street, Hampstead, the eldest of the five children of Herbert Henry Asquith (1852-1928), later prime minister and first earl of Oxford and Asquith, and his first wife, Helen (died 1891), daughter of Frederick Melland of Manchester. Academically gifted, he was educated at Winchester College (1892-7) and at Balliol College, Oxford (1897-1902), winning scholarships at both institutions. As well as being president of the Oxford Union (1900), he won the chief university prizes, including the Ireland, Craven, and Derby scholarships, and took first-class honours in classics and law. With characteristic aversion to self-importance, he wrote to a friend on receiving news of his first that 'this stirs no emotion in me' (Jolliffe, 80). 
Asquith was one of those men 'whose brilliance in boyhood and early manhood dazzles their contemporaries and becomes a legend' (Buchan, 57), a legend enhanced by his war record and courage in battle. At Oxford he was the leader of a circle which included Harold Baker, the cousins Aubrey and Auberon Herbert, and John Buchan, who was later to describe the group in print, mentioning in particular their 'scrupulous avoidance of parade', and claimed that 'in the world of action we were ready for any venture; in the things of the mind we were critical and decorous, chary of enthusiasm' (ibid., 53-4). The hero of Buchan's novel 'The Half-Hearted' (1900) is loosely based on Asquith, to whom the novel is dedicated. A much lesser light in the circle, the solicitor E. S. P. Haynes, commented that although Asquith 'was sometimes thought cold and cynical I would like to record that his kindness and friendliness to me never varied' (Jolliffe, 31). Asquith became a fellow of All Souls in 1902, an honour he prized greatly, although, like his other successes, he appeared at the time to wear it lightly. The 'Balliol College war memorial book' (vol. 1) records that 'some of his contemporaries may have equalled him in intellectual strength, but none came near the variety of his gifts'. Apart from his talent as a classical scholar, he had a fluent and distinctive style in prose and verse, in speech and oratory, and most memorably in his letters of which many hundreds have survived. A good example of his light-hearted vein is in his poem 'In Praise of Young Girls', a pastiche of Pope in thirty heroic couplets, contrasting old and new fashions in seduction. The following brief extract gives a flavour of the whole: '
When Mona Lisa posed with rustic guile 

The stale enigma of her simple smile, 

Her leisured lovers raised a pious cheer 

While the slow mischief crept from ear to ear. 

Poor listless Lombard, you would ne'er engage 

The brisker beaux of our mercurial age, 

Whose lively mettle can as easy brook 

An epic poem as a lingering look. 

Our modern maiden smears the twig with lime 

For twice as many hearts in half the time. 

' Asquith's own experience was in sharp contrast to either of the fashions which he describes. In 1901 he met Katharine Frances Horner (1885-1976), daughter of Sir John and Lady Horner ['see 'Horner, Frances Jane] of Mells, Somerset. A long courtship, occasioned by her youth and his lack of money, was eventually followed by marriage on 25 July 1907. Two daughters were born, in 1908 and 1910, and a son, Julian Edward George Asquith who eventually succeeded his grandfather as second earl of Oxford and Asquith, was born in 1916. Asquith's outstandingly happy marriage brought to light his capacity for deep feeling and personal commitment, always present in his character but which he concealed in youth, giving rise at times to a mistaken impression of cynicism. 
In 1904 Asquith was called to the bar at the Inner Temple, but he had a low tolerance for the dull work required of juniors and little professional ambition. His first long case was on an arbitration on the Newfoundland fisheries at the International Court at The Hague. He spent four months at The Hague in 1910, commenting 'the Zoo here is very bad too. There is practically nothing in it but a chiff-chaff (called in Dutch Tjif-Tjaf)' (Jolliffe, 176). By 1914 he had been made junior counsel to the Inland Revenue, and in the previous year he was adopted as Liberal candidate for Derby, where the sitting member was retiring. He made a series of speeches there, but his political career was cut short by the war. Although distrustful of dogmas of all kinds, he was keen to address the genuine problems of the day. 
Suspicious of rhetoric, not least of the kind abundantly generated on the outbreak of war in August 1914, Asquith soon decided that it was a matter of honour, at the age of thirty-six, to enlist in the army, and in January 1915 joined the Queen's Westminster rifles. Fretting at the dreariness of the jobs the Westminsters were given, and frustrated by the prospect of not seeing active service, he transferred as a lieutenant into the 3rd battalion of the Grenadier Guards in July 1915, and went out to France in October. In an early letter to his wife from the front he noted the contempt felt for staff officers behind the lines by those in the trenches, and felt that she would think he was right not to become one, adding with tragic irony, 'though of course one may find in the end that there are more uncomfortable things than general abuse' ('Raymond Asquith', 205). As the winter of 1915 drew on, discomforts inevitably increased. These he vividly described, but claimed to 'take the same sort of interest in it as an ill-tempered tourist may take in an uncomfortable hotel' (ibid., 217). He did his best to withstand attempts by his father, the prime minister, to transfer him onto the general staff but for four months (late January to May 1916) was posted, against his wishes, to general headquarters of the British expeditionary force, where he served unenthusiastically in intelligence work. He returned to his regiment in the line to take part in the Somme offensive of July, with all its dangers of constant shelling, sniping, and mortar bombs. Facing these with unfailing courage and cheerfulness he would seize any brief interval to write home with graphic descriptions of his daily life. 
On 15 September, as the guards division advanced from Ginchy on Lesboeufs, Asquith was hit in the chest by a bullet. An eyewitness recorded that in order to prevent his men from knowing the worst at once, he lit a cigarette after he fell, before being given morphia. He died on the way to the dressing station, and was buried in the war cemetery on the Guillemont Road. A private soldier wrote home that 'there is not one of us who would not have changed places with him if we had thought that he would have lived, for he was one of the finest men who ever wore the King's uniform, and he did not know what fear was. (Jolliffe, 296-7)' In a letter of sympathy to his widow, Winston Churchill referred to Asquith as 'my brilliant hero-friend', and wrote to the prime minister that 'His was a character of singular charm and distinction -- so gifted and yet so devoid of personal ambition, so critically detached from ordinary affairs yet capable of the utmost willing sacrifice' (ibid., 297). This confirms all the other evidence that it was for what he was, rather than for what he did, that Raymond Asquith occupied a unique place in the admiration and affection of his generation. 


@@@@@


doc= 41102


Pitter, Ruth (1897-1992), poet and craftswoman, was born on 7 November 1897 at 1 Meath Road, Ilford, Essex, the eldest of three children of George Pitter (1862-1926) and his wife, Louisa Rosetta (Rosamund), 'nee' Murrell (1869-1941), both assistant teachers in the East End of London. Though she grew up in poor surroundings her childhood was transfigured by the discovery of Hainault Forest, for her unforgettably magical. 
In 1911, while still at the Coborn School, Bow, and with her parents' encouragement, Pitter began contributing regularly to A. R. Orage's periodical 'New Age'. After two years in the War Office, she joined a small firm at Southwold on the Suffolk coast, making decorated furniture and other wares. When her employers moved to London in 1918 she continued with them until in 1930, with a fellow worker who became her lifelong companion, Kathleen O'Hara (known as K), she acquired the 'ghost of a similar business' in Chelsea (Kunitz and Haycraft, 1110). The partnership prospered, marketing trays and other objects delicately painted, mainly by Pitter, with garlands of flowers and fruit. 
Hilaire Belloc discovered Pitter's work through Orage, and financed her earliest publications, 'First Poems' (1920) and 'First and Second Poems' (1927). Although Pitter tended later to dismiss these works they contain many clues to her future development: she was convinced of the special nature and privilege of the poet's craft, aware that for her it was incompatible with marriage. In autumn 1927 she befriended Eric Blair (George Orwell), and was later to count him with Orage, Belloc, and Lord David Cecil as among the most important influences of her life. 
Pitter's long poem 'Persephone in Hades' (1931) appeared in a tiny limited edition printed in France, but she first attracted public attention with 'A Mad Lady's Garland' (1934), a brilliantly crafted work reflecting her early exercises, encouraged by Orage, in the art of pastiche. John Stewart Collis remembered 'Her remarkable 'range', and the subtlety of her oblique lyrical assault'. When Orage and George William Russell (AE) met with contributors at a cafe in Chancery Lane, Pitter 'far surpassed [AE], or anyone else, in conversation, her talk having in it so much of surprise and freshness' (Collis, 125). Pitter received increasing acclaim with 'A Trophy of Arms' (1936), with a preface by James Stephens, which won her the Hawthornden prize, and 'The Spirit Watches' (1939). During the Second World War she and K abandoned their business to work in Morgan's Crucible Works across the Thames, an experience which gave rise to some of Pitter's most moving poems in 'The Bridge' (1945). 
During these grim years, inspired by the broadcasts and writings of C. S. Lewis, Pitter joined the Anglican church. Her new faith intensified tendencies already manifest in her verse, which was grounded in the natural world, in common things and people, portrayed with love and a painterly exactness of vision. She celebrated a belief in an all-pervading divinity in creation, investing with visionary force the hoverfly on the anthers of a poppy as much as the constellations. Her poems ranged from profound desolation to a triumphant affirmation of renewed life, exemplified in the myth of Persephone, her aim always to capture the 'hints and echoes and messages of which everything is full' (Pitter, 'Poems, 1926-1966', 1968, xi). There was a lighter side to her, however, perceptible throughout her work -- a relish for earthy humour and demotic speech, captured in 'The Rude Potato' (1941) and 'Pitter on Cats' (1947). 
After 1945 Pitter continued her decorative painting at home, and did so into her seventies. 'Urania' (1950) collected some of her best poems from 'A Trophy of Arms' onwards, followed by 'The Ermine: Poems, 1942-1952', not long after she and K had moved to Long Crendon in Buckinghamshire, where she could indulge her love of gardening. In 1954 she won the Heinemann Foundation award, and in 1955 was the first woman to receive the queen's gold medal for poetry. She gained a reputation on radio and television, notably as a member of The Brains Trust, and from 1958 to 1959 contributed weekly articles to 'Woman' magazine on country living, gardening, and religious feeling. The then editor, Mary Grieve, recalled her later as 'physically very strong, with a strong voice, slow in her movements but with a lot of stamina, a very practical person' (unpublished interview, 17 Sept 1990). 

'Still by Choice', a Poetry Book Society recommendation, appeared in 1966, and in 1968 'Poems, 1926-1966', with an American edition, 'Collected Poems', in 1969, but these years had seen a loss of impetus. Already in a broadcast interview in 1964 Pitter had spoken of feeling 'rather suspended, like Mahomet's coffin', and in 1973 K died, but by 1975 there were further poems to appear in 'End of Drought'. Pitter had been honoured as a companion of literature in 1974, and in 1979 was made a commander of the British empire. In 1987, in her ninetieth year, the Enitharmon Press published 'A Heaven to Find', spanning the years 1908 to 1976, and in 1990 produced an invaluable new 'Collected Poems', revised and re-issued in 1996. 
In her last years Pitter was blind and confined to her couch at home, but despite her frailty her face and voice were still strong, her conversation spellbindingly rich and humorous. She died at her home, The Hawthorns, Chilton Road, Long Crendon, Buckinghamshire, on 29 February 1992 and was buried in the churchyard of St Mary the Virgin, Long Crendon, on 5 March 1992. 


@@@@@


doc= 41104


Loane, Martha Jane (1852-1933), nurse and social commentator, was born on 7 February 1852 at 8 North Place, Eldad, Plymouth, Devon, to Jabez Loane ('c'.1821-1895), a master in the Royal Navy, and Jane, 'nee' Cooley (died 1852). Her father remarried on 10 November 1852 and his second wife, Harriet, 'nee' Kiddle (1824-1864), spinster daughter of John Kiddle RN, bore a further five children, three boys and two girls. Harriet Loane died suddenly on 7 November 1864, leaving Jabez, then a staff commander, and his six young children devastated by their loss. The family had moved to Southsea by 1863, and the following year Martha began her elementary education as a boarder at the Royal Naval School for Females, St Margaret's, Isleworth, Middlesex. Her formal education was completed in 1870. No details of her whereabouts for the next fifteen years have come to light, though it is possible that she spent time travelling in Europe. 
In 1885 Loane decided to take up nursing, a profession which had recently acquired a new respectability, largely owing to the influence of Florence Nightingale. She trained at Charing Cross Hospital, London, and then, under the title of Sister Agnes, worked there as a ward sister, moving in 1888 to Shropshire and becoming a sister-in-charge at the Shrewsbury Royal Infirmary in late 1889. In 1893 she gave up hospital nursing in favour of district nursing. This branch of the profession was conducted largely under the auspices of Queen Victoria's Jubilee Institute for Nurses, a charitable organization founded in 1887, whose objectives included training nurses to care for the sick poor in their own homes. Once qualified, having attended the institute's central training school in Bloomsbury (1893-4), and having gained a midwifery qualification in 1893 from the Obstetrical Society of London, Martha worked as a queen's nurse in Buxton, Derbyshire, for two years before being promoted, in 1897, to the position of superintendent of queen's nurses for the Borough of Portsmouth Association for Nursing the Sick Poor. Martha became a highly respected figure, and was renowned for her efficiency and concern for the poor. Her enforced retirement from nursing in October 1905, following life-threatening appendicitis, was a great loss to the local community and the institute, which considered her to be an outstanding superintendent. 
Loane's retirement from nursing did not affect her well-established career as a writer on nursing and social topics. Encouraged by Florence Nightingale in 1895, she made contributions to reviews, journals, and the national press (notably 35 articles in 'Nursing Notes', 1897-1907; 23 articles in the 'Evening News', 1907-10; and 13 articles in 'The Spectator', 1910-11). She also produced six nursing handbooks ('The District Nurse as Health Missioner', 'The Duties of a Superintendent in a Small Home for District Nurses', 'The Incidental Opportunities of District Nursing', 'Outlines of Routine in District Nursing', 1904; 'Simple Sanitation', 1905; 'Simple Introductory Lessons in Midwifery', 1906). But of greatest significance were her six popular social commentaries ('The Queen's Poor', 1905; 'The Next Street but One', 1907; 'From their Point of View', 1908; 'Neighbours and Friends', 1909; 'An Englishman's Castle', 1910; 'The Common Growth', 1911), which earned her a reputation as a leading authority on the condition of the working-class poor in Britain. Studies of poverty in Britain owed much to the pioneering, largely quantitative, surveys undertaken by Charles Booth in London and J. Seebohm Rowntree in York. But Loane's commentaries were significant in two major respects: not only were they, uniquely, based on the first-hand experiences of a distinguished queen's nurse who had made repeated and extensive visits to the homes of the poor, but they concentrated on revealing intimate details about the quality of working-class life. 
Loane's apparently subjective doorstep accounts provided a penetrating insight into the thoughts and beliefs, emotions, and culture of the 'respectable poor' -- those who kept 'even the most painfully poor and crowded home together' ('The Queen's Poor', 1905, 27). Infancy and childhood, youth and education, health and welfare, domestic arrangements, courtship, marriage, parenthood and old age, work and play, religion, and the meaning of life and death were all addressed. Loane commented upon legislation which affected the lives of the poor and debated the numerous social problems of the day. Although the solutions which she offered to these did not always meet with unequivocal approval, she was successful in raising public awareness and in highlighting the complex nature of these issues. 
What no one ever suspected was that the well-known queen's nurse was, in fact, party to a literary deception that remained undetected during and beyond her lifetime. Direct and indirect references to Martha's nursing career reinforced the popular belief that she was totally responsible for the articles and the social commentaries, but she was evidently only partly responsible. Authorship was attributed variously to M. Loane, M. J. Loane, Martha Loane, and M. E. Loane: although Martha's professional experiences provided the material and thus the credibility for the work, it was her younger half-sister, Alice Eliza Loane ['see below'], who compiled much of the work and who was posthumously credited with writing the books. 
No pictures of Martha Loane have apparently survived: the only personal detail that has emerged concerns her conversion to Roman Catholicism in 1910, an event that ultimately ruptured her relationship with Alice. Martha died at her home at 22 Woodland Terrace, Lipson, Plymouth, on 16 October 1933, aged eighty-one, and was buried in the Plymouth corporation cemetery, Efford, on 19 October. The sole beneficiaries of her estate, which amounted to $463 8's'. 3died, were the Catholic Education Council and the Hospital for Women, Soho, London. 




@@@@@


doc= 41105


Goad, Charles Edward (1848-1910), cartographer and civil engineer, was born on 15 March 1848 at High Street, Camberwell, Surrey, the second son of Charles Goad, plumber, of London, and his wife, Caroline Ann ('nee' Vogel). He was educated locally and became an associate of arts of the newly created University of Oxford local examinations board. He moved to Canada in 1869 and was employed until 1873 as an engineer in the construction of the Toronto, Grey, and Bruce Railway. Without formal qualifications, his 'on-the-job' training in engineering and surveying stood him in good stead. He worked for the Montreal Northern Colonial Railway in building a line from Montreal to Ottawa, and in 1876 was appointed chief engineer of the Halifax and Cape Breton Railway. 
Goad's most significant work was his series of insurance surveys of cities in Canada, Great Britain, and elsewhere. In 1875 he realized that fires, which were destroying many buildings and even entire city districts, created a demand for street maps and detailed plans showing the width of streets and delimiting every building. Fire insurance companies needed to know details of construction, building materials (and hence flammability), and the exact size of buildings; the nature of the water-works system and the location of fire appliances; and the spatial concentration of policy holders so as to limit a company's losses in the event of a conflagration. 
The Charles E. Goad Company was established in Montreal in 1875. With teams of surveyors he mapped streets and measured each building in detail, noting its use and room arrangement, the thickness of the walls, construction material, type of roof, and location of doors and windows. The first city to be mapped was Levis, Quebec, but insurance companies were slow to buy Goad's plans and he continued to work for the Halifax Railway. In 1881 he started a magazine, 'The Insurance Society', in which he quoted statistics to prove the high profits earned by companies which used his plans. His impressive advertising had its effect, and in 1885 he moved to Toronto. An advertisement of 1884 indicated his diversity: 'Railway Surveys, Estimates and Construction, Corporation, and Water Works, Real Estate Plans and Street Profiles, Insurance Surveys, Diagrams and Views'. Over the next decade he extended his series of large-scale insurance plans to more than 1300 places in Canada. 
In 1885, with the company firmly established in Canada, Goad returned to Britain and in London opened what was to become, after his death, the company's head office. The Goad fire insurance plans were first produced for towns and cities within the British Isles in 1886, and within ten years the central parts of all the major towns and industrial districts were covered. The large-scale plans (1:3600) depict, by means of colour and symbol, impressive information on land use and building construction. London became the hub of Goad's extending international involvement with plans produced for France and Denmark, Egypt and Turkey, the West Indies, Venezuela, Chile, and South Africa. The plans contributed significantly to the development of fire insurance procedures and London's primacy in that business, and Goad's London office was strategically located at 56 Crouch Hill, near the head offices of the major London insurers, in the City. Insights into Goad's fine organizational skills, his achievements in developing and standardizing survey, cartographic, and reprographic techniques, and his methods of gaining access to various buildings, are afforded by the company's correspondence books, in the British Library. Letters between Goad and Bram Stoker, author of 'Dracula', are revealing. In 1886 Stoker, then manager of the Lyceum Theatre in London, refused access to a Goad surveyor intent upon undertaking internal surveys and drawings of the Lyceum. Goad wrote immediately threatening the possibility of 'exorbitant insurance premiums'. Stoker quickly acquiesced and allowed the detailed internal inspection to proceed. 
In 1877 Goad married Caroline Madeleine (died 1941), a Montreal woman of French-Canadian extraction; they had three sons and one daughter. A man of wide interests and considerable vitality, Goad was a member of the American Society of Civil Engineers, the Canadian Society of Civil Engineers, the London chamber of commerce, the Engineers' Club of New York, a fellow of the Statistical Society of London, and a life fellow of the Imperial Institute. He used his engineering skills to drain the swamps that then characterized Toronto Island and the present park on the island owes much to his ingenuity and vision. During his later years, accompanied by his family, he would spend winters on his plan business in London and summers in Toronto. 
Goad was well-built and bearded, and of above average height. He was a respected family man in Toronto and London society, an active freemason, an Anglican, and a long-time member of St Thomas's Church, Toronto. He died following a paralytic seizure at his home, 80 George Street, Toronto, on 10 June 1910 and was buried in the family vault at Mount Pleasant cemetery, Toronto. His three sons continued the London-based business that survived as an independent operation until 1974. 


@@@@@


doc= 41106


Bell, Florence Eveleen Eleanore, Lady Bell (1851-1930), author, social investigator, and playwright, was born on 9 September 1851 at 2 rue St Florentin, Paris, the youngest of the four children of Sir Joseph Olliffe (1808-1869), physician to the British embassy in Paris, and his wife, Laura, daughter of Sir William Cubitt MP, a member of the wealthy family of English builders. When she was ten her grandfather became lord mayor of London. She received a private education in Paris. Here she met Charles Dickens, developed a love for the theatre, and enjoyed a cosmopolitan, cultured lifestyle. In 1870, not long after her father's death, the Franco-Prussian War forced the family to flee to England. They settled at 95 Sloane Street, and this Knightsbridge home remained her London base for the rest of her life. Her ambition was to study music at the Royal College but this was considered inappropriate: she retained an appreciation of classical music throughout her life. 
On 10 August 1876 Florence Olliffe married (Thomas) Hugh Bell (1844-1931). The son of the ironmaster Sir (Isaac) Lowthian Bell, first baronet, he became the director of Bell Brothers. In addition to running the ironworks at Port Clarence on the north side of the Tees, opposite Middlesbrough, his business interests encompassed collieries and railways. In 1902 Bell Brothers merged with Dorman Long, major manufacturers of steel girders. He held a number of civic offices, including that of mayor, and was lord lieutenant of the North Riding for twenty-five years. He succeeded to his father's baronetcy in December 1904. When Florence Olliffe first met Hugh Bell (through his sisters), he was widowed. His first wife, Maria ('nee' Shield), had died in 1871, leaving him with two children, Gertrude and Maurice. Thus his second wife became stepmother to Gertrude Bell (1868-1926), the intrepid explorer and scholar of the Middle East. The Bells had three children of their own: Hugh Lowthian (Hugo), (Florence) Elsa, and Mary Katharine (Molly) ['see 'Trevelyan, Mary Katharine], who married Sir Charles Trevelyan MP. The Bells lived at Red Barns, a windswept house near Redcar designed by Philip Webb. In 1905 they moved to Rounton Grange, near Northallerton. This became a centre for entertaining family, friends, fellow Liberals, and business and civic colleagues. Here Florence Bell also welcomed literary friends such as the writer Mrs Humphry Ward. 
Lady Bell became a prolific writer, publishing over forty works. Some of her books for children, for example 'Pauline's First Reading Book' (1912) and 'Nora's Little Songbook', were initially written for her grandchildren. Her French upbringing prompted 'French without Tears' (3 pts, 1895-7), while in her best-known novel, a triple-decker, 'The Story of Ursula' (1895), the heroine is caught between the competing cultures of England and France. She also wrote many essays, a selection of which was published in 1929, entitled 'Landmarks'. She produced several political allegories such as 'Down with the Tariff!' (1908) and a number of plays for children and adults. Her most sombre work was a secret. Collaborating with the American-born actress and writer Elizabeth Robins (1862-1952), she co-wrote the play 'Alan's Wife' (1893), based on a story by the Swedish writer Elin Ameen. The Bell-Robins play, performed on the London stage and published without the playwrights' identities being revealed, was set, like a number of Lady Bell's plays, in northern England. It dealt with working-class infanticide, provoking strong reactions about the suitability of the subject matter. Elizabeth Robins, famed for her Ibsen roles, took the lead as she had done in Lady Bell's comedietta 'A Joint Household' (1892) and her play 'Karin' (1892), translated from a Swedish play. 
Elizabeth Robins became Florence Bell's closest friend. Although from markedly different backgrounds and not always sharing the same outlook (Lady Bell disapproved of her friend's militant suffragism) they shared a passion for the theatre and commitment to writing. When apart they corresponded weekly and provided constructive criticism of each other's literary efforts from the 1890s onwards. They dedicated books to each other and Lady Bell wrote an appreciation of 'Lisa' for 'Time and Tide' in 1920. Henry James's short story 'Nona Vincent' (1891) centres on two characters, apparently based on Lady Bell and Elizabeth Robins, while more than half of the latter's book of correspondence with James, 'Theatre and Friendship' (1932), is actually about Lady Bell. Florence Bell was also a key figure in promoting the stage career of Dame Sybil Thorndike. 
Yet Lady Bell is probably best remembered for 'At the Works' (1907), a detailed investigation of Middlesbrough where her husband's workforce lived. Dedicated to Charles Booth, it nevertheless rejects an approach dominated by statistics, and focuses not just on the workplace but also on the homes of more than one thousand families, emphasizing especially the role of women in household management and containing much unique information on working-class reading habits (expanded in its second edition, 1911). The evidence for this classic study was gathered by Lady Bell, Gertrude Bell, and a few others over a period of nearly thirty years. 
Concerned about the lack of recreational facilities locally, Lady Bell started an imaginative pioneering venture in Middlesbrough known as the Winter Gardens, providing an attractive venue for inexpensive recreation. Herbert Samuel MP, under-secretary of state for home affairs, described it as 'one of the most hopeful social experiments now being tried in England'. Her work in the locality extended to presidency of the British Red Cross Society. For acting as commandant of a hospital during the First World War she was made DBE in 1918. Yet close friends understood that this public figure and elegant hostess, almost invariably clad in loose gowns of grey, lavender, or silver, was actually a shy and private person. She could, however, appear daunting, as she was a stickler for etiquette. When her son Hugo's fiancee first met Lady Bell, she found her very much the 'grande dame', expecting her to talk French so that she could judge her accent. 
Hugo became a clergyman whose work took him to South Africa. In 1926 on his return voyage he died of typhoid fever. He was forty-eight. His mother wrote a poignant memoir, privately published. Six months later, Gertrude died in Iraq. Meanwhile the Bell financial fortune was beginning to crumble slightly. Rounton Grange was closed, the family settling at the Manor House of Mount Grace Priory at Rounton. Still fascinated by drama, in 1927 Lady Bell organized an ambitious pageant in the grounds of the priory. It lasted for more than three days, had a cast of 118, and was attended by the queen and Princess Mary. It provided a temporary, albeit lavish and costly, diversion from the tragedies of 1926. She also published a selection of Gertrude's letters (1927). Lady Bell lived for only three more years, dying aged seventy-nine at 5 Lennox Gardens, Knightsbridge, London, on 16 May 1930. She was buried in Yorkshire at Rounton. 


@@@@@


doc= 41107


Malvery, Olive Christian (1876/7-1914), social observer, was the daughter of Thomas Malvery, a civil engineer working in India. Her mother was Jessie Symonds. No record of her birth has been located, and there is conflicting evidence about its date (the age given on her death certificate suggests 1876/7, that on the census return of 1901 1879/80, that on her marriage certificate 1881/2). She described herself as coming from an 'old Indian family' (Cox) and referred to India as her native land, though she also celebrated her Scottish ancestry which she derived from her grandmother, a Sinclair. Surviving photographs indicate that she was part Indian. 
Malvery's parents separated when she was a child; her father, who was considerably older than her mother, failed to make a success of various business schemes. Olive and her brother were brought up in India by their maternal grandparents and received a good education. Raised an Anglican, she became involved in philanthropic work, raising money for Dr Barnardo's orphanages. She arrived in London from the Punjab about 1900 with the ambition to become a professional singer, and through financial assistance from a friend in India she was enabled to train at the Royal College of Music. In 1901, described as a student of music, she was lodging at St Mary's in the Isles of Scilly. Enterprising, hard-working, and a self-publicist, freely exploiting her Anglo-Indian ancestry, she came to prominence in London society by reciting what she called her 'Indian pictures', poems on Indian themes set to music. She gave her first performance at the Westbourne Park Institute while still at college. The press praised her work and ''The Times' gave me a splendid notice' (Malvery, 'A Year and a Day', 83). 
Malvery became best known for her investigative writing on the condition of working women and child labourers in early twentieth-century London. Driven by religious zeal and a social reforming impulse, evident in her philanthropic endeavours and her lecturing on behalf of the temperance cause in Britain, continental Europe, and North America, she set about a series of descriptions of the poor and destitute using information gathered by undercover participation and observation of their lives. In October 1904 she contributed a series of documentary articles on the London poor to 'Pearson's Magazine'. She used her position as an outsider to reveal truths about England that were largely concealed from those born and brought up there. 
Malvery claimed to have researched her articles by living in the 'seething parishes' of London's poorest quarters (Malvery, 'The Soul Market', 309). There she mixed, undetected, with thieves, tramps, costermongers, milliners, and match girls. Knowing that in such communities an outsider would be easily spotted, she somehow blended in: 'By maintaining a discreet silence, I managed to get through' (ibid., 134). Her foreign appearance, far from being a disadvantage, actually helped her, and on one occasion she gained the confidence of a coster woman who made direct reference to it: ''Is yer foreign?' she asked. 'Not by half,' I said: 'One can't help one's birth, but one can help one's heart.' This sentiment pleased her extremely. Presently she asked me to mind her stall a minute, while she went and had a drink. While she was gone I sold two cabbages. (ibid.)' Phonetic transcription of her dialogues with working poor helped to establish the authenticity of Malvery's account for a predominantly middle-brow, middle-class readership. But they also helped to entertain readers in a commercial publication. 
Malvery's articles, published as 'The Heart of Things', were accompanied by photographs depicting her in her various guises -- barmaid, costermonger, flower girl -- the overall effect falling somewhere between serious social enquiry and play-acting. In 1905 she contributed two further articles to 'Pearson's Magazine' on the alien question, by which was understood the settlement of Jewish immigrants from eastern Europe in the East End of London. The articles coincided with the parliamentary debate on a bill to restrict such immigration, and Malvery's unsympathetic depiction of the Jewish poor contrasts markedly with her earlier treatment of the cockney street people. 
Malvery married, on 13 May 1905 at the parish church of St Margaret's, Westminster, Archibald Mackirdy (1856/7-1911), the Scottish-born American consul to Muscat, the son of Robert Mackirdy, a banker of Rothesay. Mackirdy reportedly fell in love with his future wife after seeing her photograph in the press, and the newspapers published detailed accounts of her society wedding: one thousand working girls from the East End of London were invited, her attendants were coster girls from Hoxton, and, wearing an Indian dress, she was given away by the bishop of Bombay. Archibald Mackirdy was a supporter of the Salvation Army and shared his wife's concern for the welfare of London's destitute. They had two daughters and a son. 
In 1906 Malvery published 'The Soul Market', a revised version of her first series of articles for 'Pearson's Magazine'. It was dedicated 'To those who still have faith in humanity and a belief in God', and was written in the hope that it would encourage 'the suppression of some of the more hideous evils which I have in these pages only hinted at' (Malvery, 'The Soul Market', 320). She later claimed that 'The Soul Market', which went through several editions and established her as a social commentator and reformer, was 'the first book that roused the public to shame and sympathy... To-day there are a great many Missions which have been founded by people who were stirred to work by that book' (Malvery, 'A Year and a Day', 18). She took the credit, too, for stimulating the debate on night shelters for destitute women and girls. Profits from her first book, which was a considerable commercial success, and donations from readers established housing for homeless women in London. Her two shelters were later run under the auspices of the Salvation Army and the Church Army. She also ran a girls' club in Hoxton, the Girls' Guild of Good Life. Her response to the appalling working conditions which she witnessed in sweatshop trades was to form a Consumers' League with a white list of firms whose goods were produced under humane conditions. 
At one level Malvery's investigative work follows in the tradition of Henry Mayhew, General Booth, and Beatrice Webb, but its theatricality and commercialism set it apart. As a review of 'The Soul Market' in the 'Daily Telegraph' observed: 'Miss Malvery writes with a running pen... The book should attract the ordinary reader; but there is much within its cover that will be valuable to the specialist investigating modern conditions of city life' (Malvery, 'Baby Toilers', frontispiece). 'The Soul Market' was rapidly followed by 'Baby Toilers' (1907), in which Malvery and her publishers capitalized on her earlier success. She hoped that her expose of child labour would persuade parliament to legislate to end this abuse. 
Malvery understood the social stratification within the London poor and documented the occupational snobbery that differentiated factory girls, costermongers, and domestic servants. If she perhaps did not have the familiarity that she pretended with her street subjects, she exposed serious social evils to a wide public view. But there was also a harshly practical, eugenicist side to her philanthropic concern for the poor. 'These people are all kept chiefly by the middle classes, and the awful result is while they breed and increase like rabbits, the women who might give wholesome and healthy children to the nation are being disqualified for maternal duties by the heavy burdens which society and philanthropy lay upon them. (Malvery, 'The Soul Market', 314)' Drunken, idle, wife-beating men were her principal target, and she recommended for them a sharp exposure to the rigours of military discipline. Instead of taxing those who worked to subsidize those who did not, she argued, 'it would be better to compel men to work for the support of themselves and their families' (ibid., 317). She blamed the difficulties faced by boroughs such as Poplar on 'extravagant local government' rather than under-investment (ibid.). 
Such views became more strident in Malvery's later work. In 'A Year and a Day' (1912) she regarded processions of the unemployed as 'simply contemptible; one is not even sorry for the bleary, lazy creatures who make up most of these sad 'shows'' (Malvery, 'A Year and a Day', 61). Charitable work, she reflected, had 'so far saved us from dreadful outbreaks of desperate ill-used creatures' (p. 39). She had no sympathy for the organized labour movement or socialism, believing that the latter: 'has nothing to offer women except to propose that they should be made breeding cows, and that their young should be fathered by the State instead of by the animals who bred them... If you meet Socialists and listen to their talk, you will be amazed at the low value they place on women. (p. 35)' She herself belonged to a number of women's organizations, including the Pioneer Club for women and the Women Journalists' Club. 
In 1912 Malvery published 'The White Slave Market' with William Nicholas Willis, a former member of the Australian parliament and newspaperman of doubtful probity, who provided firsthand knowledge from east Asia. This harrowing book describes the enslavement to prostitution of girls in various countries, laying bare 'the nauseating details of this horrible traffic in white women' (Malvery and Willis, 'White Slave Market', 289). It was a traffic, they pointedly observed, that was carried on in Christian countries, and having put their case before the British public they hoped that parliament would be made to act. 
Partly because of the circumstances surrounding the death of her husband, in 1911, Malvery was bitterly prejudiced against the medical profession. She made an exception of women doctors, and was determined to do all that she could to get their work recognized, but her animus against the majority of male doctors knew no bounds. It led her to consider the merits of Christian Science, but she was never fully converted. Instead charitable work, which she pursued with even greater intensity, provided a way out of the personal anguish which she felt after the death of her husband. Her final project was to edit a periodical, 'Mackirdy's Weekly', published from January 1914 to the outbreak of war in August. It was pledged to the causes she espoused -- practical Christianity, a living wage for all workers, protection for children, and citizen rights for all those who paid taxes or carried out civic duties, regardless of gender. As a supporter of the constitutional movement for women's suffrage she wrote a series of articles in January and February 1914 attacking suffragette militancy, denouncing the resort to violence as a sign of desperation, and exposing the autocratic way in which Christabel Pankhurst ran the suffragette organization. 
Suffering from cancer, Malvery died at her home, Iden, Woodcote Valley Road, Purley, Surrey, on 29 October 1914, aged thirty-seven. At an inquest on 31 October 1914 the cause of death was recorded as 'misadventure, veronal poisoning' (d. cert.), in effect an overdose of sedatives. She was buried at Kensal Green cemetery. Her will, drawn up shortly before her death, made provision for the upbringing of her three young children by her devoted secretary, Charlotte Cottrill, at a property owned by Malvery at Reigate, Surrey, named Rahat Munzil, or Underhill. She also requested that the base of the gravestone over her and her husband's grave should bear the inscription, 'Who serves his country and his neighbour earns not wealth but fellowship with God.' 


@@@@@


doc= 41108


Greenwood, Christopher (1786-1855), land surveyor and map maker, was born on 21 May 1786 at Coverdale in Gisburn parish, Yorkshire, the third of the ten children of John Greenwood, grazier, and his wife, Ellen ('nee' Bullock). The family had been long established in the district. After learning his trade, and presumably practising locally for some years, he set up in Dewsbury in 1815. Soon afterwards he settled in Wakefield, where he married Maria Elizabeth, the daughter of William Fowler, a local wool stapler, at St John's Church, on 5 June 1816. In 1814 or 1815 he had embarked on the survey of Yorkshire which launched the career in county map making which was to occupy the rest of his professional life; it was published in Wakefield between May 1817 and August 1818. Trained to survey small estates and farms, Greenwood learned the techniques of triangulation and the use of instruments needed to survey areas the size of counties from the engineer and surveyor, Francis Giles, who supervised his local triangulation of Yorkshire. 
Following the death of his mother in July 1818 Greenwood moved to London. With only the Yorkshire map in print, he had determined to map the whole of the rest of England at one inch to one mile, and Wales at three-quarters of an inch to one mile. In 1822, with eleven counties already on sale, he advertised the complete scheme in detail: a set of forty-two maps comprising 184 sheets to cost 135 guineas. Greenwood was not the first private surveyor to embark on such a risky enterprise -- as it turned out, six English counties and most of Wales were never surveyed -- but he came far closer than any other map maker since his fellow Yorkshireman, Christopher Saxton, in the 1570s, to surveying all the English counties. His assistant in all his county maps was his younger brother 
For a wider market an 'Atlas of the Counties of England' appeared in parts between 1829 and 1834. The enduring popularity of its plates came partly from the beautifully engraved vignettes of cathedrals, castles, or town views that graced each one. The Greenwoods' only venture outside county or regional map making was their map of London (1827) at eight inches to one mile, engraved to high standards by James and Josiah Neele, who probably printed most of Greenwood's maps. 
Although Greenwood can rightly be regarded as an important and successful map maker, by concentrating on the publication of original surveys -- rather than on popular atlases and derivative maps -- he was taking risks. He relied on the patronage of the aristocracy, but also depended heavily on his business partners. On his arrival in London he established himself at 50 Leicester Square. In 1820 the firm moved to 70 Queen Street, Cheapside -- the premises of George Pringle, a solicitor, and George Pringle junior, who had become his new partners by 1819. His father-in-law was already a financial partner, and in 1821 or 1822 John Greenwood also became a partner. The firm secured its first unshared premises in 1824, at 13 Lower Regent Street, a fashionable address where the business had its most successful years. Each map was dedicated to 'the nobility, clergy, and gentry' of the county concerned. But Greenwood was not unusual in failing to find long-term security in making county maps -- he faced increasing competition (reflected in acrimonious exchanges in local newspapers) from other private surveyors, notably Andrew Bryant. In the longer term it was the Ordnance Survey which overwhelmed him: by 1834, when the business was already foundering, southern and midland counties, as well as south Wales, were covered by the Ordnance Survey. 
In 1828 George Pringle junior left. Thereafter the publication of maps tailed off and some plates were sold to other publishers who printed from them with little or no revision. By late 1830 Greenwood had left Regent Street and within four years, after struggling on in Covent Garden and Paternoster Row, the business appears to have collapsed. The Greenwoods had published three county topographies in 1822-3, and, after seeing his cartographic business prematurely collapse, Christopher turned, unsuccessfully, to publishing county historical guides from an office in Hart Street, Bloomsbury. 
John Greenwood had returned to Yorkshire by 1835 and made estate, enclosure, and tithe maps until at least 1850. He died on 1 October 1867, aged seventy-six, and was buried in Gisburn. Christopher Greenwood's stock-in-trade was sold at Sothebys on 18 June 1840. He died in obscurity on 25 March 1855 at 2 Sarah Place, on Kingsland Road, Dalston, Hackney, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 41109


John Greenwood (1791-1867), who had been working for him since before he left Gisburn. In fifteen years (1815-30) the brothers surveyed thirty-three English and four Welsh counties; the result is thirty-five maps at a scale of one inch to one mile or thereabouts (Yorkshire and south-east Wales at three-quarters of an inch to one mile, and Middlesex at 2 inches). Even allowing for the use of the major triangulation of the Ordnance Survey, and possibly some help from existing surveys, it was an astonishing achievement for a private surveyor in so short a time. The majority of these surveys anticipated publication of the sheets of the Ordnance Survey. Even in the south of England and in Lincolnshire, where the Ordnance Survey published their maps first, Greenwood did not slavishly copy the work, but offered a distinctive style and some additional information; not least of the attractions of his maps was the high standard of the engraving. 


@@@@@


doc= 41111


Wyld, James, the younger (1812-1887), cartographer and geographical publisher, was born in North Street, Lambeth, Surrey, on 20 November 1812, the son of James Wyld the elder and his wife, Elizabeth Legg. He was baptized in the Ebenezer Chapel, Mayfair, on 26 December 1812. He was educated at the Royal Military Academy at Woolwich but joined his father's firm which from about 1830 traded as J. Wyld & Son. The premises were frequented by politicians and others in public life, who came for maps of areas of topical interest. These included a map of Afghanistan with notes and the routes of troops at the time of the First Anglo-Afghan War, a 'Map of the gold regions of California' (1849), 'Notes on the distribution of gold throughout the world, with a gazetteer of the gold diggings of Australia' (3rd edn, 1853), and maps of the Ottoman empire and Black Sea at the time of the Crimean War. His 'Popular Atlas' contained lithographs of the maps he issued in cheap monthly numbers. Wyld profited from the railway mania of 1836-7 when he supplied the prospectus maps and plans that railway companies had to deposit to get parliamentary approval for their schemes; but when the mania collapsed he was left with heavy claims against unsuccessful companies, which he pursued in vain in the courts. The experience did not deter Wyld from further railway map publishing and he also published guide and travel books, illustrated with maps, and an extensive range of cycling maps. The timing of his map publications and their format show that he, like other cartographic publishers, was something of an opportunist and had a keen eye for publishing innovations, although, unlike many contemporaries, his maps were always of high quality, a fact acknowledged when he was accorded the title of geographer to Queen Victoria and Prince Albert. 
Wyld's most spectacular enterprise was his 'great globe', exhibited in Leicester Square between 1851 and 1861 to coincide with the Great Exhibition. It was 60 feet high and 40 feet in diameter and lit by gas. On its inside painted plaster of Paris reliefs illustrated the physical features of the earth at a horizontal scale of one inch to ten miles and a vertical scale of three inches to ten miles. The object of some ridicule, it was none the less extremely popular. It was surrounded by a large spherical building entered from four loggias opening into each side of the square. In the building maps, atlases, and other globes (inevitably mostly Wyld's own) were displayed. 
Wyld was Liberal MP for Bodmin for most of the period 1847-68 and used his position to castigate the surveyors of the Ordnance Survey and other official bodies for inefficiency and profligacy, an attitude shaped in large part by the threat they posed to his livelihood. He helped to found the Association of Surveyors in 1843 and the Surveyors' Institution in 1848 to unite non-government surveyors against official surveyors, but both societies failed. Despite his opposition, his firm was one of only six agencies appointed to sell Ordnance Survey maps after 1866. After retiring from parliament he represented Cornhill ward on the City's court of common council from 1871 to 1886. As a founder governor of the City and Guilds London Institute and as master in 1875-6 of the Clothworkers' Company, he helped to promote technical education, notably in Manchester, Leeds, and Bristol. His scientific reputation led to his being elected fellow of the Royal Geographical Society in 1839, and awarded membership of the Legion d'honneur and a gold medal for science from the king of Prussia. 
Wyld married Ann, only daughter of John Hester, on 27 February 1838. On his death on 17 April 1887 at 29 Trebovir Road, South Kensington, he left a daughter and a son, James John Cooper Wyld (1844-1907), barrister and map publisher, who was born in St Pancras, London, on 4 April 1844. The son was educated at King's College, London, and Trinity Hall, Cambridge, after which he was called to the bar at the Inner Temple in 1866. He became a special pleader on the western circuit and a deputy judge in the county courts. He was elected fellow of the Royal Geographical Society in 1888, but was not very much interested in geography and was reputedly arrogant and dismissive about all aspects of the map trade, which he little understood. Under him the family firm declined fatally, suffering particularly from competition from the energetic and talented Edward Stanford, from whom Wyld now had to get his Ordnance Survey maps and whose own maps were superior to Wyld's. Wyld blamed his difficulty in retaining good engravers on the Ordnance board, continuing his father's animosity towards government cartography. The stock and goodwill of the Wyld business were acquired by George Washington Bacon in October 1893. Wyld died on 30 January 1907 at his home in Ashley Road, Thames Ditton, Surrey. He was probably unmarried and childless. 


@@@@@


doc= 41112


Philip, George (1800-1882), cartographer and map publisher, was born at Huntly, Aberdeenshire. His father was John Philip, farmer, who, with his wife (of whom nothing is known) had at least three sons and a daughter. The family was staunchly Calvinist: two of the sons became ministers and the teaching of the local minister, George Cowie, gave George an abiding zeal to promote education for all. In 1819 he went to Liverpool where his brother Robert was a nonconformist minister. As a prolific writer of devotional books, Robert was familiar with the local bookselling trade and through Robert's introduction George became assistant to the leading Liverpool bookseller, William Grapel, in 1819. In 1834 he set up his own business as bookseller and stationer in Paradise Street, but rapidly expanded to produce books, particularly maps and educational works, and within the first year had to move to larger premises, the Atlas Buildings in South Castle Street. He placed orders with well-known cartographers, notably John Bartholomew the elder, August Petermann, and William Hughes, for maps on copper plates which he printed and had hand-coloured by his women tinters. His maps ranged from the expensive 'Imperial Library Atlas' (1864) to an atlas costing as little as 3died and, although the bulk of his production was for the commercial, and particularly the educational market, he also produced important scientific maps, notably of North America, especially the Arctic and Pacific Northwest, and of the West Indies. 
Nothing is known of Philip's marriage save that he had one son, also George (1823-1902), who in 1848 was admitted as a partner in the business. It is likely that Philip took into his care his nephew, Thomas Dash Philip (1829-1913), after the death of his father, Philip's brother John, in 1837 (such care for his family was typical -- he also supported his sister in her old age). Thomas joined the firm in 1851, assumed control of the retail bookselling and school supply departments in 1854, and became a partner in the newly formed additional company, Philip, Son and Nephew, in 1859. In 1851-2 a London house was opened at 32 Fleet Street (later also 30 and 31 Fleet Street) to promote sales of the firm's geographical and educational publications at home and abroad. The Fleet Street premises had been owned by the publisher John Murray and with them Philip acquired Murray's trademark of 'the ship'. The firm's rapid growth was helped by new technology -- notably power-driven lithographic presses and the machine colouring of maps (used effectively on his county maps of 1862); and by the separation of printing, housed in the purpose-built Caxton Buildings in Liverpool, from publishing and sales, still at South Castle Street and after in Hope Street. Further expansion was prompted by the demand from board schools established after 1870 for general textbooks, school stationery and equipment, and specialist atlases and wall maps. The firm also supplied atlases and textbooks for many overseas countries in several languages, beginning with an atlas for Australian schools in 1865 and for New Zealand in 1869. Philip retired from the business on 1 July 1879 to The Retreat, Bickley, Kent, and died on 3 October 1882 at Huntly House, Lilley Road, Fairfield, Liverpool, the home of one of his executors, James Askins Crowe, merchant. He was shrewd and canny, energetic, innovative and ready to take advantage of opportunity; in build he was short and solid with a head of thick sandy hair. His success in business is shown by his leaving over $95,000 in his will. His son exploited the same markets as his father and promoted several educational publications, notably the 'Systematic Atlas' (1894), initiated and edited by the eminent geographers E. G. Ravenstein, John Scott Keltie, and Halford Mackinder which combined new ideas of scientific geography with high technical standards. George Philip & Son Ltd remained a flourishing family firm until in April 1988 it was sold to the Octopus Publishing Company, part of Reed International Group of Companies, London; it continued to trade as George Philip Ltd. 


@@@@@


doc= 41113


Hornor, Thomas (1785-1844), surveyor and panoramist, was born on 12 June 1785 at Lowgate, Hull, where his family were Quaker grocers. He was taught surveying and engineering by his brother-in-law William Johnson. In the early 1800s he was in Manchester, surveying the property of the free grammar school, but by 1807 he was in London, living first in Kentish Town and later that year in Chancery Lane. That same year he was appointed by the vestry of St James's, Clerkenwell, to draw a large-scale plan of the parish. On 19 October 1808, well ahead of his deadline, he presented them with a huge plan measuring 81 in. by 72 in., which shows him to have been a skilled and assiduous surveyor and cartographer. The vestry was well satisfied, and Hornor particularly impressed William Cook, a local improving landowner. Under Cook's patronage Hornor set up in business at 3 Church Court, Inner Temple, from where he undertook the survey and valuation of landed properties, the division of commons, and the levelling for canals and drains. In 1813 he published a version of his Clerkenwell map, which, though decorative, remained informative and accurate. He advertised himself as a promoter of picturesque landscape gardening, having devised a new method of drawing estate plans which he called 'panoramic chorometry'. He elaborated on this technique, which he claimed reunited the arts of surveying and landscape painting, in his 'Description of an Improved Method of Delineating Estates' (1813). 
By 1814 Hornor was in Wales, advertising for business as a 'Pictural Delineator of Estates'. He produced some 300 to 400 watercolours, hinged cut-out books after the manner of Humphry Repton's red books, panoramas of estates, and at least four huge maps, all of which attest to his skills as surveyor, artist, and entrepreneur. He mixed with his clients as equals and grew very wealthy. 
Having returned to London in 1820, Hornor lived in 2 Robert Street, Adelphi, and after 1825 at 10 Royal (or Adelphi) Terrace. Having been an irregular worshipper in Manchester, he stopped attending meeting altogether in London, and in 1822 the Society of Friends disowned him. His artistic ambitions grew with his social status and he began his most spectacular project, that of a 360 degree panorama of London with the summit of St Paul's as the viewpoint. In a cabin precariously balanced on scaffolding erected in connection with repairs to the cathedral, he sketched and measured. Although he attracted considerable publicity for his enterprise and admiration for his courage, few subscribed to his initial scheme of publishing the work as a series of prints. However, the MP and banker Rowland Stephenson sponsored the construction in Regent's Park of a dome by Decimus Burton, second in size in England only to that of St Paul's, in which Hornor's work was to be displayed. In it in 1825 the artist E. T. Parris began the daunting task of transferring views from flat sheets to 42,000 square feet of curved canvas. It was due for completion in 1827 but was far from finished by the end of 1828 when Stephenson absconded to the USA, deeply in debt. In January 1829 Hornor threw open the unfinished Colosseum to the public, who could enjoy the panorama at various levels, riding upwards in the 'ascending room', the first passenger lift in England and Hornor's own design. Income was large, but costs were larger yet, and later that year Hornor also absconded to the USA. There he did some second-rate work before dying in penury (and possibly insane) in New York city on 14 March 1844. He was interred at the Friends' burial-ground there. 
The Colosseum was finished in 1831 and visitors could take delight in Hornor's pleasure gardens as well as his panorama: but, after a series of proprietors had failed to make it pay, the building and its contents were auctioned in 1868. There were no bidders for Hornor's panorama and it remained in place until 1874, when it was brought up to date and shipped to America for display on Broadway. 
Hornor fell into obscurity, not least as many of his finest works remained in private hands in Wales. He was recognized as a considerable artist in the later twentieth century, when his Welsh watercolours and prints came to light, but, despite his claims to have reunited the plan and the prospect, he had no followers. He remains more a curiosity than a pioneer, and his works 'a supreme example of misdirected genius' (Hyde, 'Hornor', 32). 


@@@@@


doc= 41114


Ravenstein, Ernst Georg (1834-1913), geographer and cartographer, was born in Frankfurt am Main on 30 December 1834 into a family which had a long tradition of work in engraving and cartography. After studying at the Frankfurt Gymnasium and the Stadelsches Kunstinstitut, he emigrated to London in 1852 and soon became a pupil of August Petermann before, in 1855, accepting a post as cartographer with the topographic department of the War Office. In 1858 his ties with England were strengthened when he married Ada Sarah Parry of Bromley, Kent, fifty years of marriage to whom he celebrated with the publication of 'A Life's Work' (1908). He began to write in 1856, publishing a work on Russian exploration (in English) and travel guides and general geographical handbooks (in German). He developed his interest in sport: he published works on gymnastics and was the founder in 1861 and the first president of the German Gymnastic Society (a post he held until 1871), as well as president of the London swimming club. He established the German gymnasium which opened at St Pancras in 1866 and collaborated with John Hulley and William Penny Brookes in founding the National Olympian Association, which held games in London in 1866 and Birmingham in 1867. 
In 1872 Ravenstein retired from the War Office and, as he had declined the position of chief cartographer at the Royal Geographical Society after being refused permission to smoke on the premises, he had time to develop his own research interests. He continued to compile and publish maps, especially of Africa, many of which appeared in the publications of the Royal Geographical Society; he was an active member of the society, and, from 1894 to 1896, a member of council. He was also cartographic editor of the 'Geographical Magazine', a semi-official publication of the society. His relations with the society were not always smooth, notably when he was preparing his 'Map of eastern equatorial Africa', which took far longer than the society hoped, though its standard was exceptionally high. None the less, the society was his natural base, given his interest in both exploration and systematic geography. He was also on the council of the Royal Statistical Society and of the British Association for the Advancement of Science, and an active member of the International Geographical Union and several foreign learned societies. He lectured on physical geography at Bedford College in 1882-3, being styled 'professor', but apparently with little success. He developed his interest in discovery, plotting the course of African exploration in his maps and helping to supply meteorological instruments to African settlers and missionaries and publishing their observations. His interest in the history of discovery led to his translation of the account of Vasco da Gama's first voyage (1898). In particular he developed his ideas on demography, notably his laws of migration, and it is for these that he is chiefly remembered. His laws reflected his familiarity with German advances in statistical and thematic mapping, notably those of Petermann, and his wish to explain geographical phenomena after detailed empirical observation. This, and work such as his study of Celtic languages in the British Isles (1879) based on questionnaire data and his maps of religious denominations in Britain, used methods ahead of their time. 
In 1902 Ravenstein was awarded the first Victoria gold medal of the Royal Geographical Society in recognition of his services to cartography and demography. In 1909 he was awarded an honorary doctorate from the University of Gottingen for his book on the Nuremberg geographer Martin Behaim (1908), a work which is still respected. He died on 13 March 1913 at Dr Schulze's Sanatorium at Hofheim in the Taunus Mountains in Germany. His dogged and loyal work for the Royal Geographical Society and his independent research were always of a high standard, but have not received the recognition they deserve in either England or Germany. Ravenstein was important in improving the standard of British cartography, and his work on migration has influenced demographers, sociologists, and economists, as well as geographers. His work has endured beyond that of many who achieved greater prominence in their lifetime. His 'Oarsman's and Angler's Map of the River Thames' (1893) was reprinted in 1991, and shows the rediscovery of the lighter side of his work. 


@@@@@


doc= 41115


Harley, (John) Brian (1932-1991), geographer and map historian, was born on 24 July 1932 in Ashley, Bristol, and spent some of his infant years in Oxford. On 15 March 1935 he was adopted by John Jack Harley ('b'. 1883), farmer, and his wife, Emily Louise Rogers (1890-1963), who lived in rural Staffordshire. He was given the name John Brian Harley. To his great delight, a few years before he died he met his natural mother, whom he had last seen on his fifth birthday. From 1943 to 1950 he attended the grammar school at Brewood near Wolverhampton, where the children exploited his family circumstances to make him miserable. However, he excelled at Brewood, gaining the school essay prize and representing the school at cross-country running and football. 
Harley's two years of national service from 1950 to 1952 were spent in the army in Trieste, Egypt, and Cyprus and were a character-forming experience which surfaced occasionally in hilarious stories. Harley was not a favourite of the officer class: the army taught him to type as a punishment. Life at school and in the army left Harley with a strong sympathy for the underdog and contempt for those with status he felt they did not merit. 
In 1952 Harley gained a place at Birmingham University. Personal distractions robbed him of his expected first in geography in 1955 but he won the W. A. Cadbury prize. Perhaps uncertain of an academic future, Harley decided to teach, gaining his diploma in education from University College, Oxford, in 1956. He then returned, however, to Birmingham for graduate work on the historical geography of medieval Warwickshire under the supervision of Harry Thorpe, whose speciality was to study past landscapes through maps. He took inspiration from Rodney Hilton, then working on the social structure of medieval Warwickshire, and whose Marxism suited Harley's own political ideology. Harley graduated PhD in 1960, publishing an important paper on population and agricultural trends as seen through the hundred rolls of 1279 in the 'Economic History Review' the year before. 
Harley married Amy Doreen (1921/1922-1983), daughter of Frederick Chatten, a welder, at St Clement's Church, Nechells, Birmingham, on 14 December 1957. In the following September he began teaching at Queensbridge School, Moseley, but in the same month he was offered an assistant lecturership in geography at Liverpool University and took up the post in January 1959. 
In Liverpool Harley turned to the history of cartography. His book 'Christopher Greenwood, County Map-Maker' (1962), written at Hilton's suggestion, was a landmark in English map history. With the significant exceptions of one further paper on medieval Warwickshire and a chapter on 'England in 1850' in H. C. Darby's 'New Historical Geography of England' (1973), virtually all his subsequent output was on maps and map makers. At first he concentrated on English mapping, mostly of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. His work on the Ordnance Survey gave him a reputation beyond the academic realm. He was influenced and supported by R. A. (Peter) Skelton, head of the map room at the British Museum, who pointed him towards the mapping of North America, notably during the American War of Independence, and through the career of William Faden. 
Harley formed lasting associations at Liverpool: as he wrote soon after leaving, 'I shall always remember that the really formative years of my life were spent at Liverpool' (letter to Robert Steel, 7 Oct 1969). He even admitted to 'occasionally missing the very different world enshrined somewhere between the Senior Common Room and the last night of a field week', but in 1969 Harley resigned from Liverpool to become sponsoring editor with the publishers David and Charles in Newton Abbot. This was a bold move for a man with a wife and three children. Harley commissioned a substantial number of works in fields entirely new for David and Charles; yet he hankered after the academic life, and by March in the following year a chance to return presented itself. 
The death of the Montefiore reader in geography at the University of Exeter in 1970 left a vacancy for a historical geographer which Harley was appointed to fill, initially as a lecturer but from 1972 as the Montefiore reader. His writing at Exeter was dominated by the history of the Ordnance Survey. His notes on the popular David and Charles reprints of the old series one-inch maps (with A. G. Hodgkiss) led to more substantial syntheses in a series of co-authored regional volumes of facsimiles, text, and carto-bibliography. He wrote 'Ordnance Survey Maps: a Descriptive Manual' (1975) and wrote a substantial part of the official history of the Ordnance Survey, which appeared in 1978. In 1985 Harley graduated DLitt by accumulation from the University of Birmingham, an achievement of which he was particularly proud. 
From the early 1980s Harley turned his attention to a philosophical view of maps and their meanings. By 1986 he had virtually completed a book-length manuscript, 'The map as ideology'. In contributions to journals, books, conferences, and symposia he revised his ideas and, shortly before he died, proposed a new book combining a selection of these essays with a guide to the map philosophy they expounded. This was published in 2001 under his own title, 'The New Nature of Maps' (ed. P. Laxton). Harley showed how the map is more than a skilfully constructed artefact with geographical outlines. Absorbing ideas from art history and literary criticism, he revealed their hidden agendas: 'silences' that speak, names that have other levels of meaning, signs and icons with subliminal messages; some reflecting deliberate propaganda, most reflecting cultural values unacknowledged by either the map maker or his society. Harley showed maps to be not just passive mirrors of landscape and society but potent agents of governments and tools of propaganda. 
Yet despite Harley's obvious distinction and notwithstanding a huge international body of admirers, he failed to secure promotion and recognition in the British academic world. His perceptive, often blunt, and sometimes angry observations on academic life gained him an unjustified reputation as a difficult colleague, despite his success in forming scholarly partnerships and his being a good administrator who served on the councils of several learned societies, including the Institute of British Geographers (1971-4). To professional frustrations were added personal tragedy: in 1983 his wife, Amy, died, followed less than a year later by his son John. Harley began to think of a new life in the USA. He was familiar with the country through fellowships and invitations to lecture (notably the Kenneth Nebenzahl lectures at the Newberry Library, Chicago, in 1974), but the main attraction was that in 1977 he and David Woodward, of the University of Wisconsin at Madison, had persuaded Chicago University Press to publish a multi-volume 'History of Cartography' (1987-). This dominated the rest of Harley's life, particularly after 1986 when he was appointed full professor of geography at Madison's Milwaukee campus. This multi-disciplinary project involving some 130 scholars worldwide is the first comprehensive history of maps in world cultures, a synthesis of existing and new research. 
Harley continued his cartographic research outside the confines of the 'History'. He was involved in controversies over the Columbus celebrations. He broadcast on the topic and wrote 'Maps and the Columbian Encounter' (1990), the interpretative guide to a travelling exhibition of maps. He was due to give twelve public lectures on the topic in 1992. 
Harley said that he wished to go out in full flood while lecturing. He did die suddenly and unwarned, of a heart attack as he arrived at his Milwaukee office on 20 December 1991. He was survived by his three daughters. He was cremated in December 1991 in Milwaukee, and his ashes were interred on 16 March 1992 at Highweek, Newton Abbot, Devon, after a memorial service. Harley's death deprived the 'History of Cartography' project of his vision and panache, which would have come especially into their own in the volumes covering the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, periods in which his authority was supreme. Bearded and with alert eyes, Harley was an utterly single-minded, formidably hard-working scholar. He judged people by the quality of their discourse and their capacity for conviviality. Beneath his strongly held views lay a characteristic uncertainty, covered by a self-mocking modesty which failed to hide his enthusiasm for both the chase and the writing. He always wrote well with an unfailing nose for the comic and tragic sides of early cartographic projects, and his lectures turned potentially abstruse subjects into an eye-opening delight. 


@@@@@


doc= 41116


Gilbert, Edmund William (1900-1973), geographer, was born on 16 October 1900 in Hemsworth, Yorkshire, the only child of the Revd Robert Henry Gilbert (1868-1922), rector of Hemsworth, and his wife, Mabel Billinton. After attending St Peter's School, York, he matriculated from Hertford College, Oxford, as an exhibitioner in 1919, graduating BA in modern history in 1922 with second-class honours. 
Gilbert's interest in geography was aroused when he attended the summer school held at the University of Oxford's school of geography, in 1922. He subsequently followed the diploma course, gaining the Oxford diploma in geography with distinction in 1924. His study of the Pontefract and Doncaster area of Yorkshire was judged to be of exceptional merit. His first geographical paper, on Pontefract, was published in 1925. He proceeded BLitt in 1928, having undertaken further work in historical geography. As a diploma student he was the instigator and a founder member in 1924 of the Herbertson Society, the Oxford undergraduate geographical society, named after Andrew Herbertson, professor of geography at Oxford. 
Between 1923 and 1926 Gilbert was junior lecturer in geography at Bedford College for Women in London, during which time he toyed with the idea of becoming a barrister. As a member of the Middle Temple he was placed in the first class in criminal law and procedure in the bar examination. But his interest in geography was restored after hearing an inspirational lecture on geography and world peace by Professor Percy Roxby of the University of Liverpool. In 1926 he moved to the University of Reading as lecturer in historical geography and was much happier there, remaining ten years and playing the leading part in setting up an honours school of geography. In 1927 he married a fellow Oxford diploma student, Barbara Maud Flux Dundas ('b'. 1902), who gave him support over the next forty-six years, caring for him with understanding during his occasional bouts of depression. There were no children of the marriage. 
Gilbert returned to Oxford in 1936 as research lecturer in human geography, to work on a survey of social services in the Oxford district financed by the Rockefeller Foundation. In the war years he worked for the naval intelligence division of the Admiralty on the production of the 'Geographical Handbook' series, writing most of the volumes on Spain and Portugal. He was appointed reader in human geography in 1943 and subsequently professor of geography in 1953, a position he held until 1967. The chair carried with it a fellowship at his old college, Hertford, for which he had considerable affection and of which he was emeritus fellow from 1967. Throughout his career Gilbert maintained close links with the Royal Geographical Society, serving three times on its council. He also served on the council of the Hakluyt Society and on committees of the British Association, section E (geography) and the Geographical Association. 
Publication of 'The Exploration of Western America, 1800-1850' (1933) while he was at Reading reflected Gilbert's early interest in historical geography. His social conscience later found expression in his work on Oxford where, influenced by the writing of Vaughan Cornish, he also became involved in the activities of the Oxford Preservation Trust, serving as a trustee. His publications in the 1940s on English regions as a basis for administrative reform were pioneering and attracted attention beyond the geographical profession. In all his writing he stressed the importance of the past as a clue to understanding the present, a philosophy that found particular expression in his publications on university towns and seaside resorts. 'Brighton: Old Ocean's Bauble' (1954) illustrates well his ability to blend geography and social history. His last book, 'British Pioneers in Geography' (1972), paid tribute to, among others, his predecessor, Sir Halford Mackinder, with whom he shared a belief in geography as 'an humane study'. 
All Gilbert's writing, like his lectures, was elegant and carefully crafted, and he drew on novelists and painters to assist in the description and interpretation of regions that he regarded as central to geography. He was a skilled photographer, preferring black and white to colour. He was especially fond of visiting the capital cities and university towns of western Europe, and took many pictures of these places. 
Billy Gilbert, as he was called by his friends, was a shy but kindly man, more at home at the school of geography in Oxford or the Royal Geographical Society than at geographical conferences and, for that reason, not as widely known as he deserved to be. He raised the status of geography within Oxford, securing fellowships in the colleges for his younger colleagues, and planning a major extension to the school of geography. He also recognized the need to encourage graduate studies, and a growing number of graduate students benefited from his encouragement and the ready hospitality which he and Barbara accorded them at their cottage in Appleton, near Oxford. He retired there in 1967 and in the same year was awarded the Murchison grant by the Royal Geographical Society in recognition of his contribution to urban studies and the history of geography. In 1968 he was presented with 'Urbanization and its Problems', a collection of essays by colleagues and former pupils. He died at his home, Old Cottage, Appleton, on 2 October 1973, having suffered a stroke in the previous year. He was buried at Appleton on 5 October 1973. The geography society at Hertford College is named after him. 


@@@@@


doc= 41117


Bacon, George Washington (1830/31-1922), map publisher, was born in New York, USA, the son of James Bacon, bookseller, and his wife, Sarah Anne, of London, and younger brother of Benjamin. Nothing is known of his education. He is reported to have started business in London in 1860 and is described as the 'American map publisher' who about 1862 traded from 48 Paternoster Row, London, publishing biographies of American presidents and political guides to the United States and acting as agent to the American atlas producer J. H. Coltton. In 1866 the firm was appointed agent for Ordnance Survey publications, but in 1867 Bacon and his partner, Francis Apperson, were declared bankrupt and their stock auctioned off. By 1868 Bacon was back in business at 337 Strand, publishing mainly British material. By 1870 his Strand Map Establishment, of 127 Strand, was selling mainly maps and atlases, but also domestic equipment such as sewing machines. The specialization in cartography was reinforced in October 1893 when he took over the important map business founded by James Wyld the elder. Bacon was elected fellow of the Royal Geographical Society in 1896. He retired as managing director in 1912, but remained a director until his death. In 1919 the firm moved to Norwich Street, London. 
In 1869 Bacon acquired from Cassells maps which had appeared with the 'Weekly Dispatch' from 1852 to 1862, and used them as the basis for numerous atlases and map series of Britain and the rest of the world published between 1869 and 1907 and presented as new and up to date. Equally out-of-date material was acquired from other publishers. Most remarkably the firm published from about 1885 until the 1920s maps printed from copper plates first used in 1792. Bacon also commonly plagiarized the maps of others and in 1900 was judged to have infringed copyright. It has been his town maps that have won widest praise, particularly those of London since they collectively constitute the finest record of the rapidly expanding capital. He also published thematic town maps (particularly of London), maps of military actions around the world, and comic cartographical interpretations of military and political events by Frederick Rose and others. He was quick to seize the publishing opportunities offered by the education boom of the late nineteenth century, issuing numerous school worksheets and materials covering geography and other subjects. In his lifetime Bacon was best known for his cycling, excursion, and touring maps, published in large numbers in a bewildering variety of attractive sizes, formats, and scales. He bought in all sorts of maps from other publishers, or simply plagiarized them to create touring maps which, although occasionally excellent, were generally of dubious reliability and poor quality. The maximum life was wrung from every product and the same maps were repackaged under different titles in attractively coloured pictorial covers. When the committee on the sale of Ordnance Survey maps called Bacon to give evidence on this genre of travelling map in 1896 it recognized his position as market leader. As well as publishing maps Bacon patented and marketed pseudo-medical cures and gadgets and wrote health guides. 
Bacon, who was a naturalized British subject, had at least two daughters and a son with his wife, Ruth ('b'. 1846/7), daughter of Samuel Stanley, carriage painter. They married at the Metropolitan Tabernacle, Newington, on 4 December 1869, and settled at Shelgate Road, Battersea, and then at the Ridgeway, Wimbledon. He died at his home, Woodlawn, Bacon Hill, Hindhead, Surrey, on 21 January 1922. His wife predeceased him; his daughter, Alice Stanley Bacon, survived him and was his sole executor. He was an opportunist who exploited the map market to the full. His publications were rarely cartographically original, but frequently broke new ground in format and price and did much to make maps widely available and affordable. 


@@@@@


doc= 41118


Ostrogorski, Moisei Yakovlevich (1854-1919), political analyst, was born in Semicatrez, in the district of Bielsk, Grodno, in Belorussia, on 3 March 1854, the eldest of the three children of Yakolev Ostrogorski, who belonged to a landowning family of Jewish origin. He studied law at the University of St Petersburg and, after obtaining his degree, took up employment in the legislative department of the ministry of justice where, in 1882, he became head of department. In 1884 the authoritarianism that gripped Russia following the murder of Alexander II caused him to emigrate to France. In Paris he enrolled in the Ecole Libre des Sciences Politiques, the private university founded in 1871 by Emile Boutmy and Hippolyte Taine. Ostrogorski's Parisian period saw him passionately committed to democratic militancy in defence of Dreyfus but, above all, it marked the beginning of his career as an expert in public law. In 1892 his study, 'Les femmes au point de vue du droit public', was published in France, soon to be followed by translations published in England ('The Rights of Women: a Comparative Study in History and Legislation', 1893) and Germany. 
In 1887 Ostrogorski began his research into political parties, at first confining himself to American parties. In 1889, on the advice of James Bryce, whom he knew by correspondence, Ostrogorski went to London to extend his inquiry to British political parties. This was to be the first of a long series of visits to the United Kingdom, during which Ostrogorski stayed in a hotel in Russell Square, close to the British Museum, where he spent his days studying. Frequently he organized trips to areas outside London to round out his bibliographical research with direct observation of the new parties in operation and to ask questions of the organizers of the political machines. He concluded his research on Britain in 1895. The following year he went to the United States to observe American parties at first hand. 
Preparation for the publication of this research lasted until December 1902, when Macmillan published 'Democracy and the Organisation of Political Parties', which was followed a few months later by a French edition. The work consisted of two volumes, the first on the subject of British parties and the second on American parties. It was the first book to be dedicated entirely to extra-parliamentary political parties. It aimed to show how the development of modern political machines would inevitably come into conflict with the principles and institutions of liberal democracies. The vicissitudes of the British parties had strengthened Ostrogorski's conviction of this. He maintained that, from the development of the caucus system in Birmingham in the 1870s, British parties had taken the same path as American parties. The caucus system, in Ostrogorski's view, severely diminished the role of the individual in politics: instead of a lively dispute about ideas and policies, organizations accompanied by material and moral corruption would predominate. To save democracy Ostrogorski proposed replacing the permanent parties with one-issue leagues which would unite individuals for a limited period on the basis of specific objectives. The collective life of the masses would thus be given merely short-term and non-constricting organization, compatible with the theory and practice of democratic liberalism. Ostrogorski's book was based on wide-ranging research in periodicals, newspapers, and local libraries, which makes it a fertile source of information. While his condemnation of the caucus seems exaggerated in the light of the twentieth-century party bureaucracies which succeeded it, many of his detailed observations of the British political system -- for example, the role of local government -- were, and remain, original. 
On completion of his book, in March 1903 Ostrogorski returned to Russia. In 1906 he was elected to the first Duma -- the first experiment in representative institutions in Russia -- for the constituency of Grodno. In keeping with the ideas expressed in his academic works, he refused to belong to a party. However, he became a leading member of the Duma, and was influential on questions of constitutional law and parliamentary procedure. When the crisis of the first Duma took place in July 1906, he was in London as a member of the Russian delegation to the inter-parliamentary conference. He tried to get himself re-elected to the second Duma (February 1907) and the third (October 1907) as a representative of the opposition coalition, but he failed both times. 
Political defeat brought Ostrogorski back to his studies, and his attention turned again to Britain. He had visited England in August 1905 to revise and update his analysis of British politics. On that occasion the fame of his researches won him the honorary title of temporary member of the National Liberal Club. He went back to England again in June 1908, in July 1909, and finally for a longer period in April 1910. He was convinced that in the years since his book had come out many things had changed in British politics and that his analysis needed radical revision, although he felt that his section on American politics was much more sound and still relevant. Therefore in 1910 he published 'Democracy and the party system in the United States: a study in extra-constitutional government', a revised and abbreviated version of the 1902 edition, exclusively concerned with American parties. The new research on the British situation became part of the French edition of 1912 entitled 'La democratie et les parties politiques', which gave a revised and abbreviated version of the whole work. Ostrogorski examined the Labour Party at some length, whereas he had merely made passing reference to it in the 1902 edition, and made significant changes to his final assessment. In general, however, his interpretation was unchanged. He remained convinced that the extra-parliamentary parties had destroyed the classic constitutional balance, by destroying the model of virtue and temperance that European liberals had admired for so long. The details of this analysis were set out again in a series of four articles on the evolution of British institutions that he began to write in 1912 and which were published the following year in the Russian periodical, the 'European Herald', whose editor was the liberal jurist Maxime Kovalevski. Ostrogorski was invited to put the four articles together to form a book to be published in France, but, although tempted by the proposal, he declined because of his precarious health. 
In September 1913 Ostrogorski was struck down with vascular thrombosis which paralysed the left side of his body. Despite a long and difficult convalescence he made a miraculous recovery. In 1916 he took up a post at the University of St Petersburg, teaching constitutional law. In the same year he put the four articles on Britain together into one volume, aimed at a Russian readership, under the title 'Konstitutsionnaya evolyutsia Anglii' ('The evolution of the British constitution'). In the introduction he defined his objective once and for all: to declare Bagehot's classic analysis of the British system out of date from the moment the extra-parliamentary parties appeared. In Ostrogorski's view the new parties had destroyed the traditional balance and produced an intolerable supremacy of the executive over the other powers. The British model was thus rejected in favour of a system of assembly in which the theory of organized parties would not find room for manoeuvre. This was his last work. Moisei Ostrogorski died in Petrograd during 1919, although the exact date has been obscured by the revolution. 


@@@@@


doc= 41121


Mozeen, Mary (b. in or before 1724?, d. 1773?), singer and actress, was possibly Mary Edwards, daughter of the singer Thomas Edwards (1659?-1730), a member of the king's musick, and his wife, Mary. If so, she would have been born by 18 June 1724, 'when Thomas Edwards drew his will and bequeathed $1000 in trust for the benefit of his children Mary and Thomas' (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA', 10.370). 
Miss Edwards first appeared on stage on 19 November 1737 at the Drury Lane Theatre, as a 'country lass' in the pantomime 'The Burgomaster Trick'd', performed by the Lilliputian Company. She then acted Margerina in 'The Dragon of Wantley' and Glowworm in the pantomime 'Robin Goodfellow' on various occasions during 1738, and quickly established herself as a prominent figure on the London stage. At first associated chiefly with Drury Lane, she played the Page in Thomas Arne's opera 'Rosamond' on 8 March 1740. Kitty Clive, who had assisted and possibly taught Edwards during the early stages of her career, took the title role. Edwards sang at Clive's benefit on 17 March 1740 and appeared in 'The Tempest' the following May. 
Later that year Miss Edwards began to perform at Lincoln's Inn Fields and became associated with Handel. She sang Clomiris in the premiere of 'Imeneo' (22 November) and Achilles in 'Deidamia' (10 January 1741) and participated in various revivals. Her performances at Drury Lane during 1741-3 were mainly at benefits for Mrs Clive, although she did appear as Juno in Arne's 'The Judgment of Paris' on 12 March 1742. Her association with Handel continued in 1743 at Covent Garden as one of the Philistine and Israelite women in the premiere of 'Samson' (18 February), and in the first London performance of 'Messiah' (23 March). The parts written for her by Handel reveal a 'flexible light soprano' (Dean). 
Miss Edwards continued to perform at Covent Garden as a singer and actress (she was Jessica in 'The Merchant of Venice' on 14 March 1744) and often collaborated with Mrs Clive. In addition there were appearances at the Crown and Anchor tavern in the Strand and at the Haymarket, and in 1745-6 she returned to Drury Lane. Roles included Polly in John Gay's 'The Beggar's Opera' and the goddess Hecate in Samuel Howard's 'The Amorous Goddess' (25 April 1746), which was her last appearance as Miss Edwards. Shortly afterwards she married the Drury Lane actor Thomas Mozeen (1720?-1768) and was billed as Mrs Mozeen when playing Miranda in 'The Tempest' on 19 May 1746. Following a summer season at Jacob's Wells Theatre in Bristol (2 June-5 September), the Mozeens returned to Drury Lane until May 1748, when Mrs Mozeen made her last London appearance as Peggy in 'The King and the Miller of Mansfield' by Robert Dodsley. David Garrick having dispensed with their services, they were engaged by Thomas Sheridan at the Smock Alley Theatre, Dublin. Mrs Mozeen remained in Dublin for two seasons from autumn 1748. It appears that she and her husband separated towards the end of 1749: Thomas Mozeen appeared frequently in London from 1750 onwards, but Mrs Mozeen moved to and performed in Bath (1750-54), followed by Belfast (1754-8) and Edinburgh (1758-65). She was acting in Norwich in 1767 and then returned to Ireland to perform in Belfast, Newry, Kilkenny, and Dublin between 1768 and 1773. Her son was acting in Belfast in September 1768. 
Contemporary critical opinion held Mrs Mozeen in higher esteem as a singer than as an actress, in which capacity she was thought to be lacking confidence, conviction, and energy. It was also reported that she 'blushed at the least suggestive joke' (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA'), but had 'no very keen scruples' (ibid.) in private, to the extent that Mrs Clive withdrew her support. No details survive after 1773 and it is presumed that Mrs Mozeen died during that year. 


@@@@@


doc= 41122


Foli, Allan James (1835-1899), singer, was born Allan James Foley on 7 August 1835 at Cahir, co. Tipperary. After working as a carpenter he went to America, where he sang in church choirs, then studied in Naples with Bisaccia. He made his debut as Elmiro in Rossini's 'Otello' in Catania in December 1862, going on to sing in Turin, Modena, Milan, and, in 1864, at the Theatre Italien in Paris. In 1865 he joined Mapleson's company at Her Majesty's Theatre, singing Saint-Bris in Meyerbeer's 'Les Huguenots' (17 April), the Second Priest in 'The Magic Flute' (6 July), and the Hermit in 'Der Freischutz' (28 October). He appeared at Drury Lane and Covent Garden until 1887, performing at least sixty roles: these included Daland in the first English performance of Wagner's 'Der fliegende Hollander' in 1870. He was also much in demand in oratorio and at festivals. His oratorio debut was on 25 April 1866 in Handel's 'Israel in Egypt' at the National Choral Society, singing the duet 'The Lord is a man of war' with Charles Santley, though his first real success came with a performance of Haydn's 'The Creation' at the Sacred Harmonic Society. His festival appearances included roles at Norwich (1869), Birmingham (1870), and Gloucester (1871). He also sang Jacob in the first performance of George Macfarren's 'Joseph' at the Leeds Festival on 21 September 1877 and Herod in the first English performances of Berlioz's 'L'enfance du Christ' in Manchester under Halle on 30 December 1880 and in London on 26 February 1881. In Russia he sang Caspar ('Der Freischutz'), Rossini's Mose and Pietro in Auber's 'La muette de Portici' with great success; he also visited Vienna and toured America. In 1892 he toured South Africa, and in 1893 Australia, and in 1896 he sang again in London. He was a popular ballad singer, and for this repertory he billed himself as Signor Foli; his operatic and concert appearances were as A. J. Foli. His voice was described as 'a rich powerful bass of more than two octaves from E below the line to F' (Grove, 'Dict. mus.', 1st edn). Bernard Shaw, however, complained of his poor articulation. He died at the Royal Hotel, Southport, on 20 October 1899. 


@@@@@


doc= 41124


Wood, (John) Christopher (1901-1930), painter, was born on 7 April 1901 at Yalding Cottage, Knowsley, Lancashire, the first of the two children of Robert Lucius Wood (1870-1960), a physician who practised on the earl of Derby's estate at Knowsley, and his wife, Clara Dolores, 'nee' Arthur (1869-1946). The family lived in Huyton until 1926, when they moved to Broad Chalke, Wiltshire. Christopher Wood was educated at Holmwood School, Freshfield preparatory school (1908-14), Marlborough College (1914-15), Malvern College (1918), and Liverpool school of architecture (1919-20). In 1915 an illness kept him at home for three years, leaving him with a permanent limp. He was apprenticed in 1920 to Thornley and Felix, dried fruit importers in London. He rented a room at 6 Oxford Terrace, Bayswater, and spent his spare time painting and socializing. 
Through Robert Tritton, Wood met Alphonse Kahn, a wealthy homosexual art connoisseur and collector, and member of a banking family. Invited by Kahn, Wood arrived in Paris on 19 March 1921, to stay in his luxurious house at 41 avenue Bois de Boulogne. Kahn paid Wood's expenses and took him to museums, dealers, and studios. It was the start of a peripatetic life, usually based in his lovers' apartments, though Wood had a flat at 11 bis rue Balzac in 1921; rented rooms briefly in 1928 at 234 King's Road, Chelsea, London; then took a house nearby at 3 Minton Place, while maintaining a studio at 54 rue des Saints-Peres, Paris. He enrolled at the Academie Julian and later attended La Grande Chaumiere. 
In the early summer of 1921 Wood met Antonio de Gandarillas ('b'. 1887), a Chilean roving diplomat. Fourteen years older than Wood and married, though homosexual, Gandarillas lived a glamorous life partly financed by gambling. Their relationship lasted through Wood's life, surviving his affairs with Jeanne Bourgoint and, probably, Jean Cocteau; his plans to marry Meraud Guinness in 1927, frustrated by her parents' opposition; and his final liaison with a Russian emigree, Frosca Munster, whom he met in 1928. His closest relationship was with his mother, the person whom he most wished to please and to whom he wrote thousands of letters. Wood was remote from his father, whom he identified with the middle-class banality of Huyton, which he loathed. 
Insecure, compulsive, bisexual, and probably depressive, Wood craved both stability and the stimulus of emotional and physical excess. Gandarillas's chic social circle provided these conditions. Unwaveringly ambitious, Wood wrote to his mother in 1921 that he intended 'to try and be the greatest painter that has ever lived' (Ingleby, 59). He grasped at social status as a route to artistic success and, in return, charmed Parisian sophisticates with his handsome features, smart, conventional clothes, good manners, and astonishing naivety, product of a secluded adolescence and a determinedly non-intellectual mindset. Yet the conflict between ambition and the life offered by Gandarillas became irreconcilable. 
In 1922 Wood and Gandarillas established a pattern of leisurely travel interspersed with bouts of intense work. After touring the Netherlands they went to Monte Carlo, Nice, Marseilles, and north Africa, where Wood painted some unremarkable portraits and still lifes. He worked hard for two months in Taormina before visiting Malta, Greece, Constantinople, and Smyrna, a centre for drug distribution. It is not clear when he began to smoke opium though it was common practice in Gandarillas's circle. Both men were hospitalized with malaria in Smyrna; when they recovered they headed for Venice, northern Europe, then Gandarillas's house at 145 Cheyne Walk, Chelsea, London. 
In 1923 Wood moved into Gandarillas's apartment at 60 avenue Montaigne, Paris, where they remained until early 1927 when they moved to a modern block at 6 rue des Marronniers. Financially and socially dependent, he benefited from Gandarillas's connections, which may have been how he met Picasso. Wood consistently avoided both artistic bohemia and fashionable society painters, aligning himself with modern, non-academic painting. In response to Picasso, whom he acknowledged as one of his primary models, he simplified his colour and imagery and began to draw statuesque nudes. Travelling with Gandarillas in the following year, Wood met Cocteau, whom he admired equally. In his own portrait drawings he adopted Cocteau's manner of drawing with a fluid line and almost no shading. 
However, by the end of 1925 Wood wanted, he wrote, to make paintings 'full of English character' (Ingleby, 109). The opportunity came when he met Ben and Winifred Nicholson in the following year, initiating a relationship that was fundamental to his development. They introduced him to the Seven & Five Society, of which he was a member from 1927 to 1929. Wood spent March and April 1928 with them at Bankshead, Cumberland. Here, unable to smoke opium, to which he was addicted, he worked intensively. In flower paintings and pared-down landscape drawings, the trio arrived at a viable, modern alternative to French sophistication. 
In August or September, during a day's visit to St Ives, Wood and Ben Nicholson encountered Alfred Wallis, whose untutored simplicity became a model for such paintings as Wood's 'Porthmeor Beach' (oil, 1928), one of his first fully individual works. Often using house paint in emulation of Wallis, he painted solid, simplified forms in rich, natural colour. He had already recognized the centrality of a childlike vision to modern art, but though his painting was often compared to children's art, its deliberate simplicity masked its real sophistication. Wood's modernity was achieved through representations of the rural that identified it with a spiritual quality located in simplicity and changelessness. 
In April 1929 Wood showed thirty-three paintings at Arthur Tooth & Sons, London, his one individual exhibition during his lifetime. That summer he worked first in Dieppe, painting fishing boats like 'Boat in Harbour, Brittany' (oil on board, 1929; Tate collection) with meticulous attention to detail. Then, suffering severe financial problems caused by his worsening addiction, he moved to Douarnenez and Treboul, where he was emotionally supported by the poet Max Jacob. 
Towards the end of 1929 Boris Kochno invited Wood to design scenery and costumes for an episode in C. B. Cochrane's 1930 'Revue', to be performed by the fashionable Ballets Russes. The theme was the human 'freaks' of the Luna Park circus. On 4 March 1930 Wood attended the well-received opening in Manchester. In May he showed with Ben Nicholson at the Galerie Barbazanges, in Paris. Ten paintings were bought by Lucy Wertheim, for whose London gallery Wood was to provide the opening exhibition in October. Under great pressure he returned to Treboul, where he produced forty paintings in six weeks. Some were based on postcards; most depicted simple buildings, religious ceremonies, and light-hearted local events. 
These are the paintings on which Wood's reputation depends. He received little critical recognition during his life, though the memorial exhibition of 1938 at the New Burlington Galleries, London, brought him considerable posthumous attention. He was then almost forgotten until the 1970s, when the first of several critical re-examinations of his work took place. Today he is acknowledged for playing an essential if limited role in establishing links between modernity, landscape, and concepts of the 'primitive'. 
In Paris in July 1930 Wood made two somewhat surreal final paintings while stress steadily increased his addiction, led him further into debt, and made his behaviour ever less predictable. Deeply disturbed, he travelled to England on 19 August to finalize arrangements with Wertheim. Convinced that he was being followed and threatened, he diverged to the Isle of Wight. On 21 August he went to Salisbury, met his mother and sister Elizabeth (Betty), then jumped under the London-bound train at Salisbury station and was instantly killed. He was buried at All Saints' Church, Broad Chalke, on 23 August. Paintings by Wood are in many regional galleries, including Southampton Art Gallery; Laing Art Gallery, Newcastle upon Tyne; Whitworth Art Gallery, Manchester; and Manchester City Galleries. The Towner Art Gallery, Eastbourne, the Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art, Edinburgh, the Musee des Beaux-Arts, Quimper, and the Phillips Collection, Washington, DC, also hold examples of his work. 


@@@@@


doc= 41126


Robinson, Henry Peach (1830-1901), photographer and writer on photography, was born at Linney, Ludlow, Shropshire, on 9 July 1830, the first of the four children of John Robinson (1806-1855), master of the national school of the Church of England in Ludlow, and his wife, Eliza, 'nee' Peach (died 1859). He was educated briefly at a dame-school in Middleton, and then at Horatio Russell's academy in Ludlow (1836-43). From 1843 to 1844 he studied drawing privately with Richard Penwarne, but, his initial year of art tuition having failed to provide him with the prospect of a livelihood, in 1844 he was apprenticed to Richard Jones, a printer and bookseller in Ludlow. 
This apprenticeship concluded in 1849, whereupon Robinson returned to his study of art, and in 1850 he joined the bookseller Benjamin Maund in Bromsgrove. There he was first instructed in the photographic art by an itinerant daguerreotype portraitist. In 1851 he took employment with a firm of booksellers and publishers, Whittaker & Co., in London. During this year he began his experiments in photography on paper, and in 1852 he exhibited an oil painting, 'On the Teme Near Ludlow', at the Royal Academy. Publishing, the academic view of art, and experimentation with photographic technique remained closely linked throughout his career. 
In 1853 Robinson sought employment in bookselling in Leamington Priors, where he remained until 1855. A meeting with the photographer Dr H. W. Diamond in 1854 inspired him to devote himself to the medium as a profession. Upon his father's death in 1855, Robinson found himself the head of the family and moved briefly to Ludlow; then in 1856 he opened a photographic studio in Leamington Spa. On 15 February 1859 he married Selina (1838-1909), the daughter of John Edward Grieves, a chemist in Ludlow; they had two sons and four daughters. 
Robinson expanded his Leamington premises in 1862, but was forced to discontinue his studio practice two years later when his health broke down owing to exposure to photographic chemicals. Having relocated his family to London, he began writing for a variety of photographic journals. By 1868 he had recovered sufficiently to open a studio in Tunbridge Wells with a partner, Nelson King Cherrill. In 1870 he was elected vice-president of the Photographic Society, which he had first joined in 1857. In 1875 Robinson and Cherrill dissolved their partnership, with Robinson retaining the business. By 1886 Robinson's son Ralph was running the studio, and by 1888 he had effectively retired. Following an episode of censure and conflict at the Photographic Society in 1891 he resigned, and the following year he formed the rival Linked Ring association of photographers, serving as chairman of the judges for its exhibitions until 1900. In that year he was elected an honorary fellow of the Royal Photographic Society. Robinson suffered a seizure and paralysis soon afterwards, and he died on 21 February 1901 at his home, 2 Queen's Road, Tunbridge Wells. He was buried in Ben Hall Road cemetery in Tunbridge Wells. 
Best-known to photographic history as a master of the combination printing technique, by which fragments of images from numerous negatives were painstakingly combined into an apparently seamless whole, Robinson created imposing photographic images modelled after the academic painting of his day. In many of these, amateur or professional models were dressed and arranged in fictitious settings to suggest a narrative. Of these, 'Fading Away' (1858) was his first celebrated success, followed by increasingly ambitious compositions such as 'A Holiday in the Wood' (1860), 'The Lady of Shalott' (1860-61), 'Bringing Home the May' (1862), and 'Autumn' (1863), many of which simulated landscape scenes even though they were photographed all or in part within the studio. His later moralizing cottage interiors, such as 'When the Day's Work is Done' (1875-7) and 'Dawn and Sunset' (1885), were still more sophisticated in their technique and plausible in their appearance. 
Robinson was ultimately more influential through his prolific writings than through his photographs. His landmark treatise 'Pictorial Effect in Photography' (1869) was one of the first serious treatments of photography as fine art. It went through numerous editions and was followed by 'The Art and Practice of Silver Printing' (written with Captain W. de W. Abney, 1881), 'Picture Making by Photography' (1884), 'The Photographic Studio and What to Do in it' (1885), 'Letters on Landscape Photography' (1888), 'Photography as a Business' (1890), 'Art Photography in Short Chapters' (1895), and 'The Elements of a Pictorial Photograph' (1896). These illustrated volumes explained the basic techniques of photography and articulated a set of aesthetic principles based on painting as a model for photographers to follow. 
Throughout his life, Robinson championed the notion that photography must bow to the established conventions of art rather than taking nature as a model. As he put it, 'I do not fear to say that nature alone, as a picture, has far less interest than the same nature represented by a great artist.' A lively feud was conducted during the 1880s between Robinson and a gifted younger photographer, Peter Henry Emerson, who challenged Robinson's views of photography, art, and nature in a series of articles and books, advocating the supremacy of nature and its use as a basis for creating photographic art. Entirely the elder statesman, Robinson refused to acknowledge the claims of the emerging school of photographers, and remained faithful to his style, subjects, and methods of composition throughout his life. His works are found today in major museum collections throughout the world, including the National Museum of Photography, Film and Television in Bradford, the Victoria and Albert Museum, the Getty Museum in Los Angeles, George Eastman House in Rochester, New York, and the Gernsheim collection at the University of Texas, Austin. 


@@@@@


doc= 41127


Robert Adamson (1821-1848), changing both their lives irrevocably. Adamson was born on 26 April 1821, the son of Alexander Adamson, a tenant farmer at Burnside (5 miles east of St Andrews), and his wife, Rachael Melville. He was educated at Madras School, St Andrews, where he twice took the prize for mathematics. Adamson displayed an unusual talent for mechanics, working for an engineering shop in his youth, but his fragile health prohibited this calling. His older brother, Dr John Adamson (1809-1870), practised medicine in St Andrews and associated with Sir David Brewster (1761-1868), the principal of the United Colleges of St Leonard and St Salvator, along with other members of the St Andrews Literary and Philosophical Society. Brewster also enjoyed an unusually close scientific friendship with William Henry Fox Talbot (1800-1877) of Lacock Abbey. When Talbot announced his invention of photography on paper in January 1839, Brewster took an immediate enthusiastic interest and became the conduit into Scotland for information on the new art. Dr Adamson was one of the leading figures in this fledgeling photographic circle and encouraged his younger brother in taking up the calotype. By summer 1842 Brewster had reported to Talbot that the young man was becoming well drilled in the art, and on 10 May 1843 Robert Adamson established Scotland's first calotype studio, in the small eighteenth-century Rock House, on the steps of Calton Hill in Edinburgh. 


@@@@@


doc= 41128


Coburn, Alvin Langdon (1882-1966), photographer and mystic, was born on 11 June 1882 at 134 East Springfield Street, Boston, Massachusetts, the only child of James Alvin Coburn (1849-1891), manufacturer of Coburn and Whitman shirts, and his wife, Fannie E. Howe (died 1928). In 1887 the family moved to Dorchester, Massachusetts, where Coburn attended the Chauncey Hall School (1891-5). His father having died, he moved with his mother in 1897 back to Boston, where they lived in Boylston Street, and the following year he met his distant cousin, Fred Holland Day, the American publisher of the 'Yellow Book' and symbolist photographer of homoerotic orientation. In 1899 Coburn made the first of thirteen transatlantic crossings to London in the company of his devoted but domineering mother. He took rooms at 89 Guilford Street, Russell Square, and exhibited nine photographs at a Royal Photographic Society exhibition organized by Holland Day in 1900. 
After touring in France, Switzerland, and Germany with his mother, Coburn opened a studio at 384 5th Avenue, New York, in 1902, and attended for two years running Arthur Wesley Dow's Summer School of Art in Ipswich, Massachusetts, where he mastered the principles of Japanese design. Arthur Symons's 'Cities' (1903) provided a model for Coburn's own projected series, 'The adventures of cities', on London, Birmingham, Liverpool, Edinburgh, Paris, Pittsburgh, and New York. Coburn's symbolist aim was to draw confidences out of the very stones of the buildings and to transfigure such cities by means of his own special combination of Japanese composition, impressionist tone, and Thomas Dallmeyer's new telephoto lens. Between 1906 and 1913 he was informally tutored by Henry James in the typology of cities for the purpose of providing frontispieces for the collected New York edition of James's novels. Boyish but bearded, he appeared at the time of his most creative work like a young Whistler or William Morris, top-hatted but craftsman-like. 
In 1909 Coburn and his mother moved from Guilford Street to 9 Lower Mall, Hammersmith, where he set up two printing presses to apply hard-won skills learned at the London County Council School of Photo-Engraving, Bolt Court. In the period 1909-14 he etched and steel-faced eighty-three plates, and oversaw the printing of some 40,000 hand-pulled gravures for his books 'London' (1909) and 'New York' (1910), his illustrations for H. G. Wells's 'The Door in the Wall' (1911), and his portraits for 'Men of Mark' (1913). His true medium was photogravure, though his gum-platinum exhibition photographs are among the finest produced in the history of photography. 
In 1911 Coburn visited Yosemite and the Grand Canyon, and in 1912 he published in Los Angeles six photographs to illustrate Shelley's 'The Cloud'. On 11 October 1912 in Trinity Church, 25th Street, New York, he married Edith Wightman Clement (died 1957) of Boston, with his mother and the verger as the only witnesses; they then returned to England, and Coburn never visited the United States again. The couple had no children: it is possible that Coburn settled for an asexual but devoted marriage in response to a troubled sense of sexual identity. Closely attracted (and attractive) to Day, James, Edward Carpenter, and George Bernard Shaw, he may have shared their less than clear sexual preferences. 
Coburn attempted to modernize his symbolist sensibility in 1917 by making and exhibiting a series of prism-like images which he called vortographs, and devoted a great deal of time to the mechanical piano, the pianola. But he maintained his long-standing interest in the occult and derived deep satisfaction from becoming a freemason in 1919. He became a Mark mason and Royal Arch mason in 1921 and eventually achieved mastership in his two lodges. In 1922 he joined the Rosicrucian Society. But the definitive change in his life came in 1923 when he met a man who taught him the practice of quietist contemplation; in accordance with principles of anonymity and impersonality, this man's name remains unknown to those not of the hermetic society called the Universal Order. Coburn was an anonymous contributor to its journal, the 'Shrine of Wisdom' (1919-47). 
In 1930, after destroying 15,000 photographic negatives and giving a collection of photographs to the Royal Photographic Society, Coburn moved to Harlech, Merioneth. On 24 May 1932 he was naturalized as a British subject. In 1935 he was appointed a lay reader in the Church in Wales, and in 1940 became honorary secretary of the joint county committee of Merioneth of the British Red Cross Society and the order of St John of Jerusalem. In 1945 the Coburns moved from Harlech to Denbighshire. Edith died on 11 October 1957, on their forty-fifth wedding anniversary, and Coburn on 23 November 1966 at their home, Awen, 17 Ebberstone Road East, Llandrillo-yn-Rhos, Denbighshire. After a service at St George's Church, Llandrillo-yn-Rhos, he was buried in the churchyard of Llandudno, Caernarvonshire, with masonic prayers being said at the graveside. 


@@@@@


doc= 41130


Beato, Felice (c.1825-c.1907), photographer, was, according to most biographies, born in Venice in 1830 and later became a naturalized British subject. However, little is known of his early life. Although he was undoubtedly of Italian ancestry, it is likely that he and his brother Antonio were born in Corfu about 1825. In the early part of the nineteenth century Corfu was a Venetian colony, but in 1814 it came under British rule; children born there could be registered as British subjects. 
Beato is acknowledged to be the first photographer to specialize in war photography. He learned photography from his brother-in-law, James Robertson, who married Beato's sister in 1855. Robertson, a native of Britain who was appointed chief engraver of the mint in Constantinople in the 1840s, took up photography professionally in the early 1850s, travelling to the Crimea in 1855 to photograph the war between Britain and Russia. It is not clear whether Beato accompanied him at this time; however, a year later he was sent there by Robertson to photograph the aftermath of the war. At a time when most professional photographers employed the cumbersome wet-plate negative process, Robertson and Beato utilized a secret (and much simpler) dry-plate process which made battlefield photography practical. 
In 1856 and 1857 Robertson and Beato travelled around the Mediterranean, photographing the sights at Constantinople, Malta, Egypt, and the Holy Land. In 1857 they established a formal partnership in Malta selling photographs to tourists. However, the partnership was short-lived for, when news of the Indian mutiny reached Malta, Beato set off for Calcutta. British policy had forbidden the photographing of dead bodies in the Crimea, but the prohibition did not apply to India. When Beato arrived in Lucknow in the summer of 1858, he was disappointed to discover that he had arrived too late to photograph the actual massacre of the rebels; undeterred, he had the skeletons of the rebels exhumed and scattered around the courtyard of the 'sikandarabagh' to create one of his most dramatic photographs. Beato stayed in India, acting as a semi-official photographer for the army for the next two years, but a new war was in the wind. 
In 1858 China took steps to end the British importation of Indian opium into their country; the British retaliated by occupying Canton (Guangzhou) and sinking a major part of the Chinese navy. Following their initial success, the British navy next attacked the Taku (Dagu) Fort complex guarding the river access to Peking (Beijing); here they were beaten off with heavy losses. The British response was to assemble an expeditionary force to invade China. Beato travelled with this army to Kowloon and Canton in the spring of 1860 and remained with it throughout the campaign. In August the army successfully stormed the Taku forts: in the heat of battle Beato followed the troops through the breach in the walls, imploring them not to touch the bodies until he had taken his pictures. He travelled with the army to Peking, where he was able to photograph the Summer Palace complex before it was looted and burned by British troops in retaliation for the torture and killing of allied prisoners. His approximately one hundred large-format photographs constitute the first and only major surviving images of China before the 1870s. 
After a brief trip to London, Beato returned to the Far East and settled in Yokohama for the next twenty years. This was the most prolific period of his career: he produced several hundred images in Japan encompassing landscape, architecture, and ethnography. He is considered the father of Japanese photography, his work the only comprehensive view remaining of the country's life and culture during the 1860s. In 1864 he joined the British forces for the Shimonoseki military expedition in Japan; in 1871 he was appointed the official photographer for the United States Navy during the attack on Korea. He also claimed to have photographed the Mahdist rebellion against the British in the Sudan in 1884, but so far no surviving images of this work have been found. In the 1870s Beato turned away from photography to become a merchant, but in the 1880s he lost all his money speculating in the Yokohama silver exchange. His friends raised the money for his passage to London. In 1889 he settled in Mandalay, Burma, and opened up a photographic studio; he appears to have operated a mail-order export business, dealing in local arts and crafts on the side. He died in Burma about 1907. The most comprehensive collections of his photographs in Britain are in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London, and the National Museum of Photography, Film and Television, Bradford (including the collection of the Royal Photographic Society). 


@@@@@


doc= 41131


Fawcett, Charles Bungay (1883-1952), geographer, was born on 25 August 1883 at Staindrop, co. Durham, the second son in the family of five children of John Fawcett ('b'. 1846), joiner, later sawmill superintendent, and his second wife, Eva, 'nee' Bungay ('b'. 1856). He was educated at the school at Staindrop and then at Gainford grammar school in the nearby Tees valley, and became a pupil-schoolteacher. In 1904 he entered University College, Nottingham, and graduated BSc in 1908. He then taught at Long Eaton county school, and from 1910 to 1912 studied under A. J. Herbertson at Oxford for a diploma in geography. In 1913 he was awarded the degree of BLitt for a thesis entitled 'The fjord peoples: an essay in human geography'. In the same year he was appointed as the first lecturer in geography at University College, Southampton. 
Exempted from war service during the First World War through poor eyesight, Fawcett combined teaching with a post at the Ordnance Survey headquarters in Southampton. He received a London MSc degree in 1916, for a thesis entitled 'The middle Tees and its tributaries'. On 5 April 1917, at Southampton register office, he married Nora Loxston (1892-1982), a schoolteacher, the daughter of Charles Loxston, locomotive driver. They had two daughters. Fawcett's first book, 'Frontiers: a Study in Political Geography' (1918), was followed by a more significant volume, 'Provinces of England: a Study of Some Geographical Aspects of Devolution' (1919), in the 'Making of the Future' series edited by Victor Branford and Patrick Geddes. Fawcett defined functional regions around major cities and made a powerful case for reforming England's archaic administrative units. He was attracted by notions of centrality, regionalism, devolution, and federalism; this book was republished in 1960. 
In 1919 Fawcett moved to the University of Leeds, where geography was being developed as an independent subject. He was promoted to a readership in 1920, and lectured to honours students, schoolteachers taking the teaching diploma, and clerical workers of the North-Eastern Railway who studied 'railway geography'. He displayed detailed knowledge of northern England in three chapters of 'Great Britain: Essays in Regional Geography' (1928), edited by A. G. Ogilvie. At that time Lionel Lyde retired from the chair of geography at University College, London, and Fawcett replaced him in September 1928. He had gained administrative experience at Leeds, had published two books and sixteen articles or chapters, and had acquired a London DSc degree in 1925 for his corpus of publications. At University College Fawcett built up a core team, including R. Ogilvie Buchanan, Robert E. Dickinson (his protege from Leeds), and Arthur E. Smailes. Fawcett gained a reputation as a kind, approachable, and sympathetic teacher, who delivered well-organized lectures, demonstrated a formidable grasp of factual information, and avoided hasty, overgeneralized conclusions. As a visiting professor he took those qualities to Clark University, Worcester, Massachusetts, in 1930-31. 
Fawcett published articles and books on regional planning in Britain, political geography, population, food supplies, and agricultural land, as well as pioneering work on 'conurbations'. In 'A Political Geography of the British Empire' (1933) he stressed geographical facts that influenced the development and organization of imperial lands, arguing that loyalty to the British flag could accommodate peoples of many different cultures, languages, and religions. 'The Bases of a World Commonwealth' (1941) articulated his humanistic beliefs and stressed the existence of a community of interest to either side of the north Atlantic, but underplayed the global impact of communism and the rising might of the USSR. This book was followed by 'A Residential Unit for Town and Country Planning' (1944). 
Fawcett was firmly committed to the promotion of geography, serving for many years on the council and executive committee of the Geographical Association and on the council of the Royal Geographical Society (1929-33 and 1945-9). He was a prime mover in the creation of the Institute of British Geographers, and became its first president (1933-6). He was active in establishing the Association of University Teachers and was chairman of the council of the Le Play Society in the 1930s. In 1937 he was president of section E (geography) of the British Association for the Advancement of Science. He presented papers at the International Geographical Congress (in 1928, 1931, and 1934), and headed the British delegation at the congress in 1949, when he was elected to the chair of the commission on population. 
When the departments of University College, London, were evacuated to colleges of the University of Wales during the Second World War Fawcett became deputy provost of University College, London, at Aberystwyth. When his department returned to war-torn central London in 1944 he took on more external commitments as national president of the Association of University Teachers (1945-6), council member (1945-9) and vice-president (1949-51) of the Royal Geographical Society, and again visiting professor at Clark University (1946-7). After the departure from University College of Dickinson in 1947 and Buchanan in 1949, he retired in 1949 and was succeeded by Henry Clifford Darby. He yet again went back to teach at Clark University (1949-51), where he was made an honorary ScD (1951), and was then visiting professor at the University of Ceylon (1951-2). He was taken ill in Calcutta in 1952 and returned with his wife to England. His health deteriorated and he died at the Royal County Hospital, Guildford, Surrey, on 21 September 1952. His funeral was held at Golders Green crematorium on 25 September. He was survived by his wife and daughters, Edith and Ruth. 


@@@@@


doc= 41132


Fisher, Lettice (1875-1956), social worker, was born on 14 June 1875 at 19 Southwick Street, Kensington, London, the eldest daughter of Sir Courtenay Peregrine Ilbert (1841-1924), clerk of the House of Commons, and his wife, Jessie, 'nee' Bradley (died 1923/4). After attending Francis Holland School, London, she went up to Oxford in 1894 to read modern history at Somerville College, taking a first in 1897. During 1897-8 she held research studentships at the London School of Economics. On 6 July 1899 she married Herbert Albert Laurens Fisher (1865-1940), a tutor at New College, Oxford, who had taught her as an undergraduate. They had one daughter, Mary Bennett (1913-2005) ['see under 'Fisher, Herbert Albert Laurens], who later became principal of St Hilda's College, Oxford. 
From 1902 to 1913 Lettice Fisher was modern history tutor at St Hugh's College, Oxford, one of the first generation of tutors appointed by the women's colleges, and she also taught economics for the Association for the Higher Education of Women in Oxford. During this period she began undertaking voluntary social work. She was one of the founders, in 1902, of the Oxford Sanitary Aid Association, which sought to improve housing and sanitary conditions in the city. From this developed the Infant Welfare Association, which attempted to educate working-class mothers in child-rearing through health visiting, lectures, film shows, and babies' welfare clubs, and by establishing clinics. She also served on the executive of the Oxford Health and Housing Association, founded in 1912 in recognition of the close link between living conditions and infant welfare. She was active in the constitutional movement for women's suffrage through her membership of the Oxford Students' Suffrage Society and the Oxford branch of the National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies (NUWSS), and was among the university women whom Millicent Fawcett co-opted onto the national executive of the NUWSS (Lettice Fisher chaired the executive from 1916 to 1918). 
Lettice Fisher left Oxford in 1913, after her husband was made vice-chancellor of Sheffield University. Through her gift for entertaining and befriending students, she played an important part in establishing a sense of collegiality between teacher and student as existed at Oxford. During the First World War she undertook welfare work among women munitions workers in Sheffield. It was the wartime scale of illegitimacy and its resulting hardships that led her in 1918 to found the National Council for the Unmarried Mother and her Child. This 'abiding and deep interest of all her later life' ('The Times', 22 Feb 1956, 11) was sparked by the registrar-general's report of 1916 which showed that the ratio of illegitimate to legitimate mortality in the first week of life had increased from 170 per cent in 1907 to 201 per cent in 1916. This evidence spurred the child welfare council of the Social Welfare Association of London to establish a child welfare office. With the welfare office overwhelmed with work, a special committee was set up to investigate further the problem of unmarried mothers. Out of this investigation arose the national council with Fisher as its first chair, a post she held until 1949. 
The aims of the council were both political and practical, but its true purpose was the re-education of public opinion, which viewed any help for unmarried mothers as 'a challenge to the accepted standards of morality' and believed that the best solution to the problem was the adoption of a deterrent rather than constructive policy (Fisher, 6). While eschewing the language of blame and punishment, the council did not shy away from putting its case for supporting unmarried mothers in moral terms. Though it argued that the separation of any mother from her baby was a factor in the high mortality of illegitimate children and should therefore be regarded as an exceptional measure, it believed that by keeping the child with her it would be possible to reform the mother for its sake and to improve her moral standards. The council also set out to awaken in fathers a sense of responsibility particularly in regard to maintenance. 
Under Lettice Fisher's leadership many of the aims of the council were fulfilled. Thousands of women were helped and the council played an active part in shaping legislation on such matters as the subsequent legitimization of children born before their parents' marriage, adoption, and the collection of maintenance from fathers. Grants for the work were not always easy to come by, so Fisher supported the council by organizing every year a fund-raising event in Oxford as well as by lobbying friends. 
During the first decades of universal suffrage, in the 1920s and 1930s, Lettice Fisher was a prolific writer in the cause of equipping all voters, but particularly women, to function as responsible and informed citizens. She wrote many books for both children and adults on economics and history. The didactic nature of much of her work is evident in 'Then and Now' (1925), in which she uses the past to illuminate the present, drawing parallels between the economic and social upheavals following the Napoleonic wars and the choices faced by governments after 1918. 'The housewife and the townhall: a brief description of what is done by our local councils and public services' (1934), which she produced in consultation with the National Federation of Women's Institutes, grew out of a series of radio broadcasts aimed at women wanting to learn more about government; she urged them to participate actively as voters or representatives. 
In 1940, on the death of her husband, who had been warden of New College, Oxford, since 1925, Lettice Fisher settled at Rock Cottage, Thursley, Surrey, formerly their country residence. She died there on 14 February 1956 after suffering a stroke. After cremation her ashes were interred at New College, Oxford. 


@@@@@


doc= 41133


McFarlane, (Kenneth) Bruce (1903-1966), historian, was born on 18 October 1903 at 191 Amesbury Avenue, Streatham, London, the only child of Andrew McFarlane OBE, a civil servant in the Admiralty, and his first wife, Elizabeth Annie Stancombe. His mother died after a long illness while he was still a schoolboy, and his father remarried. After education at local preparatory schools and Dulwich College (1917-22) he won a scholarship to Exeter College, Oxford, which he entered in Michaelmas term 1922. He won the Stanhope historical essay prize in 1924, obtained a first class in modern history in 1925, and was elected to a senior demyship at Magdalen College in 1926. He became a fellow by examination in 1927 and a tutorial fellow in 1928, and remained at the college until his death in 1966. His chosen field of research was England in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, a period which William Stubbs had seen as constitutionally retrograde, with parliament's precocious development stifled by factional politics. More recently T. F. Tout had argued that the crown and the magnates were locked in a struggle for the control of government through the administrative offices of exchequer, chancery, and household. Tout's work extended no further than 1399, and the fifteenth century remained 'terra incognita'. 
McFarlane's initial impulse was to carry forward the study of the institutions of government, the council, and the exchequer with a thesis on Cardinal Beaufort. But he rejected both Stubbs's whig constitutionalism and Tout's belief in the opposition of crown and magnates. Adopting a Marxist approach he at first interpreted the period as the clash of a new moneyed and mercantile class with the old feudal order. He soon saw this to be too crude a formulation, for what impressed him was the survival, adaptability, and inclusiveness of the ruling class throughout English history. It was this that gave direction and coherence to the evolution of the English state. Having arrived at this position he set himself to investigate all aspects of this elite in his chosen period: its members and families; their lands and finances; their consumption and culture; their education and beliefs; and their service in war and politics. In this last he was much influenced by L. B. Namier's recent study of eighteenth-century English politics in terms of patronage and 'interests'. He could see a similar structure in the political society of the later middle ages, and this he delineated in two brilliant and seminal articles, 'Bastard feudalism' (1945) and 'Parliament and bastard feudalism' (1944), reprinted among his collected essays in 'England in the Fifteenth Century' (1981). These introduced historians to a world of magnate retinues and affinities; service and patronage; indentures, annuities, and 'good lordship'; of shamelessly competitive ambition and floating loyalties. He thereby not only changed historians' views on the period but set a new direction for future research. 
McFarlane now intensified his own investigations into the archives of the medieval aristocracy, some of them in the public records but many still remaining in stately homes (like Longleat) or on deposit in county record offices (as at Stafford and Lancaster). Hitherto none of this material had been explored, and all of it required laborious transcription before it could be interpreted and a synthesis made. A provisional exposition of his findings was presented in the Ford lectures at Oxford in 1953, a landmark in the historical study of the period. These gave a portrait of the late medieval nobility both as individuals of varying temperaments and abilities and as a class with a mentality fashioned by war and chivalric convention, financial acumen, dynastic pride, and political service. But he saw the lectures as provisional, refusing to publish them and continuing to accumulate evidence for a deeper synthesis. The text of 1953, with subsequent additions, was published posthumously as 'The Nobility of Later Medieval England' (1973) and his transcriptions from the archives, comparable in value to those of Dodsworth and Dugdale, were deposited in Magdalen College. 
McFarlane's short study 'John Wycliffe and the Beginnings of English Nonconformity' (1952) was written, at the invitation of A. L. Rowse, for a wider audience. Though incredulous and dismissive about Wycliffe's beliefs McFarlane found the conflict between authority and heresy a valuable key to the mentality and power of the establishment; and in similar terms he went on to investigate how Wycliffite ideas penetrated the inner circles of the court of Richard II. The recovery of the covert beliefs of a group of chamber knights, a skilled piece of historical detective work, was posthumously published in 'Lancastrian King and Lollard Knights' (1972). He returned to political history with the delivery of the Raleigh lecture at the British Academy (to which he had been elected in 1964) on the Wars of the Roses, a masterly analysis of the causes and nature of the collapse of political society. Alongside this historical research he had been led to re-examine the canon of Memling's paintings, prompted by perceiving the inaccurate dating of the 'Donne triptych', on exhibition in 1948. This occupied him intermittently over many years, leading him into an intensive study of the iconographical elements in Memling's paintings and the inspection of most of those in European galleries. His conclusions were published posthumously in a distilled form by Edgar Wind in 'Hans Memling' (1971). 
McFarlane preferred to write lectures and papers rather than books. Some were of seminal importance and all touched major problems and raised new lines of enquiry. Everything he wrote had the stamp of authority, based as it was on first-hand investigation and an instinctive distrust of received opinion. Nor did he conceal the provisional nature of some of his conclusions. His intellectual integrity and historical craftsmanship inspired the generation whose research he supervised, and their lineal successors, so that the study of late medieval England became part of the curriculum in most British universities. Partly because of his shyness and inner melancholy, and partly because of his charismatic personality, the pupils to whom he tentatively offered friendship became lifelong intimates. A volume of his letters to some of these ('Letters to Friends, 1940-1966', ed. G. L. Harriss, 1999) reveals something of the inner man and much about his daily preoccupations and diversions. They show him as widely read, with a sharp visual sense, an intense interest in people, and a belief in the pre-eminent importance of human relationships. He had a long-standing association with Dr Helena Wright, to whom he often turned for advice. 
McFarlane never married. He died, of a stroke, while walking at Great Hampden in Buckinghamshire on 16 July 1966 and was cremated at Oxford. He had no religious beliefs and had given instructions that no memorial service was to be held. 


@@@@@


doc= 41136


Pope, Mildred Katherine (1872-1956), French scholar, was born on 28 January 1872 at the vicarage in Paddock Wood, Kent, daughter of the Revd Edwin Pope ('b'. 'c'.1830), vicar of Paddock Wood, and his wife, Emily Frances, 'nee' Watson. After attending Edgbaston High School for Girls (1881-8), she taught briefly at Maidstone School and then at Edgbaston high school, before proceeding to Somerville College, Oxford, as an exhibitioner in 1891. Her chosen field of modern languages was little catered for in Oxford at the time -- there was no honours teaching in French -- and her speciality of Old French philology not at all; so her apprenticeship in what was to become her life's work was undertaken by correspondence course with Dr Paget Toynbee of Cambridge University ('Studies', xi). The dedication and brilliance she showed as a student also extended to the games field -- she was a blue in hockey -- and the debating chamber: she was 'renowned for her pace on the wing... and her level-headedness in debate' (Farnell, 24). She achieved a first class in the Oxford University examination for women (1893) and spent the following year in Heidelberg studying philology with Neumann. 
On her return, Pope was appointed as librarian at Somerville College and almost immediately as tutor, being granted leave in 1900 and 1902 to prepare her doctorate in Paris under Gaston Paris and Paul Meyer. Her thesis was published as 'Etude sur la langue de frere Angier, suivie d'un glossaire de ses poemes' in 1903. She continued as tutor at Somerville until 1934, being 'the most beloved of all [the College's] tutors' (Adams, 53), renowned for her modesty and sheer enthusiasm for learning. When women were admitted as members of Oxford University in 1919 Pope was awarded her MA by decree and in 1920 appointed as Taylorian lecturer in French; she became fellow of her college (1921) and was the first woman to be appointed reader in Oxford (1928). The establishment and development of the teaching of medieval French at Oxford has been considered the almost single-handed achievement of Mildred Pope ('The Times', 19 Sept 1956). It was during her Oxford years that she produced her edition of 'The Life of the Black Prince by the Herald of Sir John Chandos' (1910, with Eleanor Lodge), a dozen articles on Old French and Anglo-Norman prosody and language, and numerous book reviews. It would be fair to say that Pope effectively invented the discipline of Anglo-Norman studies. 
Throughout her career Pope remained committed to social causes. During the First World War she spent the three vacations of 1915 working with the Friends' War Victims' Relief Expedition in northern France ('Studies', xii). An active feminist, she campaigned for women's suffrage, clashing in 1912 with college authorities over her recruitment of female dons to the cause (Adams, 79). She later wrote in defence of the use of the term 'fellow' in women's colleges, insisting on the importance of research-based fellowships for women in enhancing the intellectual life of their colleges (Adams, 60). 
In 1934 Pope became visiting professor at the University of Manchester, then professor of French language and Romance philology (1935), being elected simultaneously honorary fellow of Somerville. She held that post until 1939, in which year she was presented by colleagues, friends, and pupils with the volume 'Studies in French Language and Mediaeval Literature'. Her major work, and the one for which she is generally remembered, 'From Latin to Modern French, with Especial Consideration of Anglo-Norman' (1934) is a monumental study of the history of French phonology and morphology. The greatest achievement of her professional life, and her most enduring monument, was the founding of the Anglo-Norman Text Society (1937), to which she contributed editions of 'La seinte resureccion' (1943) and 'The Romance of Horn' (1955, completed by T. B. W. Reid, 1964), and of which she was honorary secretary (1937-52). On her retirement she was made professor emeritus by Manchester, and received a doctorate, 'honoris causa', from the University of Bordeaux, the first woman so honoured by a French university. 
Mildred Pope's most famous pupil, Dorothy L. Sayers, gave the address at a dinner in her honour when she left Somerville in 1934. She characterized her former tutor as having 'integrity of judgement... humility in the face of facts... the generosity of a great mind... that will not be contented with the second-hand or second-best' (Adams, 188). Sayers immortalized her as 'Miss Lydgate' in 'Gaudy Night', in which her great philological study also figures as 'A history of English prosody', identifiable by its multiplicity of fonts and special alphabet, replete with 'pot hooks'. Some who knew her say she was unhappy with this notoriety. In retirement Pope lived in Fant Cottage, Garford, Abingdon, Berkshire, and died of carcinoma of the stomach in the Acland Nursing Home, Oxford, on 16 September 1956. 


@@@@@


doc= 41137


Cadoux, Cecil John (1883-1947), theologian, was born on 24 May 1883 in Smyrna, Turkey, the ninth child of William Henry Cadoux (1840-1899), merchant, and Emma Temple (1840-1887). His father's family was Huguenot in origin, and a grandfather and an uncle were Congregational ministers. The Cadoux family left Smyrna soon after Cecil John's birth and settled in south London. He attended Stamford House School, Croydon, and then St Dunstan's College, Catford (1894-1900), before beginning work as a civil servant at the Admiralty in 1902. For the succeeding nine and a half years he spent all his spare time leading Sunday school and Boy's Brigade classes attached to a Congregational church, and studying for a London University arts degree as an external student. 
Having become convinced of a call to Christian ministry, Cadoux left the Admiralty and applied to Mansfield College, Oxford, where he was accepted as a student in 1911. Here he had a distinguished academic career and established lifelong friendships with his teachers W. B. Selbie and J. Vernon Bartlet. At the conclusion of his course he was accredited as a Congregational minister and appointed as a tutor at the college. 
Cadoux was already a convinced pacifist when war broke out in 1914, and for the rest of his life he used all his intellectual skills to produce a rational defence of pacifism. He was among the founders of the Fellowship of Reconciliation in Cambridge in December 1914. His initial research explored the attitude of the early church to pagan society and the state, and resulted in the publication of his first book, 'The Early Christian Attitude to War' (1919; reissued 1940, 1982), which long remained a classic work on the subject. He went to France with the Friends' Ambulance Unit for several months in 1915; after the introduction of conscription, he gave moral support to many young conscientious objectors. At the end of 1915 he married Marguerite Asplin (1889-1965), and they had two sons and two daughters. 
In 1919 Cadoux was appointed professor (a courtesy title used by contemporary theological colleges) of 'New Testament' studies at the Yorkshire United Independent College in Bradford, which prepared students for the Congregational ministry. During his fourteen years in Bradford he established his reputation as a scholar, not only writing numerous articles but also publishing two major works, 'The early church and the world: a history of the Christian attitude to pagan society and the state down to the time of Constantine' (1925), which was a revised version of his London University DD thesis, and 'Catholicism and Christianity: a Vindication of Progressive Protestantism' (1928), an exhaustive and vigorous defence of liberal protestantism as against the claims of the Roman Catholic church. He was well known in Yorkshire as a preacher who believed that the churches should offer firm moral leadership, and as an exacting teacher and lecturer with advanced views on biblical criticism. 
In 1933 an opportunity arose for Cadoux to realize his ambition of returning to Oxford, when he was offered the post of Mackennal professor of church history and vice-principal at Mansfield College, Oxford. Here he remained until his death fourteen years later. He continued to take an active role in the life of local Congregational churches. At Mansfield he found himself out of sympathy with the direction of thought of many of his colleagues, especially the principal, Nathaniel Micklem. While Cadoux affirmed ever more strongly his liberal protestantism, particularly in 'The Case for Evangelical Modernism' (1938), a growing number of Congregational theologians were influenced by the work of Karl Barth and Emil Brunner. In addition he differed from those of his colleagues who were involved in the negotiations for union with the Presbyterian Church of England, favouring mutual respect and co-operation between denominations rather than organic union. His position was set out in 'The Congregational Way' (1946). 
The outbreak of the Second World War forced Cadoux to reconsider his pacifism; the result was 'Christian Pacifism Re-Examined' (1940), in which he reaffirmed his commitment to non-violence. He continued to pursue his interests in both 'New Testament' studies and in history. The former led to the publication of 'The Historic Mission of Jesus' (1941), and finally to his most widely read book, 'The Life of Jesus', published posthumously by Penguin Books in 1948. His interest in history resulted in the publication of the first of two projected volumes, 'Ancient Smyrna' (1938) and, in the year of his death, 'Philip of Spain and the Netherlands: an Essay on Moral Judgments in History' (1947). 
At the time of his death Cadoux was considering a book on the human treatment of animals, a subject on which he felt strongly; from early adulthood to the end of his life he was a strict vegetarian. He died on 16 August 1947 at his home, 179 Woodstock Road, Oxford, after a long period of ill health. His funeral was held in Mansfield College chapel, and he was buried in Wolvercote cemetery, Oxford, on 19 August 1947. 


@@@@@


doc= 41140


Duckham, Sir Arthur McDougall (1879-1932), gas engineer, was born on 8 July 1879 at Blackheath, London, the second of the three sons of Frederick Elliot Duckham (1841-1918), a noted civil engineer, and his wife, Maud Mary, 'nee' McDougall. All the sons achieved prominence in their chosen careers: the eldest, William Duckham, ran a harbour works company, and Alexander Duckham, the youngest, established the Duckham oil company. Arthur, known to family and close friends as Bob, was educated at Blackheath proprietary school; he left aged seventeen to become an articled pupil in the South Metropolitan Gas Company under the chief engineer, Frank Livesey, younger brother of the chairman, Sir George Livesey. 
During his training Duckham studied carbonization, furnace work, and chemical engineering, supplementing his practical work with evening study in engineering at King's College, London. At the age of twenty he was appointed assistant superintendent of the Old Kent Road works of South Metropolitan. Two years later he left to become assistant engineer of the Bournemouth Gas and Water Company under Harold Woodall, who was to become a lifelong friend. With Woodall's active encouragement, Duckham began experimenting with methods of changing the carbonization process from a cyclical to a continuous one. He concentrated on the development of vertical retorts (in place of the traditional horizontal retorts), where coal fell by gravity and, after gasification, was extracted from the bottom as coke. He and Woodall entered into partnership in 1903 and set up Woodall-Duckham Ltd in 1906 to exploit Duckham's process. At first the company provided only a design service and relied on specialist suppliers and contractors to meet its production specifications, but by the early 1920s it was also undertaking installations on its own account. As an indication of the economic advantages of the process, within twenty years approximately half of all the coal used in British gasworks was carbonized in continuous vertical retorts. 
The success of the Woodall-Duckham company owed at least as much to Duckham's character and his ability as a salesman as to his technical expertise. He was a dominating figure, 6 feet tall and weighing 18 stone, but with the knack of making and keeping friends and of inspiring others, even at the gasworks, by both his example and his ideas. In the early years of the company there were problems of cash flow, but a number of important firms which supplied the gas industry with steelwork, refractories, and other construction parts took shares in the company to ensure its survival. As the company prospered, the minority holdings were later bought out. 
After war broke out in 1914, it became essential to supply certain by-products of carbonization, notably toluene and phenol, for the manufacture of explosives. It was therefore natural that Duckham should join the munitions invention department, becoming deputy controller of munitions supply late in 1915. He adapted very well to life in Whitehall, and held a number of executive and administrative appointments during the war: he was chairman of the advisory committee to the minister of munitions, a member of the Munitions Council, director-general for aircraft production, and in 1919 a member of the Air Council. His services were recognized in 1917 when he was made a KCB. 
After the war, business at Woodall-Duckham again gathered momentum, expanding to produce plant not only for gasworks but also for other chemical processes. Duckham's career now extended into much wider spheres. Having joined the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1918 he came to believe that chemical engineers needed a professional body of their own; he chaired a committee formed in 1922 to create what became the Institution of Chemical Engineers and was elected its founder president. He was also president of the Society of British Gas Industries for two years. In 1919 he was appointed to the coal industry commission chaired by Mr Justice Sankey to examine ways to make the industry more economically efficient. Unwilling to support full nationalization, he produced a minority report commending state ownership of mineral rights, the efficient exploitation of coal reserves, minimum wages for miners, and a role for miners in the direction of the industry. As a leading businessman, Duckham was in great demand as a speaker on the problems of both sides of industry. 
At the request of the Australian prime minister, in 1928 Duckham was appointed by the British government to lead a group of prominent businessmen on an economic mission to Australia to advise on trade opportunities. The subsequent report described the vast resources in Australia, strongly advocated a firm trade partnership between the two countries (later to be extended to all the Commonwealth), and recommended higher levels of emigration to Australia. Following this mission Duckham was created a GBE in 1929. Further government work followed and Duckham's status as a leading industrial statesman was endorsed by his election as deputy president and president-elect of the Federation of British Industries (FBI). He was also a member of the Legion d'honneur. 
In 1903 Arthur Duckham married Maud, eldest daughter of the painter A. D. Peppercorn; they had three children. Through his wife's interest he became an enthusiast for the arts. He was also something of a gourmet, and he enjoyed golf, dancing, tennis, and squash. Before he could take office as president of the FBI he collapsed at his home, High Warren, Ashtead, Surrey, after his regular game of squash, and died on 14 February 1932, aged fifty-two. He was buried at St Giles, Ashtead, and there was a memorial service for him at St Martin-in-the-Fields, London, on 17 February. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 41145


Malvern, Walcher of (d. 1135), prior of Great Malvern and astronomer, was a monk at the Benedictine abbey of Great Malvern near Worcester (founded 1085) and became its second prior; but uncertainty surrounds the period of his priorship, because of the almost complete absence of his name in archival records. As prior he attended the consecration of a new abbot of Tewkesbury in Worcester Cathedral on 23 May 1125, but almost all the remaining information on his life comes from an epitaph discovered buried in the grounds of the abbey in 1711, and now to be seen in St Anne's Chapel in the church: 'Here lies in a cyst, Doctor Walcher, a worthy philosopher, a good astronomer, a Lorrainer, a pious man and humble monk, the prior of this sheepfold, a geometer and abacist. The people mourn, the clergy grieve on all sides. The first day of October brought death to this elderly man ['senior']. May each believer pray that he may live in heaven. (Dugdale, 'Monasticon', 3.442)' The date 'mcxxv' follows, but this appears to be a mistake dating from the time of the monument's restoration, since earlier reports record 'mcxxxv' (William Cole's report of 23 June 1746, in BL, Add. MS 5811, fol. 131'r', is decisive on this point). There is no independent witness for it, but 1135 as the date of Walcher's death is compatible with other evidence. 
His epitaph states that Walcher, like his namesake, Walcher, bishop of Durham (1081-90), and several other important churchmen and administrators in the early Norman period, came from Lotharingia, or Lorraine. His continental origins are corroborated by his report to William of Malmesbury of a miraculous event that occurred 'fifteen years earlier' in the abbey of Fulda, which he may have witnessed himself; this report follows an account of the introduction of Marianus Scottus's 'Chronicle' into England by another Lorrainer, Robert the Lotharingian, bishop of Hereford (1079-95). 
The interest in astronomy attested by his epitaph is confirmed by the survival of two short texts by Walcher. The first is a set of lunar tables, in the Latin tradition, but calculated with the aid of an astrolabe from an eclipse observed on 18 October 1092 (he had failed to have the instrument with him when he witnessed an earlier eclipse of the moon in 'Romona' in Italy on 30 October 1091). This is the first mention in a Latin source of the actual employment of an astrolabe, whose construction and use had been described in texts first translated from Arabic in the late tenth century. This text is extant in several manuscripts, of which the earliest is Bodleian Library, MS Auct. F.1.9 (written between 1120 and 1140 at Worcester Cathedral priory); it often occurs following Robert the Lotharingian's 'Excerptio' -- his commentary on Marianus Scottus's 'Chronicle'. 
The second text is 'Sententia Petri Ebrei, cognomento Anphus, de dracone, quam dominus Walcerus prior Malvernensis ecclesie in Latinam transtulit linguam' ('the opinion of Peter the Hebrew, surnamed Anphus, concerning the dragon, which the lord Walcher, prior of the church of Malvern, translated into Latin'), a work reporting the information of Walcher's teacher, Petrus Alfonsi, on the times when the moon's orbit crosses that of the sun (the 'nodes' of the moon, represented in Indian and Arabic astronomy as the head and tail of a dragon). This text immediately follows the first text in the Oxford manuscript, and is also found in Erfurt, Wissenschaftliche Bibliothek der Stadt, Bibliotheca Amploniana, MS Q.351 and British Library, Cotton MS App. vi, fols. 22'r'b-22'v'a (fragment only). The work was composed after 1 April 1120 -- a date used in an example -- and draws on the astronomical tables of al-Khwarizmi, Adelard of Bath's translation of which immediately follows Walcher's work in the Oxford manuscript. 
Walcher was one of the earliest Latin scholars to make use of Arabic astronomical data. He may have acquired his interest in science in Lorraine, but he evidently belonged to a small group of scientists working in the west midlands, which included Robert the Lotharingian, Petrus Alfonsi, and Adelard of Bath. In spite of the silence of the charter records, he appears, too, to have had some prestige as a churchman, for William of Malmesbury warns that 'if anyone does not believe his [Walcher's] words, he insults religion' ('De gestis regum', 2.346), and Great Malvern's dependence on Westminster Abbey would have given him direct access to England's capital. His position as prior may have led him to look to the new science of the Arabs to obtain more accurate calculations for the church calendar, while his influence may have contributed to the spread of the new astronomical tables of al-Khwarizmi to more central English Benedictine abbeys, such as those of St Albans, Winchester, and St Augustine's, Canterbury. 


@@@@@


doc= 41149


Whitchester, Roger of (d. 1258), clerk and justice, was the son of Robert of Whitchester and his wife, Isabel, who were tenants at Whitchester in Northumberland of the Crauden family, of which Isabel was probably a member; they held the manor of Whitchester from the Bolbec barony. Robert served as sheriff of Northumberland from 1221 to 1223, and was also a commissioner of assize and gaol delivery in that county from 1229 to 1238; he held land in Benwell and Heddon on the Wall as well as Whitchester. Roger inherited from his father between October 1243 and April 1244. He clearly had no wish to become a knight, being unsuccessfully distrained to do so in 1244, and in 1253 secured life exemption from all the local duties for which knights were liable; he retained his minor clerical orders until his death. In 1226 he became rector of Elsdon, but had ceased to be so by 1245; he became rector of Ovingdean, Sussex, about 1248. His main career was as a clerk -- and later a justice -- of the bench at Westminster, where he was at first in the service of the justice William of York, probably by 1230, certainly by 1236; he also served as an attorney there. 
On 28 May 1246 Whitchester was granted an annual salary of $10 as keeper of the writs and rolls of the bench, the first man known to have held such an office. He also received an annual robe as a member of the royal household. In 1247 he went on eyre circuit with Henry of Bath, as keeper of the writs and rolls, returning to the bench in 1249 and remaining there as keeper until Trinity term 1254. It seems likely that he was involved in administrative changes which brought about improvements in the arrangement of the eyre rolls, with the development of special sections for foreign pleas and the appointment of attorneys, and a tendency for the bench rolls to become the impersonal record of the court, rather than the personal records of the justices for whom they were produced. From 1251 onwards he received frequent appointments as an assize commissioner, after 1252 invariably alone. The great majority of them were for cases in Essex and Kent, where he had acquired property. One such commission, involving a dispute at St Albans in Hertfordshire, seems to have earned him the animosity of Matthew Paris. None of his assize rolls has survived, however. Early in Michaelmas term 1254 Whitchester sat for a few days as a bench justice, and then went on eyre circuit as a justice with Gilbert of Preston, returning to Westminster to sit as a bench justice for the whole of Easter term 1255, before continuing as an eyre justice until the spring of 1258, after which he seems to have carried out assize commissions until his death later that year. 
Whitchester's career as a royal servant provided him with the means of acquiring landed wealth in a number of counties in southern England from about 1235 onwards, including Oxfordshire, Buckinghamshire, and Hertfordshire in addition to those already mentioned. He continued to acquire interests in Northumberland, some of which he gave as benefactions to the nuns of St Bartholomew's Priory at Newcastle between 1253 and 1257, when he was preparing for death. He had brothers, Robert and Master Nicholas, and sisters, Mabel and Joan, all but the last predeceasing him. He died about September 1258, Matthew Paris describing him in his obituary as a king's clerk and special counsellor, who in bearing the burden of judicial office strove wholly to please the royal will. 


@@@@@


doc= 41157


Elizabeth Strickland (1794-1875); Sarah; 


@@@@@


doc= 41158


Lawrance, Hannah (1795-1875), historian and journalist, was born in 1795. She can be identified with Hannah, daughter of Thomas Lawrance, baptized at New Broad Street Independent Chapel, London, on 1 September 1795. Her mother, who had married Thomas Lawrance in 1793, was Hannah, daughter of John Stafford, minister of the New Broad Street Chapel. These family connections are confirmed by Hannah Lawrance's will, in which she left a large diamond ring to William Warlow Harry, minister of Knutsford, 'in remembrance of New Broad Street where my grandfather wore it for forty two years'. It is probable that John Stafford Lawrance (baptized on 21 August 1794), Thomas George Lawrance (baptized on 22 November 1797), and Catherine Lawrance (baptized on 2 October 1812) were her siblings, but it seems likely that they died young, as her will only mentions cousins. The will suggests that she remained a lifelong Congregationalist, since she bequeathed $50 to the Congregational Fund Board for the Relief of Poor Ministers, as well as leaving legacies to the London Missionary Society and the Home Missionary Society. Her other bequests included her books: a copy of Edward Blore's 'Monumental Remains of Noble and Eminent Persons' is specifically mentioned, reflecting her historical interests, as is a stereoscope and slides, as well as a great deal of jewellery. 
The early stages of Hannah Lawrance's writing career are not easy to trace. She has been tentatively identified as the author of 'London in olden time, or, Tales intended to illustrate the manners and superstitions of its inhabitants, from the twelfth to the sixteenth century' (1825, 1827). Certainly it reflects her later historical interests and tendency to illustrate morals and manners through short historical tales. Two articles on 'The Anglo-Norman trouveres' in 'Blackwood's Magazine' of 1836 have also been attributed to her, as have two articles on medieval French literature in 'Fraser's Magazine' in 1844 and 1847. In 1838 she published the 'Historical Memoirs of the Queens of England', a predecessor of Agnes and Elizabeth Strickland's more sustained 'Lives of the Queens of England' (1840-48): indeed, the publication of Lawrance's 'Memoirs' temporarily persuaded Agnes to abandon her work, and forced a revision of the proposed title of their publication. Lawrance's biographies of the English queens, though they dealt in much less detail than the Stricklands' 'Lives' with each individual, were scholarly in approach and championed several maligned figures, including Eleanor of Aquitaine and Isabella of France. Christian Johnstone's review in 'Tait's Magazine' (April 1838) praised them as superior in depth of research to other historical memoirs by women writers, adding that Lawrance had 'dug deeper in the tumulus of antiquity, than more accredited excavators of the other sex' (Johnstone, 263). In 1843 Lawrance published 'The History of Woman in England, and her Influence on Society and Literature', which was intended to be the first volume of a series. In this knowledgeable work she dwelt on a theme which she had already announced in the 'Memoirs': the significant role of women in cultural developments, if only as patrons and facilitators. She also argued convincingly that Anglo-Saxon women had enjoyed greater social, political, and legal liberties than their later medieval and early modern successors. 
Lawrance's lack of further publications on the history of women can be attributed to her commitment as a major contributor to the 'British Quarterly Review'. Between 1847 and 1870 she contributed more than sixty articles to this periodical, a heavyweight vehicle for the nonconformist intelligentsia. Often highly readable and intelligent, they exhibit the width of her knowledge of English literature, art, and history, including topics as diverse as the education and employment of women, the Crystal Palace exhibitions, Elizabethan and Jacobean social life, Anglo-Norman poets, and African explorations. She was the regular art critic for the journal, producing workmanlike if uninspired accounts of the exhibitions (though an admirer of Ruskin, she usually found the works of the Pre-Raphaelites incomprehensible). More pioneering was her steady and well argued support for better education and wider employment opportunities for her own sex. 
Hannah Lawrance also contributed several articles to 'Macmillan's Magazine', and was a reviewer for 'The Athenaeum': possibly she wrote the rather critical 1840 review of the first volume of the Stricklands' 'Lives of the Queens of England', in which Lawrance herself is staunchly defended against the charge of stealing a march on her rivals. In 1844 she wrote two historical tales and one book review for 'Hood's Magazine'. In 1852 she published a full-length historical novel, 'The Treasure-Seeker's Daughter'. Set in London in 1620, it has a puritan heroine whose religious beliefs reflected Lawrance's own dissenting beliefs as a Congregationalist (the villain being, needless to say, a Catholic). It also reflected her fascination with court intrigues, seventeenth-century superstitions, and everyday life in Jacobean London. In 1854-5 Lawrance contributed five articles to Charles Dickens's 'Household Words', depicting seventeenth- and eighteenth-century social life, again through the medium of short stories. She seems not to have mixed in London literary circles; from her works Elizabeth Barrett surmised that she was a 'deeper-minded woman' than her rival Agnes Strickland and 'qualified to take, in literature, the higher place' ('Letters of Elizabeth Barrett Browning... to Richard Hengist Horne', ed. S. R. Townsend Mayer, 1877, 1.210). Lawrance died, unmarried, on 20 November 1875 at her home, 22 Albion Grove, Barnsbury Park, Middlesex. 


@@@@@


doc= 41159


Vane, Frances Anne, marchioness of Londonderry (1800-1865), society hostess and businesswoman, was born on 17 January 1800 in St James's Square, London, the only child of Sir Henry (Harry) Vane-Tempest, baronet (1771-1813), and his wife, Anne Catherine MacDonnell, in her own right countess of Antrim (died 1834). Disappointed in their hopes of a son, her parents neglected Lady Frances Anne: she recalled in 1848 that 'Never was any child so harshly treated as I was by my Father, Mother, and Governess. I met with nothing but cuffs and abuse' ('Frances Anne', 14). At the same time the child had impressed upon her by servants and other relations, particularly her aunt Frances Taylor, a sense of her position as the heir to the family fortunes of some $60,000 a year. The mixture of flattery and abuse, fawning and neglect, inevitably damaged her character, and she became by her own account 'sly, artful, and deceiving' (ibid.); haughty arrogance, which was to be her defining characteristic, also became ingrained. The death of her father brought her into possession of vast estates in co. Durham but also into conflict with her mother. Hence Frances Anne was made a ward in chancery, and at thirteen was given her own establishment and had her first love affair (with the brother of a suitor of her mother). By the time she was sixteen she had been the object of proposals from Lord O'Neil (twice her age) and the duke of Leinster, who had travelled over from Ireland specifically to inspect the heiress. In 1818 she met Charles William Stewart, Baron Stewart (1778-1854) ['see 'Vane, Charles William], heir presumptive to his half-brother Robert Stewart, then Viscount Castlereagh and from 1821 second marquess of Londonderry. Stewart, a forty-year-old widower with a young son, was ambassador in Vienna, and had a reputation as a ladies' man. Lady Antrim encouraged the relationship, but Mrs Taylor (the other guardian) opposed it. Only after the case was heard in the court of chancery did the marriage go ahead, on 3 April 1819. 
It was an ideal match. Frances Anne's pride met its equal in her ultra-conservative husband, and he revelled in the vast wealth and territorial power which the match brought him. (In 1829 he changed his own surname to Vane to reflect the importance of the connection.) In Vienna, Lady Stewart flaunted her wealth -- especially her ever-increasing collection of jewellery -- and her new position, to the amusement of some and the disgust of others. Mrs Bradford, the wife of the embassy chaplain, described the couple: 'She, decked out like the Queen of Golconda seated on a Sofa, receives you with 'freezing' pomp and the atmosphere which surrounds her is 'awful' and 'chilling'. He is her most humble slave' ('More Letters from Martha Wilmot', 35). The pride of the Stewarts offended people more important than Mrs Bradford: the Austrian imperial family refused for some time to have social contact with the embassy after they offended against court protocol. But another emperor, Alexander I of Russia, was greatly taken with Lady Stewart on their first meeting in November 1820, and when they met again in 1822, after the successive deaths of Stewart's father and brother, the relationship between the new Lady Londonderry and the tsar, pursued at the congress of Verona, became the talk of Europe. The congress, however, saw the end of Londonderry's ambassadorial career, and they returned to England in 1823. 
Londonderry's political career faltered henceforward: his extreme toryism even alienated him from the duke of Wellington. But the couple maintained a glittering presence in London, where they entertained the Conservative aristocracy and political aspirants at Holdernesse House on Park Lane, and devoted themselves to the maintenance of their interest at Mount Stewart in co. Down, and at Wynyard Park and Seaham Hall in co. Durham, all of which properties they either purchased or substantially remodelled at great expense: Wynyard Park was remodelled by Philip Wyatt at a cost of some $147,000, only to burn down partially in 1841 and be rebuilt by Bonomi with the expenditure of a further $40,000. After the death of her mother, Lady Londonderry inherited further property in co. Antrim, where she built herself a retreat, Garron Tower. The couple's income was huge, and was enhanced by the dramatic expansion of their industrial interests. Their family, too, was large: after an early miscarriage in 1819, Frances Anne had had a son in Vienna on 26 April 1821. He was followed by a daughter in 1822, another miscarriage, and two more sons and three daughters, one of whom died as an infant. Her youngest child was born in February 1836; five months later the Londonderrys travelled to Russia via Berlin, where they spent several months before returning via Warsaw in April 1837. Lady Londonderry's vivid account of what was then a most unusual holiday destination for British aristocrats was eventually published in 1973. In her own lifetime she published her account of two further journeys as 'Narrative of a Visit to the Courts of Vienna, Constantinople, Athens, Naples, etc' (1844). 
While her husband was alive, Lady Londonderry was, if not typical of her class, then at least an exaggerated caricature of it: autocratic, extravagant, and proud, she was Jane Austen's Lady Catherine de Bourgh made flesh. It was in her widowhood that she finally came into her own, in all senses of that phrase, and she rapidly took control of the empire she had brought to the Londonderry family after her husband's death on 6 March 1854. Far from handing control of the huge coalmining and coal-shipping concern that was the basis of her fortune over to her sons or agents, and retiring into obscurity, Lady Londonderry soon established herself at Seaham Hall as the active and effective head of the business. Benjamin Disraeli, who had been something of a protege of hers, visited her at Seaham in 1861, and described her life: 'on the shores of the German Ocean [North Sea], surrounded by her collieries and her blast furnaces and her railroads and the unceasing telegraphs, with a port hewn out of the solid rock, screw steamers and four thousand pitmen under her control... she has a regular office... and here she transacts, with innumerable agents, immense business -- and I remember her five-and-twenty years ago a mere fine lady; nay, the finest in London! But one must find excitement if one has brains. ('Letters... Londonderry', 268)' In addition to the business enterprises, Lady Londonderry was active in the electoral politics of the county and city of Durham; her contributions to the election funds of Conservative candidates and the scale of her local commercial and industrial operations gave her an authoritative voice in the process. She was likewise active in providing Anglican churches and schools, especially in Seaham, a town which had come into existence solely to serve the Londonderrys' industrial interests. She spent the summers at Garron Tower in co. Antrim, where she continued to entertain in the grand style, and where she took an active and admonitory interest in the agricultural practices of her tenants. Unlike most women of the period, she regularly addressed large gatherings of her tenants and employees, delivering speeches at tenants' dinners and at the huge fetes held for the Durham colliers. 
Frances Anne Londonderry did not inspire affection, but she earned the respect which she required. Some of her family proved troublesome: her eldest daughter, Frances (died 1899), married the seventh duke of Marlborough, and the second, Alexandrina (1823-1879), who was named after the tsar of Russia, became countess of Portarlington, but the youngest daughter, Lady Adelaide (died 1882), disgraced the family by eloping with her brother's tutor. The eldest son, George (1821-1884), was inoffensive enough, and succeeded his half-brother as fifth marquess of Londonderry in 1872. But Lord Ernest (1836-1885) fell in with a press-gang, and had to be bought a commission in the army, from which he was subsequently cashiered. And Lord Adolphus (1825-1864), who was his mother's favourite child and the member for North Durham, married Lady Susan Pelham-Clinton against her family's wishes, became insane, and had to be medically restrained. His death in 1864 was a great blow to Lady Londonderry. 
Having suffered for some years from liver disease and an 'enfeebled heart', Lady Londonderry died on 20 January 1865 at Seaham Hall, and was buried in the family vault in the parish church at Long Newton, co. Durham, bedecked in her turquoise rings. Her personal estate was probated at under $400,000 in England (Londonderry had left her a life interest in the estates and houses which she had brought to the marriage), and under $25,000 in Ireland. Her will included a careful catalogue of her jewels, which were to be distributed among her family strictly according to her instructions. Appointing her son to the Order of St Patrick in 1874, Disraeli recalled her as 'a 'grande dame' who was kind to me when a youth, though she was a tyrant in her way' ('Letters... Bradford', 1.74-5). 


@@@@@


doc= 41160


Lee, Elizabeth (1857/8-1920), biographer and translator, was born in Keppel Street, Russell Square, London, the daughter of Lazarus Lee ('b'. 1824/5), who dealt in ostrich feathers, and his wife, Jessie Davis ('b'. 1836/7). She was one of at least six children. Her family was Jewish, and had changed its name from Levi to Lee in mid-century. Her brother Solomon Lazarus also changed his forenames and as Sidney Lee became second editor of the 'Dictionary of National Biography'. Lazarus Lee was ambitious for his six children: Sidney was educated at the City of London School and Balliol College, Oxford, and Elizabeth at Queen's College, Harley Street, London, where she studied literature under its principal, the Revd Edward Hayes Plumptre. She travelled in France and Germany, studying languages and educational methods. She became a girls' secondary school English teacher, an editor, a translator of French and German literature and history, minor biographer, and compiler of school texts on literature, history, and art. She wrote articles for monthly magazines, notably 'The Library', and many articles for the 'Dictionary of National Biography'. She was secretary of the English Association (1907-12), where she worked with Sir Arthur Acland, A. C. Bradley, and Frederic Boase. Her English Association leaflet 'The Teaching of Literature in French and German Secondary Schools' (1907) was recognized by her appointment as officier d'Academie by the French ministry of public affairs. 
Elizabeth Lee's career as a minor woman of letters was not unconnected to the circles in which her brother Sidney moved. Three factors in his life are crucial to understanding her work because of the opportunities they created: his interest in Shakespeare, his friends and associates and their publishing connections, and his involvement with the 'Dictionary of National Biography'. At Oxford he had published two articles that attracted the attention of Frederick James Furnivall, the Shakespeare and early English texts scholar, who recommended him to Leslie Stephen when the 'Dictionary of National Biography' project began. Another Shakespeare scholar and publisher, Arthur Henry Bullen, was at school and at Oxford with Lee. Elizabeth Lee's first published translation was 'The English Novel in the Time of Shakespeare' (1890), from the work by Jean Jules Jusserand. Over the next thirty years she wrote, edited, translated, and contributed to another thirty books -- most notably a biography, 'Ouida' (1914), schools editions of the poetry of Thomas Gray, Oliver Goldsmith, and William Cowper, and selections from Thomas Carlyle and George Eliot. She translated Lucien Levy-Bruhl's 'Ethics and Moral Science' (1905), Petri Rosegger's 'A Prisoner's Story of the Cross' (1905), and Georg Enge's 'The Philosopher and the Foundling' (1906). 
After Sidney Lee became editor of the 'Dictionary of National Biography' Elizabeth contributed 110 articles: 67 to the first series (1885-1900), 14 in the supplements published in 1901, and 29 in the supplement for 1901-11. All but nine of her articles are on women. Of the 81 articles she wrote between 1892 and 1901, 79 are on women. She was not listed as a contributor until October 1892 (Sidney Lee had become sole editor in June 1891), though it is possible that she had been writing articles under her brother's name for some years before. It is noteworthy that Sidney had written twenty-two articles on women subjects in the twenty-seven volumes that appeared up to 1891, but only six in the thirty-six volumes that followed. It is conceivable that, at a time when female contributors were rare, Lee's new editorial authority simply gave him the opportunity to introduce Elizabeth as a contributor in her own right. 
Elizabeth Lee was officially employed on the editorial staff of the 'Dictionary of National Biography' as summarizer of volumes 31-5 in the 'Index and Epitome' (1903). Her work is unremarkable, but it is noteworthy that she was given the job -- the only female editor among nine men, many of whom had worked on the dictionary's staff in the past and had extensive editorial experience. She also helped to correct the proofs and to compile the index of the 1915 revision of Sidney Lee's 'Life of William Shakespeare'. 
Elizabeth Lee died, unmarried, on 10 July 1920 at home at 25 Holland Street, Kensington, and was cremated at Golders Green. Her death was a 'great sorrow' to Sidney Lee ('DNB'); they had worked closely together for thirty years, shared intellectual interests, and were very attached to each other. 


@@@@@


doc= 41161


Gladstone, Catherine (1812-1900), philanthropist and wife of William Ewart Gladstone, was born on 6 January 1812 at Hawarden Castle, Flintshire. She was the third child and elder daughter of the four children of Sir Stephen Glynne, eighth baronet (1780-1815), and his wife Mary, 'nee' Neville (died 1854), daughter of the second Baron Braybrooke and his wife, Catherine. Sir Stephen Richard Glynne, ninth baronet (1807-1874), was her brother. Catherine Glynne's father died when she was three and she was reared by her mother, who schooled her well in literature and foreign languages. She was taught the piano by Franz Liszt during her visit to Paris in 1829. From the age of three she was known in the family as Pussy (in later life Aunt Pussy) and had a reputation for flirtatiousness. She had blue eyes and, in her youth, brown hair. Well connected to the Pittite aristocracy (she was related by birth to four prime ministers -- William Pitt the elder, Pitt the younger, Sir Richard Grenville, and Lord Grenville), she travelled and made the usual social round. She had many serious suitors (her husband made a list of nine such after their marriage), and was jilted by Colonel Francis Harcourt about 1835. In 1834 Lady Glynne had a stroke and for the rest of her life she suffered bouts of depression, during which she was nursed by Catherine and her younger sister, Mary. 
In 1838 Catherine, Stephen, and Mary Glynne travelled to Rome, where they met W. E. Gladstone, who had been at Christ Church, Oxford, with Stephen. Catherine was courted in the moonlight in the Colosseum, at Naples, and by letter; after considerable initial misgivings, she became engaged to Gladstone, then a young tory MP of slightly eccentric reputation, on 8 June 1839. She quickly was married in a double wedding on 25 July 1839, her sister Mary marrying George Lyttelton at the same ceremony. Catherine was quite well prepared by her background for political life, but little prepared for domestic life with Gladstone, whose tempestuous nature and severe sexual temptations in the first thirty years of their marriage required a spouse of unusual character, determination, and forbearance. 
Between 1840 and 1854 Catherine Gladstone bore eight children and suffered at least one miscarriage. All her confinements were difficult. One daughter, Jessy, died in 1850, aged five, and her first son, William Henry, died from a brain tumour in 1891. Among her surviving children were Mary Drew, Helen Gladstone, Henry Neville Gladstone, and Herbert John Gladstone. She ran a political household in London, helped to cover for her incompetent brother Stephen's mismanagements at Hawarden, looked after her mother, and was the mainstay of her sister, Mary, who bore fourteen children in sixteen years before dying after childbirth in 1857. Catherine Gladstone played a large part in the Lyttelton household, before and after Mary's death, acting as mother to the younger children, especially to Lucy Cavendish ['see under 'Cavendish, Lord Frederick Charles (1836-1882)]. In these years she rarely flagged, although she sometimes became ill from overwork, and was seriously thrown off balance by her sister's death. 
Between 1852 and 1894 Catherine Gladstone's husband was four times chancellor of the exchequer and four times prime minister. She entertained idiosyncratically, sometimes disconcerting guests at 10 Downing Street with oblique comments and odd costumes. Her reputation for dottiness was probably in part self-encouraged. She was a consistent defender of her husband but made no attempt to assist by acting as a political hostess. She believed her husband and her family were happiest when he was in office and she strongly resisted his various suggestions of retirement. She sometimes acted as his amanuensis and on occasion as political go-between; in the 1890s she had a little success in diminishing the acrimony Queen Victoria felt towards Gladstone. He respected his wife's judgement and confidentiality and always kept her in touch with the details of political developments (when apart, he wrote to her daily, she replying rather less frequently). He relied on her heavily in moments of stress and her quite frequent absences tending sick relatives often coincided with his sexual, and sometimes with his political, crises. She was, on the whole, 'skilful in the management of her husband' (Lee, 213), seeing to his dietary needs and curbing his propensity to overwork. She provided the little bottles of egg-and-sherry drink that he consumed when giving a long speech in the Commons or on the platform, and her estimate of the length of the speech -- shown by the number of bottles -- became a famous guide to reporters and political opponents. 
In public Catherine Gladstone presented herself as the devoted wife: W. L. Watson, for example, observed 'the soft face, high-coloured as a girl's, and tremulous mouth; intent on one thing only in this life -- her husband' (Pratt, 41). But in fact she had a good eye for the details of political presentation, waving from windows and from trains when her husband was too tired to do so, and checking that reporters were ready when he was about to speak. She was one of the first political wives regularly to sit by her husband on political platforms and on occasion she spoke at public meetings. The Gladstones presented themselves at extra-parliamentary political occasions as a pair and Catherine Gladstone became something of a political icon, featuring on political plates and memorabilia. In 1887 (aged seventy-five) she became first president of the Women's Liberal Federation, her aim being to 'guide, purify, and stimulate great political movements' (Pratt, 226). Her presidency was regal rather than executive in tone, and she found the details of political business difficult. She was unable to prevent the secession of a group within the federation, led by Rosalind, Lady Carlisle, which found her modest acceptance of women's suffrage excessively timid, and, after the federation split on the question, she resigned from it in October 1892. 
As her family commitments eased in the 1860s, Catherine Gladstone involved herself in philanthropy, initially with the House of Charity in Greek Street, Soho, London, then in 1864 founding the Newport Market refuge for vagrants, in Seven Dials, London, to which she later added an industrial school. During the cholera epidemic of 1866 and its aftermath she set up an orphanage and a series of convalescent homes at Snaresbrook and Woodford. For these institutions she was an unembarrassable fund-raiser. Like her husband, she was also much involved in 'rescuing' prostitutes; she sometimes sought to restore their sense of self-respect by entertaining them to tea at 10 Downing Street. 
This active life took its toll. She, even more than her husband, suffered from insomnia from about 1880 and her memory, always somewhat selective, deteriorated in the 1890s. On her husband's advice she declined the offer of a peerage when he retired as prime minister in 1894. She was the chief mourner at his state funeral in 1898. Catherine Gladstone died from pneumonia at Hawarden Castle on 14 June 1900. She was buried on 17 June next to her husband in their double grave in Westminster Abbey: his will had made this provision a condition of his being buried there. 


@@@@@


doc= 41162


Greenwood, Sir Granville George (1850-1928), politician and animal welfare reformer, was born in London on 3 January 1850, the second son of John Greenwood QC (1800-1871) of the western circuit (solicitor to the Treasury, 1866-71) and his wife, Fanny H. Welch, daughter of William Collyns of Starcross, Devon. He was educated at Eton College (1862-9) and at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he matriculated in 1869, was a foundation scholar 1871, and gained a first class in classics in 1873. He was admitted to the Middle Temple in 1872, called to the bar in 1876, and joined the western circuit. He was assistant commissioner for charities (1884). On 11 April 1878 he married Laurentia Trent, daughter of Laurence Trent Cumberbatch MD of 25 Cadogan Place, London; they had one son and three daughters; his wife survived him. He was an original member of the Eighty Club and, from 1879, of the United University Club. He unsuccessfully contested Peterborough for the Liberals in 1886 and Central Hull in 1900. With the financial and political support of Herbert Gladstone he was elected Liberal MP for Peterborough in 1906, and sat until defeated in 1918. He was knighted in 1916. 
As a Liberal MP, Greenwood advocated reforms concerning land, education, the House of Lords, poor and labour laws, pensions, death certification, women's suffrage, national health insurance, proportional representation, handling of police complaints, rights of colonial natives, and, between 1914 and 1918, the condition of British troops abroad and the quality of the army's medical services. He was critical of capital punishment and strongly opposed the flogging of schoolchildren and colonial natives. His main concern, however, was the protection of animals, especially as regards vivisection, abattoirs, zoos, live exports, the treatment of horses, the sale of deer, field sports, the transport of poultry, plumage imports, and the condition of pit ponies. He was a council member of the Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals from 1908 to 1927. His greatest achievement politically was to steer through parliament the 'Protection of Animals Act' (1911), where his polite, businesslike, and practical approach proved successful. This consolidating act remained the basic law protecting animals from cruelty throughout the twentieth century. 
Greenwood's main literary interest was in Shakespeare, on whose works he was considered expert. From his 'The Shakespeare Problem Restated' (1908) to 'Shakespeare's Handwriting and the Northumberland Manuscript' and 'The Stratford Bust and the Droeshout Engraving' (both 1925) Greenwood published about a dozen pieces arguing that William Shakespere ('sic') of Stratford was not the author of Shakespeare's works. Not a Baconian but an agnostic, Greenwood made negative attacks on Shakespearian orthodoxy with 'a curious mixture of suavity and abuse' (Schoenbaum, 427), and argued the plays were the work of a talented lawyer. The 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' and others have rated his contribution to this long controversy as 'scholarly' and 'rational'. His other writings included attacks on field sports, steel traps, vivisection, the Church of England, the death certification procedure, and the government of Turkey. He also published two philosophical works. 
Intelligent and humane, Greenwood described himself in an enclosure with a letter to Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman as 'not a churchman' but 'a strong advocate of impartial justice to all' (letter to Sir H. Campbell-Bannerman, 3 June 1907, BL, Add. MS 41239). His motive for entering politics was, he said, his urgent desire for reform of the House of Lords -- a cause he had championed for many years. He might well have been in government but he did not enter parliament until his fifty-seventh year -- 'too late and long after I had left ambition in the rear' (Greenwood, letter to Lord Gladstone, 22 Dec 1909, BL, Add. MS 46068). In his 'The Faith of an Agnostic' (2nd edn, 1919; under the pseudonym George Forrester), Greenwood sided with T. H. Huxley against clericalism and in support of science and agnostic rationalism, advocating that 'the sacred feeling of compassion should be extended so as to embrace all sentient beings' (p. 17). Greenwood lived at several London addresses including 53 Chester Square and, later, at 33 Linden Gardens. He died at the latter on 27 October 1928. 


@@@@@


doc= 41164


Fortescue, Hugh, second Earl Fortescue (1783-1861), politician, was born on 13 February 1783 at the Army Pay Office, Whitehall, the eldest son of Hugh Fortescue, third Baron and first Earl Fortescue (1753-1841), and his wife, Hester (1760-1847), daughter of the statesman George Grenville. He had two brothers and six sisters. When his father, one of the largest landowners in Devon, received an earldom from Pitt in 1789, Fortescue took the courtesy title of Lord Ebrington, by which name he was known for most of his career. He was educated at Eton College and at Brasenose College, Oxford. He was returned to parliament for Barnstaple in 1804, and acted with the 'new' opposition to Pitt led by his uncle, Lord Grenville ['see 'Grenville, William Wyndham, Baron Grenville], whose own administration he supported. He was re-elected for Barnstaple in 1806, but defeated there as an opponent of the Portland ministry in 1807. Another uncle, the first marquess of Buckingham, returned him for St Mawes in July; but two years later he took a half-pay army commission, vacated his seat, and went to follow the Peninsular campaign. 
In 1812 Ebrington re-entered parliament -- again thanks to his uncle -- as MP for Buckingham. He was an evangelical in religion and in his maiden speech, on 27 June 1814, he supported a call for suppression of the slave trade. He had two audiences at Elba with Bonaparte (whom he admired) in December of that year ('Memorandum of Two Conversations', 1823). Already disenchanted with the Grenvillites' conservatism, he deplored the renewal of war, and in 1816 began to vote with the advanced wing of the whigs. He vacated Buckingham to contest Devon in May, and was defeated; but he was returned again for Buckingham through his cousin, the second marquess of Buckingham. Ebrington's final, though amicable, political break from his relatives occurred in 1817, when he opposed the suspension of habeas corpus and voted for parliamentary reform before surrendering his seat. 
Ebrington headed the poll for Devon in 1818, was beaten in 1820 and in 1826, but won a spectacular victory in 1830. He had meanwhile been accommodated at Tavistock by the influence of the sixth duke of Bedford. He was unopposed in Devon in 1831, as he was in its northern division in 1832, 1835, and 1837. In the 1820s he attained an influential position in the whig party as one of its younger generation of noblemen who actively promoted a liberal agenda, including parliamentary reform, in an attempt to wrest the initiative from the radicals. He had no office in the Grey ministry, but played a prominent part in rallying support for it in the reform crises of October 1831 and May 1832. Ebrington, who provided a valuable link between the aristocratic and country strands of whiggism, subsequently mustered back-bench support for the appropriation of surplus Irish church revenues, thereby helping to commit the party to practical reform while remaining undefiled by radicalism. Le Marchant wrote of him in 1833: 'He is not a man of powerful mind or extensive information, but he is integrity personified, and all his views are liberal and enlightened' (Aspinall, 366). In 1839 Ebrington was summoned to the Lords in his father's barony and appointed viceroy of Ireland, where he remained until the fall of the Melbourne government in 1841, shortly after he succeeded as second Earl Fortescue. Partly to publicize free-trade doctrines, he published in 1844 'A Selection from the Speeches and Writings' of his brother-in-law, the seventh Lord King. A promoter of public health and educational reform, Fortescue was lord steward of the household in Russell's ministry, from 1846 to 1850. 
Ebrington was twice married: first, on 4 July 1817, to Lady Susan Ryder (1796-1827), daughter of the first earl of Harrowby; they had three sons, including the politician Hugh Fortescue, before her premature death. His second marriage, on 26 July 1841, was to Elizabeth, widow of Sir Marcus Somerville, and daughter of Piers Geale of Clonsilla, co. Dublin; they had no children. Fortescue, who was lord lieutenant of Devon from 1839 and was made a KG in 1856, died at Exeter on 14 September 1861. His widow died in 1896, aged ninety-one. 


@@@@@


doc= 41165


Wedderburn, Sir William, fourth baronet (1838-1918), administrator in India and politician, was born in Edinburgh on 25 March 1838, the youngest son of seven children born to Sir John Wedderburn, second baronet (1789-1862), of the East India Company service, and his wife, Henrietta Louise Milburn (died 1881). He was educated at progressive private schools in Europe and Scotland and then at Edinburgh University, where he prepared himself for the Indian Civil Service public examinations. In choosing a career in India he was following in the footsteps of both his father and his eldest brother, John, who was killed in the uprising of 1857. William ranked third among some 160 candidates in the public examinations of 1859 and in the following year began his career in the Bombay presidency ['see 'competition wallahs]. During a British furlough, on 12 September 1878, he married Mary Blanche (died 1933), daughter of Henry William Hoskyns of North Perrott Manor, Crewkerne, Somerset. They had two daughters: Dorothy, born at Poona in 1879, and Margaret Griselda, born in London in 1884. He succeeded as fourth baronet on 18 September 1882. 
Wedderburn filled increasingly responsible revenue and judicial positions in Bombay district administration. Coming from a liberal background, he was greatly influenced by peasant disturbances in 1875 against the increasingly powerful village moneylenders. Between 1878 and 1883 he publicly criticized the government's high rates of land assessments and the destruction of traditional village institutions, and formulated a model project of co-operative agricultural banks to provide credit to cultivators at reasonable interest rates. This innovative proposal won official endorsement in India, but was blocked by the India Office in London, and another twenty years passed before the government experimented with agricultural credit. Wedderburn also supported the reform initiatives of the viceroy, Lord Ripon, designed to remove racial barriers against Indian judges and to develop local self-government throughout India. He was involved with Indian leaders in establishing the Bombay Presidency Association in 1885, and attended that year's inaugural session of the Indian National Congress as an observer. His open identification with Indian political aspirations was disapproved of by senior officials and in 1885 he was denied a prestigious judgeship of the Bombay high court. Feeling unfairly treated he took early retirement in 1887. 
Freed from bureaucratic office, Wedderburn committed the rest of his life to promoting political reform for India. A close connection with Bombay's influential Congress leaders and with the general secretary, Allan O. Hume, resulted in his election as president of the 1889 session in Bombay. That session, at which Liberal MP Charles Bradlaugh was a special visitor, endorsed a forward-looking scheme of representative government. In 1890 Wedderburn became chairman of the newly created British committee of the Indian National Congress, which attempted by various means, including the publication of the journal 'India', to mobilize support in the metropolis for that country's political advancement. His disinterested commitment to India influenced his decision to run for parliament in 1892, an enterprise in which he succeeded through a Banffshire by-election in 1893. Along with fellow Liberal Dadabhai Naoroji, a Bombay Congressman and MP for Finsbury Park (1892-5), Wedderburn organized an Indian parliamentary committee, a loose collection of India sympathizers which at its peak had a nominal membership of over 150. It played a hand in influencing the government to establish the Welby commission to inquire into the apportionment of costs between the British and Indian governments for military and civil expenditure incurred by the secretary of state for India. The commission, on which Wedderburn and Naoroji constituted a pro-India minority, resulted in some readjustments in India's favour. Indian committee activists also caught the Liberal government off guard by winning a parliamentary vote to introduce simultaneous public service examinations in India, and won a last-minute pledge from the same ministry not to retain the north-west frontier outpost of Chitral: but neither of these decisions was implemented. As an activist against the South African War, Wedderburn anticipated defeat in the 1900 election and did not stand. 
Wedderburn was disheartened by this era of imperialist ascendancy, but the Liberal re-election of 1905 and the retirement of Curzon as viceroy filled him with renewed hope for India. He pressured Lord Morley, the Indian secretary of state, to be more genuinely reformist, and developed a close relationship with G. K. Gokhale, the most dedicated leader of the constitutionalist wing of Congress. In 1910 he risked his health to return to India, as Congress president, and appealed for Hindu-Muslim co-operation and for reconciliation between Congress constitutionalists and militants. He was saddened by the death in 1912 of his more outspoken Indian co-worker Hume, and the following year published his biography, 'Allan Octavian Hume, C. B., 'Father of the Indian National Congress''. Later he utilized India's heavy commitment in the First World War to reinforce the case for a substantial measure of self-government. Wedderburn died at his home, Meredith, Gloucestershire, on 25 January 1918, active to the end in supporting India's political aspirations and in trying to transform an empire into a commonwealth. 


@@@@@


doc= 41166


Aleyn, John (d. 1373), composer, probably came from Pattishall, Northamptonshire. He is first recorded on 29 April 1361 in possession of a chantry in the church of St James Garlickhythe, London. By Michaelmas 1362 he was a clerk and chaplain in the household chapel of Edward III, and on 25 September of that year he was presented to a canonry at Windsor, which he held until his death. This was the most important of his numerous ecclesiastical preferments, and he bequeathed to St George's Chapel at Windsor a roll of music ('unus rotulus de cantu musicali') which may well have contained polyphonic works. Aleyn also appears to have undertaken a number of administrative tasks in royal service. In 1366 he was sent to Oxford by Queen Philippa to seek out one of her own clerks; he was paid on 20 October 1367 for transporting a quantity of the king's money to Westminster; and he later served as a receiver of loans from religious houses in Kent. Aleyn's most important work is the three-voice Latin motet 'Sub Arturo plebs / Fons citharizancium / In omnem terram' ('Motets of French Provenance', ed. F. L. Harrison, 172ff.). Each voice carries a different verbal text: one of the two upper voices (which are of equal range) names fourteen contemporary singers and musicians, nine of whom served in the household chapels of Edward III or of the Black Prince during the 1360s; the other names four music theorists, beginning with Tubal, and identifies the motet's composer as Alani, J. This work is the only complete English representative of the mid- and late fourteenth-century tradition of 'musicians' motets', and it was almost certainly inspired by earlier French models. Composed probably in the late 1360s or early 1370s (it was once thought to be earlier), 'Sub Arturo plebs' enjoyed an extensive continental circulation well into the fifteenth century. Four secular songs which survive in a variety of contrafact versions (that is, in versions where new sets of words have replaced the originals, but the music remains unchanged), variously attributed to 'Alanus' and to 'Magister Alanus', may also be the work of Aleyn, as may a three-voice 'Gloria' setting in the Old Hall manuscript (BL, Add. MS 57950) attributed to 'Aleyn'. Aleyn, who is commonly identified with the composer J. Alanus, died between 29 September and 7 December 1373. 


@@@@@


doc= 41175


Drew, Mary (1847-1927), private secretary and author, was born at 13 Carlton House Terrace, London, on 23 November 1847, the third of the four daughters and fifth in the family of eight children of William Ewart Gladstone (1809-1898), prime minister, and his wife, Catherine Gladstone, nee Glynne (1812-1900). Her childhood and youth were spent between Hawarden Castle, Flintshire, the London homes necessary to her father as a rising politician, and the houses of her extended family of cousins the Lytteltons, of Hagley Hall, Worcestershire. Unlike the rigorous educational standards that Gladstone applied to his sons, his daughters' schooling was haphazard, and in later life Mary admitted that she always found it difficult to concentrate on a sustained piece of work. Music was her passion: when she was less than forty days old her father observed her 'great susceptibility to musical sounds' (Gladstone, 'Diaries', 1 Jan 1848); and she was a talented pianist, but even there the lack of rigorous teaching showed: she was heard to comment: 'I know Beethoven wrote it like 'that', but I like to play it like 'this'' (Masterman, 13). 
Mary Gladstone's father was the greatest influence on her life. In many ways the Gladstone household lived up to the Victorian archetypal family: everything revolved around the needs and demands of the man at its head, and the daughters especially were expected to subordinate themselves to their parents' lives. The commandment to honour one's father and mother was held particularly strongly by the Gladstones, and religious duty was allied to the profound belief that their father was a truly great man, with genuinely important work to do. The most obvious effect of Mary's relationship with her father was the long delay of her marriage, for few men could live up to her father in her estimation, and still fewer had the temerity to approach the daughter of the prime minister. (The absence of a significant family fortune also played a part.) She had several suitors, including Edward Bickersteth Ottley and Hallam Tennyson, the son of the poet laureate, and was at least twice in love, unrequitedly -- with Lord Lorne (later ninth duke of Argyll and Queen Victoria's son-in-law) and with the family friend (and later prime minister) A. J. Balfour. Mary witnessed the marriages of her closest friends and relatives during her twenties with a growing sense of crisis about her own identity: there were no alternatives to marriage for women of her class and she clearly felt some dismay at the prospect of remaining a child in her parents' house. Fortunately one of the causes of her dilemma provided the relief from it, as she became an important member of Gladstone's (unpaid and unacknowledged) auxiliary staff. 
Mary's interest in politics had a fitful start: the rightness of her father and the demerits of his opponents pretty much encompassed her views well into the 1870s. But about 1876 there came a marked change, and she began recording in detail in her diary the issues of the day and the actions of the government. Mary, like her father, was galvanized by the Bulgarian atrocities, and when he came out of retirement she began to work for him as an unofficial private secretary. When he became prime minister again in 1880 she continued in her work, having special responsibility for correspondence concerning ecclesiastical patronage. Her duties included writing many routine letters to applicants for patronage, decoding cipher telegrams, and finding suitable candidates for vacant livings. She also undertook many of the duties associated with managing a political household which her mother found onerous and uninteresting: entertaining eminent visitors, colleagues, supporters, and potential allies required significant resources of time and energy which Catherine Gladstone would not spare from her husband. 
The other consolation Mary Gladstone found in this period was the friendship of a number of eminent, older men, among them Lord Acton, John Ruskin, James Stuart, Edward Burne-Jones, Lord Stanmore, Canon Henry Scott Holland, the Revd John Illingworth, Sir George Grove, and Lord Rosebery. Some sought initially to use correspondence with Mary as a means of gaining the ear of the prime minister but they soon came to place a high value on his daughter. Acton, in particular, wrote extensively to Mary, using the correspondence as a place in which to work out his ideas. Although he sometimes intended her to pass on information and opinions to Gladstone she was more than a conduit; an intelligent, informed woman, Mary Gladstone was the sympathetic reader that Acton had always needed. After 1886 Acton's daughter Mamie (Marie) served as his confidante, and it was with some reluctance that he resumed writing to Mary in 1892 as 'a way of conveying some things which I cannot say right off [to Gladstone]' (Hill, 313). Her social circle was not confined to politicians, nor indeed to men. Through her sisters Agnes and Helen and her cousin Lavinia Talbot she had strong links with the academic circles in Oxford and Cambridge, while her friend Frances Graham (later Horner) introduced her to the artists' studios. Clergymen and musicians were her natural constituency; she was less at home with the Souls, for though she counted many of them among her friends (particularly Laura and Alfred Lyttelton, Arthur Balfour, Margot Asquith, and Frances Horner) she was too much her father's daughter to accept their rejection of Victorian Christian earnestness and moral strictures. 
After so many years as the indispensable daughter at home it came as something of a shock to many of Mary's friends when, on Christmas day 1885, she became engaged to the curate of Hawarden, Harry Drew (1856-1910). They were married in Westminster Abbey on 2 February 1886, at the height of a political crisis; Gladstone gave his daughter away and went straight to Windsor, where he once again accepted the prime ministership. Marriage did not separate Mary from her ageing parents, as she made her home at Hawarden, and she continued to be indispensable, but she no longer played such a prominent part in their London and political lives. In August 1886 she miscarried a son and was dangerously ill for five months. In March 1890, at the age of forty-two, she gave birth to a daughter, Dorothy. She had a further miscarriage in May 1893. 
In 1897 Harry Drew accepted the living of Buckley, 3 miles from Hawarden, and for the first time Mary had her own home. The last illnesses and deaths of her parents, in 1898 and 1900, inevitably dominated these years but she established herself thoroughly in her role as a clergyman's wife; in 1904 Harry Drew became rector of Hawarden. She also began arranging to publish some of the letters that she had received from eminent men. First to appear was 'Letters to M. G. and H. G.' (1903), which contained a selection of Ruskin's rather sickly letters to Mary and her sister Helen. More controversially Herbert Paul edited 'Letters of Lord Acton to Mary, Daughter of the Right Hon. W. E. Gladstone' (1904). Mary had urged Acton to allow her to publish his letters but he had refused; now that he was dead the volume was hurried into print, with disastrous consequences for Acton's reputation. Although personal material had been removed from the letters enough was left to offend members of his family, and both Catholics and Anglicans found matter for concern in his freely expressed views on his own church and on the affairs of the other; a second, slightly amplified edition appeared in 1913. 'Some Hawarden Letters', edited by Lisle March-Phillipps and Bertram Christian, appeared in 1917, containing letters from Burne-Jones, Lord Stanmore, James Stuart, Henry Sidgwick, and George Wyndham, among others; 'A Forty Years' Friendship' (1919), edited by S. L. Ollard, contained Henry Scott Holland's letters to Mary. In 1919 Mary Drew produced her only full-length book, a biography of her mother, 'Catherine Gladstone', a lightweight volume heavy on anecdote and inconsequential letters from the great and good. In 1924 she published 'Acton, Gladstone and Others', a collection of essays and reviews, including accounts of Gladstone's books and the foundation of St Deiniol's Library, and of Ruskin's infatuation with Rose La Touche. 
Mary Drew was both lessened and liberated by her parents' deaths. She no longer had a direct connection with the great affairs of the nation, and her perspective on politics remained resolutely Gladstonian: she gave no support to the South African War, was repulsed by the military character of Queen Victoria's funeral, lamented the resurgence of the Eastern question in the form of the Balkan wars of 1912-13, and reflected ironically on the passage of the 'Home Rule Bill' in 1920. The sudden and unexpected death of Harry Drew, in 1910, was a devastating blow: 'I don't quite know how to bear 'anybody' now I can't have him', she wrote (Masterman, 460). She travelled for a time and was restored somewhat by the marriage of her daughter to Francis Parish, in 1912, and the births of five grandchildren. She made her home at 2 The Boltons, Earls Court, London, developed arthritis, and became a zealous vegetarian. She continued to take a vigorous interest in politics, viewing the rise of the Labour Party with interest and more than a little sympathy. She spent Christmas 1926 at a family party at Hawarden, and died there on 1 January 1927, having been 'rather particularly lively at dinner in the evening' (ibid., 491). She was buried at Hawarden on 5 January, and a memorial service was held on the same day at St Margaret's, Westminster. An edited selection from her diary and family correspondence appeared in 1930 and remains a valuable source for Gladstone studies and for the portrait it paints of the interactions between social, political, and cultural circles in late-Victorian London. 


@@@@@


doc= 41176


Frye, Walter (d. 1474/5), composer, is first recorded in 1456-7, when he joined the Confraternity of St Nicholas, the London guild of parish clerks. His fellow members included the composers John Bedyngham, John Plummer, and Richard Cox. This shared membership is especially interesting since the latter two composers and Frye were between them responsible for the five mass settings which form the original nucleus of the Burgundian court manuscript Brussels, Koninklijke Bibliotheek, MS 5557, with Frye himself the author of three masses. In the year 1464-5 Frye was paid an annuity by Anne, duchess of Exeter, sister of Edward IV. Here again the Brussels manuscript provides an interesting perspective: it was compiled for the marriage of Margaret of York, also a sister of Edward IV, to Charles the Bold, duke of Burgundy, in 1468. Limited though the direct evidence is, then, it seems clear that Frye had connections with the royal court. His will, which survives, is dated 12 August 1474. It was proved at the prerogative court of Canterbury in London on 5 June 1475, thus placing his death some time during the intervening ten months. He died in London. 
While there is no evidence that Frye ever worked abroad, his fame extended throughout Europe: his brief but very beautiful 'Ave regina celorum' enjoyed unparalleled popularity in the second half of the fifteenth century, turning up in sources as far away from England as Bohemia and Hungary. It is also to be found, sung by angels, in three altarpieces painted in Bruges apparently in the 1480s, and even forms part of a ceiling painting in a French chateau. Of the few other secular works ascribed to Frye, most have conflicting attributions to others: these include the highly popular 'Tout a par moy', which may be by the Burgundian Gilles Binchois, and 'So ys emprentid', which is more likely to be by Bedyngham. 
By far the most substantial part of Frye's output are his settings of the ordinary of the mass. The survival of Brussels MS 5557, without which all his complete masses would have been lost, is therefore especially fortunate. These are works of very high quality, and at least two of them, the 'Summe trinitati' and 'Flos regalis', rank among the finest mass cycles of the mid-fifteenth century. To modern ears the subtle interplay of melodic and rhythmic ideas which shape and lend a sense of structural balance to the masses offers ever deeper rewards with growing acquaintance. While these works were probably composed in the early to mid-1460s, the style of Frye's other complete mass, the 'Nobilis et pulchra', points to an earlier date, possibly in the early 1450s, and thus about the same time or slightly later than the masses of Bedyngham, who was apparently a somewhat older contemporary. A partially preserved mass based on the song 'So ys emprentid' is ascribed to Frye in the fragmentary manuscript known as the Lucca choirbook. Strong similarities between this and an anonymous mass in Brussels 5557 suggest that the latter may also be by Frye, a conclusion supported by further stylistic links with Frye's mass style generally, and with his motet 'Sospitati dedit'. This piece is the only one by Frye to survive complete in a source from his native country, where most music manuscripts for this period have sadly been lost. 


@@@@@


doc= 41178


Horwood, William (c.1430-1484), church musician and composer, is of unknown parentage and upbringing. During 1458-9 he was admitted to the Confraternity of St Nicholas, a guild of the clerks and professional musicians working in the parish and collegiate churches of the London region. In February 1461 he was appointed thence to Lincoln Cathedral, probably to introduce there the newly developing practices of choral polyphonic singing. However, he left Lincoln at Michaelmas 1461 and in 1462-3 was readmitted to the Confraternity of St Nicholas; he served as its master during 1474-5, in which year his wife, Agnes, also was admitted. 
Later in 1475 Horwood returned to Lincoln Cathedral to occupy a newly created post of master of the music, which conferred responsibility for the direction of all performances of polyphony. His duties were to attend daily at Lady mass and the evening Marian antiphon; both were sung in the lady chapel by the choristers and the ablest vicars choral, and at the former he was both to sing and play the organ. For the choristers he was to provide a comprehensive musical training, extending to playing the organ and clavichord, and to all the styles of singing then current: plainsong, counterpoint improvised to plainsong, and 'pricksong' (singing from the written notation of polyphony). In April 1483 he also became player of the principal cathedral organ, used on Sundays and major feasts at the major services sung by the full choir. His total emoluments placed him among the highest-paid professional church musicians of his day. 
In music history Horwood is very important. He was a conspicuously able composer of that generation which, by adding bass and boy treble voices to the historic core of altos and tenors, created one of the most enduring of all resources for musical performance, namely the four-part chorus of soprano, alto, tenor, and bass voices. Three Marian votive antiphons (one incomplete) and an 'alternatim' 'Magnificat', all for five unaccompanied voices, survive in the Eton choirbook of 'c'.1502-5 ['see 'Composers of the Eton choirbook]. The experimental scoring and harmonic and cadential idioms of the 'Salve regina' show it to be an early piece, dating perhaps from his London days. The remainder demonstrate Horwood's role in the establishment of the principal features of late fifteenth-century English style, especially its vocal scoring and its characteristic grandeur in terms of scale of composition, sonority of choral writing, and virtuosity of solo writing. A setting of a Lady mass 'Kyrie' survives in a fragmentary state elsewhere. 
At Lincoln Horwood dwelt within the cathedral close, and may have been of a somewhat irascible disposition, being fined in 1478-9 for an assault on one of the chantry priests. In the same year he was also fined, as was his daughter Joan two years earlier, for brewing and selling ale that was in contravention of the law. He died early in 1484, probably in Lincoln. He was survived by his wife, and was buried in the cathedral nave south aisle. 


@@@@@


doc= 41181


Davy, Richard (d. 1521?), church musician, is of unknown origins, but rose to be one of the leading composers of his generation. All that is certain about his career is that he was instructor of the choristers at Magdalen College, Oxford, from Michaelmas 1490 until Christmas 1491; he could have held the post as early as Michaelmas 1488 and as late as Christmas 1493. It is probable, however, that he stayed no longer than the many other instructors employed by the college during the 1480s and 1490s; the position was poorly paid, and its occupants tended to move to more lucrative employment. A Richard Davy entered the college as a scholar in 1483, but there is no proof that this was the future instructor. There is, however, no doubt that the instructor and the composer are identical: one copy of Davy's antiphon 'O domine caeli terraeque creator' bears the remarkable annotation 'Hanc antiphonam composuit Ricardus Davy uno die collegio magdalene Oxoniis' ('Richard Davy composed this antiphon in one day at Magdalen College, Oxford'). It appears that soon after leaving Magdalen the composer took orders as a priest; in 1495-6 the college paid for the binding of a volume of songs, masses, and antiphons of ''dom'. Richard Davy'. He may possibly have been the Richard Davy of Thorpe Malsor, Northamptonshire, who on 20 September 1494 was ordained priest by the bishop of Lincoln, in whose diocese Oxford lay. 
Attempts to trace Davy's post-Magdalen career are impeded by the frequent occurrence of the name and its variants; no later reference unquestionably applies to him. A simple explanation could be that he died or moved to another institution whose archives are lost or await study. A composer of Davy's quality would have been a strong contender for appointment to the household chapel of a magnate; the fact that he produced both sacred and secular music may reflect his activity in an environment that was not exclusively religious. 
It is tempting to identify the composer with the Richard Davy who by 1512 was a singer in the choir of Fotheringhay College, Northamptonshire, the prestigious chantry college of the house of York; he was still in place in 1533-4; and dated his will on 31 March 1538. Richard Davy of Fotheringhay, however, was a layman, and therefore cannot be identified with Richard Davy of Magdalen, unless the Magdalen reference to ''dom'. Richard Davy' is to another namesake, or intends 'dom[inus]' to denote possession of a degree rather than membership of the priesthood. Against the Fotheringay identification, however, is the fact that all of the known music by Richard Davy appears in the Eton choirbook; it would seem odd for him to have composed nothing else during the last thirty-five years of his life ['see 'Composers of the Eton choirbook]. 
It is also conceivable that the composer moved from Oxford to Devon, where the 'dominus' Richard Davy who revised music books belonging to Ashburton parish church in 1493-4 can probably be identified with the Richard Davy who was admitted as a vicar-choral of the cathedral at Michaelmas 1494. Although such a move might to us appear retrogressive, it need not have seemed so at the time, and there could have been personal or financial reasons for it; a vicarage choral at Exeter was worth more than the instructorship at Magdalen, and the cathedral's requirement that its vicars-choral be priests allowed the prospect of presentation to a benefice. A later instructor at Magdalen, Nicholas Tucker, became clerk of the lady chapel (that is, master of the choristers) at Exeter in 1535. The ordination lists for Exeter diocese reveal two candidates possibly of local origin for identification with the cathedral vicar-choral: a Richard Davy was ordained subdeacon and deacon in 1491 and another was ordained subdeacon in 1492, although neither of these is known to have proceeded to the order of priest. 
Richard Davy, vicar-choral of Exeter, vacated this office at some point between summer 1504 and summer 1510, apparently upon his presentation by the dean and chapter to the vicarage of Broadhembury, Devon, on 29 April 1507. While still at the cathedral, this Richard Davy had made a will on 6 July 1501; his date of death is indicated by the grant of probate on 11 July 1521. In 1501 he had appointed two of his fellow vicars-choral as executors, and had made provision for the bequest of a silver cup 'called a nutt' to the sub-prioress of the priory of Polsloe, Devon, and of the remainder of his goods for the maintenance of his mother, Lucy. 
The evidence seems therefore to relate to the careers of two or three church musicians named Richard Davy: a composer and instructor of the choristers at Magdalen College, Oxford, in the early 1490s, who may have entered the priesthood and whose later career is obscure; a man active in Devon, who was a priest by 1493-4, became a vicar-choral of Exeter Cathedral in 1494 and held the vicarage of Broadhembury from 1507 until his death in 1521; and a lay-clerk of Fotheringhay College from 1512 or earlier until 1534 or later, who may have died about 1538. 
Davy's extant compositions, several of which are now incomplete, include seven votive antiphons, a 'Magnificat', a setting of the Passion for Palm Sunday, and four songs in English. The Passion, in which he sets only the words of the crowd and the minor characters, is the most ambitious of the four such works known to survive from medieval England. Even more impressive are his antiphons, especially the colossal, virtuosic, and inexhaustibly inventive 'In honore summae matris', in which his sense of colour and flair for effective timing are imaginatively applied to a highly rhetorical text. Here, as in the almost equally ornate 'Salve regina', Davy makes a very large structure coherent by persistently re-using and developing brief musical motifs. Not all Davy's music is so elaborate; the 'Stabat mater' is markedly more restrained, allowing him to create the sense of rapt involvement that contemporary devotional manuals prescribe for meditation on the Passion. Davy's devotional songs 'Ah, mine heart', an urgent apology for sin, and 'Ah, blessed Jesu', a vivid anticipation of death, achieve the eloquence and intensity typical of his Latin music. 


@@@@@


doc= 41182


Wilkinson, Robert (b. c.1470, d. in or after 1515), composer, is of unknown parentage and upbringing. At Michaelmas 1496 he was appointed to the staff of Eton College as clerk of the parish of Eton, whose church was the college ante-chapel. From this humble beginning his musical talents took him, with surprising rapidity, to appointment as a lay singing-man of the chapel choir in January 1499, and as master of the choristers one year later. His occupation of this office seems to have been entirely uneventful; his stipend was increased on two occasions. An episcopal visitation of the college in April 1515 found no fault with the choir under Wilkinson's direction (its unclean surplices excepted). The degree of conscientiousness informing the choir's work in his time is suggested by the necessity for a visitation four years after his departure to require more of the singing-men to be diligent about their duties. 
Wilkinson's principal surviving monument for posterity is the wonderful collection of late fifteenth-century church polyphony known as the Eton choirbook ['see 'Composers of the Eton choirbook]. Compiled 'c'.1502-5 for performance by his choir, it contained ninety-three Marian antiphons and 'Magnificats', most being of great length and technical virtuosity. Its original inclusion of seven of Wilkinson's own compositions indicates the degree of influence which he exercised in its compilation. It is a tribute to contemporary standards of training that this ambitious collection was assembled for a body of singers consisting of but four or five chaplains, Wilkinson and four or five singing-men, and eight or nine chorister-boys (possibly enhanced by a handful of competent supernumeraries from among the fellows and schoolboys). 
While enterprising in their choice of texts, two of Wilkinson's compositions included within the original layer are now wholly lost, and three exist only as fragments. One survives complete, as does the second half of another; both appear to be early works, manifesting somewhat imperfect integration of their stylistic components. Three of the lost or fragmentary pieces were for six voices, exhibiting already Wilkinson's particular delight in sheer sonority. His masterpiece was the 'Salve regina' for nine voices, added to the Eton choirbook after his death and now one of the greatest splendours of the collection. Its unique scoring for two trebles, alto, four tenors, and two basses lends massive sound to its full passages, and affords scope for much resource in its kaleidoscopic display of combinations of voices for reduced ensembles. Also added to the choirbook was Wilkinson's setting of the apostles' creed as a canon thirteen-in-one over a plainsong ostinato; however, though highly diverting to sing, this is not of great musical consequence. Wilkinson vacated his offices at Eton College early in August 1515. No further trace has been found, but the manner in which he received a generous gratuity during his final year there suggests that his departure was not by death but to other employment, now unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 41183


Turges, Edmund (b. c.1445), composer, is of obscure origins. Nothing is known about his parentage or the circumstances of his birth or death; his surviving music is found in manuscript sources of 'c'.1500-1520. In 1469 he was established in the London area and was admitted to membership of the fraternity of St Nicholas, a guild of parish clerks and professional musicians working in the collegiate and parish churches of London and its immediate environs. From this a birth date of about 1445 may be inferred. It is just possible that he may be identified with one Sturges who was a chaplain of the choir of New College, Oxford, during 1507-8. Since he composed secular as well as sacred music, it is equally possible that he spent much or most of his career in the employment of aristocratic families whose records have perished, composing sacred music for the chapel and secular music for entertainment. 
Turges is not known to have served in the Chapel Royal, but the texts of two of the four songs attributed to him in the Fayrfax book suggest contact with the royal family. In 'Enforce yourselfe as Goddis Knyght' an unnamed king (almost certainly Henry VII) is urged to uphold the rights of the commons against 'all mysdone thinges'. The carol 'From stormy wyndis and grevous wethir' prays for the protection of 'Arthur oure prynce', perhaps on a sea voyage or other hazardous journey. Composition may have been prompted by the departure of Arthur and Katherine of Aragon for their court at Ludlow as prince and princess of Wales in December 1501. The prayer is, however, for Arthur exclusively, and possibly the 'stormy wyndis and grevous wethir' are to be understood metaphorically. This carol was apparently sufficiently admired for John Browne to use melodic material from it in his fine votive antiphon 'Stabat iuxta Christi crucem', composed about 1502. 
Turges has never enjoyed the reputation of, for example, Robert Fayrfax (died 1521) or John Taverner (died 1545); nevertheless, his work is accomplished, and sometimes striking. The five-voice 'Magnificat' in the Caius choirbook is exceptionally extended and contains passages that are extremely busy rhythmically, even in terms of the florid style of much contemporary English music. The five-voice setting of the Marian antiphon 'Gaude flore virginali' (in the Eton choirbook) gives unusual prominence to boys' voices; if the composer was indeed ever a chaplain of New College, he may have designed it specifically for its chapel choir, with its many boys and few men. The work contains several phrases that seem to recall melodic material from 'From stormy wyndis'. It may have been intended to compliment Prince Arthur if it belongs to the short period between the writing of 'From stormy wyndis' and Arthur's death in April 1502, or to commemorate him if it dates, for example, from Turges's possible stay at New College. A four-voice setting of 'Gaude flore virginali' also exists; this can be sung by men only, as can a three-voice 'Kyrie' and 'Gloria' by 'Edmund Sturges' in the Ritson manuscript. 
Much music by Turges has been lost. The Eton choirbook once contained three four-voice settings of the 'Magnificat' ['see 'Composers of the Eton choirbook]. 'Turges massys and antems' appeared in partbooks belonging to King's College, Cambridge, in 1529; as six-voice works they must have been among the composer's most ambitious. While it is possible that these were by Edmund Turges ('b'. 1506), fellow of King's from 1526 to 1535, this is unlikely, not least because the repertory of the partbooks generally suggests composition before the 1520s. 


@@@@@


doc= 41190


Ashwell, Thomas (b. c.1478, d. in or after 1524), composer, is of unknown parentage. He was admitted a chorister of St George's Chapel, Windsor, on 29 October 1491, and left on 14 January 1493; so brief a career indicates that he had been recruited by impressment, fully trained, from some other choir. Thereafter he made his career as a church musician. During 1502-3 he was a lay singing-man of the choir of the collegiate church of Tattershall (Lincolnshire), and from summer 1506 until August 1511 he served as master of the choristers and organist of Lincoln Cathedral. 
On 24 December 1513 Ashwell progressed to appointment as cantor and master of the lady chapel choir of Durham Cathedral. Here his duties were to train eight boys (of the almonry school) and such monks of the priory as were assigned to him both to play the organ and to execute all the techniques of singing then current: composed polyphony sung from mensural notation, plainsong, and the several skills of vocal improvisation upon plainsong (descant, counter, faburden, and 'squarenote'). He was to be in personal attendance in the monks' choir at every high mass, vespers, and evening Marian antiphon that was distinguished with polyphonic music (composed or extempore), singing and also playing the organ when required. Further, he was to be present daily at Lady mass to sing its plainsong and polyphony, doubtless with his monks and boys. Each year he was to compose, in honour of God, St Mary, or St Cuthbert (Durham's patron saint), at least one new mass for four or five voices, or other equivalent music. 
Of Ashwell's compositions only two masses have survived intact; two further masses, one Marian antiphon, and one secular song survive in states too fragmentary to permit reconstruction. The complete masses 'Ave Maria' and 'Jesu Christe' are both for six voices, huge in scale and replete with rhythmic vitality and intricacy. Their qualities of melodic coherence and harmonic cogency suggest that Ashwell was perhaps the most accomplished of the contemporaries of Robert Fayrfax. His capacity to influence other composers is manifest in the manner in which the five-note motif that he employed as cantus firmus for the now fragmentary mass 'God Save King Harry' is to be found also in certain other contemporary works, of which his appears to have been the prototype. A mass so named was copied for the choir of New College, Oxford, in 1518-19; possibly it was written in 1511 for the birth of the first-born (and short-lived) child of Henry VIII, an occasion marked at Lincoln Cathedral with extravagant ringing of the bells. Ashwell's now fragmentary mass 'Sancte Cuthberte' was clearly written at Durham in fulfilment of his contractual obligations. Long after his death he was listed by Thomas Morley (1597) as one of the composers whose works he had consulted and considered authoritative. Ashwell vacated his office at Durham between May 1524 and May 1525; no will is known, and no further reference has been found. 


@@@@@


doc= 41191


Preston, Thomas (fl. 1542-1559), composer, is an obscure figure; documentary sources from Oxford, Cambridge, and Windsor omit the first name. He is known as an important composer of organ music for the Catholic liturgy. A Preston was master of the choristers at Magdalen College, Oxford, in 1542-3, and the same name is found in the archives of Trinity College, Cambridge, in the years 1548-59. He originally appears there as a college servant (though probably as organist); later lists show him among the chapel staff, and it is clear that by 1554-5, at least, he was in charge of the newly established choristers and at the head of the singing-men. In 1558 and 1559 he received payments among allowances due to absent fellows. In 1558-9 a man of the same name appears as clerk, organist, and 'instructor choristarum' at St George's, Windsor, where Marbeck was similarly employed as 'magister choristarum' ('supervisor of the choristers') in that period. 'Prestonus, in oppido Vindelisoriensi' is listed, along with Sebastian (Westcote) of St Paul's and Thorne of York, in Nicholas Sander's 'De visibili monarchia ecclesiae' (1571) as a musician ejected from office for confessing the papal primacy. Although this assertion requires qualification in Westcote's case, there is indeed no subsequent documentary record of a musician named Preston. The will of a Thomas Preston of Sawston in Cambridgeshire, proved at the consistory court of Ely on 26 April 1564, cannot be shown to be that of the composer. 
Apart from the will, none of this documentation is intrinsically unlikely to refer to Thomas Preston the composer. A move from a responsible post at Magdalen to what appears to be the corresponding one at Trinity is not difficult to account for. The evidence from Trinity and Windsor is also easily reconciled, and almost certainly concerns Thomas Preston. It probably does not relate to John Preston, organist of the parish church of St Dunstan-in-the-West, London, in 1544-5, though it may be he, rather than Thomas, who wrote the work attributed to 'Preston' in the earliest section of BL, Add. MS 29996. All the organ music attributed explicitly or implicitly to Thomas Preston survives uniquely in a later section of the same manuscript. 
The style of Thomas Preston's organ music is consistent with compositional activity in the reign of Queen Mary. It is all conceived for performance in the Catholic liturgy, unless, as is likely, he also wrote the anonymous non-liturgical piece 'Uppon la mi re' in the same manuscript. Other than this, sixteen works for organ exist, the last incomplete and hence without attribution. Much of it is densely contrapuntal in idiom. Two ensemble pieces survive: an 'In nomine' for strings and a three-part setting of the faburden of the hymn 'O lux beata trinitas'. Apart from the intrinsic interest of his music, Preston was an innovator who influenced John Bull and Thomas Tomkins, the latter of whom owned the manuscript in which all of Preston's known keyboard music survives. 


@@@@@


doc= 41192


Cartimandua (d. after AD 69), queen of the Brigantes, a large tribal grouping in northern Britain, was married to Venutius, with whom she quarrelled and whom she replaced after 'c'.AD 57 with Vellocatus, his armour bearer; no offspring are known. She died after AD 69, when she lost her throne to Venutius and took refuge with the Romans. 
Under Cartimandua, the Brigantes seem to have been the largest of the British tribes of the first century AD, occupying the greater part of the north of the province. They are probably best seen as an agglomeration of tribes, from one of which Cartimandua emerged as queen, perhaps by succession, for she was queen in her own right and there is mention of her illustrious birth. Given the size and diversity of the Brigantes, it is probable that she found it difficult to exercise complete and steady control throughout her realm. 
Knowledge of Cartimandua is derived almost entirely from the writings of the Roman historian Tacitus, composed half a century after her floruit. She was one of the several female rulers of Britain and Germany who fascinated the Roman male author. In any case she could only be of prime concern to Tacitus in view of the scope of her realm and the importance of its location on the northern frontier of the expanding Roman province in Britain. Her capital has been located variously (for example, at York and at Aldborough): if she had a single centre (which cannot be assumed), then archaeology suggests that Stanwick (near Scotch Corner, north Yorkshire) is its most likely location. Everything that is known about Cartimandua indicates her allegiance to Rome, which seems to have been a constant feature of her rule. Indeed, the Roman source tends to suggest that she depended upon Roman support for the retention of her throne. 
Cartimandua enters history in the pages of Tacitus in the year AD 51, when she handed in chains to the Romans the British leader Caratacus, a thorn in their side for almost a decade. It is related that Caratacus came to her in search of refuge from his Roman enemies and that he was passed to the Romans against his will. If that is the whole story, Cartimandua could be accused of treachery, even allowing for the inter-tribal hostilities that characterized ancient Britain. However, Cartimandua's closeness to Rome (subsequently, at any rate) made her an odd choice by Caratacus as a protectress against Rome. It may be that Caratacus came to Cartimandua not simply in search of refuge but also to engage her services as a mediator to negotiate his surrender: he certainly suffered no great punishment at Roman hands, thanks perhaps to Cartimandua's negotiating skills. In any event, she gained great credit at Rome for providing the emperor Claudius with Caratacus, who became the centrepiece of his celebration of victory in Britain. 
Cartimandua's accession cannot be dated. She may have been on the throne for decades before AD 51, even before Claudius's invasion of Britain in 43. As a royal ally of Rome under the principate, she would have been awarded Roman citizenship, if she had not inherited it. If granted her citizenship by the emperor Claudius ('r'. AD 41-54), she had the right to call herself Claudia Cartimandua. If her citizenship derived (directly or indirectly) from a grant of an earlier emperor, she was Julia Cartimandua. Neither name is attested, but one was certainly hers. 
Evidence for the rest of Cartimandua's reign comes from two passages in Tacitus, one in his 'Histories' (iii.45), completed about 110, and the other in his 'Annals' (xii.40), completed about 116. Over the last century there has been recurrent and polarized scholarly debate on the relationship of these two passages. On the face of it, 'Annals', xii.40, describes Cartimandua's activities about AD 57, while 'Histories', iii.45, treats events of AD 69. Yet, given some broad similarities between the two passages, it has been argued that they are in fact doublets and that 'Annals', xii.40, is somehow a Tacitean error, the events described in the two passages having actually occurred together in AD 69. However, such similarities as exist between the two passages are quite inadequate to support so large an inference: most of them derive from the fact that the 'Histories' passage briefly reprises earlier events (subsequently recorded at 'Annals', xii.40) as background to the events of AD 69, with which it is primarily concerned. Despite persistent controversy, there can be no real doubt that the two passages present two different events, as they claim to do, and with two very different outcomes: after the events of 'c'.AD 57 Cartimandua retained power, but in AD 69 she was deprived of her throne. 
Cartimandua had taken a consort from among the Brigantes, named Venutius; he probably came from a powerful subgroup within the large Brigantian realm. In AD 57, like Cartimandua, Venutius had a long record of fidelity to Rome; together they had prospered in alliance with Rome. But about AD 57 they fell out; Tacitus, disposed to moralizing, blamed the damaging effects of growing prosperity in the wake of the Caratacus affair. Their quarrel became a wider internal conflict, doubtless always a threat within the large and disjointed kingdom. Cartimandua remained close to Rome, but Venutius now became hostile, not only to the queen but also to her Roman supporters. It may be significant that he is not mentioned in the Caratacus affair: it seems that Cartimandua had taken all the responsibility in that affair and had received all the credit. 
Cartimandua captured the brother and kinsfolk of Venutius by trickery, precipitating a major civil war among the Brigantes. It seems that Venutius's forces could be imagined as invaders from outside Cartimandua's realm, supporting the probability that he represented a regional grouping. Tacitus prefers to focus upon the supposed objections of the Brigantes to being ruled by a woman, which were very much his own. However, Cartimandua's Roman allies had foreseen the invasion of Venutius's forces and after fierce fighting repelled it; thanks to the Romans, the queen retained her throne, while Venutius was left hostile to her and to Rome. 
In Venutius's place, Cartimandua took Vellocatus, his erstwhile armour bearer. Perhaps Vellocatus represented some of the interests which had brought Venutius to prominence; again, Tacitus prefers to moralize. In AD 69 Venutius attacked again, taking advantage of an uprising against Cartimandua among the Brigantes. This time Cartimandua's Roman allies had not anticipated his attack, doubtless more concerned with the tumultuous civil wars of their own in that year. Some Roman auxiliary infantry and cavalry arrived in time to save the queen's life, but not her throne. From AD 69 Venutius was king of the Brigantes. 
Cartimandua's fate thereafter is unknown. A fragmentary inscription from Chester, which may mention a woman, has been taken to refer to her; it has been suggested that she lived out her days there. It is very likely that Cartimandua enjoyed a privileged retirement, as did other client rulers with similar histories, but there is nothing to connect her with Chester. It is just as likely that she retired to Italy, even Rome. Since she was well established as queen by AD 51, she was probably dead by 100. 
Cartimandua had done Rome a great service through the middle of the first century AD. The Brigantes were not an easy people to rule: they were diverse and apparently prone to unrest. Cartimandua's difficulties with Venutius, which Tacitus couches in personal and moralistic terms, seem to have been symptomatic of a broader instability among the Brigantes. 


@@@@@


doc= 41193


Parkes, Elizabeth Rayner (1829-1925), campaigner for women's rights and journalist, was born in Birmingham on 16 June 1829, the daughter of Joseph Parkes (1796-1865), a lawyer and politician, and of Elizabeth Rayner Priestley (1797?-1877), who was the granddaughter of Joseph Priestley, the philosopher and scientist. The Unitarian background of both parents, her father's political connections, and the culture of radical dissent inherited from her mother's family meant that her upbringing was less circumscribed intellectually than might have been expected for a young woman of the affluent middle class of her day. From the age of eleven she attended a boarding-school run by the Unitarian Revd William Field at Leam House, near Warwick, where his daughter Lucy was the first of a number of highly intelligent women to make an impact on the impressionable Bessie, as she was universally known. In 1833, on her father's appointment as secretary to the commission on municipal corporations, the family moved to London, to the first of three London residences in Great George Street, Westminster. 
Joseph Parkes was a dominant influence on his daughter. Family life was outwardly conventional, but an unspoken and irrevocable rift developed between her parents. Elizabeth Parkes's sympathies were with their son, Priestley, whose developing consumption led them in 1847 to take a house in Pelham Crescent, Hastings, on the Sussex coast, in the hope that sea air would prove beneficial. It was in Hastings that the Parkes family met the unorthodox family of Benjamin Leigh Smith and his five children. There Bessie formed one of the most significant friendships of her life, with Barbara Leigh Smith, later Bodichon, whom she was later to describe as 'the most powerful woman I have ever known' (M. Belloc Lowndes, 'A Passing World', 1897, 21). Their relationship was one of creative interaction. They were a source of mutual education; they read and travelled together, and when apart wrote to one another about what they read -- an impressive catalogue of literature and philosophy from Shakespeare, Bacon, and John Stuart Mill through to the work of contemporaries such as Harriet Martineau, Tennyson, and George Sand. In 1848 they began to contribute articles and reviews to two local newspapers with which they had connections, the 'Hastings and St. Leonards News' and the 'Birmingham Journal'. 
Another significant if less intense friendship was formed at the same time with Marian Evans, whom Bessie had met in Coventry through their mutual friend Sara Hennell. The future George Eliot was beginning her career as a translator and journalist and Joseph Parkes had been the principal contributor to a fund established to publish her translation of J. F. Strauss's 'Leben Jesu'. Marian Evans was a much sought-after guest in the Parkes's household, and Bessie memorably described the young George Eliot in retrospect in an article in the 'Contemporary Review' (February 1894; repr. in 'In a Walled Garden', 1895). To Marian Evans, Bessie Parkes was one of a number of admiring younger women by whom she was to be surrounded for much of her life. It was nevertheless to her that she confided her decision to live with George Henry Lewes shortly before their departure for the continent in 1854 and it was to Bessie, more than a quarter of a century later, that she wrote one of her last letters. 
In Barbara Leigh Smith, Bessie Parkes had a friend who was more of an equal, in age and in family background. They were bound by their creative ambitions: Barbara's to be a painter, and Bessie a poet. They were bound together, too, by a conviction that women's lives were unnecessarily restricted -- legally, and in terms of the possibilities for education and employment. 'I believe that now, as in all ages of the world, the substantial equality of nature renders the two sexes of equal weight and value in the moral world, and that their action upon each other in every relation of life is far too complex to admit of any great difference between them in any given rank' Bessie wrote in the introduction to her 'Essays on Women's Work' (1865). That principle was at the heart of a decade's vigorous campaigning for more equality of opportunity for women. 
Bessie Parkes's 'Remarks on the Education of Girls', published by John Chapman in 1854, outlined the need to extend women's education by encouraging wider, uncensored reading, and by introducing women to the study of subjects such as social and political economy to enable them to participate meaningfully in public affairs. In 1855 Barbara Leigh Smith and Bessie Parkes formed a committee to submit a petition in support of a 'Married Women's Property Bill' then before parliament. The petition failed but their appetite for action was whetted. In October 1856, while on a visit to Edinburgh, Bessie's attention was caught by the 'Waverley Journal', a fortnightly 'edited and published by ladies for the cultivation of the memorable, the progressive, and the beautiful', to which she contributed and also briefly edited. Eventually, in consultation with Barbara Leigh Smith and with Anna Jameson, who was a sympathetic supporter of the two younger women, it was decided to establish an entirely new periodical based in London, the 'English Woman's Journal', whose premises at 19 Langham Place were to become the focus of a number of interconnected enterprises devoted to widening education and employment opportunities for women. The 'Journal' was established as a joint-stock company, with Barbara Leigh Smith as the major shareholder and Bessie and Matilda Mary (Max) Hays, actress, novelist, and translator, as co-editors. It sold for a shilling, and subscribers were entitled to the use of a reading- and meeting-room at Langham Place. 
Bessie Parkes was the major single contributor to the 'Journal' and her views effectively shaped its policies. George Eliot declined to contribute, pleading total commitment to her novel writing, but became a subscriber and adviser. 'The more business you can get into the journal -- the more statements of philanthropic movements and social facts, and the less literature, the better', she counselled Bessie ('George Eliot Letters', 2.379). Bessie was in complete agreement. The journal was never intended to compete with major literary organs of the day. 'Such an idea would have been perfectly hopeless and absurd, and indeed self-destructive', she wrote later ('Essays on Woman's Work', 63). Of philanthropic movements and social facts there were plenty, particularly on women's employment and on women's education, where the combined influence of Jessie Boucherett, Maria Rye, Adelaide Anne Procter, Isa Craig, and Emily Faithfull, among others, filtered through. On the question of women's suffrage there was virtually nothing, Bessie believing it an impracticable aim. 
Bessie was temporarily replaced as editor for six months in 1862 by Emily Davies but returned in 1863. Eventually the journal foundered, riven by internal debates and differences -- personal, religious, and political -- among its chief supporters. The entire management was transferred to Bessie in August 1864, but soon after the company was officially dissolved. It continued in spirit as the 'Alexandra Magazine and English Woman's Journal' until 1865, when Jessie Boucherett refashioned it as the 'Englishwoman's Review', which lasted until 1903. 
Bessie's career as a poet, meanwhile, had made a modest beginning. A volume of 'Poems' was published by Chapman in 1852 and dedicated to Barbara Leigh Smith. G. H. Lewes reviewed it in 'The Leader' (8 January 1853), and both he and George Eliot were encouraging. 'Summer Sketches and other Poems' (1854) followed, also published by Chapman, and noticed by the 'Westminster Review'. Notable among her subjects were female friendship, other women poets ('For Adelaide' [Procter], 'For Elizabeth Barrett Browning'), and the difficulties which beset women poets ('To an Author who Loved Truth more than Fame'). In 'Summer Sketches' there was an attempt to tackle aspects of the 'woman question', in advance of Barrett Browning's 'Aurora Leigh'. Other poems celebrated places familiar to her childhood, 'To Birmingham', 'Kenilworth', 'Stoneleigh', and 'Up the River', which began 'I am on the lilied Avon'. Still others introduced direct political messages, on subjects such as public health ('My Old House'), a colliery disaster, and the death of the prince consort ('The palace and the colliery'), and the poet's political mission ('Poets of 1848'). 
From the early 1860s Bessie had become increasingly attracted to the Roman Catholic faith, possibly encouraged by her friendship with Adelaide Procter, and influenced crucially by a meeting with Cardinal Manning in 1864. She was received into the faith later the same year. Her 'Essays on Woman's Work', many of them collected from the 'Journal' -- eloquent, informed, and passionate on the subject of more meaningful lives for middle-class women, and more tolerable and varied working conditions for working women -- were published in 1865, dedicated to the memory of Anna Jameson. The 'Essays' in effect brought to an end Bessie's public contribution to the women's movement, and her conversion to Catholicism heralded a dramatic shift in her life. 
In the spring of 1867 Bessie and Barbara Bodichon, returning from a holiday in the south of France, took a chalet on the estate of Louise Swanton Belloc, a journalist, translator, and writer of children's books, and the widow of the French portrait painter Hilaire Belloc. An immediate rapport developed between Bessie and Madame Belloc, and, what was more unlikely, between Bessie and Louis Belloc (1830-1872), her semi-invalid son, who was a barrister. Bessie's ten-year engagement to her cousin Samuel Blackwell had recently ended and she had also refused a proposal of marriage from the blind Liberal MP Henry Fawcett, later the husband of Millicent Garrett. To the surprise of Madame Belloc and the consternation of her friends and family Bessie announced her intention of marrying Louis Belloc, which she did on 19 September 1867. This unlikely union proved to be brief and extremely happy. Two children were born in quick succession, Marie, later the novelist Marie Belloc Lowndes, and Hilaire Belloc, the essayist and poet. 
The marriage engendered in Bessie, whose French was already fluent, a love affair with all things French which transmitted itself to both her children. According to Marie Belloc Lowndes, she described the five years of her marriage, and nine further years spent at La Celle St Cloud, the Belloc home 12 miles from Paris, as the happiest of her life. The five years of her marriage included the Franco-Prussian War of 1870-71, the dramatic evacuation and near devastation of La Celle St Cloud, and a flight to London, movingly described through Bessie's letters in Belloc Lowndes's memoir, 'I, too, have Lived in Arcadia: a Record of Love and of Childhood' (1941). Louis Belloc died suddenly in 1872 from the effects of sunstroke. An inheritance from her uncle Josiah Parkes, a successful engineer, in 1871 enabled Bessie to live comfortably in the early years of her widowhood, moving between London and France with her children. Then, in 1877, an investment unwisely entrusted to the son of a friend who had become her lodger failed, leaving her for the first time in her life in financially precarious circumstances. She withdrew from London to Slindon Cottage, the dower house of the Slindon estate in Sussex, brought to her notice by Lady Georgiana Fullerton, a move which delighted her son but appalled her daughter, who pronounced her mother unsuited to country life. She none the less made Slindon her English home for the rest of her life. 
Widowhood brought with it the resumption of old friendships, in particular that with Barbara Bodichon, but not the resumption of an active public life. Bessie's ties with her French family were strengthened, particularly with her mother-in-law and two of her late husband's sisters. She continued to write intermittently. 'La belle France' (1868) and 'Peoples of the World' (1870) were commissioned in the first years of her marriage. 'In a Walled Garden' (1895) and 'A Passing World' (1897), two collections of reminiscences and historical sketches, contain fragments of autobiography and family history and record her interlocking circles of acquaintances and friends. Her last collection of poems, 'In Fifty Years', was published in 1904. In some ways the most remarkable of all her writings are her letters, preserved along with a manuscript diary and reminiscences at Girton College, Cambridge, and published selectively in 'I, too, have Lived in Arcadia'. Her children embarked on successful literary careers and remained close to her. She died peacefully on 29 March 1925, aged ninety-five, and was buried in the churchyard of the Roman Catholic church at Slindon. 


@@@@@


doc= 41194


Seacole, Mary Jane (1805-1881), nurse, was born Mary Jane Grant in Kingston, Jamaica, one of at least two daughters and one son of a Scottish soldier and the mixed-race proprietress of a boarding-house for officers and their families. Much of Mary Grant's early life remains obscure; from her mother she acquired nursing skills and an understanding of the Creole medical tradition, based on herbal treatment, and she is known to have made two voyages to London in the early 1820s. On 10 November 1836 she married, in Kingston, one of her mother's resident guests, Edwin Horatio Seacole, a godson of Lord Nelson, but she was soon widowed. With her sister, Louisa, she ran the family boarding-house for several years, supervising its reconstruction after Kingston's great fire in 1843. She nursed cases of cholera and yellow fever in Jamaica and at Las Cruces in Panama where, for more than two years, she helped her brother manage a hotel. On returning to Jamaica she was briefly nursing superintendent at Up-Park military camp. 
The coming of war with Russia in 1854 prompted Mary Seacole to sail to England, but when she tried to join Florence Nightingale's vanguard of nursing sisters she met a rebuff. At her own expense she took ship to the Crimea, arriving in February 1855 at Balaklava, where her husband's kinsman, Thomas Day, was employed on shipping business. By late April 'Seacole and Day' had opened the British Hotel, near the village of Kadikoi, halfway between the harbour and British headquarters. The hotel housed an officers' club and a good, clean canteen for the troops. While Thomas Day remained at Balaklava, Mrs Seacole managed its facilities. Her independent status ensured a freedom of movement denied the formal nursing service; by June she was a familiar figure at the battle-front, riding forward with two mules in attendance, one carrying medicaments and the other food and wine. She brought medical comfort to the maimed and dying after the assault on the Redan, in which a quarter of the British force was killed or wounded, and she tended Italian, French, and Russian casualties at the Chernaya two months later. Yet, on the day after the Chernaya battle, she could supply 'a capital lunch on the ground' for a cricket match between the guards division and other regiments (Astley, 268). When allied troops entered Sevastopol on 9 September Mrs Seacole obtained a special pass to go forward with her mule-train, becoming the first woman to enter the burning city: 'Every step had a score of dangers', she later wrote, 'and yet curiosity and excitement carried us on and on. I was often stopped to give refreshments to officers and men, who had been fasting for hours' (Seacole, 210). 
Mary Seacole remained in the Crimea until July 1856. By then she was in financial difficulties, for the armistice found her and Day with surplus stocks of food and equipment, and outstanding bills to pay. On returning to England she opened a canteen at Aldershot, a venture that failed through lack of funds. By November she was bankrupt. From July 1855, however, William Howard Russell and other war correspondents had made her name familiar to British newspaper readers, and both 'The Times' and 'Punch' supported appeals to reimburse Mary Seacole for her losses in the Crimea. She was encouraged to write an autobiography, published by Blackwood in July 1857 as the 'Wonderful Adventures of Mrs Seacole in Many Lands': it sold well. Her disinterested services to 'the Army, Navy and British Nation' were recognized by a Seacole fund, approved by the queen and under the patronage of the prince of Wales and two royal dukes. She survived in some comfort until 14 May 1881, when she died of 'apoplexy', at her home, 3 Cambridge Street, Paddington. Her grave at Kensal Green Roman Catholic cemetery, reconsecrated on the initiative of Jamaican nurses in 1973, honours her 'care for the sick and wounded in the West Indies, Panama and on the battlefields of the Crimea'. 


@@@@@


doc= 41195


Cheyne, Sir John (d. 1414), diplomat, heretic, and speaker-elect of the House of Commons, of unknown parentage, was a scion of the family of Cheyne of Drayton Beauchamp, Buckinghamshire. Almost certainly a younger son, he was probably intended for a career in the church. Capgrave says that he took minor orders, and later in orthodox ecclesiastical circles he was regarded as a renegade. In 1372 or 1373 he married Margaret (died 1380), daughter of William, Lord Deincourt, and widow of Robert, Lord Tiptoft (died 1372); the match transformed his prospects. Not only did he gain access to wealth, for his wife brought with her dower lands valued at 230 marks a year; he also gained connections. Probably as a result of these, he became an esquire in the king's household by 1374, and about 1378 he was knighted. At the court he became associated with the so-called Lollard knights, and it is clear that he was himself of Lollard opinion. Possibly he was attracted to the heretics' beliefs by their call for monastic disendowment. He was the recipient of many grants of the confiscated dependencies of French abbeys, among them the priory of Beckford, Gloucestershire, which was to be his chief seat. 
Cheyne was employed by the crown on a number of diplomatic missions. In 1380 he was sent on an embassy to Brittany, and in the following year he visited Wenceslas, king of the Romans, whose sister, Anne, Richard II was shortly to marry. By the late 1390s, however, his relationship with Richard was clouded by his growing association with the king's foremost opponent, Thomas of Woodstock, duke of Gloucester, for whom he deputized in the court of chivalry. When Gloucester and his allies were arrested in 1397 he was himself detained, and condemned to be hanged and drawn for treason. On the initiative of the Lords, however, he was sentenced to perpetual imprisonment. It is not clear when he was released. In September 1399 he was elected for Gloucestershire to the parliament summoned to witness Richard's deposition. According to Walsingham, Cheyne was chosen speaker of the assembly on 6 October, but on the following day Archbishop Arundel, addressing convocation, alluded to the anti-clericalism of many of the parliamentary knights and especially to the dangerous views of Cheyne himself. On the 15th Cheyne abandoned the speaker's office. The evidence suggests that he was responding to the pressure exerted by the archbishop. However, the reason publicly given was the physical weakness caused by his long spell of imprisonment. 
However unsatisfactory his relations may have been with Arundel, Cheyne was highly valued by Henry IV, who often employed him in diplomacy. In 1401 he was involved in negotiations for the marriage of Henry's elder daughter, Blanche, to the son and heir of Ruprecht III of Bavaria, and in 1404 he made two embassies to Paris to seek an improvement in relations between Henry's government and the French. He was also active in the domestic field. From mid-June 1400 he was for six years a member of Henry IV's council, and his duties involved him in organizing the defences of the southern Welsh marches against the attacks of Owain Glyn Dwr. In May 1405 he acted as intermediary between the council and the treasurers of war regarding payment of soldiers' wages, and three months later he was arranging for the submission of Welsh rebels. At the Coventry parliament of 1404, in which the Commons pressed for confiscation of the temporalities of the church to assist royal finances, it was Cheyne, probably attending as a councillor, who acted as 'prolocutor militum', even though Sir William Sturmy was the official speaker (Roskell, 87-8). His speech provoked another attack from Archbishop Arundel, who condemned his and the knights' selfish motives. 
In November 1406 Cheyne undertook a two-year mission to Rome to seek an end to the schism. He undertook further embassies to France in 1410 and 1411. He appears to have died in early 1414. His will, made on 1 November 1413, had all the characteristics of a Lollard testament -- an extravagant emphasis on personal unworthiness, request for burial outside the church, and prohibition of funerary pomp. All the same, his radical sympathies did not prevent Henry Chichele, bishop of St David's and later archbishop of Canterbury, a companion on many embassies, from acting as one of his overseers. He was buried in the chapel in Beckford churchyard. His heir was a Sir John Cheyne, who died in June 1420. His second wife, Margaret, daughter and heir of Sir Edward Lovetot of Southoe, Huntingdonshire, survived him. She subsequently married William Herle, esquire. 


@@@@@


doc= 41197


Trefnant, John (d. 1404), bishop of Hereford, was from the village of Trefnant, between Denbigh and St Asaph in north Wales. His episcopal chancellor and executor, Master Reginald Wolston, was a kinsman, and a nephew of the bishop had left Agnes Barton as a widow by 1390. Master John Trefnant (John ap Hywel or John Cresset), perhaps a brother of the bishop, was his protege and Master Hugh Trefnant (Hugh ap Dafydd), his colleague in the St Asaph chapter, may possibly have been kin too. On the other hand, in 1389 Richard II told the pope that Trefnant was related 'in a close degree' to certain nobles 'assisting at our side', presumably from among the lords appellant and, probably explicitly, the earls of Arundel (Perroy, 'Diplomatic Correspondence', 64). 
Trefnant was BCL of Oxford University by 7 April 1372, when the pope granted him four years of non-residence from his rectory of Llanwrin, Powys, to study, and DCL by July 1376 when he was involved in a dispute between the law faculty and the rest of the university. He was living in London as a clerk on 1 October 1376; the next six years are undocumented. On 3 January 1382 he was appointed by Archbishop William Courtenay to secure his pallium in the papal curia, an undemanding task which may suggest he was already there, but in April he was thought available to share custody of the spiritualities 'sede vacante' of St Asaph (where he was a canon, at least later, and had close friends). However, on 16 July 1383 he was named as a proctor by Florimund, lord of l'Esparre, to ensure a payment into the papal camera, so it does seem likely that he was already permanently in the curia. Probably by 1385, certainly by January 1386, he had become an auditor of causes, continuing in this office until he became a bishop, and being termed a papal chaplain. In these years he acted as proctor in various personal matters for the king and queen, several English bishops, and clerks of the royal household. 
On 3 May 1389 Trefnant was papally provided to the see of Hereford and consecrated in Rome on 20 June. It seems unlikely that this represents an independent initiative by the pope, but very likely that the former lords appellant had encouraged the choice, with Richard II himself having no objection. Urban VI gave Trefnant a safe conduct to return to England on 8 August, and he was in London by 16 October when he received his temporalities. He was used by the crown for his legal skills to assist in various sorts of business: for example, to settle disputes in the Anglo-Prussian trade (24 February 1390); to hear a case between the marshal of France and Sir Matthew Gournay (26 April 1390); to execute the sentence of the court in the celebrated 'Scrope v. Grosvenor' case (28 November 1390); on an embassy to France (18 March - 4 June 1394). According to Edouard Perroy he was an adviser to the king before the re-enactment of the 'Statute of 'Praemunire'' in 1393, and does seem a more appropriate choice, at least in terms of recent experience of the papacy, than Bishop John Gilbert of St David's (his predecessor at Hereford), who is named in the issue rolls of the exchequer. On the other hand, Gilbert had had a very long career, including a term as treasurer of the realm, and had pursued business more than once in the papal curia thirty years before. He was one of the few men left who could remember the many different, often unintended, effects which the original statute (enacted in 1353) had had in Edward III's later years. 
Whatever his commissions, Trefnant was usually in his own diocese. Between 1389 and 1393 he was in dogged pursuit of the heretics William Swinderby and Walter Bryt, who were evangelizing there and knew how to exploit the clumsy procedures for arrest, their eventual trials before him being recorded at unique length in his register. He also attended the Council of Stamford, Lincolnshire, which tried the heretic Henry Crump in June 1392. On the other hand, between 1393 and 1396 he opposed vigorously Archbishop Courtenay's attempts to make a visitation of his diocese. Richard II called him to a council at Oxford on 27 January 1399 to have his opinion about the resolution of the great schism. 
The circumstances of the deposition of Richard II, especially the events of 29 and 30 September 1399, required the perpetrators to make at least three successive attempts to compose an 'official account' for circulation, each one seeking to improve on the reality and present a coherent and consistent interpretation. Trefnant is always given a significant role. In the earliest, he was said to have been among those who interviewed the king in the Tower of London on the 29th. In the final version, he and Archbishop Richard Scrope headed the deputation that received Richard II's free abdication that day, and presented it as his proctors to the assembly that met on the 30th. Since this was the version which was to be circulated for dissection by a sharply divided political community, it is to be supposed that not only was there indeed such an assembly (a fact that no one was ever to challenge), and there were over 250 parliamentary members-elect from the shires and boroughs in the capital to tell their constituents about any blatant fiction, but that Trefnant and Scrope did enough to qualify for their roles. Indeed, in terms of the public events it describes, this version has been found wanting only in selectivity and interpretation. Its crucial lies are restricted to what happened away from the public eye. 
Accordingly, much effort has been invested in finding an explanation for the choice of Trefnant and Scrope in terms of their political affiliation, without much success. The truth seems to be that they were regarded, rightly, as not only the two most substantial lawyers on the episcopal bench but, specifically, the most recently familiar with the papal curia, that those seeking to remove Richard II relied on civil- and especially canon-law principles and precedents to achieve it, and that Scrope and Trefnant need be seen as no more partisan than simply willing to comply in, and lend their authority (perhaps even skilled legal advice) to, a 'fait accompli'. Since becoming a bishop, these had been the only reasons why Trefnant had ever been called into public life, but he had been so called, and regularly. In February 1400 he was even sent to the papal curia to explain the deposition. 
On 13 February 1401 Trefnant was appointed to help negotiate (in England) the marriage of Princess Blanche to Count Ludwig of the Palatinate; perhaps some canonical difficulty had emerged from close enquiry into the pair's circumstances. After criticism by the Commons in parliament in March 1401 about the thinness of the king's council, he became a regular attender until March 1403. He was a principal escort of Queen Isabella, Richard II's widow, as far as Calais, when she was returned to her royal family of France, from 26 June to 6 August 1401; England's best canon lawyers and experts in the ways of the papacy had certainly to be on hand to make the best of this most sensitive of all the consequences of the deposition. On 16 July and 26 September 1401 he was appointed to hear an appeal in the perennial case of the count of Denia and his ransom. 
Such specialist engagements apart, Trefnant appears to have been away from the heart of political life, and much more at home in his diocese. When he made his will on 1 March 1404 at Prestbury, Gloucestershire, he was too sick to do much more than name and give full discretion to ten executors, mainly members of his diocesan staff but headed by Bishop John Trevor of St Asaph, a friend since boyhood but now (as Trefnant surely was too) much troubled by Owain Glyn Dwr's claims to the allegiance of their kin-groups in that region. In fact, he did not die until 29 March, still at Prestbury. An inventory prepared for probate shows that he owned a library of nearly ninety books, sixty-six of them on canon and civil law. He was buried, as he requested, in St Anne's Chapel on the south side of Hereford Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 41198


Russell, Sir Thomas Wallace, first baronet (1841-1920), politician, was born on 28 February 1841 in Cupar, Fife, the third son of David Russell (died 1862), a stonemason, and his wife, Isabella Wallace (died 1847). He was educated at Madras Academy, Cupar, and migrated to Ulster in 1859. He settled in Donaghmore, co. Tyrone, where he held various positions, including a clerkship in a soap factory and a sales assistantship in a drapery store. He married Harriet, daughter of Thomas Agnew of Dungannon, on 29 September 1865; the couple had two daughters. Harriet died in 1894. On 23 May 1896 he married Martha Catherine Keown (died in or after 1939), daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel Henry Keown of Castleroe, Londonderry, with whom he had a son and a daughter. His son and heir, a lieutenant in the Royal Dublin Fusiliers, was killed on the western front in November 1916. 
Russell was a self-made man of formidable political and administrative talents. He was an effective polemicist and journalist; he was also an unflagging and popular platform speaker who -- along with the more conservative Edward Saunderson -- did much to represent the Irish unionist case to British audiences in the 1880s. Later in his career he demonstrated considerable ability as a junior minister, and held office under both Lord Salisbury and H. H. Asquith. He applied his talents within three main fields: temperance, unionism, and land reform. These were the governing principles of much of his career, and the foundation for all three was an evangelical Presbyterian faith. This provided biblical vindication for sobriety, and stimulated Russell to defend the political interests of Irish protestants, and especially of the Presbyterian farming community. 
Russell's advocacy of temperance laid the foundations for his later emergence as a politician of national significance. In 1863 he was elected secretary of the Dungannon Temperance Society, and used the post as a springboard to a full-time career within the temperance movement: in 1864 he was appointed as agent of the Irish Temperance League in Dublin, with a brief to convert the whole of the south of Ireland to the cause. Temperance brought Russell a training in public oratory and in polemical journalism; it also brought financial security, for in the mid-1870s he and his wife opened what would become a highly successful temperance hotel in central Dublin. 
Although Russell had little regard for landlordism and some tacit sympathy for Irish national aspirations, his Scottish Presbyterian roots and temperance convictions led him naturally into the Liberal Unionist ranks in the mid-1880s. His first attempt to get into the Commons, as the Liberal candidate at Preston in 1885, was a failure; but he found greater electoral favour in his home territory of South Tyrone, where in July 1886 he defeated the leading Parnellite William O'Brien. (O'Brien was both an opponent of the union and of temperance reformers, whom he designated as 'that sect of Puritans'.) Russell held the constituency until January 1910: thereafter (1911-18) he represented North Tyrone. Between 1886 and 1900 he was a highly effective, if independent-minded, advocate of the Unionist cause, addressing some 1400 meetings and working closely with the Irish Loyal and Patriotic Union (Irish Unionist Alliance). Gladstone considered Russell's contribution to debate on the second 'Home Rule Bill' (1893) as among the best delivered in the Commons. Other Liberals (such as A. E. Pease) recognized the threat that Russell represented as a stump orator. 
However, Russell's loyalty to unionism depended upon the movement's capacity to satisfy his farmer support. This loyalty survived, albeit in a bruised form, until 1900. Russell launched a rural agitation in 1894-5 designed to bolster farmer support for a Liberal land bill: this outraged his Conservative critics within the Unionist alliance. In 1895, on the formation of Lord Salisbury's third ministry, Russell was silenced with junior office (the parliamentary secretaryship of the Local Government Board) and by the promise of a Unionist land bill. But in the late 1890s Russell was moving towards a more radical settlement of the Irish land question; and in September 1900 at Clogher, co. Tyrone, he declared in favour of compulsory land purchase. This speech led to his dismissal from the government, and to a period of independent dissent and political reorientation. 
Between 1900 and 1906 Russell challenged mainstream unionism for the command of the protestant farmer vote. His supporters won two by-elections, wresting East Down (1902) and North Fermanagh (1903) from Unionist control and provoking panic within the Unionist movement as a whole. The early success of Russell's agitation had profound repercussions. It further chivvied the Unionist government towards a sweeping measure of land purchase, and it stimulated a comprehensive overhaul of Ulster Unionist electoral machinery. These measures simultaneously underlined the seriousness with which Russell was viewed, and helped to deflate the agitation that he had created. 
In the wake of Wyndham's 'Land Act' (1903) and the creation of the Ulster Unionist Council (1904-5), Russell's land movement began to flounder. Having been estranged from unionism, and having failed to create a lasting independent movement, he joined the Liberal Party in 1906: his most significant publication, 'Ireland and the Empire' (1901), looked forward to this development. In 1907 he succeeded Sir Horace Plunkett as vice-president of the Irish department of agriculture and technical instruction. He held this office until 1918. He was sworn of the Irish privy council in 1908, and awarded a baronetcy in 1917. He died in Dublin on 2 May 1920, aware that the final collapse of British rule in Ireland was approaching, and was buried in Mount Jerome cemetery, as he had wished, three days later. 
Russell was a Victorian faddist -- a radical nonconformist who combined unwavering conviction with very considerable political skill. The crusading zeal that he had applied to the cause of temperance was transferred to the land question. But his passion and eloquence were not always accompanied by political realism or even tact. He made demands of the Unionist alliance that, given the alliance's fissile nature, could not be granted. He was too idiosyncratic to be restrained by any one party, and yet too able to be denied access to party politics. That he held ministerial rank under both a Unionist and a Liberal administration is a reflection of both his talents and his obtuseness. 


@@@@@


doc= 41200


Ware, Henry (d. 1420), administrator and bishop of Chichester, was from Wales, almost certainly from Glamorgan, where he had his earliest preferment (as a canon of Llandaff by May 1394 and as rector of Marcross by 1398) and other personal contacts. Even in his will he asked for an 'old bible' to be returned to Margam Abbey, and left vestments to St Buruoc's, Barry. He referred there also to a brother and 'poor kinsfolk', and to his sister, Margaret, who married one John Hayward; the latter may be the man of that name who, like Ware, sought patronage from Lady Despenser, a leading influence in south Wales. Despite this apparent relative lack of advantage in life, Ware was an MA of Oxford by 1399, in fact necessarily some while before, because he was a licentiate in both laws by late 1401; he never took a doctorate. 
Ware's career was twofold. He was a notary public by 30 July 1398 and still on 28 February 1402, when witnessing an 'actum' by Archbishop Arundel at Lambeth. In June 1402 he received preferment from the archbishop, for whom he was evidently working by now, being identified as the scribe of his 'acta' in 1405, and was soon sitting over legal disputes in the diocese on Arundel's behalf. By July 1408 he was official of the court of Canterbury, and announced on behalf of a committee of the Canterbury convocation that the English church would promote the ending of the papal schism more urgently. He was still official on 25 September 1413 when he was on the tribunal which would try the heretic Sir John Oldcastle, was retained during the vacancy in the see in 1414, and was still in office under Archbishop Chichele in November 1415 and February 1416. From 20 August 1414 Bishop Philip Repyndon appointed him to supervise probate of all wills in the Lincoln diocese and used him in a heresy case in May 1415 and to confirm a hospital election in August 1416. 
Meanwhile he had been included in embassies to France as early as 2 February-2 May 1400 and 11 July-2 October 1401, but this sort of work did not continue. From 3 November 1407, however, he was appointed several times to hear appeals from the court of admiralty or military courts. On 1 July 1412 he was living in the parish of St James Garlickhythe in London, and on 20 December 1413 he was exempted from the king's order to Welsh people to go home. On 10 and 28 November 1414 he was appointed to the crucial, large-scale embassy to France, no doubt in some expert capacity, and served on this from 2 February to 2 May. From 11 July to 2 October 1414 he was in France again to develop aspects of these ultimately fruitless peace talks. On 24 July 1415 he was appointed an executor of Henry V's will. 
On 11 September 1416 Ware became keeper of the privy seal, a prominent example of Henry V's use of Canterbury men to staff his embryonic parallel administrations in England and France. He was something of a surprise choice, his not being among the names that had been bandied around, but the author of the 'Gesta Henrici quinti' thought the king had done well to identify 'a man held in high respect' and 'of considerable repute' in the court of Canterbury (p. 159). Among all the many customary duties Ware received the oaths of John, duke of Burgundy, and his son, Philip, before their interview with Henry V on 2 October 1416; was a delegate from the council to the convocation of Canterbury to seek a subsidy on 18 November 1416; and was appointed to treat for peace with France on 12 March 1417 and for truces with Burgundy on 24 April and 23 July that year, proroguing this truce on 5 December. Some reversion to his original trade came with his service, unheard of by such a high officer of state, as vicar-general for Bishop Richard Clifford in the London diocese between 17 November 1417 and late April 1418; the administration had become badly unhorsed during the bishop's unpredictably delayed return from the continent and perhaps Ware, as the most experienced administrator in the southern province, felt obliged to seize the reins. Likewise he had found time to help arbitrate a dispute between the bishop and cathedral of Ely. 
Ware had always been unusually underendowed with preferment and held no dignities at all. The crown had given him just the rectory of Tring, Hertfordshire, on 14 May 1414. On 28 February 1418 royal consent was given to his election to the see of Chichester, to which he was papally provided on 6 April. Even this was only moderate reward for a keeper of the privy seal. He secured the temporalities on 13 May, and was consecrated at Pont de l'Arche in Normandy on 17 July. His episcopal register has not survived, but it is known that John Blunham, precentor of the cathedral, was his vicar-general during his absences. The bishop had been preparing since 12 April 1418 to go abroad, being appointed to supervise the muster of various retinues on 16 April, a familiar role for any senior administrator treading the same path. Thus he joined the royal expedition in Normandy, being appointed to array retinues before Louviers on 9 June and to serve in the major embassy under Chichele and the earls of Warwick and Salisbury to treat with the dauphin on 26 October. He had resigned the privy seal on 21 September, presumably because he would be preoccupied in France. Ware was appointed to join in further important talks on 22 January (at Vienne) and 8 March 1419, and to muster the duke of Clarence's force on the 27th. He evidently returned to England shortly afterwards. He attended convocation in October, and he is known to have been in Chichester on 10 December 1419. However, apart from being appointed on 13 April 1420 to supervise the muster of the duke of Bedford's force before it left, he had undertaken no more formal business for either the crown or the Canterbury province since his return to England. It is likely that such an abrupt retirement at this time of intense royal administrative activity denotes a failure of health. He made his will on 7 July 1420 as a very sick man, and had died, probably in England, by the 23rd. He was buried, as requested, in the cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 41201


White, William (d. 1428), priest and Lollard heretic, was of unknown origins. There is no indication of the date of his birth, and no clear evidence that he studied at a university. On 6 July 1422, described as a chaplain, he was brought before the convocation of Canterbury province at the summons of Archbishop Henry Chichele (died 1443), accused of being strongly suspected of heresy, and of preaching in the parish church of Tenterden, Kent, without a licence. The proceedings revealed that he had already been imprisoned by the archbishop for the unlicensed preaching, and had been absolved by him from the excommunication incurred. He admitted the suspicion of heresy and abjured his errors. At some date he was allowed to return to Tenterden, as parish chaplain. His dissenting activities continued, principally in this same area of Kent, where he was a member, probably the leading figure, of a wide circle of Lollards. His activities were taken very seriously by Chichele. There are suggestions of a proposed Lollard uprising in the area in 1428 and White may have been one of the leaders, though this is hard to square with his subsequent profession of opposition to warfare. By 1426 at the latest he had also established himself as a Lollard evangelist in East Anglia. It would seem that he moved regularly between the two regions. He took as his wife a woman called Joan. 
Lollardy was probably established to a limited extent in East Anglia before White's arrival there. However, he and others working together, including several from Kent, much reinforced and probably enlarged heresy in the region, mainly in an area around the Waveney valley along the Norfolk-Suffolk boundary. He was a leading member of the group, possibly its dominant figure. As an itinerant teacher and evangelist he travelled round the houses of known Lollards, giving instruction and probably holding liturgical services in them. These 'schools and conventicles' were conducted in English and contributed to the development of a Lollard vocabulary. The home in Loddon of Thomas Mone, a well-to-do shoemaker, and his vigorous wife, Hawise, provided one base for his operations, neighbouring Bergh Apton another. 'A great saint in heaven and a most holy doctor ordained and sent by God' was how Margery Baxter of Martham ['see under 'Lollard women (act. c.1390-c.1520)], another provider of hospitality, described him (Tanner, 47). He wrote various books and tracts, though none of them survives. 
When Archbishop Chichele sought to arrest suspected heretics in his diocese in the summer of 1428, White was among those who eluded his grasp, with the help of supporters like Baxter. Shortly afterwards, however, he was captured and brought to trial by the bishop of Norwich, William Alnwick (died 1449). The trial, which took place in the chapel of the bishop's palace in Norwich on 13 September, was something of a show-piece, with numerous clerics in attendance, and it attests to his reputation. Thomas Netter (died 1430), prior provincial of the English Carmelites, who was one of those present, described him as a 'great satrap' and 'vassal' of John Wyclif (died 1384), a 'doctor' and 'great satellite' of the Wycliffites (Netter, 'Doctrinale', 3, cols. 412, 630, and 795-6). He defended himself with honesty and subtlety, admitting some charges, denying some, and in other cases drawing distinctions. His beliefs lay on the more radical wing of Wycliffism and there is a force and originality of his own. He was forthright in his insistence on the right, indeed the advisability, of priests to marry. Regarding the eucharist, he denied transubstantiation and was accused of substituting for the mass a memorial service of Christ's passion presided over by a layman, a charge he denied. Notable too is the social content of his doctrine: he rejected capital punishment and the lawfulness of war. 
The charges admitted by White were sufficient to secure his condemnation. As a relapsed heretic he was handed over to the civic authorities of Norwich for punishment. Accordingly, shortly afterwards, he was executed in the city by being burnt at the stake, together with his Lollard colleagues Hugh Pye, formerly chaplain of Loddon, and the layman John (or William) Waddon, who had been condemned in separate trials somewhat earlier. Margery Baxter, who was present at his execution, said that he tried to preach to the people as he was about to be put to death, but one of the bishop's officials struck him on the mouth to prevent this. 
White was a major figure in early fifteenth-century Lollardy. His influence may have spread wider than Kent and East Anglia, though there is no clear evidence to this effect. Links with the west country, for example, were quite possibly made through a priest called Thomas Bikenore and his written works may have had a wide circulation. In East Anglia his impact was striking, though his teachings lost some of their refinement when received by less educated people. To what extent it persisted after the prosecutions conducted by Bishop Alnwick in the diocese of Norwich between 1428 and 1431 is unclear. In the Tenterden area of Kent, too, his influence was marked. In this case, however, current knowledge of well-established Lollard communities in the same area in the early sixteenth century provides stronger evidence that his memory endured. 


@@@@@


doc= 41202


Voorst, John Van (1804-1898), natural history publisher, was born on 15 February 1804 at Highbury, Middlesex, the son of John and Elizabeth Van Voorst; the family was of Dutch descent but had been settled in England for several generations. Apprenticed to Richard Nicholls of Wakefield from 1820 to 1826 before joining the old publishing house of Longman, Green, Orme, Hurst & Co., Van Voorst commenced publishing at 3 (afterwards 1) Paternoster Row, London, in 1833. His list of titles began with illustrated reprints, the earliest notable being Gray's 'Elegy in a Country Church-Yard' and Goldsmith's 'Vicar of Wakefield', before moving on to the specialized sphere of natural history works. Among his illustrators were John Constable, William Mulready, Richard Westall, and Edwin Landseer, all of the Royal Academy, together with Copley Fielding, George Cattermole, W. Dickes, John Thompson, Sam Williams, Stothard, and DeWint. 
Van Voorst was not afraid to take risks in the cause of science. With his intense interest and knowledge of scientific practice he published many zoological and botanical treatises in English which have become classical works. An acquaintance of T. H. Huxley and friend of Richard Thomas Lowe, his name became synonymous with good quality printing combined with fine illustrations. He printed works of natural history ranging from the well known, such as Yarrell's 'British Fishes' and Gosse's 'Naturalist's Rambles', to less pretentious popular works such as the treatises 'Earthworm and Housefly' and the 'Honey Bee', by Samuelson and Hicks. He published at least one work by each of the foremost nineteenth-century naturalists except Darwin, the quality of his publications attracting the likes of Thomas Bell, Philip Henry Gosse, George Johnston, Edward Forbes, Frederick Apthorp Paley, Edward Newman, Charles Spence Bate, John Obediah Westwood, Richard Owen, and David Thomas Ansted, among many others. A list of works dated 1871 comprised 224 current titles of books or learned journals of which 63 per cent were on the subject of natural history. 
An astute businessman, Van Voorst successfully used Dickens's ploy of issuing works in regular parts or classified and sold in sets, as in the sixty-two volumes of 'The Natural History of the British Islands'; in later years he innovatively experimented with the use of photographs mounted on the page, as in Courtauld's 'Ferns of the British Isles'. He was appointed bookseller to the Zoological Society in 1837 and published 'The Ibis' from 1865. Elected a fellow of the Linnean Society on 15 March 1853, he was also a founding fellow of the Royal Microscopical Society, which was established on 20 December 1839, later holding the rank of senior fellow for many years. 
Van Voorst's main attributes were that of pioneer publisher, a benefactor of biological and related literature, and in associating and establishing artistic execution with science. The realization that beautiful illustration by eminent artists and engravers enhanced learned books of good quality, sold at a reasonable price, kept Van Voorst at the top of his profession for sixty years. Retiring from business in December 1886 without son or heir, he passed on his business to his assistants Messrs Gurney and Jackson. An active retirement enabled Van Voorst still to maintain his interest in the next generation of naturalists until his death at Utrecht House, Clapham Park, London, on 24 July 1898 at the grand age of ninety-four. 


@@@@@


doc= 41208


Lowther, Sir Gerard Augustus, baronet (1858-1916), diplomatist, was born at Ampthill Park, Bedfordshire, on 16 February 1858, the second son of William Lowther (1821-1912), diplomatist and politician, and his wife, Charlotte Alice (died 1908), daughter of Sir James Parke (later Lord Wensleydale), judge. The Lowther family had long been powerful landowners in the north-west. His father, who was brother of the third earl of Lonsdale, had served at Berlin, among other diplomatic postings; Conservative MP for Westmorland and for Appleby from 1868 to 1892, he had built an impressive house in Kensington (Lowther Lodge). His elder brother was James William Lowther, first Viscount Ullswater, speaker of the House of Commons from 1905 until 1921. A younger brother, (Henry) Cecil, was a general in the Scots Guards and had been a military attache earlier in his career. 
Lowther was educated at Harrow School and entered the diplomatic service in 1879. He first went to Madrid, where he was promoted from attache to third secretary in 1881 and transferred to Paris. Three years after this he was sent as second secretary to Constantinople, for the greater part of his time there serving under Sir William White. It fell to Lowther's lot to be superintendent of the Levant service student interpreters installed at the small school at Ortakoy on the lower Bosphorus. It was here that he first encountered -- and was impressed by -- Gerald Fitzmaurice. This made the young Irishman an exception, for Lowther, who was powerfully built and had the habits of a country gentleman as well as the self-confidence of his class, was in general dismayed by the 'extreme nervousness' and poor physique of the middle-class boys who had gained entry to the Levant service through the new system of open competition (Berridge, 'Fitzmaurice', 10). 
At the beginning of 1891 Lowther was transferred to Vienna from where in quick succession he was temporarily sent to take charge for short periods at Bucharest and Sofia. In October 1894, however, he was promoted to be secretary of legation at Tokyo, arriving at an eventful period, for the Sino-Japanese War had just broken out; moreover, in the following May he found himself in charge of the mission, for his minister, Le Poer Trench, had fallen ill. With no previous experience of the Far East and British relations with Japan cool (the legation was under police surveillance), Lowther was out of his depth: 'he never understood or appreciated the people', wrote Valentine Chirol privately some years later (Chirol to Lloyd, 'c'.Aug. 1908, CAC Cam., GLLD 7/3). Fortunately, Ernest Satow arrived as the new minister at the end of July 1895. Lowther remained in Japan for four years, in 1897 once more serving as charge d'affaires. 
In October 1898 Lowther was appointed consul-general at Budapest but in less than a year commenced an interlude in the Americas. First he was sent as secretary of embassy to Washington, serving there for five months as charge d'affaires in 1901, and being something of a success on the social scene, especially at Newport, Rhode Island, where the embassy withdrew during the summer; then in August he was appointed minister to Chile, where he remained until the end of 1904. He was made CB in that year. On 28 February 1905 his American period was fittingly capped when he married, at All Saints', Knightsbridge, Alice (died 1939), daughter of the Philadelphia lawyer Atherton Blight, who had a residence at Newport and a taste for life at Cannes. In 1906 a strong rumour surfaced in the United States that Lowther was to be the new ambassador in Washington, where, according to a newspaper report, he had earlier made many friends. The speculation proved unfounded. 
Following his marriage Lowther departed for Morocco, where he was appointed consul-general as well as minister. After arriving in Tangier in the middle of April 1905 he found himself -- as in Tokyo a decade earlier -- in a crisis that had just broken out. In fact he arrived just two weeks after the surprise visit by the kaiser designed to challenge the British-supported ambitions of France in Morocco. Lowther's good work at Tangier, including his contribution to following up the Algeciras conference in early 1906, was rewarded by his creation as KCMG in June 1907. 
It seems to have occurred to no one in the British embassy in Constantinople that the successor to their chief, Sir Nicholas O'Conor, who died in March 1908, might be Sir Gerard Lowther, and Gerald Fitzmaurice, by now the influential chief dragoman, lobbied hard for Maurice de Bunsen. Nevertheless, Lowther had plenty of 'Oriental' experience, and was believed to have shown the ability and high standards of conduct of his family; he was a safe pair of hands. When, therefore, at the instigation of the powerful permanent under-secretary at the Foreign Office, Sir Charles Hardinge, Lowther's name was announced, Fitzmaurice was content. It is true that he recalled him as stout, placid, and rather indolent, and wondered in a letter to George Lloyd whether the Foreign Office would 'put enough pitch under his tail to keep him going for a decade in this capital' (3 June 1908, CAC Cam., GLLD 7/3). Nevertheless, he thought that he was a straightforward, level-headed, no-nonsense sort of person, and thus a vast improvement on O'Conor. He felt he would get on well with him, and he did. 
As the new representative of the leading 'liberal' nation in Europe, Lowther, now also sworn of the privy council, received a rapturous popular welcome when he arrived in Constantinople at the end of July 1908. This was because he arrived shortly after the Young Turks' revolution -- in the name of constitutionalism and equal rights for all groups within the Ottoman empire -- had effectively overthrown the autocratic regime of the sultan and caliph, Abdul Hamid II. Inevitably, however, it was not long before this honeymoon came to an end. Encouraged by Fitzmaurice, and exhibiting the usual prejudices of his class, Lowther became suspicious of the influential Jewish presence among the Young Turks, and of their predilection for manipulating the new constitutional regime from behind the scenes by secret methods learned in the long years of opposition to Abdul Hamid, including meetings in Masonic lodges. Indeed Lowther soon concluded that one autocracy had simply been replaced by another, and without the saving graces of the former, notably respect for native traditions. In short, the brash Young Turks had not only thrown out the Old Turks' baby with the Hamidian bathwater, but replaced the latter with their own. Accordingly, Lowther believed, it was prudent to avoid over-committing to them. 
In April 1909 Lowther gave discreet support to a counter-revolution against the Young Turk-supported regime. His support for the counter-revolution was not obvious to the outside world, but was within Turkey. When the counter-revolution failed, the Germans were able slowly to rebuild at the expense of the British the position they had lost in 1908, and in London his judgement was called into question. In consequence he had to endure some barbed and patronizing advice from Hardinge, who, like the foreign secretary, Sir Edward Grey, was under pressure from parliament to be more sympathetic to the Young Turks, and was now regretting the support he had given Lowther's appointment. Hardinge's advice included the suggestion that the ambassador might need additional secret service money to find out what was actually going on. 
In the merry-go-round of Turkish politics over the following years, Lowther was never able to shake off the view that he was too much identified with the opposition to the Young Turks. As far as the Foreign Office was concerned, therefore, his fate was effectively sealed when the ruthless and charismatic Young Turk leader Enver Bey overthrew the government of the Anglophile Kiamil Pasha in the coup of January 1913, and thereafter consolidated the regime that took Turkey into the First World War in November 1914 on the side of Germany. He also suffered increasingly from ill health. In April 1913, therefore, Grey decided that he would have to be recalled. In early July he left Constantinople, and on 1 September he retired from the diplomatic service. 
In the Foreign Office Lowther was seen as a failure in his last post but this judgement was a shade too harsh: he was to some extent another ambassadorial scapegoat. The political situation in Turkey was almost always fluid and extremely difficult to predict, while British policy on Ottoman questions and the new entente with Russia, Turkey's traditional enemy, did not give him an easy hand to play; neither did the military magnet exerted on the Young Turks by Germany. In the circumstances Lowther was an adequate helmsman in Constantinople, colliding with the odd rock in white water but never fatally; and generally steering a safe course in spite of the vacillating directions he sometimes received from home. He was also loyal to his staff, not least his 'alter ego', Fitzmaurice. 
Lowther had been promoted GCMG in 1911, and was made a baronet in January 1914. He died of cerebral thrombosis and cerebral degeneration on 5 April 1916 at Whitehall, Sandwich Bay, Worth, Kent, and was buried at Campsea Ashe, Suffolk. His wife and their two daughters survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 41209


Fitzmaurice, Gerald Henry (1865-1939), diplomatist, was born on 15 July 1865 in Howth, co. Dublin, the son of Henry Fitzmaurice, commercial agent, and his wife, Margaret, 'nee' McKenny. His father was a Kerryman from a minor branch of the much wealthier Petty-Fitzmaurice family. His mother came from a Howth family with interests in the public house and hotel business. Fitzmaurice was educated and trained for the priesthood at the French College on Dublin Bay, which was run by the Holy Ghost Fathers, but for reasons that are unclear decided not to be a priest. Instead, in January 1888, he entered the open competition for the Levant consular service, passed fourth out of twenty-six candidates, and on 30 June was appointed a student interpreter at Constantinople. 
Fitzmaurice was the star pupil of his intake at the Levant service training school at Ortakoy on the lower Bosphorus, and soon acquired a remarkable knowledge of colloquial Turkish. After graduating (first) and spending over a year in the dragomanate of the British embassy in Constantinople, his first provincial postings were in the eastern extremities of Asiatic Turkey. Now a political consul -- reporting on developments and trying to promote what would now be called 'good governance' -- between 1891 and 1893 he covered for officers on leave at Van, Erzurum, and then Trebizond. In these posts Fitzmaurice, who remained a devout Roman Catholic throughout his life, observed with dismay the increasing troubles of the Armenian Christians. In October 1894 he returned to the embassy as acting third dragoman but was soon bored by the trivial tasks to which he was largely condemned. He was then given the post of vice-consul at the important consulate-general in Smyrna, of which from May until September 1895 he was in charge. 
In the winter of 1895-6 massacres of Armenians achieved such a scale that in certain towns, notably Birecik, some seemed to have converted to Islam in order to save their lives; here, too, the church had become a mosque. Attempting to deflect the anger of Europe, the sultan, Abdul Hamid II, in January 1896 invited the British ambassador to nominate someone to join a palace commission of inquiry, and Fitzmaurice was chosen. Such work was not for the faint-hearted, and some embassy colleagues felt that he was being sent to his 'certain death' (Hohler, 11). Nevertheless, he survived unscathed and his conclusions were not surprising: the conversions were obviously forced and a new commission should proceed to Birecik to establish the confidence that reconversions would require. Inevitably, he was chosen to join it. 
Fitzmaurice judged that the palace had inspired the Armenian massacres, and convinced many to this view who had hitherto given Abdul Hamid the benefit of the doubt. The obvious dangers of his second mission were not reduced when, on the eve of his departure in early June 1896, his descriptions of the massacres were included in a blue book laid before parliament. The embassy was alarmed and repeatedly pressed the palace to provide him with an adequate escort. By early July it was clear that the new commission had made remarkable progress. Fitzmaurice secretly persuaded the forced converts to declare themselves once more Christians, and the church in Birecik was returned to Christianity. Shortly afterwards his fellow commissioners reluctantly agreed to accompany him to the neighbouring villages and thence to Urfa, where the process of reconversion was repeated. 
Fitzmaurice was warmly praised for his efforts on the Birecik commission, which established his reputation both in the embassy and the Foreign Office as someone who had special insight into the workings of the Ottoman empire and could also deal successfully with its officials in the most difficult circumstances; his skill as a raconteur added to his popularity. In June 1897 he was made CMG. Though formally only third dragoman (he had been given the substantive rank in January), everyone regarded him as second, and in 1900 he would have been made chief dragoman had the incumbent, Adam Block, succeeded in his application for another post. There was mutual antipathy between Block and Fitzmaurice, for whom the drudgery of juniors' work in the dragomanate added to his unhappiness, and he now sought escape. Accordingly, Sir Nicholas O'Conor, who had been ambassador since 1898, soothed him with release to provincial posts for short periods and then with another special mission. 
There had periodically been friction along the vague frontier between the Ottoman 'vilayet' of Yemen and the Aden protectorate (then part of British India), and by late 1902 the Anglo-Turkish commission appointed a year earlier to demarcate it had made no progress. At this dangerous point Fitzmaurice was sent to stiffen the commission's British component, his instructions from O'Conor being to produce peacefully a quick settlement that would nevertheless preserve the British position, that is perform a diplomatic miracle. In the event it was not until April 1905, largely as a result of Fitzmaurice's untiring efforts (aided by his rapidly improving Arabic) that the frontier was finally delimited. Unfortunately, in the process he had initially upset the peevish O'Conor by agreeing with the Indian government on the need for a credible threat of force; had nevertheless had furious rows with the politically unsubtle Aden resident, General Maitland; and, living for the whole time under canvas until Perim Island was reached, had suffered from bouts of fever that permanently damaged his health. No one was pleased with the time taken and costs involved in the Aden affair. In consequence, though on returning to London on long leave in July 1905 Fitzmaurice found that he had been made CB, he did not get the Indian honour to which he also believed himself entitled. Worse still, he had been passed over for chief dragoman on Block's departure in 1903; O'Conor could not afford to release him from the Aden frontier at that juncture and had not been straight with him about it. He was still third dragoman, and at the beginning of 1906 returned to his 'Byzantine dungheap' nourishing a burning hatred of his chief. 
In August 1905 Fitzmaurice had been given the paltry consolation of a consular commission, and in July 1906 he finally became 'de jure' as well as 'de facto' second dragoman when Hugo Marinitch retired. It was, however, in the position of tutor and friend to the embassy's younger secretaries and honorary attaches, among them Percy Loraine, Mark Sykes, Aubrey Herbert, and above all George Lloyd, that Fitzmaurice -- who never married -- found more valuable consolations. By now in his early forties, he was short in build but had a large head and a strong, bony face with a hooked nose, deep-set blue eyes, and a fashionably drooping moustache. Perhaps his most striking feature, however, was his red hair. In his native Ireland this would have been called foxy and it is probably in part for this reason, in part because of the reputation for stealth and cunning of the fox (in Turkish 'tilki'), that Fitzmaurice always referred to the private fraternity and outlook he shared with his young proteges as 'tilkidom'. They were his 'yavri tilkis' (young foxes); Fitzmaurice was the 'bash tilki' (chief fox). 
In October 1907 O'Conor finally made Fitzmaurice chief dragoman, and in the following May he was given the local rank of first secretary in the diplomatic service. This inaugurated the long period in which he dominated the outlook of the British embassy in Constantinople, the more so because the ambassador died in the following March and Sir Gerard Lowther, who arrived to replace him shortly after the Young Turks' revolution in July 1908, proved a particularly good pupil. 
Like the Foreign Office, Fitzmaurice welcomed the eclipse of Abdul Hamid and the German influence linked to him, but it was not long before he was adopting a critical tone towards the Young Turks' Committee of Union and Progress (CUP). The 'children', as he routinely called them in his private letters, were too chauvinistic, too clumsy, and too secretive in their style of government. Controlled, he believed, by freemasons and Russophobic Jews, they were in the process of throwing out the Old Turks' baby (including the caliphate) with the Hamidian bathwater. Older, wiser, and more moderate heads were needed to lead the revolution and Britain should not commit itself too closely to the CUP. 
Lowther was easily persuaded to Fitzmaurice's view and when the committee ousted the veteran, pro-English grand vizier, Kiamil Pasha, the embassy gave discreet encouragement to the counter-revolution of April 1909. This failed and Fitzmaurice was accused by CUP supporters in London and Constantinople of being not just a reactionary schemer but one whose poor judgement had thrown away the great opportunity to replace German with British influence in Turkey. In reply he denied that the embassy had taken sides, maintaining in any case that he was just old regime rather than reactionary, though the subtlety of this distinction was lost on most of his hearers. As to encouraging Germany's comeback, this was exaggerated: recent events had simply brought to the surface the strong German leaven in the army. 
With the stout support of Lowther and influential friends like William Tyrrell and George Lloyd, Fitzmaurice weathered this crisis, though from now on he was a marked man as far the CUP was concerned. This was obvious in London and the foreign secretary, Sir Edward Grey, began to think that perhaps he was becoming more of a liability than an asset. It was as well, therefore, that he was permitted to start a long leave in June 1911 and then sent on another special mission. 
Early in December 1911 Fitzmaurice was sent as acting consul-general to the Ottoman 'vilayet' of Tripoli, which had been invaded by Italy in September and where the anti-Italian attitude of the consul-general, Justin Alvarez, was causing embarrassment to the Foreign Office. Britain could not condone Italy's unashamed land-grab, but at the same time did not wish to cement its participation in the triple alliance by seeming to condemn it. Fitzmaurice's task was difficult because Alvarez was his senior in the Levant service and they were old acquaintances; it was some time, therefore, before he could be persuaded to go. Meanwhile Fitzmaurice smoothed things over with the Italians, while sending the Foreign Office some sardonic despatches on their slow military progress. He returned to Constantinople in July 1912, only to be confronted in October with the outbreak of the First Balkan War. 
Fitzmaurice, who was an admirer of the Bulgarians and hoped to see Turkey driven out of Europe altogether, relished the initial victories of the Balkan League and in early November expected to have to accompany the Turkish government in fleeing Constantinople before its advancing armies. Instead the Turks managed to hold out on the Chatalja lines and he found himself instead successfully facilitating the direct talks between Turkey and the Balkan League that he hoped would ratify the new balance of power. This was his last major contribution to Ottoman affairs because in January 1913 a particularly ruthless version of CUP government came to power and a discreet campaign for his recall began. Moreover in the summer Lowther was recalled, and in October replaced by Sir Louis Mallet, who was more sympathetic to the German as well as CUP point of view. Though at first Mallet found Fitzmaurice indispensable, by February 1914 a combination of CUP pressure and worsening health finally forced his retreat from Constantinople, to which he never returned. 
With the outbreak of war between Britain and Germany, which Fitzmaurice had always predicted, and Turkey's decision for the central powers, which he had always feared, Fitzmaurice's stock in London had recovered -- and with it his health. He was now employed on the work for which he had special talent, political warfare. 
Fitzmaurice was an early supporter of the idea of an Arab revolt and in December 1914 supported Sir Henry McMahon in discussions on this in Paris. Early in the following year he was loaned to naval intelligence, whose director, Captain Reginald Hall, was an ardent admirer, and ordered to the Balkans with two fellow agents. Their task: to orchestrate the overthrow of the Turkish government and thus the peaceful passage of the Dardanelles by the Anglo-French fleet. At this point Lord Fisher, the first sea lord, believed Fitzmaurice to be 'the most important person in the Eastern Theatre of the War' (W. R. Hall's autobiography, CAC Cam.). Hall's scheme foundered on the promise of Constantinople to Russia and Churchill's misplaced belief in naval success, so the focus of Fitzmaurice's Balkan mission shifted. With the local rank of first secretary at the legation in Sofia, he was instructed by Grey either to enlist Bulgaria to the entente or at least keep it neutral. For this purpose Fitzmaurice, now living in real danger of assassination by German agents, was authorized to spend up to $2.5 million. This was another hopeless task and at Lemnos in April Fitzmaurice failed to persuade the British commanders to postpone further operations at the Dardanelles until the Bulgarians could be brought in; it was clear that they wanted not cash bribes but firm guarantees of territory, in the competition to provide which Britain, to Fitzmaurice's disgust, could not compete with Germany. He left Sofia in October 1915, shortly before Britain declared war on Bulgaria. 
In November 1915 the Foreign Office's loan of Fitzmaurice to naval intelligence was formalized but there remained a feeling in Whitehall that his talents were wasted in Admiralty Old Building and numerous schemes were devised to bring him back into action. For various reasons, however, he became a nearly man: nearly the negotiator in Switzerland of the formal abdication of the Egyptian khedive (1916); nearly a further recruit to the Arab Bureau in Cairo (later in 1916); nearly consul-general in Moscow following the Bolshevik revolution (1918); and nearly political adviser to General Bridges in Bulgaria (later in 1918). What he did do -- prompted not just by the 'realpolitik' of the time but by a long-held attachment to secular Zionism -- was to help his old friend Sir Mark Sykes prepare the ground for the Balfour declaration of November 1917, and then to scupper the idea of a separate peace between Britain and Turkey. 
At the time of the armistice between Britain and Turkey in October 1918 Fitzmaurice was still formally chief dragoman. However, the Turks had dropped a strong hint that it would be unfortunate if he returned to Constantinople, which probably confirmed a decision already taken. In 1919 he was transferred from the Admiralty to the Foreign Office's news and political intelligence department. In the following year this was being run down and neither of the other jobs offered to him was suitable. With his health impaired and anxious no longer to block the promotion of his friend, Andrew Ryan, the second dragoman, on 1 January 1921 he retired. He had received no further honours since 1905, though those ranking with him in the Levant service had either been knighted already or would be before long. He was only fifty-five years old. 
In retirement Fitzmaurice remained discreet about his career and refused to write his memoirs. He devoted much time to working for boys' clubs and seamen's homes in the East End of London, living in 'cheerless private hotels' (Bullard, 64), though finding warm friendship and a good audience for his stories on Sunday afternoons in the Pimlico home of the Irish Nationalist MP John Pius Boland. He died as the result of cerebral thrombosis and arteriosclerosis at 29 Devonshire Street, Marylebone, London, on 23 March 1939 and was buried at Kensal Green. 
Gerald Fitzmaurice was a classic example of what Wicquefort called a 'minister of the second order', a man who did the kind of thing with which ambassadors could not risk personal involvement. Fitzmaurice had unconquerable fear neither of political nor physical risk, and had strong political views (he was an ardent believer in tariff reform and saw no tension between moderate Irish nationalism and British imperialism). The result was that the British embassy in Turkey, weakly led for most of his time and used too much as a training school for the diplomatic aristocracy, had good reason to be grateful to him. So, too, did many British companies, not to mention, of course, thousands of Armenians and, ironically enough, Jews -- and even many Turks. Naturally he was guilty of misjudgements, and seems to have come to believe too much in his own propaganda about the conspiracy of Jewish freemasons behind the Young Turks. Nevertheless, he remained, as was often said of him, a remarkable man: clear-headed, ruthless, persuasive, and full of energy, a Lenin of diplomacy. The elite Levant service produced numerous outstanding men. Fitzmaurice of Constantinople, as it came to know him, or the Wizard of Stamboul, as he sometimes jokingly described himself, was probably the greatest. 


@@@@@


doc= 41210


Bennett, William Henry (1855-1920), Congregational minister and biblical scholar, was born on 22 May 1855 at 1 Conduit Street, Paddington, London, the son of William Emmanuel Bennett, draper, and his wife, Emily Brice. He was educated at the City of London School under E. A. Abbott, and proceeded to Lancashire Independent college, Manchester, in 1873. Although a near contemporary at the college, J. P. Kingsland, recalled Bennett's kindly disposition, he also remarked upon 'the extreme difficulty he experienced in writing a sermon for Sermon Class. I have often wondered whether he succeeded later in writing a passable sermon!' (Kingsland, 176). There was clearly some improvement, for at his death Bennett was remembered by a friend as one who spoke 'home to the conscience and to the heart', though another noted that 'his pulpit style was not what the ordinary congregation regarded as popular' ('Manchester Guardian', 28 Aug 1920). While in Manchester, Bennett graduated from the University of London with second-class honours in mathematics in 1875 and an MA in that subject in 1876. From 1878 to 1882 he was at St John's College, Cambridge, on leave from Lancashire College. He gained his Cambridge BA with first-class honours in the theological tripos in 1882, and proceeded MA in 1885. He won a number of prizes and was elected a fellow of his college, the first Free Churchman to be thus honoured in Cambridge. In 1902 he became LittD of Cambridge as well as DD at the University of Aberdeen, where the ceremony was somewhat disturbed by younger graduands. 
Meanwhile, in 1884, Bennett had been appointed professor of Hebrew, church history and 'New Testament' at Rotherham Independent college, and on 31 March 1885 he married Annie, daughter of R. J. Wibley, grocer, of Market Hill and Hurst, Cambridge, at Victoria Road Congregational Church, Cambridge. They had two daughters. While at Rotherham, Bennett lectured in Hebrew at Firth College, the predecessor of the University of Sheffield, and from 1888 to 1913 he was professor of 'Old Testament' exegesis at Hackney College, London, assuming in addition the identical role at New College, London, from 1891. Recalling his own appointment to New College, A. E. Garvie described Bennett as 'the soul of magnanimity in welcoming and working with me as Principal for some years', remarking that 'on the Senate of London University he surprised many as a 'man of affairs'' (Garvie, 230-31). Bennett served as dean of the faculty of theology, and as examiner to the universities of London, Wales, Manchester, and Bristol. Garvie further considered that the demands of the principalship of Lancashire Independent college, which, on the retirement of Walter F. Adeney, Bennett accepted in 1913, probably shortened his life; certainly the management of the college during the First World War imposed added burdens upon him. 
Bennett enjoyed excellent relations with colleagues and students alike, though he never courted popularity and could be self-deprecating. When it was suggested to him that he might consider becoming principal of Mansfield College, Oxford, he replied, 'They need a popular preacher and a man of the world, and I am neither' ('British Weekly', 9 Sept 1920, 443). Modest himself, he knew how to prick the pretensions of the pompous. 
While at Hackney and at New colleges, Bennett collaborated with Adeney on 'The Bible Story Re-Told for Young People' (1897), 'A Biblical Introduction' (1899), and 'The Bible and Criticism' (1912). An example of Bennett's wry humour occurs in his introduction to the 1912 volume. In the wake of the 'Downgrade' controversy which was orchestrated by the Baptist C. H. Spurgeon, Bennett wrote, ''Higher Criticism' forms and expresses judgments as to the date, authorship, and mode of composition of a book. When Mr. Spurgeon expressed such judgments he was a 'Higher Critic'' (p. viii). In 1887, when the controversy was at its height, and in response to the 'British Weekly''s question, 'Are Nonconformists departing from the faith?', Bennett suggested that there were changes of terminology rather than of substance, and that for the most part nonconformists remained evangelical in doctrine. 
Bennett was the sole author of 'The Mishna as Illustrating the Gospels' (1884), and 'A Primer of the Bible' (1897). He contributed the volumes on 'Chronicles' (1894) and 'Jeremiah' 21-52 (1895) to the 'Expositor's Bible', those on 'Genesis' and 'Exodus' to the 'Century Bible', and 'Joshua', a new translation, illustrated and 'with colours exhibiting the composite structure of the book', to 'The Polychrome Bible' (1899). This was followed by 'Joshua and the Conquest of Palestine' (1904). In 1907 his 'Religion of the Post-Exilic Prophets' appeared. Here Bennett introduced the prophets in chronological order and then expounded their teaching in relation to the standard themes of dogmatics. While he admitted that a new reformation of theological thought, comparable with that of the sixteenth-century Reformation, was required, he considered that the scholarship of the time, both biblical and scientific, was too much in a state of flux for any such enterprise to succeed. In 1909 his 'Old Testament History' appeared, followed by 'The Moabite Stone' (1911), 'The Historical Value of the Old Testament' (1911), 'The Value of the Old Testament for To-Day' (1914), and (for young people) 'The Bible: its Place in the Christian Life' (1918). 
Though pre-eminently concerned with the 'Old Testament' (he was the first president of the Society for Old Testament Study, from 1917 to 1920), Bennett also published 'The Life of Christ According to St Mark' (1907), in which he sought to reproduce the impression of Christ which would be gained by a reader who had no other source of knowledge of Jesus than this gospel. Bennett also contributed the volume on the general epistles, 'James', 'Peter', 'John', and 'Jude', to the 'Century Bible', and published a pamphlet on 'The Congregational Churches' (1910). Among his other writings are articles in 'Encyclopaedia biblica', 'Encyclopaedia Britannica', 'Hastings Dictionary of the Bible', the 'Expositor's Bible', and chapters in 'Faith and Criticism' (1893) and 'Christianity and Civilization' (1910). Bennett died aged sixty-five on 27 August 1920 at Lancashire College, and was survived by his wife. 
Bennett was a 'believing critic': P. T. Forsyth described him as one who taught the 'Old Testament' in the spirit of the 'New'. Over and above his careful if not earth-shaking studies of biblical texts and themes, his contribution lay in keeping his head and helping others to find their feet in the wake of the 'higher criticism'. It is not wildly speculative to surmise that but for the work of scholars such as Bennett and his Manchester colleagues, the Wesleyan J. H. Moulton and the Primitive Methodist A. S. Peake, the reaction against biblical criticism and towards fundamentalist literalism would have been much stronger than it proved to be in Britain. The words with which Bennett and Adeney concluded the preface to their 'Biblical Introduction' epitomized their work as a whole: 'The authors of this volume trust that it may help its readers to a truer understanding of the sacred Scriptures, and to a fuller appreciation of their unique importance; and may confirm them in the evangelical recognition of the supreme authority of the 'Bible' as interpreted and applied by the Holy Spirit for the spiritual life. (Bennett and Adeney, 'Biblical Introduction', vii)' 



@@@@@


doc= 41211


Mansfield, Margaret, Lady Sandhurst (bap. 1827, d. 1892), women's suffragist and spiritualist, was the youngest of the seven children of Robert Fellowes (1779-1869) of Shotesham Park, Norfolk, and his second wife, Jane Louisa Sheldon (died 1871); his father also had a child from his first marriage. She was baptized at Tredington, Worcestershire, on 14 November 1827. On 2 November 1854 she married Lieutenant-Colonel William Rose Mansfield (1819-1876), who was knighted in 1858 and created Baron Sandhurst in 1871; they spent eleven years in India and had four sons and a daughter. 
After her husband's death in 1876 Lady Sandhurst became increasingly involved in both spiritualism and Liberal politics, which interests came together in 1884 when she played host to a private seance for the benefit of the prime minister, W. E. Gladstone. Gladstone commented that she had 'explained to me the spirit & purpose, wholly Christian & biblical, of her proceedings in this matter' (Gladstone, 'Diaries', 18 Nov 1884). From 1886 she was active in the Women's Liberal Federation, and in January 1889 she was the first woman elected to the London County Council, as member for Brixton. She was, however, unseated on petition in May, when the objection of her Conservative opponent, Beresford Hope (who maintained that, though empowered to vote in municipal elections, women were ineligible to serve as councillors), was upheld. In the same year she was given the freedom of the city of Dublin, in recognition of her sympathy towards Ireland. She died suddenly in London on 7 January 1892, at her home, 29 Park Road, Regent's Park, and was buried with her husband at Digswell, Hertfordshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 41213


McIlquham, Harriett (1837-1910), local politician and suffragist, was born on 8 August 1837 at 41 Brick Lane, Old Street, London, the daughter of Edward Medley, master baker, and Harriet Medley, 'nee' Sanders. She spent her early life in London, and was reared in a Unitarian family in an atmosphere conducive to freedom of thought. Encouraged to take an interest in public questions, she read advanced literature, attended lectures by eminent Victorian radicals, and, like other young women with a social conscience, turned to parish visiting. Her liberal upbringing and exposure to radical thought thus sowed the seeds of a life devoted to progressive social reform and the political emancipation of women. Upon marriage to James Henry McIlquham ('b'. 1832/3), surveyor to the Cheltenham improvement commissioners, on 23 September 1858, in the Finsbury Chapel, London, she moved to Gloucestershire, where she resided for the rest of her life. Their union produced two sons, Gilbert and Harold, and two daughters, Mary and Harriett. After an initial stay in Cheltenham, in 1869 Harriett purchased an estate at nearby Staverton, which she personally managed as a working farm. For the next forty years she gave her considerable energies to raising the children, managing the estate, and a life of public work that encompassed pioneering service in local government and a vigorous commitment to women's emancipation. 
McIlquham's initial encounter with women's suffrage occurred upon hearing George Jacob Holyoake lecture in 1856, and she was also present in the House of Commons when the first women's suffrage bill was talked out by opponents. Her main organizational activities centred on Gloucestershire: with Henry's assistance and support she assiduously promoted the issue at innumerable public meetings, and was a key member of the Cheltenham Women's Suffrage Society in later years. However, she also contributed to the great demonstrations of 1880-81 in both Birmingham and Bristol, working with activists such as Lilias Ashurst and Helen Blackburn. Her speaking gifts, and later her writings, helped to make her a national figure. The division in the suffrage movement in the 1880s over strategy saw her take a leading role in the formation of the London-based Women's Franchise League (WFL) in 1889, which was uncompromising in its insistence that every suffrage bill should specifically include married women; Harriett firmly believed that their exclusion would render coverture a statutory disability. Other members included Elizabeth Wolstenholme Elmy, a close friend, with whom she helped to establish the Women's Emancipation Union in 1892 after a split with the WFL, and shared an interest in reform of marriage and the divorce laws; her article 'Marriage: a just and honourable partnership' appeared in the 'Westminster Review' (157, April 1902). 
In the field of local government Harriett McIlquham was a true pioneer. In 1881 she was elected by a large majority as poor-law guardian for Boddington in the Tewkesbury Union, thus becoming the first married woman guardian in the country. Local government law 'vis-a-vis' the position of women was full of anomalies: although the clerk of the union refused to allow her to vote in respect of her own property because she was married, he none the less let her nomination go forward. When the result was contested, the Local Government Board ruled that on the question of the election of married women it saw no reason why Mrs McIlquham should not 'lead the way'. Many other women, married and unmarried, followed in her footsteps, although not until the 'Local Government Act' of 1894 were the rights of married women both to vote and serve enshrined in statute. Harriett continued to blaze a trail: she was subsequently appointed an overseer for the parish of Staverton, a unique position for a woman to hold, became the first chair of Staverton parish council in 1894, and served as returning officer at the second parish council election. She also acted as rural district councillor for Boddington, served on the Boddington and Staverton school board, and after the 1902 'Education Act' sat on the board of management of the education committee. In 1888 she was one of four women selected by campaigners to test the eligibility of women to sit on the new county councils: she stood unsuccessfully as an independent in the central ward of Cheltenham, which proved to be the only failure in a distinguished career in which she 'abundantly vindicated women's claim to a share in every branch of local government work' ('Cheltenham Chronicle'). 
In the 1890s Harriett McIlquham worked with other campaigners in the National Union of Women Workers, the Women's Local Government Society, and the Women's Emancipation Union, publishing under its aegis several pamphlets on the themes of women's work in local government and the franchise, such as 'Women's Enfranchisement: an Ancient Right, a Modern Need' ('c'.1892). A well-known figure at conferences, she read papers on suffrage, local government, and the poor law. She also contributed articles to the 'Westminster Review' and the 'Nineteenth Century', including a series of original and scholarly essays on the history of feminist writing, an example being 'Mary Astell: a seventeenth century advocate for women' ('Westminster Review', 149, April 1898). 
Harriett McIlquham remained an active radical in later life, embracing new ideas and new movements. She joined the Cheltenham branch of the Women's Freedom League, became a loyal supporter of the local Independent Labour Party, and was a leading light of the Cheltenham Ethical Society, for which she had prepared a paper only days before her death. She died of heart failure on 24 January 1910 at Staverton House and was buried three days later in Staverton parish church. Her life was marked by great generosity to friends and colleagues, and by a vigorous belief in the political emancipation of women. 


@@@@@


doc= 41214


Reeves, Magdalen Stuart (1865-1953), suffragist and socialist, was born on 24 December 1865 at Mudgee, New South Wales, the third of ten children of William Smoult Robison, a bank manager, and his wife, Mary, a literary and well-travelled relative of the Carr-Saunders family of Surrey. When Maud, as she was always known, was two years old, her parents migrated to Christchurch, New Zealand, an Anglican settlement founded on the colonizing principles of Edward Gibbon Wakefield. She was one of the first pupils at the new Christchurch High School for Girls. A 'keen and spirited' pupil, she developed a passion for the theatre. Tall and striking, with a handsome face, full red lips, dark eyes, and brown hair, Maud met her husband, William Pember Reeves (1857-1932), a journalist and politician eight years her senior, at a coming-out ball when she was nineteen. The son of a newspaper proprietor, who 'grew up an Englishman', Reeves was an ambitious -- if absent-minded -- politician whose vision for New Zealand was 'no slums and no poverty'. They married at Christchurch on 10 February 1885. 
Newly married, Maud acted, helped her mother-in-law in charitable works, and for three years was the lady editor of the weekly 'Canterbury Times', edited by her husband and owned by his father. The Reeves's first child, William, lived only a few hours. Their daughter Amber ['see 'White, Amber Blanco] was born in 1887. After the birth of her second daughter, Beryl, in 1889, Maud took the first part of a BA in French, mathematics, and English at Canterbury College (founded in 1873). In 1890 the family moved to Wellington, where William Reeves had been a radical member of the house of representatives since 1887. Maud's studies were abandoned for her duties as the wife of a minister and suffragism. She had been converted to women's suffrage by Julius Vogel, a former prime minister and friend of her husband. She had been president and founder of the women's section of the Christchurch Liberal Association. Education, she believed, would both convince women of the need to vote and civilize national debate. Although never a temperance advocate, she worked closely with Kate Sheppard, the Women's Christian Temperance Union's suffrage superintendent, and Ellen Ballance, the prime minister's wife, and she used her considerable charm to influence her husband's colleagues. In September 1893 New Zealand was the first country in the world to grant women the vote, and Maud chaired the first public meeting of enfranchised women in Christchurch on 11 October. 
In March 1896 William Reeves was appointed New Zealand agent-general in London. Maud followed him eagerly thither with the three children, Fabian having been born in December 1895. The Reeves immediately made friends with the Fabians, whose essays they had read and who admired Reeves's experience in government. They spent country weekends with the Webbs, Shaws, and Blands, working, bicycling, and talking. Maud joined the Women's Liberal Association, the Fabian Society in 1904, and the executive of the National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies in 1906. At Maud's instigation the Fabian Society's statement of its basic aims included a clause on equal citizenship in 1907, when she was elected, with Ethel Bentham and Marian Phillips, to the society's executive committee. The first meeting of the Fabian Women's Group, which she founded with Charlotte Wilson, the anarchist, was held in her Brunswick Gardens drawing-room early in 1908, after a winter of suffrage agitation. 
The Lambeth mothers' project, initiated by Maud, was prompted by the recognition that more infants died in the London slums than in Kensington or Hampstead. It asked 'How does a working man's wife bring up a family on 20s a week?', and from it sprang Maud's 'Round about a Pound a Week' (1913), one of the sharpest of the many works of Edwardian social observation. Forty-two families were selected from a lying-in hospital in Lambeth, London, to have weekly visits, medical examinations from Dr Ethel Bentham every two weeks, and 5's'. to be paid to the mother for extra nourishment for three months before the birth of the baby and for one year afterwards. The money came from private donations, and the mothers wrote down their weekly expenditure. Eight families withdrew because the husbands objected to this weekly scrutiny. Eight other mothers who could not read or write dictated their sums to their husbands or children. The verbatim accounts of the 'maternal manner of recollecting' -- 'Mr. G's wages was 19 bob out of that e took thruppons for es diner witch is not mutch e bein sutch a arty man' -- is one of the features of the book which is in part an ironic comment on class relations: Lambeth women, familiar with the habits of educated visitors, politely anticipated sitting in draughts, listening to the gospel of porridge, and being advised against marriage. 
Poverty, the book argued, and neither maternal ignorance nor degeneration, caused ill health and high mortality. Had the children of Lambeth been 'well housed, well fed, well clothed and well tended from birth' who knows what they would have become. Fabian women were would-be law makers. The state must cast off its 'masculine' guise and 'co-parent'. The individual not the family should be the economic unit, and the state should pay family endowment, train midwives, make burial 'a free and honourable public service', introduce a legal minimum wage, and build clean, light, roomy buildings at economic rents for the working classes. If socialism should address the needs of working mothers then women themselves must want more: 'If people living on $1 a week had lively imaginations, their lives, and perhaps the face of England, would be different.' 
Maud's own household was unorthodox. In 1900 Maud's favourite sister, Effie Lascelles, recently widowed, moved in with her two daughters. Amber remembered a house filled with children, relatives, servants, nursemaids, 'frightful rows' in the nursery, and her mother too busy to pay much attention to children. The Reeves marriage after the birth of Fabian was not intimate. William did not approve of birth control. The tensions in their marriage, H. G. Wells -- who until his affair with Amber was a close friend -- wrote, were about money and birth control. When Amber, then a student at Cambridge, became pregnant by H. G. Wells -- a public and political scandal -- Maud offended her daughter by suggesting an abortion. 
In March 1917 Maud was appointed director of women's services in the Ministry of Food, and in June 1917 Fabian died of wounds sustained during service in the First World War. Maud turned privately to spiritualism, and later to Higher Thought. From the early 1920s her participation in public life declined. She travelled to New Zealand with William in 1925, but while she had conversed with the London poor she had never met a Maori. She was a conscientious grandmother, and she nursed both William and her sister through their final illnesses. Amber described her mother as 'serious-minded' and 'obviously chaste to the last degree'. Her focus on the needs of others was as austere as her prose, but the unflinching eye for detail and clamour of voices in 'Round about a Pound a Week' dramatized both the 'almost intolerable conditions' of women's daily lives and Fabian feminism's response. After twenty-one years as a widow, having lived with her sister Effie in Cambridge, Maud died in a nursing home at 27 Powis Gardens, Golders Green, Middlesex, on 13 September 1953. 


@@@@@


doc= 41215


Hanbury, Richard (c.1535-1608), goldsmith and ironmaster, was born at Elmley Lovett, Worcestershire, the only son of John Hanbury of Elmley Lovett and his first wife, Elizabeth, daughter of John Brode of Dunclent, Worcestershire. He came of a long line of small landowners in Worcestershire. He married Alice (1538-1593), heir of Jasper Fisher, royal goldsmith to Queen Mary, on 28 April 1560. They had two daughters and lived first in Goldsmiths' Row, in the City of London, and later at Riding Court, near Datchet in Buckinghamshire. 
Sworn in as a freeman of the Goldsmiths' Company in 1555, Hanbury progressed through the various offices to prime warden in 1591. Meanwhile in 1570 he had been introduced to the Company of Mineral and Battery Works (founded in 1565) and thereafter concerned himself mainly with developing an iron industry in south Wales. The older iron industry in Sussex and the weald of Kent was by then in decline, at a time when the demand for iron goods was rising fast. 
Hanbury's first efforts as an ironmaster were devoted to making a success of the company's wireworks at Tintern and to supplying the necessary high-grade (osmund) iron from his own forges. As time went by, however, he saw better prospects in disengaging from the wireworks and, in effect, holding them to ransom by securing as many as possible of the local sources of ore and most of the nearby woods suitable for charcoal making. As a spokesman for the company put it in 1593, 'the works have no provision of good osmond iron but from him [Hanbury] both that for all the best mines in Monmouthshire be his and almost all the woods within ten miles compas thereof be his also' (Sir Richard Martyn to Lord Burghley, BL, Lansdowne MS, 75/90). However, osmund iron was expensive to produce and there was more profit in producing merchant iron for a wider market. When Hanbury began sending cheaper iron to the wireworks, the company appealed to the privy council, making much play of the hardship caused to the workers and their families when the poor quality of the wire made it difficult to sell. Despite continued pressure on him, Hanbury continued to send inferior iron to Tintern until in 1598 the privy council ordered his arrest, together with his son-in-law Edmund Wheeler, and they were committed to the Fleet prison. Three months later they made their submission and were released. The supply thereafter of reasonable quantities of osmund iron to the wireworks, at a price Hanbury still claimed was uneconomic, does not seem seriously to have reduced his profits. 
Another contentious issue at times had been the cutting of timber for charcoal, which had culminated in two or three clashes between Hanbury's woodcutters and armed parties of those who felt that their ancient rights to cut what they needed were being put at risk. For whatever reason, these disputes died down after 1580 and it is now possible to see that the extra value given to Monmouthshire woods by the demand for charcoal did much to ensure their survival. 
Richard Hanbury was the most enterprising and successful ironmaster of the sixteenth century in Wales, not least because he had the deviousness and lack of scruple needed to overcome entrenched opposition. His works were principally concentrated around what later became the town of Pontypool, but he also had forges in Brecknockshire and Glamorgan, as well as depots in Bristol and London. His workforce, probably never more than 200 strong, would spend the summer months in the woods producing charcoal, and the winter, when the rivers were better able to turn the water-wheels that worked the bellows, making iron. Hanbury sat for Minehead in the parliament of 1593; Minehead was probably one of the ports to which he shipped his iron. 
Richard Hanbury died on 20 May 1608 and was laid beside his wife in Datchet church. His total bequests, besides land in Buckinghamshire, Worcestershire, and south Wales, amounted to $17,850, together with $5000 invested in the ironworks. These last, and his land in south Wales and Worcestershire, passed to his nephew and executor, John Hanbury. 


@@@@@


doc= 41217


Hughes, William (1818-1876), geographer, was born in Middlesex. Nothing is known of his parentage, early life, or education, though it seems probable that he had no education beyond school. On his election to the fellowship of the Royal Geographical Society on 26 November 1838 he was an engraver of 9 Wharton Street, Pentonville, London. He continued to trade as an engraver, printer, and map seller, but it is as a pioneer of geographical education that he is best remembered. An early teaching appointment was as professor at an (unidentified) college of engineers, but his most influential appointment came in 1840 when he became lecturer at St John's College, Battersea. At this newly established pioneering college which used the methods of Pestalozzi to train poor boys to be teachers in schools for the poor, Hughes taught geography and cartography. His own inclinations to teach by explanation rather than rote learning and to follow the scientific German school of geography were mirrored in the attitude of the school's founder, James Kay-Shuttleworth, who drew inspiration from progressive developments throughout Europe. 
While at Battersea Hughes published his first major work, 'Principles of Mathematical Geography' (1843), a treatise on the construction of maps, which ran to three editions in English and one in Urdu for use by civil engineering students in India. He also continued his engraving and map business and, from 1841 to 1843, worked three days a week in the British Museum, cataloguing maps and charts. He expounded his teaching methods in 'Remarks on Geography... Chiefly with Reference to the Principles upon which it should be Taught in Normal Schools' (1847) and a textbook, 'A Manual of Geography' (1852; reissued 1864). 
In 1853 Hughes was appointed to teach geography at the Church of England Metropolitan Training College, Highbury, but was less successful there. He began, possibly in 1858, to teach evening classes at King's College, London, and his success here and his publications, which now included 'Classbook of Modern Geography' (1859), led to his appointment as first professor of geography at the college in 1864, to teach day-boys, 'riotous hobbledehoys sent by parental compulsion' (Hughes, in Vaughan, 49), and evening classes for serious, eager, older students, many of whom were teachers. From 1863 Hughes was also professor at Queen's College, Harley Street, a women's college. His textbooks were by now used in many leading public schools as well as national schools, and contemporaries found them eminently readable. Unlike most geography textbooks which simply gave lists to be memorized, Hughes sought to help students understand the nature and distribution of phenomena. His methodological writings and lectures stressed the scientific nature of geography, its links with the natural and physical sciences, and his belief that an understanding of physical geography could unify the physical and human, pure and applied, aspects of the subject. He felt that students must be able to draw maps to understand the character of great natural features and thus come to revere the natural world. Through his books for young children, such as 'A Child's First Book of Geography' (1854), he hoped to excite children's wonder at and interest in studying the world around them. Believing that maps could captivate children's imagination, Hughes published educational maps, wrote the text for a Philips schoolroom map of 1859, and helped produce a map jigsaw puzzle. Despite his publishing success he died in modest circumstances on 21 May 1876 at Adelaide Road, Hampstead, leaving less than $1500. He was survived by a widow, Susanna, and two daughters of whom no more is known. 
Unquestionably a pioneer of geographical education, Hughes foreshadowed rather than shared in the main developments in British scientific geography. His death before John Scott Keltie's 1886 report, which revolutionized British geography, combined with lack of money and education, which cut him off from developments in German geography, led to the obscurity from which he was deservedly rescued in the late twentieth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 41218


Petermann, August Heinrich (1822-1878), geographer and cartographer, was born in April 1822 (probably on the 1st) in Bleicherode am Eichsfelde, Prussia, the second of six children born to Katherine Henrietta and August Rudolf Petermann. He attended elementary school in Bleicherode and, from 1836 to 1839, the 'Gymnasium' in Nordhausen. Maps drawn during his school days survive, and it was a map of South America that won him admittance to Heinrich Berghaus's Geographische Kunstschule in Potsdam in 1839, the year of its foundation, after plans that he should enter the church had been abandoned. Fees at the school were waived because of his parents' poverty. Clearly the most gifted student in the school, Petermann was employed on several important projects, notably Alexander von Humboldt's 'Asie centrale' (1843), which contained the first map to be published as Petermann's independent work, and the 'Physikalischer Atlas' (1838-48), the first thematic atlas of the world. The work met with acclaim and, when Alexander Keith Johnston was granted leave to produce an English version of it, Petermann moved to Johnston's cartographical institute in Edinburgh in 1845 to work on it and other atlases. In 1847 Petermann moved to London where, from his cartographic institute at 5 Carrington Street and later 9 Charing Cross, he produced maps for scholarly journals, newspapers, and other publications, sometimes in collaboration with Ernst Ravenstein and John Bartholomew, the younger. His map of 1852 showing the progress of the cholera epidemics of the 1830s is a remarkable early medical map with perceptive 'statistical notes'. 
Petermann became interested in geographical discovery: in 1846 he was elected fellow of the Royal Geographical Society and in 1849 became a corresponding member of the Berlin Gesellschaft fur Erdkunde with the support of Karl Ritter. As a result of his influence the German scientists Heinrich Barth and Adolf Overweg were invited to join James Richardson's expedition to central Africa in 1849, and Petermann published English and later German accounts of the expedition. He also made knowledgeable contributions (for example, on polar routes influenced by the Gulf Stream) to the debate about the fate of Sir John Franklin. Petermann was active as a lecturer on geographical topics to the Royal Geographical Society and the British Association. In 1852 he was granted the title 'physical geographer and engraver on stone in ordinary to the queen' and his maps were held in high regard in Britain. However, economic difficulties and personal differences with his English colleagues led him to renounce his intention of settling permanently in England. 
In 1854 Petermann returned to Germany to Justus Pertes's publishing house in Gotha, which was being reshaped as a geographical institute under the influence of Wilhelm and Bernhardt Pertes; the status of professor was conferred on him by Ernst XI of Saxe-Gotha. From Gotha in 1855 he founded 'Petermanns Geographische Mitteilungen' -- an important journal still continuing in the late twentieth century -- the contents of which reflected Petermann's cartographic skills, and his interest in both scientific geography and exploration. His work in encouraging exploration in Africa and the polar regions, cartographic innovations, and geographical education in universities and among the general public led in 1868 to his being awarded the founder's medal of the Royal Geographical Society, then the highest accolade for a geographer. His personal life was less happy than his professional. His first marriage in 1856 to Clara Mildred Leslie, with whom he had three children, was dissolved in 1877, and his second marriage, to Tony Pfister in 1878, lasted only four months before his death, by suicide, on 25 September 1878 in Gotha. 
Petermann's maps were remarkable technically (for example, in their use of a modified lithography and of new projections), aesthetically (for example, in their use of colour), and intellectually (for example, in his development of thematic maps, which promoted understanding of phenomena by showing their distribution). His writings reflected the scientific nature of German geography and combined detailed observations and imaginative hypotheses. Through his pupils, who dominated the next generation of German cartographers, and his 'Mitteilungen' he continued to influence geography, exploration, and cartography long after his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 41222


Orr, James (1844-1913), theologian, was born in Glasgow on 11 April 1844, the son of Robert Orr, an engineer, and his wife, Montgomery ('nee' Hunter). He began school in Manchester and Leeds before, when he was about nine, both his parents died. Living with Glasgow relatives, he became an apprentice bookbinder. In 1865 he entered Glasgow University to prepare for the United Presbyterian ministry. He was moulded in philosophy by John Veitch, the last representative of the Scottish common-sense school, and in lesser degree by John and Edward Caird, early advocates of idealism. He graduated MA with first-class honours in mental philosophy in 1870, winning a Ferguson scholarship that enabled him to remain at Glasgow for two further years. In 1872 he graduated BD and shared in the lord rector's prize for a penetrating critique of David Hume that he later published in revised form (1903). From 1868 to 1872 he also attended the United Presbyterian Divinity Hall in Edinburgh and during most of 1873 preached as a probationer at Trinity Church, Irvine, Ayrshire. 
From 1874 to 1891 Orr was minister of East Bank United Presbyterian Church, Hawick, Roxburghshire. On 7 April 1874 he married Hannah Fraser, the daughter of James Gibb, a shoemaker from Glasgow; she was to survive him. He became chairman of Hawick school board, campaigned for the reduction of liquor licences, and was known as a Liberal, one of his four sons being named William Gladstone. He helped to draft the United Presbyterian declaratory statement that in 1879 repudiated any total endorsement of Calvinism. Six years later he obtained a Glasgow DD by examination. In 1891 he delivered his church's Kerr lectures, published two years later as 'The Christian View of God and the World', which showed originality in teaching the coherence of an incarnation-centred world-view. The book remained influential a century later. 
The lectures secured Orr's appointment in 1891 to the United Presbyterian college in Edinburgh as professor of church history. In 1894 he published one of three replies to the anti-supernaturalist Gifford lectures given by Otto Pfleiderer of Berlin, and in 1895 and 1897 lectured in North America. The resulting books, especially 'The Ritschlian Theology and the Evangelical Faith' (1897) and 'The Progress of Dogma' (1901) criticizing Adolf Harnack, the German theologian and church historian, cautioned against the subjectivist trend in German theology. In 1896, when the Free Church approached the United Presbyterian church with a proposal of co-operation, Orr urged merger instead and became joint convenor of the United Presbyterian union committee. At the eventual creation of the United Free Church in 1900 Orr was transferred to the chair of systematic theology and apologetics at its Glasgow college but, perhaps partly because of hostility to his pro-Boer stance during the South African War, he failed to secure its principalship two years later. He edited the 'United Presbyterian Magazine' (1896-1900) and with his friend and Glasgow colleague James Denney co-edited the 'Union Magazine' (1901-4) and the 'United Free Church Magazine' (1904-6). 
In 1902 Orr seconded Robert Rainy's general assembly motion not to proceed against another colleague, George Adam Smith, for his advocacy of higher criticism. Yet, as Orr explained in 'The Problem of the Old Testament' (1905), he dissented from the growing acceptance of that approach. In the same year 'God's Image in Man', based on the 1903 Stone lectures at Princeton Seminary, argued that supernatural interruptions of the evolutionary process were essential to account for the emergence of humanity. From 1906 Orr's prolific writings became more popular in tone, a tendency culminating in the republication of four of his articles in 'The Fundamentals' (1910-15). His 'Revelation and Inspiration' (1910), though explicitly repudiating biblical inerrancy, cogently defended a high estimate of scripture. His final years were spent chiefly as general editor of the conservative 'International Standard Bible Encyclopaedia' (5 vols., 1915). After illness caused by a weak heart, he died at his home, 4 Hampton Court Terrace, Glasgow, on 6 September 1913 and was buried in Cathcart cemetery, Glasgow, on 9 September. 
Tall and broad-shouldered, Orr was tolerant of opponents and, though sometimes abrupt, markedly kind to students. He swam against the tide of contemporary British theological opinion, but his influence was more widely felt in North America. 


@@@@@


doc= 41224


Greenwood, James William (bap. 1835, d. 1927), author and journalist, was born in Lambeth, Surrey, where he was baptized on 15 November 1835, the second son in the family of eleven children of James Caer Greenwood, coach trimmer, and his wife, Mary Ann, 'nee' Fish, of Park Street, Lambeth. His year of birth is not known for certain; in census returns and elsewhere his age was variously recorded, pointing to a birth year between 1830 and 1835. He married, at Southwark, on 21 December 1851 (when he gave his age as twenty-one), Eliza Hayson (1824-1917), a dressmaker, daughter of William Hayson, mason. They had at least three sons and five daughters. 
Greenwood is known to have been apprenticed as a compositor, and was employed as an engraver. Following his elder brother, Frederick Greenwood, he took up writing as his occupation. Together they wrote a novel, 'Under a Cloud', first published serially in the 'Welcome Guest' and in 1860 as a separate volume. Thereafter he established himself as a successful children's author. His adventure book for boys, 'Wild Sports of the World' (1862), with accounts of big game and biographies of hunters, was published by Samuel Beeton, who went on to publish at least four more of Greenwood's books, first in serial form and later as novels. 'King Lion', a story that appeared anonymously in Beeton's 'Boy's Own Magazine' in 1864, but was later attributed to Greenwood, was credited as an influence by Kipling. He worked with a succession of publishers and produced more than thirty children's novels until about 1890. His stories were often illustrated by Ernest Griset, an artist born in France but known as 'the English Dore', who specialized in depictions of animals. 
Through his elder brother, who became editor of the 'Pall Mall Gazette', Greenwood established a reputation as an early investigative journalist. He had begun to explore the potential of London's rough street life in children's stories, such as 'The True History of a Little Ragamuffin', which originally appeared in the 'Englishwoman's Magazine' and was later (1866) published as a book, and in contributions to the 'Penny Illustrated Paper'. Late in 1865 Frederick commissioned him to spend a night in the casual ward of a London workhouse. He was allegedly reluctant, but agreed to the work when offered a fee of $30 or $40 in advance, and further payment if the resulting articles made a significant impact on the 'Pall Mall Gazette''s circulation. Accompanied by a friend named Bittlestone, a stockbroker, he entered Lambeth workhouse for a night in January 1866, both men having adopted clothing appropriate to occupants of the casual ward, which housed vagrants seeking overnight shelter. They remained in the workhouse for fourteen hours and emerged the following morning to be collected by Frederick's carriage. Their observations were conflated (to give the impression that Greenwood had entered the workhouse alone) and were allegedly toned down by Frederick 'to avoid suspicion of exaggeration' (Robertson Scott, 167) before being published in three successive issues of the 'Pall Mall Gazette' (12, 13, 15 Jan 1866), under the title 'A night in a workhouse'. The articles were published anonymously, and the author was styled 'the amateur casual'. Greenwood's revelations of squalor, neglect, and degradation, and maladministration by the workhouse authorities, together with the shock of his and his companion's personal experiences (submerged in the filthy bathwater and sharing a bed with paupers), caused a sensation. A later reading has also drawn attention to the homoerotic undercurrents of the casual ward, which Greenwood brought to light, and which scandalized contemporary opinion (Koven, 25-87). Circulation of the 'Pall Mall Gazette' increased significantly, the articles were reprinted in full in 'The Times', and they were issued later in the year as a pamphlet. 
Greenwood both wrote and lectured as the Amateur Casual for the next thirty years, producing further observations of the poor districts of London, disguised as a tramp. 'Unsentimental Journeys, or, Byways of Modern Babylon' (1867) was one of a series of works in which he presented observations of the poor as travellers' tales. His 'Seven Curses of London' of 1869 attempted to summarize the problems facing the city: 'neglected children'; 'professional thieves'; 'professional beggars'; 'fallen women'; 'the curse of drunkenness'; 'betting gamblers'; and 'waste of charity'. His passion for his subject and his fascination with a quirky story were combined with an outlook that attempted to distinguish between the deserving and undeserving poor. He proposed emigration to the colonies as a remedy for pauperism. A later work, 'Odd People in Odd Places' (1883), offered pen portraits of the 'homes, haunts, and habits of some of the lower grade of the great community' of London (preface). 
Greenwood left the 'Pall Mall Gazette' to write for the 'Daily Telegraph', where he published four articles, in December 1871, resulting from a commission by the Liberal MP Michael Thomas Bass to investigate working conditions on Britain's railways. His revelations of long working hours contributed to the establishment of the first railway workers' trade union, and led to Greenwood's becoming editor of a new journal, the 'Railway Service Gazette', which first appeared in February 1872. He was later editor of the short-lived 'King's Cross Journal' of 1880. Writing under his second pseudonym, One of the Crowd, he produced for the 'Daily Telegraph' another expose, claiming in 1874 to have attended a fight in which a man was pitted against a dog. The engagement was alleged to have taken place in Hanley in Staffordshire. The account aroused public anger and the Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (among others) attempted to trace the organizers of the fight. Greenwood could not subsequently locate the venue, the human participant in the fight, or any other member of the audience and so could never vindicate his account; he was said to have earned the enmity of the inhabitants of north Staffordshire for his slur on life in the Potteries. A self-styled activist against social abuses, he is known to have become involved in philanthropy during the mid-1890s, establishing two funds for children, to provide outings to the countryside and to supply Christmas hampers. His last books, published in 1902 and 1905, were concerned with his experiences as an observer in the London police courts and his interviews with the inmates of lunatic asylums. 
Known to his friends and colleagues as Jimmy or Bill, Greenwood was on friendly terms with his fellow journalists, and was said to have been acquainted with Dickens; yet despite the success of his workhouse articles he never enjoyed a cordial relationship with his brother Frederick, who never forgave him for leaving the 'Pall Mall Gazette'. There were apparently differences of character between them. Frederick was described by a niece as a man of strong principles, in contrast to James for whom 'principles were not one of his strong points' (Robertson Scott, 171). His investigative journalism rests on the pioneering technique (albeit one initially forced upon him) of temporarily adopting the dress and circumstances of others. He has been described as 'the most celebrated exponent of mid-Victorian complete participation' in the experience of the poor (Freeman, 104). Mayhew, Dickens, and others may have interviewed the poor, but Greenwood became 'one of the crowd' and so provided a model for successors like Jack London, Mary Higgs, and George Orwell. 
Greenwood -- 5 feet 6 inches tall, with black curly hair -- was described as 'a short, squarish, good-humoured man, dressed in a long black frock-coat, and black tie -- the cut of a slum missionary' (Robertson Scott, 169). His later years were spent in obscurity and evident poverty. He was living with his daughter at Lee, London, at the time of his death, at 390 High Street, Catford, London, on 11 August 1927, and was described in his death certificate as an 'old age pensioner', aged ninety-six. 


@@@@@


doc= 41225


Forrest, John, first Baron Forrest (1847-1918), explorer and politician in Australia, third son of the ten children born to William Forrest (1819-1899), farmer and millwright, of Preston Point, near Bunbury, Western Australia (who had migrated from Stonehaven, Kincardineshire), and his wife, Margaret Guthrie (1821-1895), daughter of David Hill, of Dundee, was born on 22 August 1847 at Preston Point. After attending the government school in Bunbury and Bishop Hale's School, Perth, and having been apprenticed as a surveyor from 1863, he entered the survey department of the colony in 1865. He soon showed conspicuous skill at exploration: first in 1869, when he led a search for the remains of the lost Ludwig Leichhardt; then in 1870, when he travelled overland from Perth to Adelaide, establishing a reliable overland telegraph route; and, most notably, in 1874, by his expedition from Geraldton to the overland telegraph line between Adelaide and Port Darwin, a distance of 2000 miles through the central desert country. He was feted in Australia and London, received a freehold grant of 5000 acres and the founder's medal of the Royal Geographical Society, and was appointed deputy surveyor-general in 1876. On 29 February 1876, at St George's Cathedral, Perth, he married Margaret Elvire (1844-1929), daughter of Edward Hamersley of Guildford, Western Australia. Wealthy and well connected, she proved a great asset to his political career, although the couple were childless. 
In 1883 Forrest was promoted surveyor-general and commissioner of crown lands with a seat in the executive and legislative councils. He proved as thorough and thoughtful an administrator as he had been an explorer, although he was not immune from the endemic quarrels in the administration. When the colony was granted responsible government in 1890, he formed its first ministry, as treasurer with the unofficial title of 'premier'. In ten years Forrest's administration oversaw the construction of almost 2000 miles of railway and many important public works including Freemantle harbour and the 350 mile pipeline supplying 6 million gallons of water daily to the Coolgardie-Kalgoorlie goldfields, discovered in 1892-3. These projects increased colonial debt sevenfold, but, helped by the gold, Forrest transformed a huge pastoral expanse with a few transitory miners into a prosperous colony with settled rural, mining, and urban populations. His 'Homestead Act' (1893) instituted free land grants of 160 acres to those wanting to settle, and he founded the Agricultural Bank in 1894 to extend credit to agriculturists for improvements. He improved the rights of industrial, mining, and shop workers, and of women in general, abolished state aid to religion, and tightened the restrictions on immigration from Asia. He represented Western Australia at the colonial conferences in London in 1887 and 1897, playing a prominent part in each. He worked steadily for Australian federation, and although his caution looked to some like reluctance, he finally led the campaign for popular acceptance of the federal constitution. 
In February 1901 Forrest left state politics to join the first commonwealth administration. He held office in three non-Labor governments, before resigning in 1907 from a ministry which had become dependent on Labor support in parliament. Having been active in discussions among non-Labor members, he returned as treasurer in the new Liberal Party 'fusion' administration, and negotiated improved financial arrangements between the commonwealth and the states. He was narrowly defeated four times in party elections for leader, and thereby for prime minister, but was treasurer again in 1913-14 and 1917-18, before cancer forced his resignation in 1918. Already appointed a KCMG in 1891 and a GCMG in 1901, in 1918 he was created Baron Forrest of Bunbury, the first peerage bestowed on an Australian politician; but while bound for England to take his seat in the House of Lords and to seek medical advice, he died at sea on 3 September 1918 off Sierra Leone. He was buried in the Karrakatta cemetery, Perth. He left an estate worth $45,000. 
Although by 1918 Forrest's political style seemed outmoded in the era of national party politics, he left a lasting legacy of social and economic advances and physical infrastructure. His achievements at Perth were not matched by those in federal politics, but within and beyond Australia he won lasting renown as an explorer and practical geographer, convinced that rational resource exploitation based on accurate survey and mapping was the only scientific and coherent means to develop a new nation. 

Alexander Forrest (1849-1901), surveyor and entrepreneur, John Forrest's brother, was born on 22 September 1849 at Preston Point, near Bunbury, in Western Australia. He attended the same schools as his brother and also trained as a surveyor. Not so accomplished a surveyor as John, he was the more adventurous explorer. He accompanied John in his expeditions of 1870 and 1874 and himself led a party past Coolgardie and south to Esperance Bay in 1871, forming an overfavourable opinion of that district. In 1879 he led a brilliant expedition in the north of Western Australia, with a party which included his brother Matthew, when he discovered and named the Kimberley district and a huge tract of well-watered grazing lands on the Fitzroy and Ord rivers. Having, like John, already been criticized for profiting from his discoveries, he resigned his government appointment to become an extremely successful land agent in the south-west and particularly in the Kimberleys, attracting investment, settlement, and railway construction, and himself setting up a number of concerns and becoming very wealthy. There were complaints against some of his business practices, but he was never found to have broken the law. On 15 January 1880 he married Amy-Eliza (1852-1897), daughter of Edward Thomas Barret-Lennard; they had four sons and a daughter. 
An ardent supporter of responsible government and protectionism, Forrest represented Kimberley in the legislative council from 1887. After responsible government was granted he sat in the assembly from 1890 to 1901, strongly opposing federation. As mayor of Perth in 1892-5 and in 1897-1900 he used his connections with his brother to win government subsidies for public works in the city, although in general he was a firmer believer in private enterprise than John, who increasingly advocated government planning in developing public lands. Appointed a CMG in May 1901, Alexander died on 20 June, in Perth, from a kidney disease; he was buried in Karrakatta cemetery, Perth, on the 21st. He left an estate worth $195,000, but also a lasting legacy in the settlements and landholdings he laid out in the north-west of Australia. 


@@@@@


doc= 41227


Leopold I (1790-1865), king of the Belgians, was born on 16 December 1790 in Coburg, the eighth child and third son of Prince Francis Ferdinand of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld (1750-1806), heir to the German duchy of Coburg, and Augusta Caroline Sophia of Reuss-Ebersdorff (1757-1831). His baptismal names were Leopold George Chretien Frederick. Charles Theodore Hoflender, head of ecclesiastical administration for Coburg and first professor at the Collegium Casimirianum, oversaw his education. He was confirmed in the Lutheran church on 12 September 1805, and left Coburg in the winter of 1805-6, Napoleonic troops having overrun it. 
Leopold then joined the Russian army; Tsar Alexander's brother Grand Duke Konstantin was his sister Anna's husband. The treaty of Tilsit (1807) returned the duchy of Coburg to Leopold's eldest brother, Ernest, and the two brothers travelled to Paris to meet Napoleon, who asked Leopold to act as his aide-de-camp. Leopold refused, returned instead to the Russian army, and fought at the battles of Lutzen, Bautzen, Kulm, and Leipzig. He was appointed to the military order of St George of Russia and accompanied the tsar on his triumphal march through Paris following Napoleon's defeat. 
It was as part of the tsar's retinue that Leopold travelled to London in 1814, where he met Princess Charlotte (1796-1817), daughter of the prince regent and heir presumptive to the British throne; their first encounter was accidental, on the back stairs of Pulteney's Hotel. At the time arrangements were being made for Charlotte's engagement to the prince of Orange, but she, known for her beauty and cultivated, independent spirit, alighted on Leopold -- who in contrast to Orange was tall, handsome, and soldierly -- as a more suitable husband. Tellingly in view of his later role in shaping modern European constitutional monarchy, she regarded his freedom from party ties in Britain an important recommendation. Leopold remained in London after the Russian delegation had departed, and moved from a flat above a grocer's shop on Marylebone High Street (reflecting the family's low income) to a residence of the Count Beroldingen in nearby Stratford Place. Their courtship letters were in French, though according to Lord Lauderdale, Leopold had 'a mania for England and English manners' (Sturt, 216). He was warmly received at the end-of-season ball at Carlton House, and the match was encouraged by, among others, the dukes of Kent and York, although with the regent (who, taking his cue from a favourite expression of Leopold's, nicknamed him le Marquis Peu a Peu) his relations were cool, and remained so (Hibbert, 93). 
Napoleon's escape from Elba and return to power saw Leopold return to the Russian army at the head of a cavalry division. After the French emperor's final defeat at Waterloo (Leopold's division arrived too late for the battle) Leopold undertook negotiations on behalf of his brother for the enlargement of the duchy of Coburg. Pleading these diplomatic commitments, he resisted entreaties to return to England from the prince regent and an increasingly frustrated Princess Charlotte. He finally crossed the channel in February 1816, and the couple were married on 2 May at Carlton House by the archbishop of Canterbury. The marriage settlement gave Leopold the rank of army general, English citizenship, and a generous annual stipend of $50,000. Charlotte, whose original preference for Leopold had been pragmatic (she had told her confidante Mercer Elphinstone on 8 November 1814 that she was 'not in the least in the world in love with him'), now hailed him as 'the perfection of a lover' ('Letters of the Princess Charlotte', 180, 242). Once feisty, she now submitted to his dislike at seeing ladies in the saddle and ceased to ride; Leopold for his part grew a moustache to please her. They settled at Claremont House, Esher, Surrey, but enjoyed life together for barely eighteen months, as Charlotte died on 6 November 1817, following the traumatic birth of a stillborn son. Baron Stockmar, Leopold's private secretary, later recorded that his master 'never recovered the feeling of happiness which had blessed his short married life' ('Memoirs of Baron Stockmar', ed. F. M. Muller, 1872, 1.67). 
Leopold remained in England for the next fourteen years. He was accorded the title of royal prince and the military rank of field marshal, and lived on at Claremont on his vast pension, giving rise to murmurs of discontent in parliament: particular objection was felt to his profiting, as a state pensioner, from the produce of his Surrey estate. He angered George IV by paying a private visit to Queen Caroline at the height of the divorce proceedings against her in 1821. (During her exile in Italy Leopold made no contact, giving rise to accusations of crowd-pleasing opportunism.) Thereafter he left England for a time to visit his own mother, and to travel to Florence, Naples, and Vienna. 
By this time Leopold had acquired another connection within the British royal family. After Charlotte's death the sons of George III had bestirred themselves to ensure the survival of the dynasty; Edward, duke of Kent, had married Leopold's sister Victoria of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld, and a daughter -- Alexandrina Victoria -- was born on 24 May 1819. After Kent's death in February 1820 Leopold granted his sister a pension of $3000 (which he could certainly afford) and encouraged her to remain in England in spite of the attitude taken towards her by her royal brothers-in-law, which ranged from indifferent to hostile. He provided funds too for the education of his niece, who later recalled her visits to Claremont as the 'brightest epoch of my otherwise rather melancholy childhood' ('Letters of Queen Victoria', 1.14). A slight distancing factor was his sister's disapproval of his private life; he had installed his mistress, the German actress Kristina Bauer, in a house overlooking Regent's Park, and continued to have numerous affairs even after his second marriage. 
Leopold had little to do in the United Kingdom; having been married to the heir presumptive to the throne he was effectively a king without a country. The first opportunity for him to rectify this omission came in February 1830, when he was put forward by France, Britain, and Russia for the throne of the newly established kingdom of Greece; finding that little popular support existed for him on the ground, he prudently declined the offer. His refusal was later recalled with gratitude by Victoria; Richard Barham, the pseudonymous Ingoldsby, took a less charitable -- and widely held -- view of his decision: '
Some say in hope to rule for his niece 

He hath refused to be king over Greece. 
(Weintraub, 64)' In October 1830, however, the revolt of the former Habsburg territories in the Netherlands against Dutch rule, and the establishment of a provisional government in Brussels, provided Leopold with another opening. The London conference on the future of Belgium, as the new kingdom became known, was held in the following month and involved France, Britain, Prussia, Austria, and Russia. Apart from setting the boundaries of the new state the five powers' main concern was to select a suitable constitutional monarch. The initial favourite was the duke of Nemours, son of the French king, Louis Philippe, but the prospect of expanded French influence sparked objections, and Leopold emerged as a compromise candidate. His selection was confirmed by the vote of a Belgian national congress on 4 June, and -- with expressions of regret at leaving his adopted home of England -- he accepted the invitation. (He forwent some, but not all, of his pension and maintained establishments in England for which he had little use; this became the subject of press criticism, to which he reacted with uncomprehending irritation.) Dressed in the uniform of a lieutenant-general of the Belgian army, he was inaugurated as the first king of the Belgians on 21 July 1831. 
Before Leopold had finished his inaugural tour of the country the Dutch had amassed 50,000 troops along the border. The Belgian army, ill-trained and half the size, was no match -- in spite of Leopold's own engagement with Dutch forces near Louvain -- but the invading army retreated at the threat of French intervention. The new state survived, albeit on terms less favourable than Leopold would have liked (he even threatened abdication). Belgian independence and neutrality was finally guaranteed by the treaty of London in 1839. In the meantime Leopold had strengthened his position with the country's Roman Catholic hierarchy by marrying on 9 August 1832 Louise Marie d'Orleans (1812-1850), the eldest daughter of Louis Philippe, the king of the French, on 9 August 1832. According to Charlotte Bronte the Brussels court to which he brought her was as gloomy as a conventicle. Their children were raised as Catholics; the eldest surviving son, Leopold Louis Philippe Marie Victor (1835-1909), was married to the Habsburg archduchess Marie-Henriette -- an example of the dynastic empire-building for which the Coburgs won repute. Leopold also brokered the marriage between his nephew Prince Ferdinand of Saxe-Coburg-Kohary and Queen Maria of Portugal in 1836, and married another nephew and a niece into the house of Bourbon. His daughter Marie Charlotte (1840-1927) -- known by her second name in honour of Leopold's first wife, reputedly at the suggestion of his second -- married another Habsburg, Archduke Ferdinand Maximilian of Austria. He later became emperor of Mexico -- with consequences fatal for himself and catastrophic for the mental health of his widow. 
With his niece Victoria, Leopold maintained a steady correspondence from her childhood onwards. Their letters ranged from personal matters to court intrigue and national and international politics. They give an unparalleled insight into the mind of the young princess and her development of a sense of her destiny and constitutional role. Leopold's position in her life in the years leading up to 1837 -- something between a father figure and an 'eminence grise' -- was exemplified in a letter of 19 November 1834, in which Victoria thanked him for sending her an extract about Queen Anne 'to show what a Queen ought not to be', and requested 'that you will send me what a Queen ought to be' ('Letters of Queen Victoria', 1.50). In June 1837, with the health of William IV clearly rendering Victoria's succession imminent, Leopold advised her to keep the Melbourne ministry in office, that she would 'do wisely' by showing herself 'attached to the English Protestant Church as it exists in the State' (ibid., 94), and -- above all -- to train those around her to offer their opinion only when she asked for it. When she ascended the throne he prudently declined her invitation to visit Britain for fear of giving the appearance of interference, but made the trip in September 1839 and on numerous occasions thereafter. 
Leopold's most lasting contribution to the history of the British empire -- and his most triumphant piece of matchmaking -- was his energetic promotion of the union of Victoria and his nephew Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld. This had been a pet project of his even before he arranged Albert's first visit to England, in May 1836, in the teeth of opposition from William IV. Victoria, however, would not be hurried into marriage; having found another confidante in Lord Melbourne she chafed at her uncle's overbearing influence and early became wise to his attempts to embroil her in Belgian affairs and his own international politicking. Leopold was shocked at the change in her tone towards him but bided his time and continued, through the agency of Stockmar, to groom Albert for the role of royal consort that he himself had been denied. His patience was rewarded and, though his relationship with Victoria inevitably altered, their correspondence continued unbroken until he died. In reply to his condolences on the death of Albert in 1861, she addressed him as 'Dearest, kindest, father' (Weintraub, 304). Afterwards, with his accustomed wiliness, he urged her to end her seclusion by invoking the popularity and high profile of the prince of Wales. 
As king of the Belgians Leopold was active in promoting commerce and industry, and gave sanction in 1834 to the first railway on the European continent. He left domestic policy largely to his ministers; the lessons in constitutional monarchy absorbed during his time in England may have helped to ensure his survival of the revolutions of 1848 that toppled, among others, his father-in-law. He concerned himself more directly with foreign affairs; his diplomatic abilities were widely regarded and he was regularly called to act as an arbiter in international disputes. 
Leopold made his last trip to England in April 1865 and, having been in declining health for a decade, returned to Belgium suffering from bronchitis. He died on 10 December 1865 at Laeken, Brussels. After lying in state at the Palais Royal dressed in the full uniform of a Belgian general, he was given a state funeral on 16 December. He was buried at Laeken, alongside his second wife, the wishes of his subjects having taken preference over his own desire to be buried at Windsor alongside Princess Charlotte. His eldest son succeeded him as Leopold II, whose rule in the Congo made his name a byword for colonial exploitation. 


@@@@@


doc= 41228


Evans, John Thomas (bap. 1770, d. 1798), explorer, was born in the farmhouse of Gwredog Uchaf in Caernarvonshire, the son of Thomas Evans (died 1788) and his wife, Anne. Baptized on 14 April 1770, he was the product of a pious home. His father, a farmer, gained some distinction as an itinerant preacher and was one of the first Methodists in Caernarvonshire. After attending the village school Evans had established himself in London by the spring of 1792. He believed, with others, in the story of the pre-Columbian discovery of America by a twelfth-century Welsh prince, Madoc, and his mythical descendants, the white-skinned, Welsh-speaking Padoucas. This persistent legend was revitalized by the Nootka Sound crisis of 1790, which gave old legends of a British prior claim to America contemporary political relevance. The Padoucas were identified with a real people, the Mandans, on the upper reaches of the Missouri. Iolo Morganwg resolved to find them. In May 1792 it was mentioned for the first time that Iolo would be accompanied by Evans. Although Iolo fell desperately ill, Evans was undeterred: he borrowed money for his steerage passage and reached Baltimore in October. 
Evans walked to the home of the influential Welsh-American Baptist the Revd Samuel Jones in Philadelphia to seek advice. Back in Baltimore, he became a merchant's clerk and spent the winter of 1792 there, whence he wrote: 'Either Death or Liberty... so it is with me, either the Madogion or death' (J. Evans to E. Williams, 22 Nov 1792, NL Wales, 13222). In February 1793 he consulted Samuel Jones for a second time, who tried to dissuade him, but without success. He left Philadelphia in March and in May reached New Madrid in Spanish Louisiana. He set out for the Illinois, and for eighteen months after his arrival dropped out of sight. It seems likely that a frontier merchant found employment for him as a surveyor or general agent. He became embroiled in the imperialist and trading tensions of the frontier, and was imprisoned by the Spanish as a British spy for two days in St Louis. The US supreme justice in the Northwest Territory interceded and effected an introduction for him to the Spanish governor. The Spanish realized that even if he failed to find the Welsh Indians, he might find a great deal more. 
Evans had already met the experienced explorer James Mackay, who was to be the leader of a full-scale Spanish scientific expedition. Mackay and Evans set out in mid-August 1795 aiming to reach the Pacific for Spain. By November they were in Omaha territory, where they wintered. Early in 1796 Evans and a detachment set out to find the Mandans. Mackay supplied him with detailed charts and instructions. For over six months Evans lived among the Mandans and held them to their Spanish allegiance. The Missouri Company unravelled behind him and in May 1797, facing pressure from the British Northwest Company, he had to leave. On 15 July he reported to Samuel Jones from St Louis that 'there is no such people as the Welsh Indians' (Williams, 'Mission to the Madogwys', 600-01), although the letter was not in his usual style, and may have been censored by the Spanish. The report was published in the American and then the Welsh press. Through the winter of 1797-8 Evans was a surveyor in upper Louisiana, in the employ of Americans. His months on the Missouri had undermined his health; without pay, he returned to St Louis. Suffering from nervous depression, Evans began to drink heavily. He moved into the household of the enigmatic Spanish empire builder Jacques Clamorgan, and went down to New Orleans on his behalf to secure assistance for another expedition. The governor of New Orleans observed that the strength of liquor had deranged his senses. Evans died in poverty in New Orleans in June or July 1798. 
According to an oral tradition, Evans claimed while drinking that he knew more about the Welsh Indians than anyone would ever know, but that he had been paid to keep his mouth shut. A more concrete legacy was the striking resemblance between the instructions drawn up for a later explorer, Meriwether Lewis, and those which James Mackay drew for John Evans's visit to the Mandans in 1796. 


@@@@@


doc= 41230


Cust, Sir Herbert Edward Purey- (1857-1938), naval officer and hydrographer, was born on 26 February 1857, the second son of Arthur Perceval Purey-Cust (1828-1916), dean of York (1880-1916), and his wife, Lady Emma Bligh, younger daughter of the fifth earl of Darnley. He entered the Royal Navy in 1870, was promoted to midshipman in 1872, and to sub-lieutenant in 1876. He served in the steam frigate 'Newcastle' in China, and then in the sloop 'Squirrel' at Devonport, where he was promoted to lieutenant. After a time in HMS 'Valiant' in the channel squadron, he specialized in hydrographic surveying from 1881. He was appointed to HMS 'Fawn' and worked for two years in the Red Sea and on the east coast of Africa. After taking a course in 1884 at the Royal Naval College, Greenwich, where he gained the first prize for general proficiency, he joined the surveying sloop 'Rambler'. On passage out to China she was involved in military operations in the Sudan, based on Suakin, for which Purey-Cust was awarded the Egyptian medal and the khedive's bronze star. In China Purey-Cust surveyed the south channel of the Yangtze (Yangzi) River from the imperial Chinese customs cruiser 'Kua-Hsing'. His four years in the 'Rambler' were followed by three in HMS 'Egeria' in the Pacific and the eastern archipelago. 
Purey-Cust obtained his first command, the converted yacht 'Dart', in 1892, and spent three and a half years surveying on the east coast of Australia, in Tasmania, and in the New Hebrides (now Vanuatu). Working off the island of Ambrym, 'Dart''s surveys were interrupted by a volcanic eruption, which threw molten lava into the sea near the ship. Steam and dust clouds put a stop to surveying, and the ship's company gave help to the inhabitants of the island before resuming work. Purey-Cust was promoted to commander in 1894, and before leaving Australia in 1895 married Alice Ella (died 1945), daughter of George Stuart Hepburn of Smeaton. In England Purey-Cust joined the hydrographic department as a naval assistant until, in November 1897, he was sent back to the 'Rambler' in command. In three years in this ship he ranged widely, from the Strait of Belle Ile and the West Indies to east and west Africa and the Red Sea. His work included surveys of the South African coast in 1900, for which he successfully applied for the South African medal for himself and his ship's company. He was promoted to captain in 1900, and left the 'Rambler' in Malta in 1901. His final sea command was the paddle surveying vessel 'Triton' from 1902 to 1905, working in home waters. He was commended by the hydrographer for his ingenuity in devising a transparent plastic protractor, which remained in use until automatic plotting devices were introduced in the 1970s. 
In April 1907 Purey-Cust was appointed assistant hydrographer, and two years later became hydrographer of the navy. As the storm clouds gathered over Europe he was much concerned with preparing the hydrographic service for war. He ordered new surveys of the southern North Sea. He also prepared the systems required for promulgating navigational information to warships and friendly merchant vessels under the constraints of wartime secrecy. He relinquished office on 31 August 1914, shortly after war broke out. He had been promoted to rear-admiral in 1910, and made CB in 1911. Not content to idle in retirement, during the war Purey-Cust was commissioned as a captain RNR in November 1914, and appointed in command of the fleet auxiliary 'Zaria'; initially employed as a store ship, from 1915 'Zaria' was a depot ship for auxiliary patrol craft, with Purey-Cust holding an appointment as commodore RNR. 'Zaria' was paid off early in 1919, when Purey-Cust reverted to the retired list. He had been promoted to vice-admiral on the retired list in 1915, and to admiral in 1919, in which year he was made KBE. 
Herbert and Alice Purey-Cust had two children, a son, Arthur John, born in 1897, who followed his father into the Royal Navy and was killed in action in HMS 'Strongbow' in October 1917, and a daughter, Marjorie, born in 1905, who survived them both. Sir Herbert died in Highgate on 11 November 1938; he was buried in Highgate cemetery on the 15th. 


@@@@@


doc= 41237


Rowntree, Joshua (1844-1915), social reformer, was born on 6 April 1844 at Princess Street, Scarborough, the fourth of the five children of John Rowntree (1788-1845), grocer, and his wife, Jane, 'nee' Priestman (1807-1880). In 1860, on leaving Bootham School, York, he was articled to a solicitor in that city, subsequently practising from 1866 to 1886 in Scarborough. He married on 22 September 1880 Isabella Ann Tindall (1843-1929): there was one child, the social worker Maurice L. Rowntree (1882-1944). 
Rowntree's interventions in municipal affairs were often unpopular: nevertheless he was chosen as mayor in 1885, relinquishing the position to stand as Liberal candidate in the 1886 parliamentary election. He entered the Commons as MP for Scarborough with his brother-in-law John Edward Ellis (1841-1910): though almost as unlike as possible in temperament and tastes, the tie between them was particularly close for there was underlying unity of aim. Rowntree was a firm home-ruler, visited Ireland on several occasions, and earned a tribute from John Dillon. He was also a temperance reformer and a vigorous supporter of the social purity campaign of Josephine Butler (1828-1906). He consistently attacked the opium traffic, and when a royal commission (1893-5) presented a report demonstrating the impossibility of stopping the trade between India and China he set to work patiently and painstakingly to examine its conclusions, which he confuted in 'The Imperial Drug Trade' (1905); he lived to see his judgement accepted and acted upon. 
Defeated at Scarborough in the 1892 election, Rowntree 'gave himself with whole heart and mind to the modern interpretation of Quakerism' ('Annual Monitor', 130). He took a quiet (sometimes underestimated, but indisputably effective) part in enabling British Friends to come to terms with scientific discoveries and biblical criticism and with shaking off outdated customs -- notably through the Manchester conference (1895), Scarborough summer school (1897), and the establishment in 1903 of a study centre at Woodbrooke, Birmingham, of which he and Isabella were the first wardens. He did not take part in leading Quaker worship until beyond middle life: his gift in the ministry was recorded by Pickering and Hull monthly meeting in 1896. 
Rowntree was known in Scarborough simply as Joshua (accented by many on the last vowel). He was well versed in geology, botany, archaeology, and history, a lover of the moors and of the sea: he knew how to sail a boat in all weathers, he was at home with the fisherfolk and they with him, and in the last summer of his life he was rowing visitors with boyish enthusiasm. It was this breadth of interest and his ability to draw out the shy that made him so successful an adult school teacher. 
Rowntree and his wife visited Friends' missions in Palestine and Syria in 1899. Concern for peace and conciliation led, in the South African War, to his promoting a meeting at Scarborough (March 1900) to be addressed by S. J. Cronwright Schreiner (1863-1936): this resulted in mob violence against the Rowntree families and property. With his wife and nephew Harold T. Ellis (1875-1930) he visited South Africa between December 1900 and April 1901 to investigate possible Quaker relief work, particularly in the concentration camps. Among contacts made was 'an Indian barrister, Mr Gandhi' (Hewison, 163), who spoke to him of the demoralizing conditions to which all Asian people were subjected. In 1902-3 he and his wife, who were part of a deputation on behalf of British Quakers to Friends in Australia and New Zealand, visited American Friends on their way home. Rowntree died at the home of his sister, Maria Ellis (1845-1941), at Wrea Head, Scalby, on 10 February 1915; his body was interred two days later in Scarborough cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 41241


O'Grady, Standish James (1846-1928), journalist and historian, was born at Castletown, Berehaven, co. Cork, on 13 September 1846, the son of Thomas O'Grady, a Church of Ireland clergyman and small landowner, and Susanna Doe, who inherited property in her own right. He was one of a family of eleven children, and he was brought up in an atmosphere of evangelical piety and classical culture. He was educated at Tipperary grammar school, and entered Trinity College, Dublin, in 1864; he graduated in 1868. He won a classical scholarship and the university silver medal in ethics and psychology, and the philosophical society's medal for essay writing; he was also a noted sportsman. He was intended for the church, and studied for his vocation for two years, but then chose the law instead. He was called to the bar in 1872 and went on the Munster circuit. 
It was now that O'Grady began to write, for the Conservative 'Dublin Daily Express' (which connection he maintained until 1898) and the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (1873-5). In 1875 he published his first book, 'Scintilla Shelleiana', under the pseudonym Arthur Clive, investigating Shelley's attitude towards religion. But his career as an influential writer began on a wet day in the west of Ireland, when, in his own words, he was twenty-four years of age (in fact, he was almost certainly twenty-seven or twenty-eight). He described in 1899 how, because of the 'stupid educational system of the country', he knew nothing of Irish history and legend. But in a country house on a rainy day he browsed in the library and chanced upon Sylvester O'Halloran's 'History of Ireland' (1774), 'the finest history of Ireland into which I have ever looked'. He asked himself how it was that 'all this interesting history of my own country' was 'never brought before my notice by any one' (Boyd, 3). This chance encounter sent him to the Royal Irish Academy, where he read similar works; and his reading of the Cu Chulainn epic inspired him to write, and publish at his own expense in 1878 and 1880, his 'History of Ireland: Heroic Period'. 
This work was, as O'Grady himself confessed, one of imagination. He knew no Irish, and did not try to learn it until 1899, and then with little success. He misspelt the name of his hero (using the form 'Cu Culain') and never bothered correcting his mistake; as late as 1933 this misspelling was repeated on the English title-page of a translation of 'The Coming of Cuculain', published by the Gaelic League. But the importance of the 'History' lay in its impact upon leading figures of the Irish literary revival, including W. B. Yeats, T. W. Rolleston, and George Russell (AE). O'Grady's belief that Ireland had a continuous 'race history', and that this was centred in the imagination, the 'legends' which nations 'make for themselves... that dim twilight region, where day meets night' (Brown, 525), appealed to Yeats, who included no fewer than six of O'Grady's books in a list of the 'thirty best Irish books' in 1895. Yeats declared that it was after reading O'Grady that 'I turned my back on foreign themes, decided that the race was more important than the individual, and began my 'Wanderings of Oisin'' ('Collected Letters', 502). 
O'Grady was torn between his imaginative history and a more scientific approach to writing about the past. In 1881 he published his 'History of Ireland: Critical and Philosophical', which was an attempt to write a more 'scientific' history in a plain style. But he continued to defend his view that, while 'imagination' was the cause of many errors, yet 'nine tenths' of the errors of history arose from its being generally written by men 'destitute of imagination' and thus tied to 'conventional opinions'. O'Grady now developed an interest in Tudor Ireland, and published various works, including 'Red Hugh's Captivity' (1889) and 'The Bog of Stars' (1893), which was the second volume in the 'New Irish Library', a venture launched by Yeats and Sir Charles Gavan Duffy. But O'Grady's writings were inseparable from his political ideas, which he expounded in his 'The Crisis in Ireland' (1882). O'Grady was a Conservative in politics, and he acted as honorary secretary to a landlords' meeting in Dublin in December 1881, when the landlords were embroiled in their conflict with the Land League and the followers of Charles Stewart Parnell. 
O'Grady saw the landlords as essential to the welfare and stability of Ireland. In Tudor times the Anglo-Irish lords had looked to the crown 'as the lawful centre of order and authority and the fountain of honour'. Chieftains remained 'virtually kings, each man governing his own people'. Now he called on the landlords to reassert their authority, and control the 'wild, tameless democracy', 'tameless but tameable', 'in its heart desiring to be tamed'. He feared the consequences if the 'lowest and most dependent class' became sovereign, for it would produce leaders as 'the boiler sends up scum' (Boyd, 165-8). O'Grady drew lessons from Lord Randolph Churchill's brand of tory democracy, and in 1886 in his 'Toryism and the Tory Democracy' he set out the principles which he maintained throughout his life: the landlords of Ireland must give a firm lead, rally their tenants, and reverse their decline into degradation. Landlords must stay on their estates, hire labour, and build up loyal retainers who would both love and fear their masters. 
This feudal relationship was the only hope for the landlord class. O'Grady saw the opportunity for this class to revive its fortunes in the controversy over the report of the Childers commission which, in 1894, admitted that Ireland had been overtaxed to the sum of $250 million. This united nationalists and unionists in a common condemnation of the great abuse, and O'Grady, in his 'All Ireland' (1898), urged the setting up of an Irish convention in Dublin, comprising all Irish opinions, and especially the Ulster protestants, which would convey legislative proposals to the Irish MPs in Westminster. This convention would be led by the landlords, now back in their rightful place. When nothing came of this scheme, O'Grady left Dublin and devoted his energies to the purchase and editing of a provincial Irish newspaper, the Kilkenny 'Weekly Moderator', a decision which was less eccentric than it seemed, for it was O'Grady's intention to spread his gospel in rural Ireland, and his Christmas number for 1898 contained contributions from Yeats, George Russell, Lady Gregory, and T. W. Rolleston. A series of libel suits cost him his newspaper but, indefatigable as ever, in 1900 he founded the 'All Ireland Review', which the nationalist MP William O'Brien described as a 'one man show', but which had a circle of subscribers ranging from landlords like Lord Dufferin to the Fenian John O'Leary. 
This publishing venture was typical of the intellectual mood in Ireland in the early years of the new century, when Irish people of various political persuasions were exploring the possibility of reconciliation between nationalist and unionist. But O'Grady's mood was by now deeply altered. In 'The great enchantment', a series of editorials in the 'All Ireland Review', he contemplated the inevitable fall of the landlord class. He linked this to his studies of the heroic period: in time of crisis, a mental and spiritual debility fell over Ireland, the consequence, apparently, of some past guilt. And now the Irish gentry were 'rotting from the land in the most dismal farce-tragedy of all time, without one brave deed, without one brave word' (Boyd, 180). He ceased editing the 'All Ireland Review' when his health broke down in 1906. 
O'Grady's political stock was not yet exhausted. Now he developed his political thought to encompass a concern for the poor and unemployed. In the 'All Ireland Review' he wrote about the problems of the urban poor and the badly paid clerks who worked in Dublin. In the 'Irish Review' (April 1912) he urged the 'governing classes' to set themselves to the task of 'getting our unemployed, under-fed multitudes out from these seething centres of want and discontent, out into the sane and wholesome country, and there setting them, in the first instance, to the cultivation of the good earth'. He wrote for A. R. Orage's 'New Age', advocating the construction of little labour colonies, but there was an echo of his earlier beliefs in his assertion that these should be headed by enlightened aristocrats. 
By now O'Grady's journalistic and historical career was all but over. He was awarded a civil-list pension, which helped his financial position. O'Grady enjoyed a tranquil family life. He had married Margaret, the daughter of the Revd William Fisher, and they had three sons. In 1918 he left Ireland for health reasons, settling first in France, then in the south of England, and then in Northamptonshire, where his eldest son was vicar. He lived here for some years until his son was moved on, and then went to live on the Isle of Wight. He died outside the Home of Rest at Lake on the Isle of Wight, on 18 May 1928. 
O'Grady had a Cork accent, and was of medium height; his portrait, by John B. Yeats, reveals a more introspective person than his bubbling enthusiasm would suggest. His works were not widely read in his day, but his role in inspiring the Irish literary revival is secure. Although he wrote about pagan Ireland, his rather apocalyptic vision was inspired by his deeply rooted evangelical protestant background, and he combined this with a scepticism and a great anxiety about the future of Ireland, and of England too, under the coming rule of the 'mob-men'. His creation of his hero Cu Chulainn as the figure embodying the truly Irish spirit certainly inspired the 1916 conservative revolutionary Patrick Pearse, and it is not inappropriate that Yeats included O'Grady as one of his 'beautiful lofty things', recollecting O'Grady's drunken speech at a public dinner prophesying an uprising. He has been described as an Irish Carlyle, but he lacked the intellectual powers and cutting edge of Carlyle. Lady Gregory dubbed him a 'Fenian Unionist', which is acceptable provided it is acknowledged that his Fenianism consisted in a strong Irish patriotism, and a desire to defend Irish gentry rights even against England, rather than any inclination towards separatism. O'Grady defended the union; but his writings gained him the admiration of nationalists such as P. S. O'Hegarty (a member of Sinn Fein) and Daniel Corkery (who held the Anglo-Irish literary revivalists in contempt). It can be said of O'Grady (unlike most prominent Irishmen in his troubled times) that he had no enemies. 


@@@@@


doc= 41243


Martyn, Edward Joseph (1859-1923), playwright and politician, was born on 30 January 1859 in Tillyra Castle, Ardrahan, co. Galway, the son of John Martyn (died 1860) and Annie May Josephine Martyn, 'nee' Smyth (1830-1898). His father's family traced its descent from the crusader Sir Oliver Martin, who came to Ireland with Strongbow in 1170, and the Martyns, although Catholic, were loyal enough to retain their estates in penal law times through a special act of parliament. Martyn had no recollection of his father, who died shortly after he was born, and his devout and austere mother, the daughter of an upwardly mobile Galway land speculator, continued to exert a dominant influence over him until her death. A younger brother died in early manhood, shortly after taking a commission in the British army. 
After some years at Belvedere College in Dublin, Martyn's mother moved him to another Jesuit school, Beaumont College in England. The intellectual curriculum did not suit him, and an unsuccessful attempt to blow up the school nearly led to his expulsion. His feeling of isolation was intensified at Christ Church, Oxford, where he matriculated in May 1877, partly because he found few fellow Catholic undergraduates, but largely because his ignorance of Latin and Greek made his time there a humiliation. By way of compensation, he threw himself into the aesthetic movement, and travelled much in the vacations, developing a lifelong love for Wagner, Ibsen, Greece, and architecture. 
Leaving Oxford after two years, and without a degree, Martyn kept rooms in London, but returned frequently to Galway where he extensively rebuilt Tillyra Castle. Agrarian agitation was at its height (there was a subsequent attempt to assassinate his agent), and he was noted for his uncompromising position as a magistrate, a stance reinforced by lifelong disdain for the people. He rebuffed his mother's attempts at matchmaking, and remained unmarried and a lifelong misogynist. His emotional energy went rather into religion, and he became an unusually devout Catholic, destroying a long poem because of its supposed pagan tendency. There was little to indicate the future president of Sinn Fein, yet he soon became vehemently pro-nationalist and anti-English. His cousin the novelist George Moore thought this a return to his genuine beliefs after the death of his mother in May 1898, while he himself ascribed his conversion to his reading Lecky's 'History of Ireland in the Eighteenth Century'. His first published work, 'Morgante the Lesser' (1890), a prose satire influenced by Swift and Rabelais, contrasts a hellish vision of the modern world with the utopian Agathopolis, a womanless state, classical in art, Catholic in religion, and enlightenedly despotic in politics. Perhaps in an attempt to create something of this in Ireland, he began to support a wide variety of cultural organizations. He became a prominent member of the ruling council of the Gaelic League, and was particularly eager to re-Gaelicize the upper and middle classes, a policy he urged in his pamphlet 'Ireland's Battle for her Language' (1900). He also sat on the Irish committee of the Pan Celtic Association from 1898, and helped to plan its first congress in Dublin in 1900. At the same time Martyn was elected a vice-president of the Feis Ceoil, a cultural and musical organization, which he supported not only financially but also practically, by acting as a judge at its competitions. This taste for Irish music was predated by his interest in Wagner and church music. He made the pilgrimage to Bayreuth, and founded the Dublin Palestrina Choir in 1899, subsequently expending a great deal of time and money in persuading the Catholic hierarchy to merge this into the Cathedral Choir of Dublin, an ambition he achieved in 1903 at a personal cost of $10,000. These initiatives were part of a more general campaign to improve Irish ecclesiastical art. He induced the department of technical instruction to establish classes in stained glass at the Dublin Metropolitan School of Art, and helped finance Sarah Purser's stained-glass co-operative, An Tur Gloine (Tower of Glass), which opened in Dublin in 1903 and from which he commissioned windows for his local church. He also advised the bishop of Clonfert on the use of Irish artists in decorating a new cathedral at Loughrea. 
Martyn had met W. B. Yeats in London in 1896 through Arthur Symons, and the two stayed with him for the first time that summer at Tillyra. By this time he had already written an Ibsenite play, 'The Heather Field', with George Moore's help, and was completing a more symbolical piece, 'Maeve', which he paid Arthur Symons to revise. Unsuccessful in getting either play produced commercially, in June 1897 he resolved, with Yeats and Lady Gregory, to establish an Irish Literary Theatre in Dublin. Martyn agreed to underwrite any financial loss, recruited potential subscribers, helped to find a venue for the first productions, and successfully lobbied Irish MPs to change the laws governing theatrical performances in Dublin. 
Although they met frequently in Galway, Dublin, and London from 1896 to 1900, Martyn was always suspicious of Yeats's unorthodox religious beliefs, and shortly before the first season of the new society threatened to abort the whole project by withdrawing his financial guarantees because he objected to several passages in Yeats's 'Countess Cathleen' on theological grounds. Yeats enlisted influential Catholic churchmen to counter these suspicions; the performances went forward, and the enthusiastic reception of 'The Heather Field' gave Martyn the greatest triumph he was to know in the theatre. Even international success seemed to beckon when the play was staged in New York. 'Maeve' was also well received at the second Irish Literary Theatre season in February 1900, and Martyn had begun work on a third play, a satire on Anglo-Irish relations entitled 'The Tale of a Town'. He had received considerable help with the writing of his previous plays, and George Moore and Yeats with singular lack of tact now began a radical revision of this one under the title 'The Bending of the Bough'. Mortified, Martyn repudiated the new version and began to reconsider his position in the Irish Literary Theatre. 
Meanwhile, Martyn had openly declared his nationalism. At a Christmas celebration at Tillyra in 1899 he refused to allow a band to play 'God Save the Queen', and when Lord Clonbrock suggested that he had compromised his position as deputy lord lieutenant and commissioner of the peace for co. Galway, he promptly resigned these offices, explaining that he no longer shared the views of the Unionist Party in which he had been brought up. The cool response to the publication of his plays 'The Tale of a Town' and 'An Enchanted Sea' disappointed him, while Yeats's alliance with the Fay brothers of the Irish National Dramatic Society indicated that the direction of the theatrical movement would be toward poetic and folk drama, rather than the psychological, Ibsenite plays he preferred. Early in 1902 he let it be known that he was withdrawing from what remained of the Irish Literary Theatre, and turned his attention to the Players' Club, a semi-professional company which produced 'The Heather Field' in June 1903, and his homo-erotic four-act tragedy 'An Enchanted Sea' in April 1904. Although Moore thought it was the play which most fully expressed Martyn's essential paganism, Dublin critics found it monotonous and far-fetched. 
In May 1903 Martyn, Maud Gonne, and Arthur Griffith founded the National Council, the immediate purpose of which was to oppose an impending royal visit to Dublin, but which outlasted this occasion, and in September 1908 became one of the planks in the Sinn Fein movement. By that time Martyn had been elected president of Sinn Fein at its first annual convention in November 1905. His political affiliations had already led to his resignation as the president of the Catholic Association, and, as a consequence of a speech made to the National Council, he was expelled from the Kildare Street Club, a bastion of ascendancy values. To general astonishment, he took an action disputing its right to do this, won his case, and defiantly remained a member of the club until his death. His presidency of Sinn Fein was far shorter: in July 1908 he told Yeats that he had 'left the Sinn Fein organization and retired from politics altogether'. Yeats suspected that the organization had made inordinate demands on his pocket, but reported that he was 'busy writing as ever, is very amiable' (W. B. Yeats to J. B. Yeats, 17 July 1908). 
Martyn's interest in the theatre continued: he was a regular patron of the Abbey Theatre, as well as serving simultaneously on the committees of several drama societies. In October 1905 the National Players' Society, of which he was a vice-president, produced 'The Tale of a Town', and when in 1906 actors seceding from the Abbey set up the Theatre of Ireland, Martyn agreed to become its president. In May 1908 it revived 'Maeve' to a hostile reception, while the return of 'The Heather Field' to the Abbey stage in April 1909 aroused little interest. In January 1912 Count Markiewicz's Independent Dramatic Company produced his domestic melodrama 'Grangecolman' to mixed reviews, and he despaired of finding an Irish theatre group that could give him the theatre he wanted. Nevertheless, when the poets Thomas MacDonagh and Joseph Plunkett proposed a new company, the Irish Theatre, he jumped at the chance of becoming one of the three directors. 
The company's first production, in 1914, was Martyn's heavy-handed comedy 'The Dream Physician', in which the absurd George Augustus Moon was his revenge for George Moore's ridicule of him in 'Hail and Farewell'. The following year the company revived the play in its new Hardwicke Street venue, and in November 1915 premiered his three-act play 'The Privilege of Place'. The Irish Theatre was severely afflicted by the Easter rising in 1916, but, despite the execution of Martyn's fellow directors Plunkett and MacDonagh, it reopened in November with a revival of 'The Heather Field', followed in December by the production of Martyn's 'symbolist extravaganza' 'Romulus and Remus'. This clumsy satire on Moore, Yeats, and Lady Gregory, first published in the 'Irish People' in 1907, transposes the quarrels in the Irish Literary Theatre to a hairdresser's salon. In 1917 'Grangecolman' was revived in Hardwicke Street, and Martyn offered a $10 prize for the best psychological play of Irish life. But his hopes of creating a new national theatre were fading, and the company limped on in its cramped theatre, playing to tiny audiences. 'The Heather Field' was revived in April 1918, and in April 1919 Martyn presented his wordy new 'drama in elective moods', 'Regina Eyre'. The reviewers panned it, as they did a lugubrious production of Chekhov in June 1919, and the Irish Theatre came to an end early in 1920. The resignation of the main director, the deteriorating political situation, the frequent curfews, and the refusal of Joseph Plunkett's mother to continue the lease on Hardwicke Street all contributed to its demise. 
The breakdown of law and order during the Irish War of Independence revived all Martyn's old mistrust of the people, and he tried to sell Tillyra, but could not find a buyer. He began to regret his early support for Sinn Fein, although this did not save him from the attentions of the crown forces; his rooms in Dublin were raided by the military, and the fine village hall he had built at Ardrahan was burnt by the Black and Tans. In autumn 1922 Martyn suffered a stroke, and was almost entirely incapacitated. He supported Griffith and the signing of the Anglo-Irish treaty, but, although there was republican activity in his area, Tillyra escaped burning. Martyn was operated on for a brain tumour, and died a few days later at Tillyra Castle on 5 December 1923. In his will he left his body to be dissected, and his library to the Discalced Carmelites in Clarendon Street, Dublin. 


@@@@@


doc= 41244


Hearn, (Patricio) Lafcadio Carlos (1850-1904), author and translator, was born on the Ionian island of Santa Maura, Greece, on 27 June 1850, the eldest surviving child of Surgeon-Major Charles Bush Hearn (died 1866), later of the East India Company, and his first wife, Rosa Antonia Cassimati. The marriage, ever turbulent, failed when Hearn was four, and the boy, abandoned by his parents, spent a troubled childhood in Dublin in the company of Sarah Brenane, his father's aunt. Because of Brenane, who longed for her nephew to become a Roman Catholic priest, Hearn was educated in Jesuit seminaries in Paris and Yvetot, France, as well as at St Cuthbert's College, Ushaw, near Durham, where he lost one of his eyes to schoolboy bullying. 
In 1869, when Hearn was nineteen, Brenane was swindled out of her fortune and she cut Hearn adrift. For the next several years he washed dishes and lived in cardboard boxes on the streets of London, New York, and Cincinnati, comparing his life (as Edmund Gosse was to do after him) to Thomas De Quincey's 'Confessions of an English Opium-Eater'. Then, in 1873, Hearn got his big break as a newspaper man, first as a typesetter and then as Old Semi-Colon on the 'Cincinnati Enquirer'. He quickly achieved notoriety for grisly depictions of death -- he once plunged his fingers into the boiling brains of a corpse, he ice-skated on frozen gore, and he drank blood at the abattoirs when that craze had fallen on the people of Cincinnati. But Hearn's popularity as a slaughter-house journalist had little effect on his finances, and his existence was beset by starvation and disease as he migrated from Cincinnati to New Orleans and the West Indies (possibly even taking the voodoo queen, Marie Laveau, as his lover, after a failed marriage to Althea Foley, a cook and former slave). His first stabs at literature, written during this period, were lurid and over-coloured, such as his translation of Gautier, entitled 'Cleopatra's Nights and other Fantastic Romances' (1882), and his original volumes of short stories, 'Stray Leaves from Strange Literature' (1884) and 'Some Chinese Ghosts' (1887). But the tone of these writings reveals Hearn's growing obsession with the East, which, he said, 'perfumed my mind as with the incense of a strangely new and beautiful worship' (Hearn to W. D. O'Connor, 1883, Wetmore, 1.291). 
As a result, in 1890, when Hearn got the chance to go to Japan as a journalist working for 'Harper's Weekly', the experience was profound. Within a week of landing in Yokohama, on 4 April 1890, Hearn quit 'Harper's' and found work as an English teacher in the tiny coastal town of Matsue, where, in 1891, he married Setsu Koizumi, daughter of a samurai, converted to Buddhism, and, in 1896, gave up his British passport to become Yakumo Koizumi, a Japanese citizen. For the next fifteen years Hearn specialized as a Western interpreter of Japan, publishing thirteen volumes composed in the Japanese 'zuihitsu' style (miscellaneous essays which follow the idiosyncratic flow of the pen). Merging folk superstitions, Buddhist and Shinto philosophy, and ancient stories within his own fleeting impressions, Hearn's project was to present not himself to his readers but the beauties of an 'authentic' Japanese literature. Among his works, published both in London and Boston, were 'Glimpses of an Unfamiliar Japan' (1894), 'Gleanings in Buddha-Fields' (1897), 'Exotics and Retrospectives' (1898), 'Kotto: being Japanese Curios with Sundry Cobwebs' (1902), and 'Kwaidan: Stories and Studies of Strange Things' (1904). Only 'Japan: an Attempt at Interpretation' (1904) had anything analytical about it, while in each book his passionate and sometimes mystical prose so glorified Japan that Hearn has remained a favoured author among the Japanese. Hearn also held a prestigious lectureship in English at the Imperial University of Tokyo from 1896 to 1903. He seems to have been universally beloved by his students, who remembered him as gentle and affectionate, devoid of the anger and paranoia that so upset his human relationships in the West, though partial blindness and chronic illness continued to plague him. 
On 26 September 1904, at his 'yashiki' in Okubo, Toyko, Hearn died from a heart attack, surrounded by his wife and children -- Kazuo, Iwao, Kiyoshi, and Suzuko. He was buried in Tokyo's Zoshigaya Buddhist cemetery in a ceremony attended by more than 200 Japanese. A century after his death, Hearn's popularity is still evident in Japan's wealth of Hearn museums and other 'Hearniana'. His stories are still used to teach children English, and 'Kwaidan' was made into a film by the Japanese director Masaki Kobayashi, winner at the Cannes Film Festival in 1965. Wrote Yone Noguchi, the celebrated Japanese poet, 'To denounce Hearn is the same thing as a denunciation of Japan. Lafcadio Hearn was as Japanese as haiku' (Noguchi, 20). 


@@@@@


doc= 41245


Praeger, Robert Lloyd (1865-1953), naturalist and author, was born on 25 August 1865 at The Crescent, Holywood, co. Down, the second of the six children of Willem Emil Praeger (died 1884), linen merchant, and his wife, Maria, daughter of Robert Patterson. Praeger's father was of Dutch extraction and had emigrated to Belfast in 1860 to set up a linen exporting business, in partnership with his brother in The Hague. His maternal family, the Pattersons, were prosperous Belfast dissenters with many interests in the fields of antiquities, art, local history, and natural history. In 1868 the Praegers moved to Woodburn House, Croft Road, Holywood, a newly built semi-detached villa. Next door was Croft House, a large house owned by Robert's maternal uncle Robert Lloyd Patterson (1836-1906), himself an avid naturalist. Robert, or Robin, enjoyed extra-curricular tuition in natural history so that by the age of six, he later claimed, he could identify the quartz, feldspar, and mica in a specimen of granite from the Mourne Mountains (Praeger, 'The Way', 8). Early membership of the Belfast Naturalists' field club brought him into contact with other amateur naturalists from his area and provided opportunities for wider exploration in the north-east of Ireland. 
Following his early education at Sullivan Lower School, Holywood, Praeger attended the Royal Belfast Academical Institution (1876-1882) before proceeding to Queen's College, Belfast, where he graduated BA (1885) and BEng. (1886). His first employment was as an engineer working on the enlargements to Belfast harbour between 1886 and 1888; this gave him an opportunity to study fossil shells in the estuarine clays and stimulated a lifelong interest in Quaternary history. At this period he also conducted botanical research on the ferns of Ulster with William H. Phillips and the flowers of the Mourne Mountains with Samuel Alexander Stewart. 
In 1888 Praeger passed up the opportunity of a permanent contract in engineering and began to cast around for an alternative which would allow him to devote his main energies to natural history. He eventually secured a position in 1893 as a librarian at the National Library in Dublin, where he worked until 1923. This was the beginning of a prolific period of fieldwork, publishing, and organizing of scientific societies. The establishment of a monthly journal, 'The Irish Naturalist', by Praeger and George Herbert Carpenter in 1892 provided the natural history movement with an outlet for regular publication of sightings, finds, and distributional papers. In 1895 Praeger launched the Irish Field Club Union, uniting all the field clubs in Ireland, in order to co-ordinate fieldwork and to report on progress in the different branches of natural history. Praeger's energies, as well as his indifference to bad weather and physical discomfort, were now famous in field club circles: a friend celebrated his calf muscles to contemporaries as 'one of the seven wonders of Dublin' (Aleyn Reade to Praeger, 1 May 1941, Praeger Collection, 10:77); on a trip to Fermanagh in 1904, when three-and-a-half out of five days rained, he decided 'not to mind it; so I put in an average of twelve hours' field work each day, and every evening returned, dripping but happy' ('Among the Fermanagh Hills', 'The Irish Naturalist', 13, 1904, 232). 
While Praeger continued with research into estuarine clays and glacial deposits, botany and Irish plant distribution became his major interest. His 'Irish Topographical Botany' appeared in 1901 following a marathon programme of summer fieldwork lasting five years. He subsequently concentrated on the floral communities of Irish islands and organized a multidisciplinary survey of Lambay Island, co. Dublin, in 1907. The results of this survey included ninety additions to the Irish flora and fauna, including seventeen new British species and five which were new to science. These findings prompted the Royal Irish Academy, where Praeger was already an influential member, to sponsor a larger survey of Clare Island in Clew Bay, co. Mayo. When it finally appeared under Praeger's editorship the Clare Island survey (1911-15) listed 3219 plant species and 5269 animal species of which 11 and 109, respectively, were new to science. Despite these findings the survey failed in its stated aim to demonstrate endemism on Clare Island. 
On a holiday visit to Germany in 1901 Praeger met Hedwig (Hedi), daughter of the artist Christian Carl Magnussen. They were married the following year and set up home at Lisnamae, Zion Road, in Rathgar, a prosperous Dublin suburb. The Praegers had no children, but theirs was a companionate marriage, with Hedwig accompanying her husband on many of his travels; accordingly he dedicated his 1937 masterpiece, 'The Way that I Went', to her, his 'dear companion in many wanderings'. 
The move to Rathgar also marked the beginning of Praeger's work as a gardener and a specialist in succulents. The garden at his new home provided him with the opportunity of growing many native and exotic species, and here he took a special interest in houseleeks ('Sempervivum') and stonecrops ('Sedum'). His cultivated collection of stonecrops eventually numbered 1500 specimens and formed the basis of his taxonomic study of the genus 'Sedum', published by the Royal Horticultural Society of London in 1921. This sedentary pursuit was suited to a period of war and upheaval in both Ireland and Europe with the restrictions placed on fieldwork. 
In 1923, following the creation of the Irish Free State, Praeger retired from his position as head librarian at the National Library and was free to pursue botanical fieldwork full time. During the 1920s Praeger and his wife made several visits to the Alps, the Canary Islands, Madeira, and the Balkans for a second taxonomic study, 'An Account of the Sempervivum Group' (1932). This taxonomic work earned him an international reputation as a botanist. 
Having published several sketches of his foreign travels in periodical and then in book form ('Beyond Soundings', 1930), Praeger discovered a facility for impressionistic prose. He committed this talent to a topographical survey of Ireland, 'The Way that I Went' (1937), based largely on personal experience; this is the book by which Praeger is known to a general readership. His findings on Irish plant distribution and habitat types culminated in 'The Botanist in Ireland' (1934); he also published a further volume of reminiscences, 'A Populous Solitude' (1941), a biographical dictionary, 'Some Irish Naturalists' (1949), and a 'Natural History of Ireland' (1950). 
During Praeger's retirement he and his wife lived at 19 Fitzwilliam Square, Dublin, where they had moved in 1922. The central location suited the Praegers, who were never car owners, as it afforded quick access to the museums, libraries, and other institutions with which Praeger had connections. In later life Praeger enjoyed many honours for his contributions to natural history, but the one which gratified him most was his election as president of the Royal Irish Academy in 1931. Twice president of the Dublin field club, he received the gold medal of the Royal Horticultural Society of Ireland in 1940 and became its president in 1949-50. He continued to enjoy vigorous physical health into the 1930s, working in a voluntary capacity as a gardener at the zoological gardens and continuing his fieldwork on Irish plant distribution. In his final years increasing deafness contributed to a brusqueness of manner while arthritis of the knee joints eventually reduced his mobility. 
Following his wife's death in 1952 Praeger settled his affairs in Dublin and returned to the north-east of Ireland, where he spent his last months at his sister Rosamond's house, Rock Cottage, Craigavad, co. Down. He died at the Musgrave and Clark Clinic, Belfast, on 5 May 1953. 


@@@@@


doc= 41247


Swiney, (Rosa) Frances Emily (1847-1922), writer and women's rights activist, was born in Poona, India, on 21 April 1847, the daughter of Ensign John Biggs of HM 8th regiment, later to become a major in the 4th Royal Irish dragoon guards, and his wife, Frances Charlotte Malden. John Biggs's family claimed descent, through the Hesketh family, from Sir Isaac Newton. Frances Biggs spent most of her childhood in Ireland, returning to India apparently in early adulthood. Her first main interest was in painting. She studied under James Danby, son of Francis Danby RA, and specialized in pictures of Indian scenery and life, exhibiting at Simla, Madras, and Birmingham. She had even intended taking up painting as a profession, but on 1 June 1871 she married Major John Swiney (1832-1918), of Donegal, who was fifteen years her senior, and became a full-time wife and mother. In 1877 Swiney returned to Britain and settled in Cheltenham, Gloucestershire, where her husband finally joined her ten years later (he retired in 1890). She soon became involved in political activity, first through the Primrose League, becoming a member of its executive council (although she later left the league) and writing pamphlets on Irish home rule of a generally Unionist character. She retained a keen interest in Irish affairs, towards the end of her life being a strong supporter of the 1921 treaty. 
Despite her apparently conventional circumstances, Swiney held many ideas popular with the radical progressive intelligentsia of her day, and was an active member of such bodies as the Malthusian League, the Secular Education League, and the Eugenic Education Society. Her eugenic beliefs led her to write a series of leaflets entitled 'Racial Poisons', warning of the dangers of such things as alcohol, tobacco, and syphilis. However, her main political and philosophical interest was in feminism. She became involved with the Women's Emancipation Union, and in 1896 joined with Harriet McIlquham and others to form the Cheltenham Women's Suffrage Society, of which she remained the president until it merged with the local Women Citizens' Association in 1920. Despite her long connection with Cheltenham, she seems to have found campaigning there hard, and described it on her retirement from the suffrage society as 'the town of no ideas'; on one occasion in 1913 she was mobbed while attempting to address a meeting on women's suffrage. Although her main official position linked her to the eventually non-militant National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies, she also joined the highly militant Women's Social and Political Union and the Women's Freedom League, and strongly defended militant action. In addition, from about 1907 she was the moving force behind the League of Isis, although she attributed its origin to Henry Ancketill of Durban, Natal. The object of the league was to promote the protection of maternity and more rational and humane sex relations generally. The league regularly met in the Eustace Miles Restaurant, London, and by 1911 it also had branches in New York, South Africa, and India. 
At a time that saw a great flowering of feminist activity and theoretical writing, Frances Swiney stood out as a highly original feminist thinker. Her writing increasingly reflected her interest in a theosophical matriarchalism, and an evolutionary philosophy of feminism. As she put it in 'Woman and Natural Law' (1912), she believed that '[t]he first male cell, and the first male organism, was an initial failure on the part of the maternal organism to reproduce its like, and was due to a chemical deficiency in the metabolism or physique of the mother'; much of her writing was concerned to redress the malign effects of that failure. A major feature of her work which has contributed to her popularity with more recent feminists was her view that women should have control over their own sexuality, expressed in terms similar to those of radical feminists such as Elizabeth Wolstenholme Elmy, as, for example, in her insistence that the female alone should have the right to regulate sexual intercourse. 
Swiney's many feminist publications began with 'The Plea of Disfranchised Women', published in 1897 under the auspices of the Women's Emancipation Union, and continued regularly thereafter, including such titles as 'The Awakening of Women' (2nd edn, 1905), 'The Bar of Isis' (1907), and 'The Cosmic Procession' (1906). She was a frequent contributor to periodicals. From 1902 to 1914 she wrote a regular column entitled 'Women among the nations' for Jaakoff Prelooker's monthly 'The Anglo-Russian', a paper which, as well as informing a British readership of the political situation in Russia, carried considerable information on feminist movements in Europe and the United States. In addition, from 1912 to 1914 she regularly wrote for 'The Christian Commonwealth', and at this time she also frequently contributed to the American feminist paper 'The Woman's Tribune'. Above all, in 1913 and 1914 she wrote a series of major articles on sexuality for 'The Awakener', the journal of the Men's League for Women's Rights, a body campaigning against the traffic in women and for women's suffrage. 
Swiney's last major work, and the culmination of her philosophical beliefs, was 'The Ancient Road, or, The Development of the Soul' (1918). However, that year also saw the death of General Swiney, at the age of eighty-six, and she herself did not long outlive him; she died of bronchial asthma on 3 May 1922 at her home, Sandford Lawn, Bath Road, Cheltenham, and was buried in Leckhampton churchyard three days later. She was survived by four sons and a daughter, all of whom had seen distinguished service in the First World War. 


@@@@@


doc= 41248


Hancock, William Neilson (1820-1888), lawyer and economist, was born on 22 April 1820, at Lisburn, co. Antrim, the second son of William John Hancock, land agent and later a poor-law commissioner, and his wife, Mary, daughter of Samuel Neilson of Belfast, who took part in the 1798 rebellion. He was educated at the Royal Belfast Academical Institution from 1830 to 1834 and at the Royal School, Dungannon, co. Tyrone, from 1834 to 1838. From there he entered the University of Dublin, Trinity College; he graduated BA in 1843 with a senior moderatorship and gold medal in mathematics. Called to the Irish bar in 1844, Hancock took the degrees of LLB in 1846 and LLD in 1849. In 1846 he entered for the quinquennial examination by which the Whately chair of political economy in the University of Dublin was then filled, and was the successful candidate. In some of his published lectures Hancock showed considerable potential as an economic theorist; but since the magnitude of the calamity which the potato blight had brought upon Ireland was becoming evident, Archbishop Whately suggested to him that he give first priority to considering the relevance of economic doctrine to the case of Ireland, and from that time onwards all Hancock's economic work was applied and policy-oriented. 
In 1847 Hancock was the prime mover in founding the Dublin Statistical Society (later renamed the Statistical and Social Inquiry Society of Ireland) and he went on to play a major role in the society's development. When the new Queen's College at Belfast opened in 1849, Hancock became its first professor of jurisprudence and political economy, and for the next two years he discharged the duties of both the Dublin and Belfast chairs. In 1851 he took up residence in Belfast, but in the same year he was appointed secretary to the royal commission inquiring into the affairs of Dublin University. He resigned from the Queen's College post in 1853 and thereafter used his economic and legal expertise in a series of public appointments while continuing his legal practice in Dublin. 
Hancock once described himself as a 'liberal unionist' and when Liberal governments were in power he was frequently asked for advice or reports on economic and social questions, as well as being appointed to a number of mainly legal offices. He acted as secretary to four other royal commissions between 1854 and 1867 and was clerk of the custody of papers in matters of idiots and lunatics in the court of chancery from 1855 until 1858, and again from 1859 to 1866. From 1863 until 1873 he was responsible for judicial, criminal, and local taxation statistics for Ireland and gained a high reputation for accuracy and fairness in collecting and compiling them. He became a QC in 1880, but gave up his practice at the bar in 1881 on being appointed keeper of the records of the Irish land commission; his last public appointment brought him back to the Irish court of chancery, as clerk of the crown and hanaper, from which office he resigned in 1885 because of ill health. In 1858 Hancock married Mary Anne (Nannie), daughter of James Haughton of Dublin. He died, as the result of a heart attack, at Craigpeatton Cove, the Dunbartonshire home of his brother-in-law James Thomson on 10 July 1888. Survived by his wife, he was buried a week later at Mount Jerome cemetery, Harold's Cross, Dublin. 
Hancock was an energetic, compassionate, and fair-minded man, eager for economic and political reform, who strove to reconcile the principles of political economy as he knew them with the needs and problems of the Ireland of his time. His initial conviction was that 'the true business of government' was to establish a framework of just laws within which private enterprise could, and would, ensure progress to prosperity. In later life, however, he came to recognize that more positive action by government was necessary and inevitable, particularly on the question of land tenure in Ireland; the advice on which Gladstone acted in framing his 'Irish Land Bill' in 1869-70, the first measure to recognize the tenants' right to compensation for improvements and damages for eviction, came largely from Hancock. 


@@@@@


doc= 41252


Wagner, Arthur Douglas (1824-1902), Church of England clergyman, was born on 13 June 1824 at Park Hill, Windsor; he was the only child of Henry Michell Wagner (1792-1870), clerk in holy orders, and his first wife, Elizabeth Harriott (1797-1829), daughter of the Revd William Douglas, vicar of Gillingham in Dorset, chancellor of Salisbury Cathedral, and canon of Westminster. Wagner's father was tutor to the sons of the first duke of Wellington until his appointment to the vicarage of Brighton and West Blatchington in Sussex, to which he was inducted on 30 July 1824. Wagner was educated at Eton College (1835-42) and at Trinity College, Cambridge (1842-6), where he took an honours degree in mathematics. He was ordained deacon in 1848 and priest in 1849, serving as curate to his father, who, between 1846 and 1849, built the new church of St Paul at Brighton. Henry Wagner intended that St Paul's should be served by his son, who was appointed its first perpetual curate in January 1850. Wagner's father was a pre-Tractarian high-churchman and Wagner himself was strongly influenced by the Tractarian movement. The new church of St Paul was designed by one of the leading Tractarian architects, Richard Cromwell Carpenter, and it was the first church in Brighton at which an advanced ritual, including eventually the use of vestments and incense, was adopted. Wagner remained at St Paul's for the whole of his ministry, becoming its first vicar when a parish was assigned to the church in 1873. 
In 1855 Wagner founded a sisterhood in connection with St Paul's, the Community of the Blessed Virgin Mary. Wagner and the sisterhood became the source of controversy in 1865 when Constance Kent, who was a nurse at the home for the reclamation of prostitutes established by the community, was tried for the murder, some five years earlier, of her half-brother. She had voluntarily admitted to the murder after having made a sacramental act of confession to Wagner, who at the trial refused to answer questions relating to this confession. Public meetings were organized in Brighton to protest against Wagner's actions, and he was assaulted in the street. 
Wagner never married. He continued to live at Brighton vicarage until his father's death in 1870, when he moved into the neighbouring house, Belvedere, which he had inherited from his aunt Mary Ann Wagner in 1868. He used his wealth to carry on the tradition established by his father by building four further churches in Brighton: St Mary Magdalene (1862), the Annunciation (1864), the vast and austere St Bartholomew, in Ann Street (1874), and St Martin (1875). In 1873 he purchased Totease Hall at Buxted in Sussex, in which parish he erected a new church between 1885 and 1886. Altogether Wagner is estimated to have spent some $70,000 during his lifetime on financing churches, schools, and even houses for his poorer parishioners. 
Wagner lived an ascetic life, though in later life he became extremely stout; he was looked after by his two unmarried cousins, Elizabeth and Fanny Coombe. His only luxuries were the purchase of books and manuscripts. After his death the sale of his library, which totalled 12,000 volumes, took three days. He was not considered a good preacher and published very little: 'Parochial Sermons Bearing on the Subjects of the Day' (1855), 'Reasons for Disobeying on Principle' (1874), 'Christ or Caesar: an Open Letter to the Archbishop of Canterbury' (1874), and 'Christ or Caesar, Part II: a Letter to the Lord Bishop of Chichester' (1877). The last three pamphlets were attacks on the 'Public Worship Regulation Act' and the courts created by it for suppressing illegal ritual in the Church of England. Although Wagner used illegal ritual at St Paul's in Brighton, no attempt was ever made to prosecute him under the provisions of the act. His brand of ritualism became popularly known as the 'London, Brighton, and South Coast Religion'. 
By 1896 Wagner was in failing health and mentally incapable of administering his own affairs; his parish was run by curates. Attempts were made to persuade him to resign but they were unsuccessful. After six years of further decline he died on 14 January 1902 at his house, Belvedere, and was buried four days later, wearing full eucharistic vestments, at Lewes Road cemetery in Brighton. Large congregations attended the requiem masses said for him at all the churches in Brighton which he had helped to establish, and 3000 people attended the interment. Part of his estate, valued at $49,907 15's'. 6died, was used to provide endowments for the churches and the sisterhood that he had founded in his lifetime. 


@@@@@


doc= 41297


Catherine Marsh (1818-1912), philanthropist and writer, was the youngest of William Marsh's five children and his fourth daughter. Born on 15 September 1818 at St Peter's vicarage, Colchester, she lived with her father and later wrote his biography. During the 1850s in Beckenham, she became concerned for the spiritual welfare of the labourers working on the re-erection of the Crystal Palace nearby and for the many soldiers setting out for the Crimean War. 'Memorials of Captain Hedley Vicars' (1855), her emotive biography of an earnest Christian killed in the war, caught the heroic mood of the day, selling 78,000 copies in its first year of publication. Likewise, the account of her work among the navvies given in 'English Hearts and English Hands' (1857) was reassuring in its positive approach to the labouring masses. She also established a convalescence hospital in Brighton during the cholera epidemic in 1866. She died on 12 December 1912 at Feltwell rectory, Norfolk, and was buried at Upshire, Essex, on 17 December. 


@@@@@


doc= 41999


Hussey, (John) Walter Atherton (1909-1985), dean of Chichester and patron of the arts, was born at St Matthew's Parade, Northampton, on 15 May 1909, son of Canon John Rowden Hussey (1864-1949), vicar of St Matthew's, Northampton, and his wife, Lilian Mary Atherton (died 1946). The second of two surviving sons, he attended the Knoll, a preparatory school at Woburn Sands, and Marlborough College, before reading philosophy, politics, and economics at Keble College, Oxford (1927-1930). For a short period he served as a schoolmaster at Charleston, Sussex, then went to study theology at Cuddesdon (1931-2). He was ordained to a curacy at St Mary Abbots, Kensington (1932), and was in charge of the daughter church of St Paul (1935-6). In 1937 he succeeded his father as vicar of St Matthew's parish church, Northampton, remaining there until nominated dean of Chichester in 1955. 
Hussey's role as an ecclesiastical patron of the arts began in earnest when, in 1943, he commissioned Benjamin Britten to write the cantata 'Rejoice in the Lamb' to mark the fiftieth anniversary of St Matthew's Church. The words of the cantata, from an eighteenth-century poem by Christopher Smart, came to epitomize Hussey's own attitude to the relationship between religion and the arts, and between sanctity and aesthetics: '
Hallelujah from the heart of God, 

and from the hand of the artist inimitable, 

and from the echo of the heavenly harp 

in sweetness magnifical and mighty. 

' At a time when church decoration was languishing in mass-produced Victorianism, and when art itself was often considered unjustifiable luxury work, Hussey sought to re-establish the church's connection with modern artists, musicians, and writers of high calibre. Henry Moore's sculpture 'Madonna and Child' (1943), with its neo-romantic emphasis on the nurturing body, and Graham Sutherland's painting 'The Crucifixion' (1946), which consciously alluded to the atrocities of the Nazi death camps, were installed in opposite transepts of the parish church. These images echoed Hussey's own sacramental, catholic theology, and attested to his astuteness as a patron. At the time of their unveiling, both works were heavily criticized in the press: the 'Madonna' for being 'grotesque' and 'an insult to every woman', and the 'Crucifixion' for its modernist style and uncompromising portrayal of suffering and degradation (Hussey, 'Patron of Art', 45, 67-73). However, Hussey had the support of his congregation, and of Kenneth Clark, director of the National Gallery. Moreover, the unity of these art works with their liturgical and architectural context has been attested by more recent critics. They certainly document the catholic preoccupation with synthesis and balance: between the Christian doctrines of incarnation and redemption, between neo-romanticism and artistic modernism, between peaceful detachment and impassioned protest, and between the consciousness of beatitude and the conviction of the sin which perpetrates the most horrifying atrocities. 
These commissions, combined with a broadcast from the church by the BBC Symphony Orchestra in 1943, two performances by the soprano Kirsten Flagstad in 1947 and 1948, a litany and anthem written by the poet W. H. Auden for the patronal festival in 1946, and the publication in pamphlet form of Norman Nicholson's poem 'The Outer Planet' in 1949, served to place St Matthew's Church at the centre of a small renaissance of religious art. It was not a coincidence that this occurred amid 1940s austerity; Hussey's sacramental aesthetic, like that of Bishop Bell of Chichester, was nourished by a conviction that the vision of the artist, in conjunction with that of the church, was a weapon in the spiritual arsenal of 'Christian civilization', essential for combating the cultural influence of totalitarianism. 
Hussey's reputation for inspired art patronage, combined with highly aesthetic catholic liturgical celebration, was firmly established by the 1950s, and his appointment as dean of Chichester in 1955 transformed the cathedral into a thriving centre of ecclesiastical and artistic co-operation. By his retirement in 1977 Hussey's vision of a renewed tradition of religious art was amply attested by the decoration of the church itself, which contained significant works of modern art alongside medieval sculptures and architectural features, painstakingly restored. Ceri Richards designed a set of copes in 1960, Graham Sutherland contributed a painting, 'Noli me tangere' (1961), John Piper designed an imposing tapestry for the altar reredos (1966), and 1978 saw the unveiling of a window illustrating 'Psalm 150', designed by Marc Chagall. As Alan Doig has commented, the artistic objects commissioned by Hussey for the cathedral possess a 'calm completeness' which enhances the sense of continuity between the medieval and the modern (Doig, 18). At Hussey's instigation, a Victorian wooden choir screen was replaced by the restored fifteenth-century stone screen, two twelfth-century Romanesque carvings of 'New Testament' scenes were newly displayed, and, among other musical commissions, Leonard Bernstein wrote settings for the 'Chichester Psalms' in 1965, and William Albright a 'Chichester Mass' in 1975. 
In the year of his retirement, Hussey wrote movingly of the relationship between the church and the arts: '[The artist] can purge our imagination. He may, by forcing us to share his vision, lead us to the spiritual reality that lies behind the sounds and sights that we perceive with our senses. If all this be so, the true artist is one of the most valuable and honourable members of society and his work one of the highest activities of man... Art of high standard can and should be offered to God and in the offering symbolise all that should be offered by mankind. (Hussey, 'The arts and the church', 1)' That uncomplicated theological perception was the driving force behind Hussey's determination to invite modern artists to rejoin the life of the church, and the enthusiasm with which he approached that task is evident in his one book, 'Patron of Art' (1985). Following a stroke, Hussey died on 25 July 1985 at St Stephen's Hospital, Chelsea, London. After his death his enormous private collection (which had become very valuable) was inherited by Pallant House in Chichester, and by the Northampton City Museum and Art Gallery. His estate was valued for probate at $1,370,620. 


@@@@@


doc= 42000


Gower, Elizabeth Leveson-, duchess of Sutherland and 'suo jure' countess of Sutherland (1765-1839), landowner, was born on 24 May 1765 at Leven Lodge, near Edinburgh, the youngest and only surviving child of William Sutherland, eighteenth earl of Sutherland (1735-1766) and his wife, Mary ('c'.1740-1766), daughter and coheir of William Maxwell. Both parents died of 'putrid fever' in Bath in 1766, leaving the family, for the first time in five and a half centuries, with no direct male heir. Lady Sutherland was brought up by her maternal grandmother, Lady Alva; her interests, as an orphan, were placed in the care of tutors whose directives were executed by the general commissioner of the Sutherland estates. The succession to the title was disputed by several claimants but her tutors successfully defended her case in the House of Lords in 1771, tracing her descent from William, earl of Sutherland, in 1275. She thus inherited, under an entail of 1706, the ancient earldom and estate of Sutherland, as well as lands acquired subsequently, notably the barony of Assynt. 
Between 1779 and 1782 Elizabeth Sutherland was educated in London, and she lived mainly there and in Edinburgh. She married on 4 September 1785 George Granville Leveson-Gower, Viscount Trentham (1758-1833), known as Earl Gower from 1786, who in 1803 succeeded his father as second marquess of Stafford. The marriage settlement instituted a fresh enfeoffment in terms of the entail on the Sutherland estates, which were arranged on life rent to her husband. This was a prelude to further acquisitions of land in the county, including the Skelbo estate, so that by 1816 two-thirds of the county of Sutherland was in the hands of the Sutherland family. Further purchases of land continued to be made until the death of her husband in 1833, just six months after he was created duke of Sutherland. The huge highland estate had been heavily tied up in the hands of mortgagors who, from the 1790s, were progressively displaced to make way for a new management regime. A new philosophy of modernization and improvement (from the landowners' perspective) was inaugurated. Lady Sutherland (as she continued to be known) was the driving force behind much of the change, having shown interest in management questions since before her marriage. After 1803 the policy was accelerated, leading to a radical agrarian transformation of the estate which drew heavily on her husband's great wealth. Ambitious building and industrial projects grew as highland small tenants were removed from the interior to settlements on the coast. The family employed professional managers, notably James Loch, to undertake and shape the massive changes (and to bear the brunt of the vociferous criticisms of the policy). The countess visited Sutherland regularly and was fully apprised of the nature and consequences of these highly controversial changes. She was the target of great hatred in the northern highlands, though the policy of highland clearance also had its supporters, who considered the changes necessary, inevitable, and benevolent. Lady Sutherland endeavoured to counteract the adverse publicity surrounding the clearances, but with little success. 
Like many aristocratic women of the period, Elizabeth Sutherland's interests were not confined to her estates. She accompanied her husband to Paris in May 1790 on his appointment as ambassador, at the height of the French Revolution, and wrote interesting descriptions of the political turbulence. She sent clothing to the imprisoned Marie Antoinette, an act which was reputed to be the last gesture of kindness shown to the doomed queen. The family experienced some difficulty in leaving France, finally departing in 1792. At the time Lady Sutherland's passport described her as 'five feet in height, hair and eyebrows light chestnut, eyes dark chestnut, nose well-formed, mouth small, chin round, forehead low, face somewhat long'. In 1793 she raised a regiment, the Sutherland fencibles, which in 1798 was employed in quelling the Irish rising. In the 1790s, she and her husband were closely connected with George Canning, one of her many male admirers, who regarded her as beautiful, intelligent, and charming. Other women regarded her as rather overbearing. She became a leading hostess in London, where she gave sumptuous dinners attended by royalty, aristocrats, and statesmen from Britain and abroad. 
Privately, Lady Sutherland spent much of her time raising her four children, sketching (she was a gifted watercolourist, and was especially accomplished in her landscapes of the Sutherland coast and of Dunrobin Castle), corresponding with Sir Walter Scott, and consuming snuff. She dominated her sons and probably her husband as well. One of the main aims of her life was to maximize the personal fortunes of both of her sons, George Granville (1786-1861), who became second duke of Sutherland, and Francis Egerton (1800-1857), created earl of Ellesmere, and to make the best marriages for her daughters, Charlotte Sophia (1788-1870), who became duchess of Norfolk, and Elizabeth Mary (1797-1891), who became marchioness of Westminster. From the death of her husband until her own death, the Scottish estates were administered separately on her behalf. 
The duchess-countess of Sutherland, as she was known after her husband's elevation to a dukedom, died tranquilly on 29 January 1839 at Hamilton Place, Hyde Park, London. She was buried on 20 February, with great state, at Dornoch, in Sutherland. 


@@@@@


doc= 42006


Lyttelton, Alfred (1857-1913), sportsman and politician, was born on 7 February 1857 at Hagley Hall, Worcestershire. He was the eighth son and youngest of the twelve children of George William Lyttelton, fourth Baron Lyttelton (1817-1876), and his wife, Mary Glynne (1813-1857) (W. E. Gladstone's sister-in-law). Arthur Temple Lyttelton and Edward Lyttelton were his brothers. His mother, exhausted by child bearing, died six months after his birth. Despite this and his father's melancholia, Alfred Lyttelton had a serene and sunny disposition that was noticed by all. Brought up in a sporting and especially a cricketing family (which could field an eleven composed only of Lytteltons), he went to a preparatory school in Brighton and then to Eton College (Evans's house) in January 1868, where he was tutored by W. Johnson Cory, who encouraged him to study history. At Eton he was known as a supreme all-round sportsman. Curzon, his friend there, later wrote that 'no athlete was ever quite such an athlete, and no boyish hero was ever quite such a hero as was Alfred Lyttelton'. The rest of his life, Lyttelton felt, was to an extent an anticlimax. In 1875 he went to Trinity College, Cambridge, where he was an Apostle as well as the leading cricketer of his day. He was disappointed with a second class in history, but played cricket for Cambridge from 1876 until 1879, when he captained an undefeated team. He took up royal tennis at Cambridge, and held the amateur championship from 1882 until 1896, while continuing to play cricket. With little family money available, he was called to the bar in 1881 and made a steady income. From 1882 to 1885 he was legal private secretary to Sir Henry James, the attorney-general. He resisted Gladstone's attempts -- intense after 1886 -- to persuade him to stand as a Liberal, preferring instead the social life of the Souls, though he was untainted by their decadence. In that context he met (Octavia) Laura Tennant ['see below'], whom he married in May 1885. She died following childbirth eleven months later, leaving a son who died from tubercular meningitis in 1888. Their romance and her early death added to Alfred Lyttelton's reputation as a man apart. On 18 April 1892 he married Edith Sophy Balfour ['see 'Lyttelton, Dame Edith Sophy (1865-1948)], also a Soul and daughter of Archibald Balfour, a London businessman. They had two sons and a daughter, one of the sons dying in infancy. The surviving son, Oliver Lyttelton, was a member of Churchill's war cabinet. Her memoir of her husband shows a dispassionate and shrewd mind. 
Unwilling to buck the family tradition during Gladstone's political lifetime, Lyttelton waited until 1894 overtly to declare his Liberal Unionism. He was Liberal Unionist MP for Warwick and Leamington from 1895 to 1906. He also increased his standing at the bar, being recorder of Hereford, 1893-4, and of Oxford, 1894-1903, and taking silk in 1900. In that year Joseph Chamberlain rather surprisingly sent him to South Africa as chairman of the Transvaal concessions commission to plan post-war reconstruction, his elder brother Neville Lyttelton becoming commander-in-chief at almost the same time. Alfred Lyttelton impressed Milner, who suggested to Chamberlain that he should succeed him as high commissioner. 
On Chamberlain's resignation in September 1903, Lyttelton was appointed colonial secretary, a dramatic elevation and one for which he felt himself unprepared and unsuited. He accepted, against the advice of his officials, demands from Milner and the mine owners for indentured labour to solve the labour shortage in South Africa; the Chinese Labour Ordinance of 12 March 1904 led to the outcry over 'Chinese slavery' and 50,000 Chinese on the Rand, an important factor in the 1906 election, though the Liberals, once in office, were unable immediately to cancel the ordinance. He also, by letters patent of 31 March 1905, granted representative government to the Transvaal, a constitution abrogated by his Liberal successor on 8 February 1906. In April 1905 Lyttelton sent a dispatch advocating what he hoped would become a permanent 'imperial council'; the Unionist government fell before this body met and the Liberals used the traditional term 'colonial conference', and abandoned Lyttelton's proposal for a permanent secretariat. As in all his major initiatives as colonial secretary, Lyttelton acted against the advice of his officials. 
Lyttelton lost his seat in the 1906 general election, but was unopposed for St George's, Hanover Square, at a by-election in June 1906. He held the seat easily in 1910. He did not return to the bar but was a director of the London and Westminster Bank and other companies. He opposed Welsh disestablishment, advocated housing and town-planning reform, and supported women's suffrage and the government's 'Trade Boards Bill' to improve conditions in sweated industries. He was an active supporter of the university settlement movement. 
In 1913 Lyttelton and his family took a holiday in east Africa, but he was unable to throw off lassitude, though continuing his duties. While scoring 89 in a cricket match at Bethnal Green he was struck in the stomach and developed an abscess, from which he died on 5 July 1913 at 3 Devonshire Terrace, London, a nursing home. He was buried in Hagley churchyard. The Oxford-Cambridge cricket match was briefly stopped to mark his passing and H. H. Asquith gave a memorable tribute to the Commons on 8 July. If Lyttelton's pre-eminence was that of the cricketer, his colonial secretaryship was bolder and more coherent in its imperial objectives -- unpopular though they were -- than might have been expected from one often regarded as a charming, Corinthian dilettante. Like a hero in a Buchan novel, he touched a nerve in his contemporaries, prompting Asquith, his political opponent, to say of him that 'he, perhaps of all men of this generation, came nearest to the mould and ideal of manhood, which every English father would like to see his son aspire to, and if possible to attain'. 

(Octavia) Laura Lyttelton (1862-1886) was the daughter of Sir Charles Tennant and his first wife, Emma Winsloe. She was a prominent Soul and led an emancipated, flirtatious life, smoothly moving from the manufacturing background of her family into the odd mixture of liberation and snobbery which constituted the Souls. Adolphus Liddell and Gerald Balfour were two of her conquests. She seems to have selected Alfred Lyttelton in a search for stability and security. She was ambivalent about her engagement ('the fact is marriage is a lower form of life -- a happier, I am sure, but a more egotistical'; Jalland, 108) but successfully projected with her husband the image of a perfect couple. Her early death, on 24 April 1886, eight days after childbirth and possibly weakened by tuberculosis, shocked society and created an enduring legend. 


@@@@@


doc= 42007


Dymoke family (per. c.1340-c.1580), king's champions, claimed their right to that office through their tenure of Scrivelsby, Lincolnshire. The family's first successful claimant was 


@@@@@


doc= 42009


Ashworth, Edmund (1800-1881), cotton manufacturer and free-trade activist, was born on 17 November 1800 at Birtenshaw, Turton, near Bolton, the fifth of the eleven children of John Ashworth (1772-1855), farmer, land agent, and cotton spinner, and his wife, Isabel Thomasson (1772-1852). Edmund was a younger brother of Henry Ashworth (1794-1880), a founder of the Anti-Corn Law League. John Ashworth became a Quaker shortly before marrying Edmund's mother in 1793, and Edmund was raised in the Quaker tradition. He received his early education at schools in Bolton and Manchester, but later studied chemistry under John Dalton. In 1831 Edmund married Charlotte Christy (died 1868) of Chelmsford, Essex, the daughter of Thomas Christy, a wealthy Quaker business associate of the Ashworths. They had nine children, and lived at Egerton Hall, Turton. 
Ashworth joined the cotton-spinning firm of John and Edmund Ashworth, his father and uncle respectively, in 1821. At this early stage they were running a fairly modest business at New Eagley Mills, Turton. Edmund and Henry Ashworth (who had joined in 1818), each took one fifth of the profits, though this was increased to one quarter in 1824. From 1831 onwards they were the sole partners in the firm of Henry and Edmund Ashworth. They invested heavily in their own business, and expansion was rapid throughout the 1820s and 1830s. They purchased a partly built mill at Egerton in the early 1830s, finished building it, and equipped it with some of the best machinery then available. By 1835 when they became the sole owners of the mill, it had a spindleage of 49,000 and a dye works. At the same time New Eagley had a total spindleage of 29,000. By 1854 they had added a weaving shed housing 290 looms at New Eagley and employed 1000 people. Good-quality housing, schools, and leisure facilities were also provided for employees. 
Edmund Ashworth declined the invitation to stand for one of Bolton's parliamentary seats in 1837 and 1841, but after the Liberals failed to win a seat in 1837, he helped to secure the charter of incorporation for the town the following year. He never sought election to the borough council. Despite his disinclination to hold public office, however, he remained politically active. He was prominent in both the Anti-Corn Law League and in the Manchester chamber of commerce, then at the height of its powers. Despite his general opposition to trade unionists and Chartists, he solicited their support for the free-trade campaign; he advocated non-payment of taxes, and urged members of parliament who supported free trade to hold up other parliamentary business. It was during this period that one contemporary commented that Edmund was 'a Quaker of the fighting school' (J. W. Croker, 'Anti-corn-law agitation', 'Quarterly Review', 1, Dec 1842). However, Ashworth did not completely sever his links with Lancashire's gentry and while fighting for the free-trade cause he was also a correspondent and guest of one of the largest Lancashire gentry families, conversing on agricultural matters and attending farming meetings. Ten years later he was to issue a tract on salmon farming. 
This political activity, as well as the hardships of the 1840s caused strain on the partnership between the Ashworth brothers. Some of the ensuing disputes were dealt with by Quaker arbitrators, but as the families of Henry and Edmund Ashworth grew, the dissolution of the partnership became more inevitable. This was done in 1854, with Edmund Ashworth taking control of Egerton Mill while Henry took control of New Eagley. In 1864 Edmund retired and control of the firm passed to his sons, Edmund and Samuel, though he remained a senior partner. Edmund Ashworth & Sons was one of the fourteen firms that combined in 1898 to form the English Sewing Cotton Company. 
After the battles of the 1840s had been won, Ashworth became less active politically, and the will to expand the business further subsided. The 'Bolton Free Press', a Liberal newspaper in which the brothers were principal shareholders, ceased publication in 1847, and despite assisting Cobden to negotiate the Anglo-French commercial treaty in 1860, and involvement with the Cotton Supply Association, Ashworth's public life was rather more limited than it had been previously. On the resignation of Henry from the Manchester chamber of commerce in 1868, Edmund Ashworth became vice-president. He declined the presidency in 1871, but took the office from 1875 to 1877. The chamber was not the force it had previously been, however. He was spending more time hunting in Egerton and Scotland, as well as spending much time in Southport. He was appointed to the Lancashire magistracy on 20 April 1847 and served for thirty-four years, during which time he sat on various committees, including the building committee for the new prison in Manchester, and the Salford district finance committee, of both of which he was chairman. He was also chairman of the newly formed Turton urban district council from 1872 to 1880. Ashworth died on 21 March 1881 at the Prince of Wales Hotel, Southport, and was buried at Walmsley church, Egerton, near Bolton. 
Although Edmund Ashworth has failed to make the same impact on the historical record as Henry, this is likely to be an accident of the archives rather than a reflection of his contemporary significance. He was clearly a competent and motivated business man, was politically active and outspoken, and evoked both the respect and criticisms of his contemporaries. 


@@@@@


doc= 42012


Princess Sophia (1777-1848), the next year, on 3 November. 


@@@@@


doc= 42015


Stuart, Lady Louisa (1757-1851), author, was born on 12 August 1757, the youngest of the eleven children of George III's prime minister, John Stuart, third earl of Bute (1713-1792). Her mother, Mary (1718-1794), to whom she was greatly attached, was the daughter of Edward Wortley Montagu of Wortley and his wife, Lady Mary Wortley Montagu. The presence of this grandmother was a notable element in her rich dynastic background, with its royal blood and its interlocking Stuarts, Scotts, and Campbells, but a 'tainted' one too, as she confided in a letter ('Letters... to Miss Louisa Clinton', 2.354). No such suggestion figures in her important 'Introductory anecdotes', concerning Lady Mary, which was published anonymously in 1837. By the age of ten she had begun to take after her grandmother, having embarked upon a French novel and planned a Roman play, and she was to feel threatened by brothers who teased her for her sensibility and learning. 'Such are men', she once sighed, with reference to the brother of her closest female friend, Frances Scott, eventually Lady Douglas (Miller, 29). Louisa's own brothers included John Stuart, first marquess of Bute, Sir Charles Stuart (1753-1801), and William Stuart, archbishop of Armagh. 
In 1765 Lady Louisa's father retired from a bruising experience of political life to the grandeur and seclusion of Luton Hoo and the pursuit of botany. He is understood to have forbidden her marriage to a second cousin, the distinguished soldier William Medows, who campaigned against Tipu Sultan in the Carnatic and took part in the seizure of Seringapatam. She was thought to have worn mourning clothes at his death in 1813. 
Lady Louisa Stuart was a gifted writer who hoped, for reasons of caste, never to see her name in print, and it was not until the 1890s that writings of hers were published under her name. Her memoirs and letters are addressed in the main to women -- friends and relatives. One of her correspondents was Walter Scott, who, while no immediate relation to these Scotts of Dalkeith Palace, nevertheless saw himself as feudally bound to their dukes of Buccleuch. Scott valued her taste and talent, together with her far descent (Lockhart's 'Life of Scott' contains several of her letters). Conscious of his poetry, and of that of Pope and Samuel Johnson, she wrote a number of poems of her own -- among them elegant, sententious fables, and a ballad about cannibal brothers and an ill-starred woman who marries for money. 
Stuart's accounts of Lady Douglas and of Lady Mary Coke are magnificent pieces of writing. The first is an evocation of her friend -- a granddaughter of John, second duke of Argyll, and a pattern of afflicted virtue. Frances had to suffer the aversion of her mother, Lady Dalkeith, and was to be shielded from it by her mother's second husband, the brilliant and unstable politician Charles Townsend, whose customs duties hastened the loss of the American colonies. George III (Miller, 42) was said to have thought him the worst man in the world. Stuart sees him in a sympathetic light, while relating that a dangerous intimacy developed between Frances and her stepfather, and that she had to flee the stressful south of England for the palace of Dalkeith in order to marry her 'safe man' (ibid., 38), in the person of Archibald, Lord Douglas, the claimant in the celebrated lawsuit over the right to the Douglas estates. 
The memoir of Lady Mary Coke, dated 1827, also presents -- this time in comic vein -- a pattern of afflicted virtue. She is seen as a tragedy queen, as a woman subject to paranoid delusions, but as also subject to house arrest at the hands of a brutal husband. Later she was to suffer the imaginary machinations of the empress Maria Theresa; she believed herself, reported Horace Walpole, to have been robbed of a passage by sea from Ostend to England by a codicil in the empress queen's will. Lady Mary was her own woman: 'The dry rot that broke out in her house was totally different in its nature from the dry-rot at her next neighbour's; and in case of a cold, or a sore throat, woe to the apothecary who ventured to quicken her pulse and excite her ire by tendering that established consolation, 'It is going about, madam, I assure you; I suppose I have now twenty patients with just the same symptoms as your ladyship's.' ('Selections', 60)' She was also a survivor. Those who 'fairly love a grievance', Stuart writes, may be able to support real evils better than imaginary ones. 'As heroic sufferers they are in their proper element' ('Selections', 64). 
Stuart is a writer who is able to produce a compelling aphorism -- 'the injurer never forgives' -- while also, in mid-passage, casting doubt on it ('Lady Mary Wortley Montagu: Essays', 56). 'Most people addicted to romancing', she declared, 'are their own heroes'. Like Walter Scott, she was herself capable of romancing, while remaining a disapprover of the addiction. A 'leaning towards the romantic' is linked with possession of 'wit, genius or imagination' (Stuart, 'Memoire of Lady Douglas', 37, 56). The loss of the man she might have married is likely to have affected her own romantic leanings and yearnings, this shrewd woman's castles in the air. Her shrewdness is disclosed in the ability to contradict herself to interesting effect, and she can sometimes appear to believe in a spirit of contradiction inherent in the order of things. Her inconsistencies include a fidelity to the old order in matters of politics and government, and an aversion to the mob, accompanied by a regard for unadorned human worth, which could make her resistant to family pride and anxious about Sir Walter's regard for rank and lineage. A chronicler of the patrician bluestockings of her time, she was both for and against the emancipation of women. 
Stuart was to settle at 108 Gloucester Place, Marylebone, from which she would go rambling round Regent's Park. She spoke in 1837 of the 'quiet hole' in which she had spent her days ('Lady Mary Wortley Montagu: Essays', 55), but can be accounted a highly sociable recluse. There she sat in her studious closet, bent over her books, deploring the 'Reform Bill', listening to the excitements and unreason of a bellowing John Bull, writing about her Lady Marys, and destroying, it was said, many of her manuscripts. But her days were also spent counselling, conversing, corresponding, and on progresses from one great house to another. She is the least-known, but by no means the least, of the good writers of her long lifetime. She died unmarried at the age of ninety-four on 4 August 1851 at her London home and was buried in the catacomb at Kensal Green cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 42016


Eaton, Peter (1914-1993), bookseller, was born Peter Eton at 8 York Gate, London, on 24 January 1914. His father is unknown, but his mother was (Elizabeth) Maria Eton, who later married George Papp and lived in Hungary. Peter was advertised in the 'Nursing Times' for fostering, and was brought up by John William Atkinson, electrical engineer, and his wife, Catherine Elizabeth Atkinson of 37 Haslam Street, Rochdale. For several years Peter's mother wrote confused and emotional letters to Mrs Atkinson which showed concern for the boy's welfare and education. In these she referred to Peter's father as 'in no way a reliable man', and to the fact that Peter 'has... Scotch and Irish and Hungarian blood in his veins' (private information). The Atkinsons adopted Peter on 25 April 1928, and in 1933 George Papp wrote to terminate the correspondence. 
It was in Rochdale that Peter acquired his soft Lancashire accent and assumed the name Peter Eaton Atkinson. Asthma and the Atkinsons' poverty blighted his childhood, and he later described himself in campaigning literature as having been 'brought up... in the slums of Lancashire'. Sunday school was an important influence, but his day school is unknown, and he left at fourteen to work for a Rochdale printer. Also about this time he attended art school, developing there his skill at painting and his lifelong interest in it as a collector. Promoted at sixteen from errand boy to machine minder, he took up a three-year printing apprenticeship, and joined the Typographical Association. 
Catherine Atkinson died aged sixty-six on 12 January 1931, and her husband not long afterwards, and Peter then lived briefly and not very happily with their son George and his wife. An unusual career of self-help and self-improvement followed -- unusual in that it diverged from the conventional Victorian pattern because it contained elements of what can only be described as an anti-career, whose details he did not conceal in later life. Studying at the Municipal School of Technology, Manchester, for two days a week, he was (according to his 'Who's Who' entry) 'expelled', and did not complete his apprenticeship. None the less, self-education was taking place as he browsed in lunch hours among the books for sale at Shude Hill market in Manchester. He was also picking up socialist ideas, but of the Methodist rather than Marxist variety. 
A second ingredient of the self-help career -- the search for opportunity through a move to London -- also featured: at twenty he walked there, and in later years liked to describe how the price of lodging at a Church Army hostel was to cut up firewood until his hands bled. He took several low-grade jobs, but also dabbled in bookselling, helped to found the Domestic Workers' Union, joined the Labour Party, and in 1937 the Peace Pledge Union, by which time he was living at 103 Hereford Road, Paddington. On 27 August 1940 a tribunal of three unanimously accepted his status as a conscientious objector, requiring him to work full-time on air-raid precautions work or on the land. He worked full-time for the London rescue squad from 1939 to 1946, occasionally also helping with bomb disposal. 
Dealing in books on Saturday afternoons from 1945 at what was then Portobello Road's only bookstall, Atkinson soon found that this brought in more than his entire weekday income from the rescue squad. At this point luck gave a twist to his self-help career, for the late 1940s were a time when the book shortage invigorated the secondhand book market, and when the contents of many large houses were being cleared; in Kensington many of their occupants were selling off interesting collections. He had soon raised enough to rent his own premises and eventually moved up to a shop in Church Street, Kensington, where he got to know many interesting customers, some of them prominent figures on the left. From there he moved his shop to Notting Hill Gate, and thence in 1957 to Holland Park Avenue, by which time he was attending five or six auctions a week and networking widely among well-to-do owners of private libraries but also among sharp-eyed dustmen and rag-and-bone men. 
Atkinson's family life also diverged from a conventional self-help pattern of respectability: his first marriage, on 31 May 1943, to Edith Laura (Ann) Wilkinson ('b'. 1916/17), telephonist, and daughter of Albert Wilkinson, tug boat operator, was dissolved shortly thereafter. With Valerie Carruthers he then had two sons, the elder of whom was named Russell, after Bertrand Russell. On 28 June 1948 he changed his name by deed poll to Peter Eaton, and on 23 February 1952 he married his second wife, Margaret Taylor ('b'. 1930/31), daughter of Henry Gordon Taylor, accountant, and his wife, Liliane Robinson. They later adopted two daughters, Ruth and Diana. Margaret Eaton looked after the firm's accounts, which freed up Peter's entrepreneurial flair, a quality more frequently combined with socialist belief than is often supposed. Eaton's consistently socialist commitment had no Fabian puritanical or gradualist component, and he stood at least three times without success as a Labour candidate for Kensington borough council. These were anyway no-hope contests, and as he hated committee work he would have been horrified to win. Politically he was a rationalistic and lifelong idealist who lacked the temperament which organizes sympathetic opinion: his was the principled stand from the floor which gave a headache to the organizers of many a meeting. 
Yet in the book trade Peter Eaton was always a step ahead. This was partly because the autodidact's wide and rather indiscriminate reading made him knowledgeable about what was contained in the shrewdly purchased books that he sold, and he was well able to build up subject-based book collections in a scholarly way. These he sold to libraries overseas at a time when the foundation of many new universities boosted worldwide demand for out-of-print books. Among the beneficiaries were the Toike Library in Hitotsubashi University, Japan, for his collection on the co-operative movement; Riverside University, California, for his Marie Stopes collection; and the University of Ife, Nigeria, for his collection of books on the study of soil. His secondhand bookselling business boomed in the 1960s and 1970s, enabling him to travel widely on business at home and overseas. In acquiring Pre-Raphaelite paintings, too, he ran ahead of fashion, buying them just because he liked them; but at a time of rapid inflation, owning things was coincidentally prudent. 
In 1975 Eaton moved into purpose-built premises designed by Rick Mather a few doors away from his Holland Park shop. In 1969 he and his wife had also acquired Lilies, a seventy-roomed dilapidated country mansion in Weedon, near Aylesbury, which in subsequent years they gradually restored. 'It was a crazy thing to do', he later recalled, 'but all I was concerned about was somewhere to put the books' ('The Bookdealer'). As events turned out, it was financially not crazy at all, but Eaton was no mere money-maker, and often gave away prize discoveries to suitable institutions. Feminist in outlook, he published with Marilyn Warnick in 1977 a fifty-nine-page indexed checklist of Marie Stopes's writings which grew out of listing items he had collected and sold. He also published 'A History of Lilies', a booklet which had gone into three editions by 1993; it discussed not only the house and its history, but also some of the treasures he had collected there. 
Eaton's life centred increasingly on Lilies in his last years, and the Holland Park shop was let. From the hospitable lunch table that was central to social life at Lilies, family talk ranged widely over a host of subjects, and many visiting scholars, customers, and friends were entertained there. President of the Private Libraries Association from 1989 to 1992, Eaton was influential in the book trade, and influential, too, on those who got to know him. Tall, casually dressed, with hinged double-layered spectacles on a high forehead, and with unusually long earlobes, he was a prize individualist and breaker of rules and conventions. Inquisitive, argumentative, plain-speaking, and provocative, he listed his recreations in 'Who's Who' as 'taking the dog for a walk' and 'watching my wife play tennis'. He was fond, too, of music, with an avant-garde taste for Mahler, and always said that the book for his desert island would be the 'Dictionary of National Biography'. Heart problems from the late 1980s, however, forced him to sell parts of the Lilies estate, and he died of heart disease at Lilies on 23 October 1993. He was survived by his wife, Margaret, their two adopted daughters, and his two sons from his relationship with Valerie Carruthers. 


@@@@@


doc= 42017


Hawksley, Bourchier Francis (1851-1915), lawyer and imperialist, was born on 4 April 1851 at Barlborough, near Chesterfield, Derbyshire, the son of John Hawksley, a Church of England priest who in 1874 was commissioner to the bishop of Saskatchewan and in 1883 became an honorary canon of Saskatchewan, and his wife, Henrietta Cordelia, 'nee' Jackson. Hawksley became a solicitor, after being articled in Bristol in 1866. He moved to London in 1872 and was married there, on 3 April 1873, to Clara Elizabeth, the daughter of Leonard Addison Duncan, gentleman. By 1881 they had a daughter and a son. It was through his appointment as solicitor for the British South Africa Company's London office that he came into contact with Cecil Rhodes and his imperial project. From 1889 until Rhodes's death in 1902 Hawksley was his trusted lawyer and confidant. 
Hawksley never set foot in Africa himself, but in 1889 he was entrusted by Rhodes with concluding the legal formalities that turned a supposed grant of authority from Lobengula, paramount chief of the Ndebele (Matabele), into the British South Africa Company charter. The company proved to be Rhodes's vehicle for the conquest and administration of the lands that later became Zimbabwe, Zambia, and Malawi, as well as for ultimately unsuccessful assaults on Mozambique and Zaire. Hawksley, an austere, combative man, was entirely committed to Rhodes's 'big idea', the quasi-Jesuitical dream of uniting all English-speaking lands into a commonwealth to improve and save the world. Rhodes's 'band of brothers' was the vehicle of mystical imperialism. What Hawksley eventually helped to develop was more practical and lasting. As the drafter of Rhodes's final four versions of his will Hawksley was able to refine what became the Rhodes scholarship scheme, and was almost certainly responsible for the final definition of the qualities to be sought in Rhodes scholars. As an executor of the will, he was an important interpreter of Rhodes's wishes to the committee which implemented the scholarship plan after Rhodes's death. 
Hawksley was influential in the selection of the members of the House of Commons select committee of inquiry into the Jameson raid of 1895; he also inspired many of the favourable lines of questions put to Rhodes and his accomplices who testified during the summer of 1897. Under Rhodes's instructions, he refused to reveal a clutch of secret telegrams to the committee. The telegrams, which Hawksley wanted to produce, implicated Joseph Chamberlain (who could protect the company's charter) in the planning of the raid; Rhodes obfuscated, and Hawksley fumed privately. Hawksley also acted to extricate Rhodes from the clutches of Princess Catherine Radziwill, who had been forging his name and causing him financial embarrassment, and, in order to protect the British South Africa Company's share price, managed the news of Rhodes's long illness and death in 1902. 
Hawksley was a member of the Liberal Party from the mid-1890s, stood unsuccessfully in 1895 for Holderness, campaigned for several colleagues in 1897, and always hoped that Rhodes would leave Africa for British politics. He died on 22 December 1915 at his home, 14 Hyde Park Gardens, London, and was survived by his wife and at least one daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 42021


Schluter, Auguste (1849-1917), domestic servant, was born on 27 June 1849, probably in Hanover, of which state she was a native. At the age of seventeen and speaking very little English she arrived in England, where she joined the household of William and Catherine Gladstone as lady's maid to the unmarried daughters of the family, Mary and Helen. Schluter kept a diary for many of the years she spent in service to the Gladstones; it was published in 1922. Apparently written in an old exercise book discovered after she left England, it reads in part like a conventional diary, in part as excerpts from letters: 'Here I am, dearest', she wrote on 10 October 1878. 'You will be surprised to find me at the seaside' (Schluter, 31). The diary provides a fascinating account of the life of a lady's maid in an upper-class household in the last quarter of the nineteenth century. 
Gladstone's first three ministries, and politics in general, made almost no impact in Schluter's diary -- its editor observed unkindly that, 'supremely unconscious of the historic background, she watched the great events of her time like a cow gazing at a passing train' (Schluter, 7). For her, it was enough that 'our Gentleman' (as she invariably called Gladstone) was in charge. She was not, however, entirely divorced from the political functions of the household, as in June 1882 she noted that she sometimes did a little writing for 'the gentlemen secretaries when they have to deal with German letters' (ibid., 82). 
In an age when young women were closely chaperoned, lady's maids had considerable opportunities to witness, and mimic, the social round of the upper classes. Schluter accompanied Mary Gladstone to concerts and plays, on country house visits, and on trips abroad (notably to Darmstadt in 1878, when she took the chance to visit her mother in Hanover). Like her employers, the lady's maid had social circles both in London and at Hawarden, to whom she paid regular calls and with whom she corresponded. It is reported that when Mary Gladstone Drew read her erstwhile maid's diary, she commented with amused condescension on 'the way she gives us all back seats while she occupies the front seat!' (Gladstone, 102). 
Schluter's world, although troubled by homesickness, concern for her mother in Germany and sister in New York, and occasional poor health and melancholy, seems from her diary to have been a comfortable one, illuminated by her devotion to her employers. It therefore came as a considerable and unpleasant shock to her when her 'beloved Lady', Mary Gladstone, her last remaining charge, announced her marriage to Harry Drew in December 1885. 'When I saw Mr Drew', she wrote, 'I felt like a tigress wishing to throw herself on the enemy' (Schluter, 135). But she was soon reconciled, especially as Catherine Gladstone took her on as her personal maid. By March 1890 Schluter recognized that her usefulness to the Gladstones was receding, while her own mother was in financial difficulties and needed her at home. In November 1890 she left England with some cash supplied by Mary Drew and a letter of recommendation from Mr Gladstone, which she carefully copied into her journal, 'for perhaps I might sell it some day when I am in need' (ibid., 177). She remained in touch with the Gladstones for the rest of her life and visited them occasionally. The First World War did not end their correspondence, but she died in Hanover in the autumn of 1917; her last letter to Mary Drew, dated 20 March 1917, did not reach England until after the armistice. 


@@@@@


doc= 42022


Karim, Abdul (1862/3-1909), Queen Victoria's Indian secretary, was the son of an Indian Muslim, Sheikh Mohammed Waziruddin of Agra, India, a hospital assistant at Rs60 a month. Records suggest he had an older brother and four sisters, a wife and one child. Having been employed as a vernacular clerk in Agra gaol (salary Rs10 monthly), in 1887, aged twenty-four, he came as a servant to Queen Victoria's household. 
Slim and strikingly good-looking, Abdul Karim, promoted the queen's munshi in 1889, gave Victoria lessons in Hindustani, with 'instructive' discussions in Indian religion and culture. Graduating to the position of the queen's Indian secretary, with the title hafiz, in 1894, he assisted with her 'boxes', handling Indian petitions which required 'merely a civil refusal' (Longford, 638). His official residences were at Frogmore Cottage, Windsor, and Arthur Cottage, at Osborne. At the latter, he gave a party every Christmas for the children of the estate. Rewards followed: a grant of land in the suburbs of Agra and permission to attend the durbar. He was painted twice by Rudolf Swoboda (1888 and 1889) and by von Angeli in 1890. Accorded high social position at court, he was made a companion in the Order of the Indian Empire. 
Such social elevation caused much controversy and resentment in the royal household, especially among the private secretaries. Abdul Karim was snubbed socially, while the queen was shown an Indian report depicting his low origins. A sensitive man, the munshi was deeply hurt. According to a biographer of Queen Victoria there was a 'running battle' between the queen and her advisers (Longford, 674), with the queen determined to promote 'her excellent and much esteemed Munshi and Indian Clerk', and the court putting him down (Victoria to Lansdowne, 29 Oct 1890, MS Eur. D/558/1). The court alleged that giving the munshi access to state papers was dangerous, leading to his movements being watched and reports being compiled on him in India. The climax came in 1897: the viceroy was wired for details of his family status and Henry Frederick Ponsonby, the queen's private secretary, requested gossip from 'native' and European papers. Finally, the government called a halt. Instead the queen was 'plainly' spoken to by some trusted Indian officers in her court, and the munshi put into his 'proper place' (George Hamilton to Lord Elgin, 7 May 1897, Longford, 678). 
Like the court at the time, some historians have suggested that Abdul Karim saw 'more confidential papers than he should have' and 'probably influenced' the queen on Indian 'problems' (Plumb, 281). But, given the fact that, according to the queen, he saw ''no' political papers' and did not 'read English fluently enough to be able to read anything of importance', it is unlikely he could have influenced policy or posed any danger to the state (Victoria to Salisbury, 17 July 1897, Longford, 678). The row over the munshi (similar in ways to the earlier rows about the role of John Brown) is more an illustration of race and class prejudice in Victorian England: of the munshi not being kept in what was perceived as his proper place. More significantly, however, his presence may have made Queen Victoria 'more sensitive' to race prejudice, as seen from a long letter urging the future viceroy to be 'more free' of the 'red-tapist narrow-minded Council' (Plumb, 282). 
Following Queen Victoria's death, a bonfire of the munshi's papers was ordered by King Edward at Frogmore. Abdul Karim retired to Agra, where he died in 1909. All his papers were burnt, except for a few letters allowed to his widow as a memento of the queen. 


@@@@@


doc= 42024


Murray, Anne, duchess of Atholl (1814-1897), courtier, was born in Edinburgh on 17 June 1814, the only daughter and second of the three children of Henry Home Drummond, MP (1783-1867), of Blair Drummond, Perthshire, and Christian Stirling (1779-1864), elder daughter of Charles Moray of Abercairny. She was rejected, sight unseen, as the potential bride of an unspecified duke before marrying, on 29 October 1839, George Augustus Frederick John Murray (1814-1864), Baron Glenlyon and heir presumptive to the dukedom of Atholl. The marriage was successful, Anne Glenlyon observing to her father in its early days, that 'my ticket in the marriage lottery is a prize' (Abercairny MSS). They had an only child, a son, born in 1840, later seventh duke. 
Connections with the court were initially formed in 1842, when Victoria and Albert visited the Glenlyons at Dunkeld, in Perthshire, during their first visit to Scotland; this visit was also the occasion of Victoria's first attendance at a Church of Scotland service, in Blair Atholl. In 1844 the royal couple again visited the Glenlyons, taking over Blair Castle during September. These connections were made the more important by financial difficulties: the Atholl estates were held in trust during the lifetime of the fifth duke who was insane, and the Glenlyons actively sought positions at court to enhance their incomes. In 1846 Glenlyon obtained the position of lord in waiting from Peel, whom he supported in parliament, but changes in the administration removed him from the court after six months. On 14 September 1846, Glenlyon succeeded as sixth duke of Atholl (which he and his wife consistently spelt Athole). 
In March 1852 Anne Atholl was invited to serve at the head of the female household as mistress of the robes under the Derby administration, which position she filled until the following January. In May 1854 she was invited to become a lady of the bedchamber, a position of lower rank than that which she had previously held, but which involved closer contact with the queen through regular residence at court. Their relationship was always friendly, in part because the duchess understood how to manage the queen, 'the complete folly of opposition if started at once, without any care, and the ease with which advice may be given and well received, if you don't begin in antagonism' (Ponsonby, 63). The death of the duke in 1864 from cancer of the neck after a lengthy illness, drew the duchess closer to the queen, who took comfort from the presence of another mourning widow, describing her as 'so wise, so excellent and so pleasant and so truly Scotch' (Fulford, 26). 
After the death of the duke, Anne Atholl lived at Dunkeld House with her cousin Emily Murray MacGregor as a companion, and here the queen stayed with her on a number of occasions. She took an active interest in the local community, particularly in the school for girls which she had opened in Dunkeld in 1856. She continued to hold her position at court, and served as acting mistress of the robes with the dowager duchesses of Bedford and Roxburghe during Gladstone's final ministry when no duchess could be persuaded to accept the office. She denied having party political opinions, although her husband and father had been Peelites and her son, who succeeded as seventh duke in 1864, was a Conservative; Miss Murray MacGregor, by contrast, was a convinced Gladstonian. 
Anne Atholl died at Dunkeld House on 18 May 1897 at the age of eighty-two and was buried four days later with her husband in the ruined Old Kirk at Blair Atholl. 


@@@@@


doc= 42025


Fraser, Francis Charles (1903-1978), zoologist and museum administrator, was born on 16 June 1903 at Glenturret, Station Road, Dingwall, Ross-shire, Scotland. He was the youngest of the six sons (there were also four daughters) of James Fraser (died 1910/11), master saddler and blacksmith, and his wife, Barbara Anne Macdonald. He was educated at Dingwall Academy and Glasgow University (1921-1924), from where he graduated with a BSc (honours) in zoology. His first job was demonstrator in the department of geology at Glasgow University from 1924 to 1925. 
Fraser's academic potential, coupled with a good nature and ready humour, secured him, in 1925, a position as zoologist with the Colonial Office's 'Discovery' investigations committee to quantify, using scientific methodology, the whale stocks around the Falkland Islands. On finding out Fraser's first name Stanley Kemp, the director of research, told him: 'we've got one of those already; you'll be Jimmy' ('Memoirs FRS', 289). Between 1925 and 1933 Jimmy Fraser travelled to the Antarctic three times and, in 1942, he was awarded the polar medal. Much of his research concentrated on the biology of the species on which baleen whales fed; his first major publication was 'On the development and distribution of the young stages of krill ('Euphausia superba')' in 'Discovery Reports', volume 14 (1936). 
In 1933 Fraser was appointed assistant keeper in the department of zoology at the British Museum (Natural History). He was put in charge of the osteological room, the mammalian skeletal material and marine mammal collections. Thereafter his research was mainly devoted to cetology (study of whales). He was actively involved in choosing public exhibits for the New Whale Hall and, in particular, installing the 93 ft long life-size model of the blue whale in 1938. 
In 1936 Fraser was awarded the DSc from Glasgow University. On 30 June 1938 he married Anne Nuttall ('b'. 1906); they had no children. During the Second World War he was seconded to the Admiralty. Shortly after rejoining the museum he participated in the Danish Atlantide expedition to west African waters from 1945 to 1946. It was from this time that Fraser became involved with identifying the animal remains from archaeological excavations in Britain leading to the museum's becoming a major repository. But it was Fraser's efficient re-organization of the skeletal collections as well as his scholarly publications that brought him to the attention of the museum's managers, and he was promoted to deputy keeper of zoology in 1948 and keeper of zoology in 1957. He was an effective administrator, yet sensitive to the needs of the staff at a time when the museum was undergoing expansion, and in 1962 he was made CBE. 
Fraser relinquished the keepership in 1964 to concentrate on whale research. He took immense pleasure in talking about cetaceans not only to colleagues but whenever answering enquiries from the public. He discovered a mechanism for determining the age of cetaceans by counting the number of concentric rings in the wax plugs in their ears. With his assistant, Peter Ernest Purves, he elucidated the hearing mechanism of marine mammals using pioneering techniques. The result was a series of papers, co-authored with Purves, and culminating in a major review, 'Hearing in cetaceans' in 'Bulletin of the British Museum (Natural History)', zoology series, volume 7 (1960). Fraser was elected FRS in 1966 for this work, but his relationship with Purves had become strained. He retired from the museum in 1969 but continued his research until shortly before his death from stomach cancer at Beckenham Hospital in Kent on 21 October 1978. His wife survived him. 
In the course of his career Fraser published nearly eighty scientific papers. In particular he produced for the museum four 'Reports on Cetacea Stranded on the British Coasts' for the years 1927-66 (published 1934-74) and wrote (with H. W. Parker) 'Guide for the identification and reporting of stranded whales, dolphins, porpoises and turtles on the British coasts', first published in 1949. With J. R. Norman, another museum zoologist, Fraser wrote one popular work: 'Giant Fishes, Whales and Dolphins' (1937). 


@@@@@


doc= 42026


Scott, Walter Francis Montagu-Douglas-, fifth duke of Buccleuch and seventh duke of Queensberry (1806-1884), magnate and politician, born at Dalkeith House, Midlothian, Scotland, on 25 November 1806, was the second, but eldest surviving, son of Charles William Henry Montagu-Scott, fourth duke of Buccleuch (1772-1819) and the Hon. Harriet Catherine Townshend (1773-1814). He was thirteen when he succeeded to the dukedom, and sixteen when he entertained George IV for a fortnight at Dalkeith House during his ceremonial visit to Scotland in 1822. He was educated at Eton College and at St John's College, Cambridge, graduating MA in 1827. On 13 August 1829 he married Lady Charlotte Anne Thynne ['see below'], youngest daughter of Thomas Thynne, second marquess of Bath, and the Hon. Isabella Elizabeth Byng (died 1830), third daughter of the fourth Viscount Torrington; they had three daughters and four sons, the youngest of whom was Lord Charles Thomas Montagu-Douglas-Scott. Buccleuch was created knight of the Garter in 1835. He entertained Victoria and Albert at Dalkeith in 1842, in which year he was sworn of the privy council. A staunch Conservative, he was lord privy seal in Peel's ministry from February 1842 to January 1846, and lord president of the council from January to July 1846, reluctantly accepting repeal of the corn laws. 
As the owner of the largest and wealthiest estates in Britain, Buccleuch exercised an almost feudal control over his many tenants, with a reputation for evicting those who did not vote in accordance with his wishes. Gladstone's opponent in the Midlothian campaign of 1879 was Buccleuch's eldest son, the earl of Dalkeith, who was defeated in spite of the extensive creation of 'faggot votes' by the duke's agents. Buccleuch was president of the Highland Agricultural Society in 1831-5 and 1866-9. Between 1835 and 1842, he built at his own expense a pier and breakwater at Granton, forming a harbour which was developed as a port on the Firth of Forth. He was president of the Society of Antiquaries from 1862 to 1873 and of the British Association in 1867; and he was elected chancellor of Glasgow University in 1877. He died at Bowhill, Selkirk, on 16 April 1884, and was buried on 23 April in St Mary's Chapel, Dalkeith. 

Charlotte Anne Montagu-Douglas-Scott, duchess of Buccleuch and Queensberry (1811-1895), was mistress of the robes to Queen Victoria in 1841-6, and used her connections with Peel's ministry to secure patronage for her brothers. Her hospitality, exercised at the many Buccleuch houses in Scotland and at Montagu House in London, was often remarked upon by contemporaries. Under the influence of Henry Manning and Cecil, Lady Lothian, she converted to Roman Catholicism in 1860, after struggling with her conscience for many years over the distress it would cause her Presbyterian husband. After the death of the duke in 1884, she made her home at Ditton Park, Slough, Buckinghamshire, where she died on 28 March 1895; she was buried at Dalkeith. The family connections with the court were maintained by her daughter-in-law Louisa Jane, wife of the sixth duke, who served as mistress of the robes in 1886-92 and 1895-1901. 


@@@@@


doc= 42027


Canning, Charlotte Elizabeth, Countess Canning (1817-1861), courtier and vicereine of India, was born at the British embassy in Paris on 31 March 1817, the elder of the two daughters of Sir Charles Stuart, later Baron Stuart de Rothesay (1779-1845), diplomatist, and his wife, Lady Elizabeth Yorke (1789-1867), daughter of the third earl of Hardwicke. Like her sister Louisa ['see 'Beresford, Louisa, marchioness of Waterford], Charlotte Stuart was celebrated for her beauty, piety, and artistic talent. Her appearance was enthusiastically described in 1853: 'She is very dark, with splendid eyes and rich black hair and the most classic outline of head and face' ('Letters of the Hon. Mrs Edward Twisleton', 139). At eighteen she married, on 5 September 1835, Charles John Canning (1812-1862), only surviving son of the prime minister, George Canning, and heir to his mother's viscountcy. 
The early years of the marriage, which was childless, were spent in establishing Canning's political career, and in travel on the continent. Then in May 1842 Charlotte Canning was invited to become a lady of the bedchamber to Queen Victoria. This appointment, which entailed spending a fortnight in waiting on the queen three times a year, shaped her life for the next thirteen years. Although at this period the queen was too wrapped up in her husband to have much interest in the friendship of her courtiers, Lady Canning was a particular favourite, not least because she won the approval of Prince Albert. The prince was notorious for being unwilling even to talk to the ladies of the household, but Charlotte Canning's character was so impeccable that he unbent sufficiently to deem her 'such a distinguished person' ('Letters of Queen Victoria', 1st ser., 3.609). Her quiet charm, tolerance, and capacity for enjoyment endeared Lady Canning to the queen, and her artistic talents made her indispensable. Photography was in its infancy, and the queen herself seldom had time to make a complete visual record of the places she visited, so Charlotte Canning was often her choice of attendant for expeditions where her pencils and watercolours could be put to good use. Thus she accompanied the royal party on a yachting trip to the west country and to France in August 1843, and in the following month to Belgium. In 1844 she went with them on their second excursion to Scotland, staying at Blair Castle, and in 1845 on the visit to Albert's homeland of Coburg and Gotha. Lady Canning's facility with a pencil was matched by her ability to draw vivid word-pictures, and her many letters are a valuable mine of social detail. 
Charlotte Canning was a devout high-churchwoman, and active in many charitable causes. As chairwoman of the committee of the Establishment for Gentlewomen during Illness, she had been responsible for the appointment of Florence Nightingale as superintendent of their hospital in Henley Street in 1853; she was criticized for not seeking the permission of Miss Nightingale's parents. Then with the outbreak of the Crimean War, Lady Canning was heavily involved in the interviewing and selection of nurses to accompany Florence Nightingale to Scutari. 
In June 1855 Lord Canning accepted the post of governor-general of India. '[I] will not take any part in the decision but only be ready to follow like a dog' (Surtees, 193), his wife wrote, rather dispiritedly. They left London in November, travelling to Calcutta via Paris, Malta, and Egypt, pausing in Bombay, Ceylon, and Madras before reaching their destination on 29 February 1856. The queen thanked her for her first letter, from Cairo, envying her former lady-in-waiting the opportunity to see the wonders of the East, though not its inconveniences: 'If it was not for the heat & the 'insects' how much I should like to see India', she wrote (ibid., 197). Lady Canning now experienced court life from the other side, presiding over the society of the British in India, as well as being the hostess at the governor-general's court. With no formal duties, no family, a husband inevitably preoccupied with affairs of state, no British ladies of sufficiently high social status to make friends, and only very limited contact with Indian ladies, it was a lonely and challenging life. She was fortunate in the selection of her husband's aides-de-camp, who provided her regular companionship, even if, like Johnny Stanley, they had a tendency to fall in love with her. 
The year of the Indian mutiny, 1857, put a tremendous emotional and physical strain on the Cannings. Charlotte was kept well away from the dangerous areas, but she gathered information assiduously, keeping the queen informed in detail of the events as they unfolded, and was able to dispel some of the worst atrocity stories: 'there is not a particle of evidence of the poor women having been 'ill-used' anywhere', she wrote (Surtees, 245). (Death, murder, starvation, and the mutilation of corpses did not compare to the horror felt at the idea of interracial rape.) To Lady Canning, the queen was able regularly to express her complete confidence in the beleaguered Canning, who was under continual pressure from the British at home and in India to exact a bloody retribution. Canning was able to rely on his wife to communicate with his colleagues in Britain when the pressures of the situation overwhelmed his correspondence. Lord Granville read a letter of hers to the cabinet in October 1857, drawing from the prime minister, Lord Palmerston, 'a compliment at the expense of her sex. 'Ah, ah, a capital letter, unlike a lady's letter; it is all to the point, ah, ah'' (Fitzmaurice, 1.261). 
The revolt over, Canning was elevated to an earldom, the government of India was removed from the hands of the East India Company, and the governor-generalship was transformed into a viceroyalty. The new vicereine travelled widely throughout India, from Madras in the south, to the borders of Tibet in the north. She sketched and painted as she went, and wrote detailed accounts of her travels to her family and to the queen. Despite the difficulties, she had come to enjoy India, but was looking forward to her frequently postponed return to England, which was set for January 1862. In October 1861 she journeyed through Darjeeling, to the borders of Sikkim, and saw Mount Everest, but her mind was on home and planning for the future there. She returned to Calcutta on 8 November, clearly suffering from 'jungle fever', or malaria. Four days later she was confined to bed, and shortly afterwards her mind started wandering, and she died at 2.30 in the morning of 18 November. She was buried the following day in the viceroy's garden at Barrackpore, 'looking upon that reach of the grand river which she was so fond of drawing, -- shaded from the glare of the sun by high trees, -- and amongst the bright shrubs and flowers in which she had so much pleasure' ('Letters of Queen Victoria', 1st ser., 3.608). The queen received news of Charlotte's death as her own husband lay dying; when Canning followed his wife to the grave seven months later, she thought him blessed: 'How enviable to follow so soon the partner of your life! How I pray it may be God's will to let me follow mine soon!' ('Letters of Queen Victoria', 2nd ser., 1.36). 


@@@@@


doc= 42028


Cavendish, Louise Frederica Augusta, duchess of Devonshire (1832-1911), society figure, was born on 15 January 1832, the second of the three daughters of Karl Franz Victor, Count von Alten, of Hanover, and his wife, Hermine de Schminke. On 22 July 1852 she married, in the palace chapel at Hanover, and subsequently at the British embassy, William Drogo Montagu (1823-1890), then Viscount Mandeville. They had two sons and three daughters. 
Lady Mandeville, accounted one of the great beauties of the period, rapidly acquired a position of social pre-eminence and attracted admirers from across the political spectrum. Lord Granville wrote to her that 'you are irresistible for man, woman, and I should think beast. I can conceive, if it was not for your grande dame much-too-big-for-any-street-to-hold-me-look, being passionately in love with you' (Kennedy, 24). Duchess of Manchester from 1855, she served as mistress of the robes to Queen Victoria under Derby's ministry of 1858-9. Victoria, who had initially been pleased to have a German in her household, rapidly came to disapprove of the duchess, and urged the princess of Wales to drop the acquaintance, as she had 'done more harm to Society from her 'tone', her love of admiration and 'fast' style, than almost anyone' (Magnus, 110). The duchess, however, remained one of the principal members of the Marlborough House set, sharing with the prince of Wales a passion for gambling and racing, and a willingness to overlook discreet infidelity. 
Her liaison with Spencer Compton Cavendish, marquess of Hartington (1833-1908), began in the early 1860s, when she reclaimed him from the embraces of the courtesan Catherine ('Skittles') Walters, and lasted until their marriage some thirty years later. The relationship was well-known in aristocratic society, but never drew public attention. The duchess was a convinced tory, though she cultivated politicians of differing opinions, including Lord Clarendon and Sir Charles Dilke, for the information they could provide. She devoted herself to inspiring political ambition in her notoriously indolent lover, and to fulfilling her own ambition of seeing him prime minister. Liberals regarded her with suspicion and Gladstone saw her influence as a barrier to Hartington's acceptance of his radical proposals. Of her intelligence, opinions differed: Dilke thought her lacking the 'clearness of head' necessary to make her useful to Hartington, but Baron von Eckardstein regarded her as 'one of the cleverest and most capable women that I ever met' (Eckardstein, 123). 
Manchester died in 1890, and, with no show of unseemly haste, on 16 August 1892 she married Hartington, who had become the eighth duke of Devonshire in the previous year. Widely referred to as 'the Double Duchess', she was one of the dominant figures of London society: awesome and formidable, she was admired and respected more than she was liked. Her entertainments at Chatsworth, at Devonshire House, and at the racecourses were lavish and spectacular, particularly the fancy-dress ball which was her contribution to the diamond jubilee celebrations of 1897. A passion for bridge in her later years earned her the unkind sobriquet 'Ponte Vecchio', though it is unlikely that anyone would have used it in her presence. Devonshire died in 1908; three years later Louise Devonshire had a seizure at the Sandown racecourse, and died the following day, 15 July 1911, at Sir Edgar Vincent's house, Esher Place, Esher, Surrey. She was buried on 18 July at Edensor, Derbyshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 42030


Power, Edward Joseph (1899-1993), radio engineer and art collector, was born on 11 September 1899 at Maryborough, Queen's county, Ireland, one of the four children of Patrick Power, an army sergeant in the Leinster regiment, and his wife, Jane, formerly Heart. The family moved to England in 1907, when the regiment was transferred, but his parents later separated, and in 1910 his mother took the children to Manchester. Power was educated probably at Xaverian College, Manchester, leaving in 1916 to take a short course at Wilmslow Radio School before joining the navy as a wireless operator. After the war he joined the merchant navy, leaving in 1922 to set himself up as a manufacturer of crystal sets and transformers. On 22 November 1924 he married Irene (Rene) Cordelia Bevan (1899/1900-1978), wig maker and hairdresser. They had four children. He worked as chief engineer for McMichael Radio from 1926, before setting up a business in Slough repairing wirelesses and making radio receivers. 
In 1928 Power joined his friend Frank Murphy, a former Post Office engineer, in setting up Murphy Radio Ltd in Welwyn Garden City, as partner and chief engineer. The first Murphy sets were produced in 1930, and Murphy and Power then approached the furniture maker Gordon Russell in their search for a good modern designer for their radio cabinets. The cabinets designed by R. D. Russell, Gordon Russell's brother, for Murphy radios, became classics of industrial design. When Frank Murphy resigned in 1937 Power became chairman. 
During the Second World War Murphy Radio played an important part in the development of radar, manufacturing high-power valves and experimenting with valve technology. After the war the company resumed its expansion into television production, which had begun in 1937; in 1949, when it was floated on the stock market, Power became a wealthy man. He remained chairman until 1962, when he allowed the Rank Organization to buy control of the company. 
Power began to collect modern art in 1951, and by the mid-1950s had acquired a large collection of paintings, mainly by as yet unknown contemporary French artists. He particularly admired Jean Dubuffet, eighty of whose works he bought between 1956 and 1960. He sought out the newest art he could find on frequent trips to Paris, mainly in the company of Peter Cochrane, a director of Tooth's Gallery. He amassed large collections of works by individual artists in order to try to understand their ideas, and he bought experimentally to see whether he liked a work, and if he did not he sold it. As Lawrence Alloway, deputy director of the Institute of Contemporary Arts, wrote in 1956: 'this collector works... in the spirit in which his artists paint -- impulsively, experimentally, to see what will happen' (Arts Council exhibition catalogue, 'New Trends in Painting: some Pictures from a Private Collection', 1956, 5). 
In the late 1950s Power turned his attention to American art, buying works by de Kooning and Rothko, and he was one of the first British collectors to buy paintings by Jackson Pollock, Ellsworth Kelly, and Barnett Newman. He also became a close friend of the Danish artist Asger Jorn, twenty-nine of whose paintings he bought between 1956 and 1960. In the 1960s he bought works by R. B. Kitaj, Howard Hodgkin, Claes Oldenburg, and Roy Lichtenstein, and he owned a number of early paintings by Andy Warhol, including 'Soup Can', which he bought in 1964. Although he continued to buy -- and sell -- until the end of his life, after 1968 he no longer tried to collect the best of contemporary work, but he kept in touch with the latest trends. Power believed in the vital importance of contemporary art and donated many paintings to the Tate Gallery, where he was a trustee from 1968 to 1975. Although he was one of the most important British collectors of modern art in the 1950s and 1960s he shunned publicity and few knew the scale of his collection. 
Power died on 16 September 1993 at Oakwood House Hospital, Old Watton Road, Colney, Norfolk. Two sons and a married daughter survived him. His estate was valued at over $26 million. 


@@@@@


doc= 42032


Bek family (per. c.1150-c.1350), gentry, is principally noteworthy for having produced four bishops in two generations in the reigns of Edward I and Edward III. The family owed its estates at Eresby and elsewhere in Lincolnshire to the marriage of Walter Bek to the heiress of the hereditary stewards of the bishops of Durham in the mid-twelfth century, while in the thirteenth century its members served the earls of Lincoln as constables of Lincoln Castle. According to a brief family history, added to the register of the Gilbertine priory at Alvingham in the late thirteenth century (Bodl. Oxf., MS Laud misc. 642), the estates had been divided among four younger sons at the end of the previous century, after the death of the eldest son, Hugh Bek, on crusade. Of the family of Henry Bek of Eresby ('fl'. 'c'.1200), said to be 'not very wise', two grandsons became bishops, Thomas (I) Bek (d. 1293), bishop of St David's, and Antony (I) Bek (c.1245-1311), bishop of Durham. The eldest of Henry Bek's grandsons, John Bek, Lord Bek (d. 1303/4), had a career in royal administration, acting on a variety of commissions, mostly of an economic nature, and as a justice of assize from 1276. In 1255 he secured a grant of a market and fair at Spilsby, founded a chapel there, and was probably responsible for the first of a tradition of great houses in the adjoining manor at Eresby. He took part in Edward I's Scottish campaigns and was summoned to the parliaments of 1295 and 1296. In his will drawn up in 1301, he sought burial at Kirkstead Abbey. With an unknown wife he had a son, Walter, who predeceased his father, and three daughters. 
Of the descendants of Henry Bek's brother, Walter Bek of Lusby, two great-grandsons were bishops, Thomas (II) Bek (1283-1347), bishop of Lincoln, and Antony (II) Bek (1279-1343), bishop of Norwich. This Antony had also produced a brief family descent (preserved in BL, Harley MS 3720) before his elevation to a bishopric, and the two histories are remarkable in demonstrating the family's close and continuing interest in its own lineages. The eldest grandson, Sir John Bek of Lusby (1278-c.1324), had been a prominent member of the affinity of Henry de Lacy, earl of Lincoln, but continued in the service of Thomas, earl of Lancaster, on the latter's acquisition of the Lacy earldom, perhaps with the support of Sir Robert Holland. He was a witness to the agreement at Horninglow, Staffordshire, in 1318 which had sought to bring peace between Lancaster and Edward II, in 1319 served under Lancaster in the Berwick campaign, and in 1321 acted as the earl's spokesman in delivering the bill of grievances which was presented to the magnates at Sherburn in Elmet. In the following year he was captured in the earl's service at the battle of Boroughbridge, but was later pardoned and employed in royal service. He died about 1324. 


@@@@@


doc= 42033


Bek family (per. c.1150-c.1350), gentry, is principally noteworthy for having produced four bishops in two generations in the reigns of Edward I and Edward III. The family owed its estates at Eresby and elsewhere in Lincolnshire to the marriage of Walter Bek to the heiress of the hereditary stewards of the bishops of Durham in the mid-twelfth century, while in the thirteenth century its members served the earls of Lincoln as constables of Lincoln Castle. According to a brief family history, added to the register of the Gilbertine priory at Alvingham in the late thirteenth century (Bodl. Oxf., MS Laud misc. 642), the estates had been divided among four younger sons at the end of the previous century, after the death of the eldest son, Hugh Bek, on crusade. Of the family of Henry Bek of Eresby ('fl'. 'c'.1200), said to be 'not very wise', two grandsons became bishops, Thomas (I) Bek (d. 1293), bishop of St David's, and Antony (I) Bek (c.1245-1311), bishop of Durham. The eldest of Henry Bek's grandsons, John Bek, Lord Bek (d. 1303/4), had a career in royal administration, acting on a variety of commissions, mostly of an economic nature, and as a justice of assize from 1276. In 1255 he secured a grant of a market and fair at Spilsby, founded a chapel there, and was probably responsible for the first of a tradition of great houses in the adjoining manor at Eresby. He took part in Edward I's Scottish campaigns and was summoned to the parliaments of 1295 and 1296. In his will drawn up in 1301, he sought burial at Kirkstead Abbey. With an unknown wife he had a son, Walter, who predeceased his father, and three daughters. 
Of the descendants of Henry Bek's brother, Walter Bek of Lusby, two great-grandsons were bishops, Thomas (II) Bek (1283-1347), bishop of Lincoln, and Antony (II) Bek (1279-1343), bishop of Norwich. This Antony had also produced a brief family descent (preserved in BL, Harley MS 3720) before his elevation to a bishopric, and the two histories are remarkable in demonstrating the family's close and continuing interest in its own lineages. The eldest grandson, Sir John Bek of Lusby (1278-c.1324), had been a prominent member of the affinity of Henry de Lacy, earl of Lincoln, but continued in the service of Thomas, earl of Lancaster, on the latter's acquisition of the Lacy earldom, perhaps with the support of Sir Robert Holland. He was a witness to the agreement at Horninglow, Staffordshire, in 1318 which had sought to bring peace between Lancaster and Edward II, in 1319 served under Lancaster in the Berwick campaign, and in 1321 acted as the earl's spokesman in delivering the bill of grievances which was presented to the magnates at Sherburn in Elmet. In the following year he was captured in the earl's service at the battle of Boroughbridge, but was later pardoned and employed in royal service. He died about 1324. 


