@@@@@


doc= 42034


Isabella Bewick (1790-1883), who was also born at Newcastle upon Tyne, on 14 January 1790, she was a jealous guardian of their father's posthumous reputation, carefully preserving his correspondence, original drawings, proofs, and the complete series of original woodblocks for his three principal works. They planned the gift of large collections of drawings and prints to the British Museum and to the Natural History Society of Northumberland, Durham, and Newcastle upon Tyne (now Natural History Society of Northumbria). Deeply suspicious of would-be biographers of their father and metropolitan collectors such as T. F. Dibdin and the Revd Thomas Hugo, they were nevertheless susceptible to the flattery of a few others, Ruskin among them, and their surviving correspondence and the records of their release of small groups of prints and drawings provide a useful view of the nineteenth-century enthusiasm for their father's work. Jane died on 7 April 1881, to be followed by her sister Isabella on 8 June 1883 -- both at their home, 19 West Street, Gateshead, co. Durham. They were buried at St Mary's, Ovingham, Northumberland, on 12 April 1881 and 11 June 1883 respectively. 



@@@@@


doc= 42053


Caplin, Roxey Ann (1793-1888), corset maker, writer, and lecturer on health, was born in Canada, the daughter of English settlers; Canadian Indians taught her canoeing and swimming as a child. Probably trained as a milliner, she married about 1835, and by 1839 was living in London. Her husband, Jean Francois Isidore Caplin ('c'.1790- 'c'.1872), used his knowledge of anatomy, gained as a Paris medical student, to treat spinal deformities. He moved to London about 1830. In 1838 he patented (no. 7640) a front-opening corset with a back adjusted by pulleys and wheels. In 1839 Madame Caplin appeared in the London Post Office directory as a 'wholesale and retail milliner and patentee of the mechanical corset' (her name was given as Emily Roxey, then Roxey Ann from 1849). 
From 1841 the couple were listed at 58 Berners Street, London. Jean Francois Caplin, called an orthopaedic corset maker and later an 'orthorachidiste', registered designs for a mannequin in 1841 and the Hygean or Corporiform Corset in 1849. However, the Athenee des Arts de Paris's commendation stated that it was invented and manufactured by his wife. In 1843 the 'Court Magazine' commented: 'Madame Caplin has made the manufacture of Corsets a complete study, embracing at once the several designs of anatomy, geometry, drawing and mechanics... the artist may be traced in all, and her system of measurement is at once perfect and infallible. (R. A. Caplin, 'Health and Beauty', frontispiece)' The Caplins' knowledge of anatomy, fashion, and commerce created a highly successful product. 
In 1849 Jean Francois Caplin lectured in Manchester on spinal deformities, then in the early 1850s, while retaining their London base, husband and wife had premises in Princes Street, and the Manchester Hygiaenic Gymnasium ['sic'] was run from their Pendleton home. Invalid boarders were cured by exercise, diet, and good corsetry. Its prospectus reassured parents that 'Independently of the maternal care of Madame Caplin, a well educated governess of the highest respectability, residing in the establishment, will devote her whole attention to the requirements and comforts of the young ladies' (J. F. I. Caplin, 'Prospectus'). 
Madame Caplin's corsets and Monsieur's portable gymnasium were awarded medals at the 1851 Great Exhibition and examples of their corsets survive in the Museum of London. Royal patronage followed, according to James Torrington Spencer Lidstone's 'Londoniad' (1856), which described Madame thus: '
You'll an incarnation of the Graces meet 

At No. 58, in Berners-street; 

A deity in human form enshrined; 

Gracious demeanour, and a courtly mien, 

Learning and worth are thine, great Nature's queen. 
(Lidstone, 60)' Jean Francois Caplin became a doctor of medicine in 1854, perhaps for his electrochemical bath which used the principle of electroplating to expel poisons from the body. In 1855 he opened the Hygeinic Gymnasium and Kinesitherapic Institution for Ladies and Children, at 9 York Place, Portman Square, London, which soon became the Hydro-Galvano Therapeutic Institution. His many books describe the bath, with testimonies to its effectiveness for an astonishing range of illnesses. 
Madame Caplin now advertised extensive alterations to Berners Street, to show her 'numerous inventions for the purpose of preserving the health and displaying the natural beauties of the female form' (R. A. Caplin, 'The Needle', 60). She also lectured upstairs in her Ladies Anatomical Gallery where, 'in addition to Canova's Anatomical Venus and the Venus de Medici, hundreds of magnificent models, executed with the utmost fidelity to nature, exhibit every organ of the body and the whole course of embryology' (ibid.). This was 'quite distinct from the rest of the Establishment, and a visit to one does not necessarily involve a sight of the other' (ibid.). 
Roxey Caplin wrote her first book in 1856. 'Health and beauty, or, Corsets and clothing, constructed in accordance with the physiological laws of the human body' gave a history of stays, culminating in her own Hygeinic Corset, which had been 'pirated or attempted by almost every staymaker in London and Paris' (R. A. Caplin, 'Health and Beauty', 51). 'The Needle: its History and Utility' (1860) concentrated on the history of the needle since Homer's day, and the clothing it created. She noted 'so far as ornament is concerned... no genuine and earnest effort has yet been made to adapt the dress to the body, in such a manner as shall preserve the health and display the natural beauties of the human figure'. She decried the appalling conditions in the clothing trades, but hoped the sewing machine would improve 'the condition of those whose woes have been so beautifully and pathetically described by dear Tom Hood'. 
Roxey Caplin ran her business at Berners Street until her death. In 1876 she co-wrote 'Women in the Reign of Queen Victoria'. This praised the recent increase in physical exercise and work opportunities for women, but called for dress reform. From the 1870s she lived in Mortlake with her bookkeeper and three servants. Although she claimed to be a widow of sixty-four in the 1881 census, when she died of old age and gangrene at Cambridge Lodge, Mortlake, East Sheen, Surrey, on 2 August 1888, her death certificate gave her age as ninety-five. 


@@@@@


doc= 42055


Osborn, Sarah (1693-1775), letter writer, was born in October 1693 at Southill, Bedfordshire. She was the eldest and only surviving daughter of George Byng, first Viscount Torrington (1663-1733), the eminent naval officer, and his wife, Margaret (1670-1756), daughter of James Master of East Langden, Kent. She had six surviving brothers, including Admiral John Byng (bap. 1704, d. 1757). Presumably educated at home, Sarah was married in August 1710 to John Osborn (1683-1719), eldest son of Sir John Osborn, bt, of Chicksands Priory, Bedfordshire, and his first wife, Elizabeth Strode. John Osborn died in January 1719, a few months before his thirty-sixth birthday, leaving his wife with two children: Danvers, born in 1715, and John, born in 1718. Three other sons and a daughter predeceased their father; the infant John died in the summer of 1719. Danvers became the third baronet on the death of his grandfather in April 1720. 
Only a few months after her twenty-fifth birthday Sarah Osborn became the guardian of her son, with responsibility for maintaining his inheritance. The earliest of her published letters are primarily concerned with settling the estate and collecting all the rents and other income owed to her son. She depended on the help of her brother Robert (1703-1740) in dealing with the lawyers and the courts, for 'When they see a man appear for one they will not delay so, but a poor woman is made nothing of -- she may live upon air seven year if she can' ('Letters of Sarah Byng Osborn', 9). Nevertheless, hers was the guiding force in managing her son's inheritance and seeing to the upkeep of his houses and lands. 
In 1740 Danvers Osborn married Lady Mary Montagu, fourth daughter of George, first earl of Halifax. She died in 1743 after the birth of her second son, John. Greatly distressed by his wife's death, Danvers withdrew from his family, travelling and serving with the Bedfordshire regiment during the Jacobite rising of 1745. He died in North America as governor of New York in 1753. Once again Sarah was left with small children to bring up and an estate to manage. Not only was she once again supervising the Osborn family interest, but as the senior surviving member of the Byng family, with her only brother an admiral often absent in the Mediterranean, she was concerned with that family as well. She played an active part in trying to secure mercy for her brother John Byng after he was sentenced to death on 22 January 1757 for failing to engage the French fleet at Minorca the previous year. Osborn, based not at Chicksands but at a town house in Charles Street, Berkeley Square, sought the help of John Russell, fourth duke of Bedford, a member of the cabinet and the most powerful neighbour of the Byngs and the Osborns. In her letter she emphasized both the justice of her cause and her status as 'a distressed sister, surrounded only by weeping females, and helpless boys' ('Letters of Sarah Byng Osborn', 85). This was followed by a cogently argued letter to the lords of the Admiralty questioning the procedure and principles under which Byng had been sentenced. Despite her efforts Byng was executed on 14 March; his last letter to Osborn, dated two days before his death, told her that 'All has proved fruitless, but nothing wanting in you that could be done' (ibid., 89). Osborn continued to maintain her connections with the duke of Bedford, and her letters to her younger grandson John, written while he was a fledgeling diplomat in Italy from 1766 to 1768, kept him informed of political issues and ministerial changes at home with the family's links to the Bedford whigs in mind. Her elder grandson Sir George Osborn, fourth baronet (1742-1818), married in 1771; she welcomed the birth of his son John in 1773. 
Sarah Osborn, born and married into families widely connected among the gentry and nobility of Bedfordshire and surrounding counties, lived a typical life for one of her time and class. She visited country houses, travelled on the continent, went to Bath, spent the season in London, attended court. Her family and friends were active in county politics. A number of family members held government appointments. However, she also had to assume responsibilities which few women would have expected to bear. Nearly forty years of her life were spent as guardian of her son and grandsons and in caring for the Osborn family inheritance. She learned to deal with lawyers, bankers, tenants, servants, and tradesmen. She carried on through family tragedies both great and small. She died in November 1775 and was buried on 22 November at Campton, Bedfordshire. 
The challenges that Sarah Osborn faced are remembered because at least some of her letters survived and were published by a descendant in 1890 and republished with a new commentary in 1930. Although this collection contains only ninety-three letters and has doubtless been edited, it is sufficient to provide a picture of her life. The cost of housekeeping, the difficulties of renovation at Chicksands, and problems with livestock during her years of guardianship take up as much space as politics. Accounts of local elections and marriage arrangements, especially when these involved acquaintances, are frequently reported. Osborn's letters contain little about literature, art, or music. What has been published, however, is valuable for the reader who wants to know more about the life and responsibilities of aristocratic women in the eighteenth century. Osborn surely wrote many more letters than this small number, and it is to be hoped that more of her correspondence has survived. Perhaps other family members were not so ruthless as Osborn herself; she wrote to Danvers in 1739 that 'I have amused myself with cleaning away drawers full of old letters and papers, to save you the trouble of making a bonfire of them' ('Letters of Sarah Byng Osborn', 43). This was, alas, often the fate of women's letters. 


@@@@@


doc= 42073


John [iii] Fuller (bap. 1680, d. 1745), ironmaster and gun-founder, was the eldest son of John [ii] Fuller, of Tanners, Waldron, Sussex, and his wife, Elizabeth, the daughter of Samuel Fowle of London. He was baptized at Waldron on 28 July 1680. On 20 July 1703 he married Elizabeth ('bap'. 1681, died 1728), daughter of Fulke Rose, of Jamaica, and his wife, Elizabeth, who later married Hans Sloane. The marriage settlement brought a large fortune from sugar plantations in St Katherine's and St John's parishes in Jamaica, the income from which formed an increasingly significant element in the family's wealth. In 1705 he took possession of Brightling Park, which he renamed Rose Hill, in honour of his wife. During the ensuing years a substantial amount of property in the Brightling and Burwash areas was purchased. It is likely that he took control of the family's furnace at Heathfield as early as 1703, when the first furnace account book was begun, and thereafter the accounts (at East Sussex Record Office) form a number of series. In 1713 he was elected MP for Sussex, but did not stand for re-election when parliament was dissolved in 1715. In 1716 he purchased Burwash forge from William Western, having worked it since 1700. During the peace of the 1720s and 1730s Fuller kept Heathfield furnace at work supplying Sussex forges with pig iron, returning to large scale ordnance production at the onset of war in 1739. Fuller favoured a protectionist policy in respect of the importation of iron, seeing the reinvigoration of the English, and not least the wealden, iron industry as a means of providing employment as well as improving the quality of iron produced. In 1734 he unsuccessfully contested one of the Sussex parliamentary seats, espousing the tory anti-excise cause. Fuller died on 4 August 1745 at Rose Hill, Brightling, and was buried on 10 August at Waldron. 



@@@@@


doc= 42074


John [iv] Fuller (1706-1755), ironmaster and gun-founder, was the eldest of the ten children of John [iii] Fuller and his wife, Elizabeth. He was born on 1 February 1706. In 1723 he went up to Trinity College, Cambridge, and in 1724 was admitted to the Middle Temple. He was elected FRS in 1726. On the death of his father in 1745 he took over the estate and its ironworks in a period of great demand for ordnance. The late settlement of accounts by the Board of Ordnance, the main purchaser of the family's guns, caused Fuller much concern. The reputation of Fuller guns was such, however, that a number of orders were received from foreign states. In August 1746, at Croydon, Surrey, he married Elizabeth, daughter of Francis Dayrell, of Shudy Camps, Cambridge. There were no children from the marriage. In the same year he was appointed a justice of the peace. In 1750 he dispensed with the services of the family's Ordnance agent of more than twenty years, Samuel Remnant, concerned that he was not receiving a fair distribution of contracts compared with the other gun-founders that Remnant represented. In December 1754 Fuller was elected as MP for the duke of Newcastle's constituency at Boroughbridge, Yorkshire. He died on 5 February 1755 at Rose Hill, and was buried on 12 February at Waldron. 



@@@@@


doc= 42075


Stephen Fuller (1716-1799), merchant and agent for the Jamaica assembly, John [iii] Fuller's seventh son, was born on 26 November 1716. He was educated at Tonbridge School and, from 1734, at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he was a scholar, and elected fellow in 1741. On 8 July 1744 he married Elizabeth (Betsy), daughter of Laurence Noakes of Brightling. The couple had five daughters. On the death of his eldest brother, John [iv], he took charge of the Sussex estates and ironworks in the interim before his brother Rose returned from Jamaica. He continued to have a management role in both thereafter, and lived at Brightling. He was appointed justice of the peace in 1761. From 1764 until his death he was English agent for the Jamaica assembly and with his brother did much to further the Jamaica interest, being the author of several pamphlets, notably on slavery. He died on 8 September 1799 at South Stoneham, Hampshire. His wife predeceased him; she was buried on 9 March 1753. The Fuller estate was inherited, on the death of Rose Fuller, by his nephew, John [v] Fuller (1757-1834) -- known as Honest John or Mad Jack Fuller -- who maintained Heathfield furnace in operation, supplying local forges with pig iron, until 1787. The forge at Burwash closed in 1803. 
In the diversity of their interests the Fullers were not typical of their wealden contemporaries. Long-term investment in agriculture was the basis of their wealth, and their Jamaica estates eventually made large profits; in their political activities, with the exception of Rose Fuller, they were largely unambitious; and in the manufacture of iron they were not numbered among the innovators of their age. Where their significance lies is in the wealth of letters and accounts which have survived and the light which they shed, not only on the family's interests, but on the provincial, colonial, political, and commercial life of the time. 


@@@@@


doc= 42077


Rose Fuller (1708-1777), politician, gun-founder, and landowner, the second son of John [iii] Fuller, was born on 12 April 1708. He studied medicine at Trinity College, Cambridge, from 1725 to 1728, and from 1729 to 1732 at the University of Leiden. He graduated MD from Cambridge in 1732. He was elected FRS in 1732. In 1733 he was sent by his father to Jamaica, to supervise the family's sugar estates. In April 1737 he married Ithamar ('c'.1720-1738), daughter of the Hon. Richard Mill, of St Katherine's, Jamaica, and in the same year was appointed to the Jamaica council. The island's council and assembly contained strong factions for and against the governor; Fuller joined the opposition. The couple had one son, who was stillborn. Ithamar Fuller died on 22 April 1738, but the marriage had brought Rose Fuller financial security. In 1740 he was dismissed from the council by Governor Trelawny, and was elected to the Jamaica assembly. He now led the faction against Governor Trelawny and, having returned to England in 1748, used his family's friendship with the duke of Newcastle to gain support against Trelawny, with whom, however, he was reconciled in 1751. Fuller was appointed chief justice by the new governor, Admiral Knowles, in 1753, but he was soon in opposition to him over the latter's plan to move the island's capital to Kingston. He resigned as chief justice over the dismissal of a fellow judge but in 1755 returned to England on inheriting the Sussex estates. In the following year he was elected MP for New Romney, and in 1761 for Maidstone. That year he was appointed a justice of the peace. Fuller, unlike his father, had whig sympathies, and supported the duke of Newcastle's faction. In parliament he was an important spokesman for Jamaica, and spoke frequently on American affairs. In 1765 the decrease in the price offered for guns by the Board of Ordnance, occasioned by the Carron Company's low tender for orders, caused Fuller to withdraw from the manufacture of guns for the government. In the next decade, when Carron guns repeatedly failed the Ordnance board proofs (or tests of quality), Fuller and his brother Stephen tried again to tender for business but met with only limited success; within ten years, however, increased income from the Jamaica estates had almost compensated for the financial loss. As in their father's time Heathfield furnace returned to serving the needs of a diminishing number of local forges. In 1768 Rose Fuller was elected MP for Rye, the seat he held until his death on 7 May 1777, at Gerrard Street, London. At his death his landed estate amounted to 5584 acres. He was buried at Waldron on 15 May. 



@@@@@


doc= 42083


Fox, Robert Were (1754-1818), merchant and industrial entrepreneur, was born on 5 July 1754 in Fowey, Cornwall, the second of the five sons of George Croker Fox (died 1807) and his wife, Mary. The Foxes were a Quaker family holding a long-established and significant position in Cornish commercial life. As mine owner, merchant, and shipping agent, Fox was to play a pivotal role in further enhancing this influence at a time when Cornwall had emerged as an early focus of British industrialization. He was principal partner in the family firm, G. C. Fox & Sons, from 1780 until 1810, and during this period consolidated his company's position in the rich Gwennap copper mines, notably as adventurers (shareholders) in Poldice and Wheal Unity. In partnership with John Williams of Scorrier, another local mining magnate, he also purchased the mineral rights of the duchy of Cornwall for a period of thirty-one years, operating as Fox, Williams & Co. 
In 1791 Fox and Williams established the Perran foundry (on an inlet of the River Fal) to supply machinery to the Gwennap mines. Fox sought business partners among the influential group of Quakers involved in Cornish commerce, and principal shareholders were the interrelated Price and Tregelles families of Falmouth and Penryn. Although Fox was anticipating the expiry (in 1800) of Boulton and Watt's patent rights on the manufacture of steam engines, it was not until the 1830s that large Cornish engines were being built at the Perran foundry. In this earlier period, Perran concentrated on the production of smaller components, larger items being constructed at the Neath Abbey ironworks in south Wales, which the partners had acquired in July 1792. Near the Perran foundry was the Perran smelting house, a tin-smelting operation acquired by Fox between about 1802 and 1806 but abandoned by 1811. 
About 1799 Fox purchased the lease on Portreath harbour, on the north Cornish coast. Between 1800 and 1805 the port was extensively reconstructed to facilitate the export of copper ore (to south Wales for smelting) and the import of coal (again from south Wales) and timber. In 1809 Fox and Williams began the Portreath-Poldice tramway, with the aim of linking the harbour to the nearby Gwennap mines. As well as establishing more efficient communications, the construction of various spurs and short branches allowed them to exercise monopolistic control over the traffic between port and mines. 
Alongside his mining interests, Fox was involved in the maritime trade of Falmouth, then home of the packet service and extensive shipping business. In May 1794 he was appointed consul to the United States of America for the port of Falmouth, a position he held until succeeded by his son Robert Were Fox FRS, in 1815. Fox lived in Falmouth, at Bank House, Grove Place, and at the nearby country residence of Penjerrick. He married in 1788 Elizabeth (1768-1849), the daughter of Joseph and Sarah Tregelles of Falmouth, with whom he had six sons, the eldest being the geologist and physicist Robert Were Fox. He died, probably in Falmouth, in 1818. 


@@@@@


doc= 42086


Chichester, Mary Barbara, Lady Chichester (1801-1876), diarist, was born on 29 October 1801 at Tixall Hall, Staffordshire, the first of three children of Sir Thomas Hugh Clifford (from 1821 Clifford Constable) (1762-1823), topographer and botanist, of Tixall, Staffordshire, and Wycliffe and Burton Constable, Yorkshire, and his wife, Mary MacDonald (died 1825), daughter of John Chichester of Arlington, Devon. She had one brother and one sister and grew up in an atmosphere of devout Roman Catholicism. 
Mary spent the greater part of her life travelling and assiduously recorded her experiences in diary form. She began her first surviving journal in 1822 'en route' for Ghent, and included architectural descriptions of the Catholic churches she attended. She stayed at the Normandy estate of the marquis de Montmorency at Beaumesnil in autumn 1823, and on her return to Paris was introduced to Mlle Fouchet, who had secretly visited Marie Antoinette in prison before her execution. 
On 13 April 1826 Mary married her cousin, Charles Chichester (1795-1847), army officer, the second son of Charles Joseph Chichester (1770-1837) of Calverleigh, Devon, and his wife, Mary Honoria (died 1831), daughter of Robert Ffrench of Rahasane, co. Galway. She bore eleven children, of whom three sons and two daughters survived to adulthood. During the early years of her marriage she dwelt mainly at Calverleigh Court; however after her husband left to fight in Spain in 1835 as a brigadier-general in the British Legion, she resided in Pau, north of the Pyrenees. The uprising in Upper and Lower Canada in late 1837 took her to the wilds of British North America, when her husband volunteered for the colonial army. 
Appointed lieutenant-colonel of the 81st foot in late 1839 and knighted the following April, Sir Charles sailed for the West Indies with his wife in autumn 1840. Based near Port of Spain in Trinidad, Lady Mary was able to visit Caracas in Venezuela over Christmas 1841. There, as the guest of a local landowner, she was served 'bologna sausage, cheese, olives and they wanted to add butter, all on the same plate, it seemed a strange mess' (diary of Lady Chichester, 21 Dec 1841, DDCH/87). She then endured several months in Antigua, where the regiment was stationed in early 1842. 
Of the Caribbean islands, Lady Mary became most attached to Trinidad, of which Sir Charles was appointed acting governor in July 1842. Her abiding memories were of Trinidad's natural beauty and the kindness of its inhabitants, coupled with the trauma of witnessing, in February 1843, the impact of an earthquake centred on Guadeloupe which enveloped Montserrat in a cloud of dust, destroyed the dockyard in Antigua harbour, and left thousands of people dead (diary of Lady Chichester, 15 Feb 1843, DDCH/87). 
When Sir Charles's term as governor ended, the 81st was posted to Canada and the Chichesters arrived in Quebec shortly before the new governor-general, Sir Charles Metcalfe, in August 1843. From her vantage point in St John's, Montreal, Lady Mary witnessed the violent elections to the legislature of the united Canadian province in spring 1844. She travelled in the area around the North American lakes, including Niagara Falls, until her husband's sudden death in Toronto on 4 April 1847 caused her to return to England. 
Unable to settle in the East Riding, which Lady Mary considered 'a frightful county where no family recollection belongs to us' (diary of Lady Chichester, 20 July 1844, DDCH/88), she moved to Paris in autumn 1847 and so witnessed the early days of the 1848 revolution. Opposed to the republic and fearful of mob violence, she informed her eldest son, 'If they bombard Paris I shall go into my cellar' (Lady Mary to C. R. Chichester, 16 Feb 1848, DDCH/62). However the behaviour of the populace during the 'February Days' gained her respect, as did the provisional government's attempts to maintain order. She escaped from Paris on 3 March. 
Lady Mary returned to France many times during the 1850s and undertook an extensive European tour in 1856-7 through France, Italy, Switzerland, Germany, and Belgium. At the age of seventy-one, she made her last journey to the continent, but continued to travel around Britain and Ireland, visiting many well-known landed families, until, on 14 December 1876, she died at her London home, 5 Ovington Gardens, South Kensington, from the debilitating after-effects of a large abscess on her thigh. 
A woman with a great love of travelling and interest in different cultures, but with a deep commitment to her own faith, Lady Chichester once expressed the belief that 'nothing can be so melancholy as a splendid funeral without religious signs because it is only religion which can make it less so, by giving hope for the future' (Lady Chichester to M. Balfe, 26 Nov 1852, DDCH/63). Her diaries and correspondence combine a wealth of detail with an unusual perspective on nineteenth-century history and bear witness to the hope for the future which guided her life. 


@@@@@


doc= 42087


Horrabin, Winifred (1887-1971), socialist and journalist, was born on 9 August 1887 in Sheffield, the fourth of the six children (three died in infancy) of Arthur John Batho (1855/6-1891), postal telegraph clerk, and his wife, Lilian Outram (1858/9-1938). Her parents came from artisan families and were members of the Wicker Congregational Church. Her father sailed to South Africa on the SS 'Durban' in 1890 hoping to cure his tuberculosis, but, shortly after being joined by his family, he died and was buried in Graaff-Reinet in May 1891. 
Batho returned to Sheffield and attended the Central School, then the Sheffield School of Art from 1907 where she met her future husband, James Francis Horrabin (1884-1962), the cartoonist and cartographer. Her political awakening reflected the legacy of her father's death; she became anti-Boer and felt a close affinity with the South African feminist and socialist Olive Schreiner, whose biography she began to write. Batho joined the Women's Social and Political Union and disrupted a speech by Winston Churchill in 1909 with the suffragettes' cry 'votes for women'. She 'converted' to guild socialism 'via William Morris art' (Horrabin MS DWH/1/64) and wrote a play, 'Victorian Love Story: Beloved Good', about Thomas Carlyle and his wife, Jane. 
Winifred Batho and James Horrabin were married on 11 August 1911 and moved to London. Together they worked in the labour college movement: they favoured independent workers' education and published these views in 'Working Class Education' in 1924. Horrabin was honorary secretary of the Plebs League and edited 'The Plebs'. She joined the Communist Party and delivered a paper in 1912 to the Fabian Society in which she argued that only the destruction of private property would release women from economic slavery ('Is Woman's Place the Home?', published in 1933). During the First World War she began writing an autobiographical novel about a wartime love affair. 
In the 1920s Horrabin became internationalist and pacifist in her outlook. She visited Russia in 1926, meeting N. K. Krupskaya and making a pilgrimage to Lenin's tomb. In Poland she observed a mass trial of political dissidents. When her younger brother, Harold Batho, died from First World War injuries in 1932, she told the National Conference of Labour Women that the international working classes should resist war, choosing starvation over employment in munitions factories. 
In 1937 Horrabin began reviewing films and books for 'The Tribune' (she continued until 1948), beginning a long career in journalism which included travel writing, social commentary, and short stories for journals such as 'Time and Tide'. She had a weekly column in the 'Manchester Evening News' from 1944 under the 'nom de plume' of Freda Wynne. In 1938 Horrabin's mother died, Horrabin's novel was rejected by publishers, and she was diagnosed as having an ovarian cyst. She underwent a hysterectomy in February 1939. She moved to Oxford at the outbreak of war and in March 1942 her husband, who was immersed in his second extramarital affair, asked for a separation. Despite knowledge of his adultery, she was devastated and sought psychoanalytical treatment. On 13 October 1947 the marriage was dissolved. Horrabin lived and worked for six months in Jamaica before moving to Blackheath in 1950. 
Horrabin's final years were marred by loneliness and a deep sense of failure. In 1951 her elder brother, Arthur (Artie) Denton Batho, died, leaving her without family, and she never fully recovered from the dissolution of her marriage. She compiled, but did not publish, 'The Summer of a Dormouse', a series of autobiographical essays. Their significance lies in her recollection of suffragist work with Adela Pankhurst in 1909 and socialist contacts in the 1920s and 1930s such as Harold Laski and H. G. Wells. She polished her novel and gave it the title 'After which War?', but, like her play and the Schreiner biography, it remained unpublished. She died at her home, Sandycross, Ridgeway Road, Dorking, Surrey, on 24 June 1971 and was cremated at Randall's Park crematorium, Leatherhead, on 30 June. Her estate of $185 was bequeathed to Robert Alfred Blatchford. 


@@@@@


doc= 42089


Kerr, Anne Patricia (1925-1973), politician, was born on 24 March 1925 at 20 Hazlewell Road, Putney, south-west London, the daughter of Arnold Leslie Bersey, a chartered accountant, and his wife, Kathleen Isabel, 'nee' Mitchell. Her family was Methodist. From the mid-1930s she attended St Paul's Girls' School in Hammersmith before being evacuated to Budleigh Salterton in Devon at the start of the Second World War. She attended Exmouth grammar school and Southlands College before volunteering for the Women's Royal Naval Service (WRNS) in 1942. In the WRNS she was stationed at Plymouth, Portsmouth, and Dartmouth. On 6 May 1944 she married James Ewen Doran Clark ('b'. 1923/4), a lieutenant in the Royal Marines, the son of James Thomson Doran Clark, a major in the Royal Army Medical Corps. She left the WRNS before the birth of their son, Patrick, in July 1945. 
Anne Clark returned to London at the end of the war and joined the Ealing branch of the Labour Party in the late 1940s. She trained as an actress and joined the actors' union, Equity, in 1951. She was a broadcaster on 'Perspective' for BBC television and 'Woman's Hour' for BBC radio. Her forays into film work were not very successful. She moved to Roehampton and joined the Putney branch of the Labour Party in 1953, becoming its membership secretary and increasing membership from 2000 to 4000 in three years. Her marriage was dissolved in 1953 and she threw her energy into Labour politics. She stood unsuccessfully for Wandsworth borough council in 1956 but was elected as Labour candidate to the London county council (LCC) in 1958. 
From early in her political career Anne Clark combined constituency work with political activism. She was deeply involved in the campaign for the abolition of the death penalty and befriended the family of Derek Bentley, an intellectually disabled epileptic hanged in January 1953 for the murder of a policeman. At the LCC she worked on housing and welfare committees, and when she stood (unsuccessfully) for the seat of Twickenham in the general election of 1959 she campaigned on the housing conditions of the poor. During this campaign she met Russell Whiston Kerr (1921-1983), an Australian air charter executive who stood as Labour candidate for Merton and Morden. They shared political views, and married on 29 April 1960. 
In 1962 Anne Kerr became Labour candidate for Rochester and Chatham in Kent and in the general election of 1964 she unseated the Conservative MP. Her energetic local campaigning made her popular with constituents and she was re-elected in 1966. Kerr was a member of the Tribune Group of Labour MPs, which was chaired by her husband, and was a signatory to the charter advocating public ownership and the redistribution of wealth. Her Christian background made her socially conservative as well as deeply committed to a string of national and international causes. She opposed legislation for abortion and easier divorce, and was involved in women's groups as a Christian humanitarian and not a feminist. She chaired the Christian action group for the abolition of capital punishment and successfully lobbied the home secretary over the Christian reburial of Derek Bentley. 
In her first speech to the House of Commons Kerr argued that there should be a minister for peace, and her lasting contribution to 1960s British politics was as a peace activist and sponsor of the British peace committee. She was a founding member of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament and addressed public demonstrations against the war in Vietnam. She worked with the British council for peace in Vietnam and personally donated large sums to medical aid for Vietnam. She organized petitions for the release of female prisoners in Saigon and chaired a group of women who sent letters of protest about the bombing of Vietnam to the prime ministers of Britain, Australia, and New Zealand, and the president of the United States. In 1965 she and her husband visited Hanoi and she attended conferences on Vietnam held by international peace organizations in Stockholm. In 1968 they visited Chicago to support Eugene McCarthy during his campaign for the presidential nomination on an anti-war ticket; Anne Kerr's arrest during a demonstration, and subsequent detention, received publicity in Britain. 
During the 1960s Kerr was a ceaseless international traveller in the dual causes of world peace and equality. She visited Cuba in 1964 and India in 1966. After a trip to Biafra and Nigeria in 1969 she spoke stridently in the House of Commons against the sale of arms during the war in Nigeria. She supported anti-apartheid campaigns and the Movement for Colonial Freedom (later Liberation), and during the Middle East crisis of 1967 refused to support the government's pro-Israeli stand and lobbied on behalf of Palestinian refugees. However, her overseas trips and political campaigns alienated her from those in her constituency who did not share her humanitarian concerns, and she received bigoted hate mail before suffering a heavy defeat in the general election of 1970. 
Kerr was devastated by the loss of her parliamentary seat and turned down several alternative offers of Labour candidacy. She threw herself instead into the Amnesty International campaign for the release of women taken prisoner during the military coup in Greece. In November 1970 she formed Women Against the Common Market, a group aiming to muster popular support against the Common Market and lobby parliament. She was motivated by concern about the exclusion of developing countries and chaired this group until her death. She died tragically at her home, 37 Popes Avenue, Twickenham, London, from acute or chronic alcohol poisoning on 29 July 1973. 


@@@@@


doc= 42092


Booth, Charles (d. 1535), bishop of Hereford, is of uncertain parentage, but was undoubtedly a member of the noted Booth family of Barton, Lancashire. It has been thought that he was the son of Sir Robert Booth and therefore of a junior branch of the family. It is certainly true that he was closely related to Lawrence Booth and William Booth, archbishops of York in the second half of the fifteenth century, and to John Booth, bishop of Exeter between 1465 and 1478. 
Charles Booth seems to have been educated at Cambridge, studying civil law at Pembroke College, and received the degree of BCL in 1485, but the grace book references are not conclusive. His likely uncles, William and Lawrence, had been members of Pembroke, so it is hardly surprising to find Charles Booth also associated with that college, of which he was later a benefactor. After Cambridge it is certain that he studied at Bologna, where he received the degree of DCL in 1493. In 1505-6 he was granted a grace of incorporation at Cambridge. 
Leaving Bologna in 1493 Booth was an advocate at the court of Canterbury for two years, leaving in 1495 to become treasurer of the diocese of Lichfield under Bishop William Smith, a position he held until 1516. Although he had been rector of Normanton-on-Soar, Nottinghamshire, from 1493 (vacated in 1499), his career flowered after his association with Smith. In addition to the treasurership of Lichfield he was named canon of Auckland, co. Durham, and prebendary of St Helens. In 1499 he became rector of St James Garlickhythe, London. In 1501 he followed Smith to Lincoln, where he served as chancellor and commissary-general until 1506. In the same year he was collated canon of Lincoln and prebendary of Clifton (later exchanged for the prebend of Farendon). From 1505 until 1516 he was archdeacon of Buckingham and held various other positions including canon of St Paul's and prebendary of Reculverland (1516), until he became bishop of Hereford in 1516. 
Booth's friendship with Smith in 1501 led him into the circle of advisers to Prince Arthur. Most sources claim that he served as chaplain and chancellor of the council in the marches of Wales in 1502 but it seems that that council did not have a position as chancellor, an error that seems to have originated in Francis Godwin's 'Catalogue of the Bishops of England'. Booth appears to have been an active member of this council, working alongside Smith, whom he also supported in his efforts to defend the knights of St John. He continued his work after the death of the prince in 1502, being named as one of the 'lordys marchers in Wales', as late as 1531 ('LP Henry VIII', 5, no. 390). 
On 22 April 1516 Booth was nominated to the see of Hereford. Custody of the temporalities was granted on 17 May. Papal provision followed on 21 July, and he was consecrated on 30 November. In 1518 he was summoned by Wolsey to attend the council for the reformation of the clergy and subsequently organized a synod within his diocese to discuss the results of that council. It was undoubtedly while he was serving on the council in the marches of Wales that he made the acquaintance of Prince Arthur's wife, Katherine of Aragon. This relationship continued after the death of Arthur and her subsequent marriage to Henry VIII. He was one of the bishops invited to be present when the future Charles V visited England on his way to be crowned emperor at Aachen in 1520. He was also one of three bishops who attended the queen at the Field of Cloth of Gold, the others being Fisher of Rochester and Athequa of Llandaff (formerly her confessor). Although there is little firsthand evidence of Booth's position on the annulment he is thought to have been a strong supporter of the queen. His attitude at the convocation of 1529 certainly appears to have irritated the king, who instructed Cromwell in 1531 'to make processe and to prosecute against Charles, busshop of Hereford, according to the lawes, with all spede, if he do not agree' ('LP Henry VIII', no. 394). Booth's advocacy of the queen stopped well short of the lengths to which others were prepared to go, and the king's warning seems to have had an effect. However strongly he may have felt about the issue he appears to have responded to the king's shot across his bows, for no further action was taken against him. 
Once the proceedings for the annulment had been completed and the king remarried, Booth concentrated on his diocese. He was unreceptive to reforming ideas, and his register testifies to his conservative turn of mind. Archbishop Warham's instructions to his bishops of 1526 to collect and burn all translations of the 'New Testament' are reproduced in their entirety in Booth's register, as is his letter in response claiming, with some pride, that there were no copies surrendered to him in Hereford. He appears to have conducted the business of the diocese with some care. There were, however, internal diocesan problems that seem to have been beyond his capabilities, for Cranmer wrote to him at one point hoping that he would not have to intervene in a dispute. Booth was also criticized for incurring too great a cost for his diocese in the repair of his house in London. During his episcopate the north porch of Hereford Cathedral was built. 
Booth died on 5 May 1535, leaving all his books not already bequeathed elsewhere to the library at Hereford. He was buried in Hereford Cathedral, in the north aisle of the nave. 


@@@@@


doc= 42094


Varley, Julia (1871-1952), trade unionist, was born on 16 March 1871 in Horton, Bradford, the first child of Richard Varley, an engine tenter (a skilled worsted mill worker), and his wife, Martha Ann Alderson. Her maternal great-grandfather, Joseph Alderson, who died in 1886, was a veteran of Peterloo and the Chartist campaigns. Julia Varley attended St Andrew's School, Listerhills, Bradford, and the Quaker Sunday school, but because of family circumstances left school at the age of twelve, and became a part-time mill worker, soon progressing to full-time weaver. 
Julia Varley joined the Weavers and Textile Workers' Union and by the age of fifteen had become Bradford branch secretary. On her mother's death she had to give up full-time mill work to care for her younger sisters and brothers, but this did not stop her union work, remarkable at a time when few women were members of unions, let alone active in them. Her involvement increased with the Manningham Mills strike of 1890-91; she became the first woman member of the Bradford Trades Council as secretary of her union branch, and served on its executive committee from 1899 to 1906. 
This marked a considerable broadening of Julia Varley's activities away from 'pure' union activity. In 1903 she was appointed by Bradford corporation to inquire into employment conditions and assist in the organization of school meals. She served on the Bradford board of (poor law) guardians from 1904 to 1907. This brought her into contact with tramping women, whose conditions she determined to investigate at first hand. She therefore disguised herself and tramped from Leeds to Liverpool, ostensibly in search of an errant husband, sleeping in casual wards on the way. She followed this up with a similar tour of London doss-houses. She also became a suffragette and was twice imprisoned in 1907. By comparison with her doss-house and casual ward experiences, she found food and accommodation in Holloway quite good. 
At this time Julia Varley had also become involved with Mary Macarthur and the National Federation of Women Workers (NFWW), and in 1907 they succeeded in establishing a branch of the NFWW among the female small-chain makers of Cradley Heath. The agitation begun by the NFWW was taken up and given high-profile national publicity by the women's suffrage press and the Anti-Sweating League, with the result that small-chain making was included within the provisions of the 1909 'Trade Boards Act'. In 1909 Edward Cadbury invited her to Birmingham to organize women workers; she immediately established an NFWW branch at Bournville, which affiliated to the Birmingham Trades Council, with Julia Varley as branch delegate. In January 1910 she was elected to the executive (again the first woman in both positions), and was immediately involved in successful campaigns concerned with pay and conditions of bakers and chain makers. However, the attempt to establish a branch of the newly formed Workers' Union (WU) in the potteries at Bilston not only failed, but involved her in physical violence. 
By 1912, Julia Varley's involvement with the WU had come to convince her that men and women should organize in a single union, and she transferred her allegiance to it from the NFWW. Its heartland was in the Black Country, and in the hard but ultimately successful 1913 metalworkers' strikes Julia Varley played a major part in rallying the strikers' women to the cause. A strike among Cornish clay miners was less successful. However, a major change to the WU's fortunes occurred with the First World War, when the influx of new, especially female, labour into munitions led to a sharp increase in membership, particularly among women; from 5000 in 1914, the WU's women membership had risen to over 80,000 by 1918. Until August 1915 Julia Varley was the WU's only woman organizer, and she continued to organize actively right through the war, despite having to undergo a major throat operation early in 1917. 
Nevertheless, the war brought to an end Julia Varley's connection with the Birmingham Trades Council, which had initially given qualified support to war work, but soon changed its position, especially after the introduction of conscription in 1916. This apparent lack of patriotism caused Julia Varley and a number of other council members to form a breakaway body, the Birmingham Trade Union Industrial Council, which ceased activity in 1918, when most of its members reaffiliated to the Birmingham Trades Council. However, Julia Varley apparently remained unreconciled. 
In general at this time Julia Varley seems to have become more favourable to certain official institutions. In 1917-18 she was selected to serve on two bodies set up by the Ministry of Labour: first, the Labour Advisory Board, responsible for investigating and reporting on the working of labour exchanges; the second was as part of a commission of five representative women sent to investigate rumours of immoral behaviour by WAACs in France (the committee found the rumours groundless). More controversially, she accepted an invitation to serve on the executive of the National Alliance of Employers and Employed, a body regarded with deep suspicion by most of the trade union movement; the executive committee of her own WU gave her permission to join provided it was made clear that she was acting in a purely personal capacity. 
After the war Julia Varley continued as chief woman organizer for the WU, and, after their 1929 merger, for the Transport and General Workers' Union, until 1936. She was elected to the newly established general council of the TUC as one of two representatives of women workers from 1921 to 1924, and from 1926 to 1935; in this capacity she attended various International Labour Organization conferences in Geneva, Rome, and Vienna. She served on various government committees, notably on the working of the labour exchanges, and the condition of women and young persons under the two-shift system. She became involved in the work of the Society for the Overseas Settlement of British Women, and in 1925 travelled with a group of emigrants to Canada. As a member of the executive committee of the Industrial Welfare Society, she got to know the duke of York (later George VI). Another unexpected friend was Nancy Astor, who apparently warmed to a fellow rebel. In 1931 she was appointed OBE for her public work, and in March 1936 she finally retired from the trade union movement and active participation in public life, though still taking an active interest from her home at 42 Hay Green Lane, Bournville. 
Julia Varley worked to assure women's position within the trade union movement as a whole, rather than (like Mary Macarthur) in separate unions. She achieved high position in one of the country's largest unions, and with it a prominent place in public life, which she enjoyed. She was sturdily built, wore pince-nez, and habitually had a determined expression. Her general approach was forthright, though she was capable of kindness and affection. Throughout the 1930s her eyesight gradually failed to the point of total blindness, though she still kept contact with the TUC and the local church. She died of a stroke on 24 November 1952 at 32 Hampden Street, Bradford, the home of her sisters, Mrs Martha Jarrett and Mrs Jessie Wooller; and after a service in All Saints' Church, Bradford, she was buried in Undercliffe cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 42123


Traill, Catharine Parr (1802-1899), author, botanist, and settler in Canada, the fifth of the eight surviving children of Thomas Strickland (1758-1818) and his wife, Elizabeth Homer (1772-1864), was born at Rotherhithe, London, on 9 January 1802. She was named after Henry VIII's sixth wife, with whom the family (wrongly) claimed a connection. Shortly after her birth the family moved to East Anglia, where Thomas Strickland began his own business, living in Norwich and then at Stowe Hall, near Bungay. In 1808 he bought Reydon Hall, near Southwold in Suffolk, where Catharine was largely brought up. Socially isolated and educated at home, the Stricklands were a close-knit and affectionate family. Catharine's education was a liberal one, covering subjects including history, geography, botany, the natural sciences, and several languages; she was encouraged to read widely and independently. Practically all the Stricklands had a literary turn -- her elder sisters Agnes Strickland and Elizabeth Strickland ['see under 'Strickland, Agnes (1796-1874)] later became the well-known authors of 'The Lives of the Queens of England' (1840-48) -- but Catharine was the first of the siblings to have a manuscript published: 'The Tell-Tale: an Original Collection of Moral and Amusing Stories' (1818). Over the next fourteen years she published some fifteen or more books for children, often works of didactic fiction, such as 'Prejudice Reproved, or, The History of a Negro Toy-Seller' (1826), or reflecting her geographical or botanical interests, such as 'The Young Emigrants, or, Pictures of Canada' (1826) and 'Sketches from Nature, or, Hints to Juvenile Naturalists' (1830). She also contributed to annuals and periodicals. 
About 1829 Catharine Parr Strickland became engaged to Francis Harral, the son of an editor of Suffolk newspapers. When the engagement was broken off in 1831 she went to London to recover: there she and her sister Susanna met their future husbands, both of whom were officers in the 21st Scottish fusiliers. She married Thomas Traill, an Orkney-born widower with two sons, on 13 May 1832 at Reydon; soon after, on 7 July 1832, she and her husband emigrated to Canada, sailing from Greenock. They settled on the River Otonabee, near Catharine's brother Samuel, who had emigrated in 1825, and in 1834 Catharine's sister Susanna Moodie and her husband, who were also emigrants, came to live near them. Later the Traills lived at Ashburnham, near Peterborough, and on the south shore of Rice Lake, both in the same region of Upper Canada, always in some financial difficulty and dependent on help from family and friends. 
The difficulties and discomforts of a settler's life, exacerbated by her husband's periodic fits of depression and commercial failure, made Mrs Traill's life a hard one: however, the struggle for subsistence, the birth of nine children in fourteen years, and the constant need to earn extra income by writing do not seem to have dimmed her innate optimism and ability to enjoy the small delights of everyday life. She wrote for English and Montreal journals, and in 1836 'The Backwoods of Canada' was published by the London publisher Charles Knight; it was a collection of her lively letters home to her family, detailing the journey to Canada, the seasons, sights, flora, and fauna of her new country, and the day-to-day activities of a newly arrived settler. In 1852 she published 'Canadian Crusoes: a Tale of the Rice Lake Plains', again with a London publisher. The tale of three children lost from home for three years, it was at once an adventure story, a piece of contemporary wisdom literature, and a practical survival guide for the Canadian backwoods. The more mundane accounts of how to dig a root-house and to harvest seasonal fruits were enlivened by such events as a forest fire, the adoption by the party of an outcast Indian girl, and the kidnap of one of their number by Indians. It was well reviewed and the 1852 American edition went through at least nine impressions; it was reprinted as late as 1923 as a commercial concern, and remains one of the founding works of Canadian children's literature. 
In 1854 Mrs Traill published 'The Female Emigrant's Guide, and Hints on Canadian Housekeeping', republished as 'The Canadian Settler's Guide' from 1855 on. This work was intended to offer advice to lower-class women (and, indeed, men) on a variety of topics, such as what to bring with them to Canada, how to build a log-house, and what to plant in a vegetable garden. Recipes for apple puddings and bread jostled with government statistics on numbers of settlers and the cost of fares for passages to Canada. In 1856 Mrs Traill published 'Lady Mary and her Nurse, or, A Peep into the Canadian Forest' in London; in Canada it had already appeared in serial form. 
On 26 August 1857 the Traills' home, Oaklands, on Rice Lake, was burnt down; the family lived with a friend, Frances Stewart, for the next two years. Catharine Parr Traill's notes on Canadian wild flowers were among the few items saved from the fire. She attempted to earn money by writing, needlework, and producing albums of pressed flowers and ferns, but her financial difficulties were increased by the death of her husband on 21 June 1859. A grant from the British government of $100 -- achieved through the influence of Lady Charlotte Greville, who was impressed by one of Mrs Traill's albums -- and the help of her family finally enabled her to buy Westove, in Lakefield, in 1860. There she lived for the rest of her life with her devoted daughter Kate. 
Mrs Traill's later publications brought to fruition her lifelong interest in botany. In 1868 she published 'Canadian Wild Flowers', which was illustrated by her niece Agnes Dunbar Fitzgibbon, who also illustrated her 'Studies in Plant Life in Canada', which appeared in 1885. These publications were too late to earn Mrs Traill the place she deserved in the history of Canadian botany, which had evolved from the Paleyite perspective and emphasis on gathering and classifying species which characterized her botanical researches. But the charm and detailed observations of her essays in 'Pearls and Pebbles, or, Notes of an Old Naturalist' (1894) show that she was no unworthy disciple of Gilbert White, whose 'Natural History and Antiquities of Selbourne' (1789) had been her model for 'Plant Life'. Mrs Traill's last publication was 'Cot and Cradle Stories' (1895). 
Catharine Parr Traill had an attractive personality, gentle and humorous, and formed many close friendships, particularly with other women, in her Canadian life. A visitor in 1853 described her appearance and manner: 'a pleasant enough woman, stout with a slightly blue tinge but very frank and made no secret of their having had a great struggle for the bare necessities' ('Selected Correspondence', 24). In her later years Mrs Traill received several honours, including, at her own request, the grant of Polly Cow Island in the River Otonabee. A fern was named after her. She died at her home, Westove, on 29 August 1899, and was buried in the cemetery at Lakefield on 31 August. 
Catharine Parr Traill's significant role in the development of a Canadian pioneer literature -- intent on exploration and discovery, naming and taming the New World -- has long been recognized, although her reputation has sometimes been overshadowed by that of her sister Susanna Moodie. The efforts of scholars such as Carl Ballstadt, Clara Thomas, and Michael A. Peterman have succeeded in rescuing Mrs Traill from Northrop Frye's characterization of her as a Wordsworthian sentimentalist. But the essential optimism and equanimity of her outlook on life and her surroundings still provoke criticism from those more impressed by Moodie's more dramatic and complicated reaction to the settler experience. Recent critics such as Marion Fowler and Gaile McGregor have argued that she tended to take refuge from the trials of her Canadian experience in an unconvincingly cheerful and ladylike domesticity. However, Mrs Traill's desire to cultivate a civilized way of life in the Canadian backwoods illustrates her adaptability and resourcefulness at least as much as her conventionality, and does not mean that she underrated either the difficulties or the unexpected pleasures of settlement life. Modern readers may find her proselytizing piety occasionally tiresome, but Catharine Parr Traill's clarity of style and openness to new experiences and natural phenomena ensure that her varied works will continue to retain their appeal and interest. 


@@@@@


doc= 42124


Nissen, Peter Norman (1871-1930), mining engineer and inventor of the Nissen hut, was born on 6 August 1871 in New York, the second of the three children of Georg Hermann Nissen (1832-1913), a Norwegian mining engineer, and his wife, Annie Lavinia (1842- 'c'.1930), daughter of Elisha Fitch of Nova Scotia. His education at Trinity College, Trinity, North Carolina (1887-8 and 1890-91), and at Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario (1896-7), both of which he left without taking a degree, was interrupted by long periods working at goldmines in the USA and Canada where crushed ore was fed to stamp mills for finer crushing. Georg Nissen suggested improvements in which heavier stamps would be used and each stamp would have its own mortar, unlike the conventional mill where five stamps crushed ore in one mortar. Peter Nissen, having failed to sell the Nissen stamp mill in the United States, redesigned it and introduced it to the Witwatersrand of Transvaal. The Nissen stamp mill proved its superiority over the conventional mill during the period June to September 1911 in Johannesburg. Sales continued until 1926 when it was superseded by the tube mill. 
In 1915 Nissen was in France as a temporary lieutenant in the Royal Engineers. In reply to a pressing need for behind the lines accommodation he submitted a design for a semicircular hut similar in principle to the indoor ice hockey sheds of Ontario. For the remainder of the First World War he was settled at Hesdin, in the Pas-de-Calais, where he organized the production of Nissen huts from components made in England which were then shipped to France and Belgium. About 100,000 of the smaller bow huts were assembled, each housing twenty-four men; also 10,000 of the larger hospital huts, each accommodating twenty-four patients. Nissen was awarded the DSO and the order of St Sava of Serbia. He left the British army with the rank of lieutenant-colonel. Immediately after the war he established Nissen Buildings Ltd, which produced Nissen hut type buildings for industry and housing on a site at Rye House, Hoddesdon, Hertfordshire. A Nissen house in Yeovil, Somerset, was listed by the Department of the Environment as an important example of a cost-cutting design for cheap housing. Nissen was thus a pioneer of the mass production of prefabricated huts and houses. 
Naturalized as a British subject in 1921, Nissen moved to Deepdale, Westerham Hill, Westerham, Kent, in 1922. On 2 January 1900 he had married Louisa Mair Richmond (1873-1923); they had one daughter. He married Lauretta Maitland (1882-1954) on 4 May 1924; there were two sons. Nissen died of pneumonia at his home on 2 March 1930 and was buried three days later at St Mary the Virgin, Westerham. 


@@@@@


doc= 42126


Acres, Birt (1854?-1918), film-maker, was born in Richmond, Virginia, USA, most probably on 23 July 1854, to British parents who had emigrated to America as prospective farmers. No record of his early life has been found; we know only that his father's name was John Acres, but he later told of being orphaned during the Civil War when the family farmstead, possibly in North Carolina, was burnt to the ground in 1865. He stayed with an aunt in Richmond, Virginia, who sent him to Paris about 1870 to finish his education. It was probably here that his interest in moving images was sparked; he later recalled experimenting with sequence photographs in a zoetrope. In 1875 he returned to his aunt, but soon set out to prove himself. He later told his children of adventures as a frontiersman on the North American plains, trapping and trading with the Rosebud Sioux tribe, who called him Red Pine. 
In the 1880s Acres came to Britain, and from the early 1890s he contributed articles on photographic chemistry and optics to the 'Photographic News Almanac'. In 1891, when he was living in Hackney and was employed as a photographer, he joined the London and Provincial Photographic Association. His prints and lantern slides often featured transient subjects: clouds, waves, and flowers opening. On 29 April 1891 he married Annie Elizabeth Cash (1863-1955/6), daughter of Isaac Cash, business clerk. A son, Sidney Birt Acres, was born on 28 July 1892, and later two daughters, Winifred (1 December 1893) and Lulu (6 November 1896). 
In the summer of 1892 Acres became manager of Elliott & Sons photographic works at Barnet, Hertfordshire. Inspired by the work of Eadweard Muybridge, he returned to his experiments with sequence photographs. His 'Story of a Cloud', showing changing formations, was shown to the Photographic Society in 1892, using his patented device (patent no. 23670, 1893) for projecting a sequence of slides in quick succession, simulating movement. The device could also be used for photography. In 1893 he suffered a serious accident during a chemical experiment, but over the months his damaged eyesight recovered. Realizing the limitations of glass as a medium for sequence photography, he was by now experimenting with 23/4 inch celluloid roll film, manufactured for Eastman's snapshot cameras. His assistant Arthur Melbourne Cooper later described how they used an experimental motion picture film camera to shoot sequences of the opening of the Manchester Ship Canal in January 1894, and there is some evidence that Acres filmed the Henley regatta in July. But results on unperforated film were imperfect, and at that time no one had succeeded in motion picture film projection. 
In 1895 Acres became a fellow of the Royal Photographic Society. Meanwhile a young English mechanic-electrician, Robert William Paul, had discovered Edison's Kinetoscope arcade peepshow film machine, developed before screen projection of films could be achieved, and was making copies. Paul needed to produce his own films, and was introduced to Acres. Paul constructed a camera to Acres' design, which Acres tested in March 1895. Fragments of the successful test using 35 mm perforated film show their mutual friend Henry Short and Annie Acres outside the Acres' residence, Clovelly Cottage, Barnet. Acres made an agreement with Paul to supply films, and on 30 March 1895 filmed Britain's first news film, the 'Oxford and Cambridge Boat Race', and the Derby horse race on 29 May. By early June he had shot several one minute comic subjects in a purpose-built studio, including 'The Arrest of a Pickpocket' and 'The Comic Shoeblack'. Acres patented the mechanism (patent no. 10474, 1895) in May. He resigned from Elliott's and began an association with Stollwerck, a German chocolate company with an interest in arcade slot machines, and on 20 June filmed scenes at the opening of the Kiel Canal. Paul and Acres ended their agreement acrimoniously in July 1895. 
Acres developed a projector, probably demonstrated to his family later that year, which was soon ready for a more public exhibition. On 10 January 1896 he gave a presentation to the Lyonsdown Photographic Association at Barnet, and on 24 January to the Royal Photographic Society in London -- the first film screenings in England. On 21 March 1896 he opened a commercial cinema venue at 2 Piccadilly Mansions, London, but a fire on 10 June closed the show. 'Rough Sea at Dover', filmed by Acres, was shown in New York in April. In that month he started the Northern Photographic Works at Barnet, but he sold the company the following year, retaining some shares. Meanwhile he was presenting his films at prestigious events including, at Marlborough House on 21 July 1896, the first royal command film performance. He filmed the disastrous launch of HMS 'Albion' on the Thames on 21 June 1898, when a wooden structure occupied by spectators collapsed into the river and thirty-eight people died. That same month he patented a cinematograph system for amateurs -- the eponymous Birtac. The first narrow-gauge motion picture system, this ingenious apparatus for shooting and projection failed commercially. 
By this time Acres's most important and acclaimed achievements were behind him, his activities mostly being devoted to the production of materials for the photographic and cinema trade. In 1901 he founded the Whetstone Photographic Works. Financially overstretched after commissioning a 42 foot yacht in 1906, his business failed later that year, and he became bankrupt in 1909. He died at the London Hospital, Whitechapel, on 27 December 1918, when appendicitis turned to peritonitis, and was buried in Walthamstow cemetery three days later. A very significant figure in the nascent film industry, Birt Acres's photographic skills and technical ingenuity were key elements in his successful shooting and projection of this country's first presentable motion picture films. 


@@@@@


doc= 42128


Williamson, James (1855-1933), film-maker, was born on 8 November 1855 at Pathhead, Dysart, near Kirkcaldy, Fife, the illegitimate son of Janet Williamson ('b'. 1822/3), a domestic servant. Raised in Edinburgh, he later moved to London to train as a master chemist. In 1877 he found employment as an apprentice chemist at Eastry, Kent. He had purchased the chemist's shop from his employer by 1881, and on 9 August that year married Betsy, daughter of Thomas Heaysman, a gardener. They had four sons and three daughters. In 1886 the family moved to new premises at 144 Church Road, Hove, Sussex. During the next decade Williamson developed a keen interest in photography and optical entertainments and, as a Kodak agent, he acquired a good understanding of the technical and chemical nature of photography. In 1896 he introduced X-ray photography to Sussex and began to make regular trips with the apparatus to the county hospital. The year also saw him become involved with moving pictures, as he introduced the first programme of films to the camera club at Hove town hall in November. 
Williamson began to make his own films, or animated photographs, in 1897. His first catalogue of 1899 listed sixty films, each usually single shots between 60 and 75 feet in length. Williamson did not produce his first edited multi-shot narrative film until his 'Attack on a China Mission' (1900). This four-shot film of 230 feet, his longest film to date, was made in the autumn of 1900 and came after a summer of inspired film-making by George Albert Smith (1864-1959), his Hove friend and counterpart. It is in the context of Smith's active development of English film form that Williamson conceived and executed this film. Its appearance marks his move from 'non-continuous' to 'continuous' narrative. 'Attack on a China Mission' was a new model for film realism as it was founded on naturalistic acting, a real location, and a linear structure which worked to bring the viewer into the fictional world. The events in China in 1900 informed the making of the film and its reception. The majority of the film's viewers presumably experienced pleasure and comfort from this rescue narrative because of its dramatic energy and its evocative and topical representation of the Boxer uprising. 
Williamson's next significant multi-shot film, 'Fire!' (1901), was shot on the streets of Hove. It showed a wide familiarity with the 'fire dramas' found in the theatre, magic lantern lectures, newspaper reports, and other 'fire' films. Like 'Attack on a China Mission', 'Fire!' reflected Williamson's understanding of the rescue narrative and his ambition to find the means to develop a more complex and arresting film structure; and in this he was largely successful, across 280 feet and five shots. By designing a work of fiction which employed the apparatus and staff of a real fire brigade, used locations, a set, and careful shot construction, allied to a clear editing strategy, Williamson created a film which was simple in form yet radical for its time. Williamson's subsequent social dramas 'The Soldier's Return' (1902) and 'A Reservist before the War and after the War' (1902) and his ingenious trick films, especially 'A Big Swallow' (1901), continued this spirit of innovation. 
A growing commitment to film production became central to Williamson's life. This process began in 1898, when he moved his chemist's shop to 55 Western Road, Hove. The size of this new property and its close proximity to Smith's 'film factory' at St Ann's Well enabled him to concentrate on film processing and film production. By 1902 the Williamson Kinematographic Company opened its first purpose-built film production studio and film processing works at Cambridge Grove, off Wilbury Road. Williamson was now a professional 'animated photographer' and no longer a high street chemist. This site also furnished the family with a detached house. Williamson's wife and children played a distinctive role in the new business by participating in the creation of scenarios, by making sets and costumes, and by taking both small and major acting roles. Tom Williamson's part in 'Our New Errand Boy' (1905), as the anarchic boy upsetting the pillars of society, expresses this enthusiasm for film-making and his father's provocative imagination. The eldest son, Alan, would become more involved in the company's business affairs, and was responsible for the opening of its New York office in 1907. 
Williamson began to withdraw from film production in 1909 as a result of changes in the world film market. In 1910 he sold his studio and premises in Hove and moved to London. The company now devoted itself to film processing and the manufacture of cameras and printers. The Williamson apparatus acquired an excellent reputation and was used worldwide. His last years were spent in his neo-Tudor mansion at Mortlake, Surrey, where he would conduct experiments with colour photography. Williamson died on 18 August 1933 at his home, 593 Upper Richmond Road, Mortlake, following a heart attack while in his bath. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 42129


Hepworth, Cecil Milton (1874-1953), film-maker, was born Herbert Milton Hepworth on 19 March 1874 at 12 Beaufort Gardens, Lewisham, London, one of three children of Thomas Craddock Hepworth (1834-1905), hospital secretary, and his wife, Sarah Margaret Stevens. Thomas Hepworth provided his son with an ideal background as he was an eminent late Victorian magic lanternist, who published a number of popular and successful books on the subject. His publications included 'The Book of the Lantern' (1888). As a boy, Cecil (as he was always known) accompanied his father on his lantern tours and learned how to operate the biunial lantern, a double-lensed projector designed to produce a 'dissolving view'. In 1896, at the age of twenty-two, Hepworth was very aware of the arrival of film for commercial use in theatres and music-halls but, as his articles in the 'Amateur Photographer' reveal, he was sceptical of the new medium's ability to produce a flicker-free image that could rival the beauty and colour of the lantern image. Within a year these doubts were replaced by real enthusiasm for the moving image, a fact demonstrated by his first book, 'Animated photography: the ABC of the cinematograph, a simple and thorough guide to the projection of living photographs, with notes on the production of cinematograph negatives' (1897). It was the first on the subject to be published in England. The rest of Hepworth's life would be involved with the moving image. 
For the next two years, 1898 and 1899, Hepworth was employed as a film processor and camera operator by the Warwick Trading Company in London, then the largest film production company in the country. Here he designed and patented the first film processing machine (patent no. 13315, 1898). All future machines designed for this purpose would descend from Hepworth's invention. Dismissal from Warwick led Hepworth and his cousin Monty Wicks to acquire a house on Hurst Grove in Walton-on-Thames in 1899. For almost twenty-five years this site would be the home of the Hepworth Manufacturing Company. On 11 February 1902 Hepworth married Margaret Hope ('b'. 1873/4), daughter of Andrew McGuffie, a manufacturer. 
At Walton films were first made out of doors and then processed within the detached house which served as the laboratory. By 1905 a purpose-built glass house studio with electric-arc lighting was erected. The 1903 Hepworth catalogue marked the company's rapid rise and expressed Hepworth's commercial understanding of the popular and the topical. It listed film subjects under such headings as 'Animated portraits' (the king, the queen, Lord Kitchener), 'Comics' (facial expressions, jokes on policemen, motor cars), 'Pageants', 'Processions', 'Railway scenes', 'Military subjects', and 'Street Scenes'. Hepworth was now a leader of this new entertainment industry. 
In 1905, under the direction of Lewin Fitzhamon, the most famous Hepworth film was made, 'Rescued by Rover'. It was Hepworth's first international success. He described it as: 'a particularly family affair. My wife wrote the story, my baby -- eight months old -- was the heroine, my dog the hero, my wife the bereaved mother and myself the harassed father... we had to make it all over again a second time and then even a third, because we wore out the negative in the making of the four hundred prints to satisfy the demand. (Hepworth, 'Came the Dawn', 66-7)' The total cost of the first production was $7 13's'. 9died The film moved fluently from studio shots to locations and was an important example of an effective early film rescue narrative. Over the next fifteen years the Hepworth Company's films evolved from short comedies and dramas of only a few minutes in length to multi-reel works of over one hour. The company chose a path that reflected a particularly English sense of pictorialism, theatricality, and the national literary heritage. It made 'Hamlet' (1913) in Devon and Walton, with Forbes-Robertson as the prince, as well as adaptations of 'Oliver Twist' (1912) and 'David Copperfield' (1913). Underpinning this work was the Hepworth Stock Company, which operated along the lines of a traditional theatre company. Its leading players, including Alma Taylor, Chrissie White, and Henry Edwards, would become the first British movie stars. 
Hepworth's sense of his company's direction after the First World War was very clear. 'I was to make English pictures, with all the English countryside for background and with English atmosphere and English idiom throughout' ('Came the Dawn', 144). However, in a market now dominated by new American work this strategy was not successful. Hepworth's films began to lose their appeal. The collapse of his company in 1924, the direct result of an under-subscribed share issue, was devastating and made only the more painful by the necessary sale of the company's most important asset -- its original film negatives. Tragically, this invaluable film heritage of over 2000 works of fiction and non-fiction was not preserved, but melted down for 'dope' for aeroplane wings (ibid., 196). Over the next twenty years Hepworth found some employment at the national screen service making film trailers. Official recognition of his significant place in British film history finally came with the fiftieth anniversary of cinema in 1946. Hepworth became an honorary fellow of the Royal Photographic Society, the British Kinematographic Society, and the British Film Academy, and was chairman of the British Film Institute's history committee. He wrote his second book, 'Came the Dawn: Memories of a Film Pioneer' (1951), in these last years. Accompanied by his own illustrations, it is a charming anecdotal account. Hepworth died at his home at 211 Eastcote Road, Ruislip, on 9 February 1953, survived by his daughter Valerie. 


@@@@@


doc= 42130


Cotton, Agnes (1828-1899), social reformer and philanthropist, was born on 27 February 1828 at Walwood House, Leytonstone, Essex, the sixth of the seven children of William Cotton (1786-1866), merchant and director of the Bank of England, and Sarah (1790-1872), only daughter of Thomas Lane of Leyton Grange, Leyton, Essex, and his wife, Barbara. Her siblings included William Charles Cotton (1813-1879) ['see under 'Cotton, Sir Henry], a clergyman and writer on bees; Sarah Acland (1815-1878), wife of Sir Henry Wentworth Acland; Phoebe (1817-1857), an illustrator; and Sir Henry Cotton (1821-1892), a lord justice of appeal. Both parents were evangelical Anglicans, heavily involved in philanthropic activities. Sarah and Phoebe Cotton received a rigorous academic education from their mother, although in 1842 Agnes was at boarding-school. 
According to one account, after miraculously recovering from an illness at the age of fourteen, Agnes Cotton 'dedicated herself and her subsequent possessions to the service of God' ('Pastures Youth Centre', 3). Surviving letters from the 1840s show that she was very devout and was influenced by the Oxford Movement. By the age of eighteen she was actively involved in philanthropy, both assisting the projects of family members and taking her own initiatives in connection with the care of local children. 
Agnes Cotton was short and wore spectacles from about the age of seventeen. Surviving portraits in middle age show her in nun's dress, though not that of the Community of St John Baptist, Clewer, of which she may have become an associate. Gulielma Lister ('b'. 1860) recalled that, when she was a child living in Leytonstone, Cotton 'wore a black habit and veil' and 'we regarded her with horror as a 'nun''. However, Gulielma's father, Arthur Lister, very much admired Cotton and 'enjoyed her racy humour' (Lister and Lister, 2-3). By 1889 she was known in the locality as Sister Agnes ('Forest School Magazine', 11-12). 
In Lent 1865 Cotton began a 'small industrial home for destitute children' in Forest Place, Leytonstone, later described as 'the first Church of England home for fallen children'. In 1876 she purchased a property in Davies Lane, Leytonstone, which she renamed The Pastures and inhabited from 1877 to 1899. Between 1879 and 1881 Cotton had built beside it the Home of the Good Shepherd, with a chapel, schoolhouse, infirmary, and laundry, at a total cost of $9500. The initial aim of the home was to provide a special kind of care for girls who had been 'led into habits of impurity' (Cotton, 1), but not to be a reformatory for juvenile delinquents. Industrial training was provided in laundry work. Numbers rose from six to twenty in 1865, and to thirty by 1871. In 1882 the home was registered under the 'Criminal Law Amendment Act' to receive forty girls, and certified to receive fifty in 1892. 
In 1865 there were two male trustees, while by 1885 the home had acquired a more formal structure, with a male warden and an all-male council (which included five of Cotton's relatives). However, between 1865 and 1885, Cotton, known variously as 'mother', 'foundress', and 'superintendent', remained the chief organizer. To start with the home was financed through Cotton's own fortune and through the fund-raising and publicizing efforts of family and friends, both male and female. These included four people connected with houses of mercy in Soho, Hammersmith, Horbury, and Birmingham. A pamphlet written by Cotton and distributed in 1865 resulted in many gifts in kind from local tradespeople. However, by 1885 about half the school's income came from the Treasury and school boards. 
Despite the rhetoric of 'love' and 'care' in the reports, and the approval expressed in guidebooks to Leyton, in 1894 widely publicized allegations of ill treatment were made. The Revd A. Drew, chairman of the industrial schools committee of the London school board, demanded a Home Office inquiry. Cotton was exonerated by Inspector William Inglis, who concluded that 'a better and kinder old lady does not live' (TNA: PRO, HO 45/9887/B17047/9). Nevertheless, her agreement with the London school board was terminated in 1895, and she formally resigned her industrial school certificate in 1897. This conflict may have been caused by insufficient supervision, by Cotton's differing approach to discipline from that of Revd Drew, or because Cotton had become too old and infirm to manage the home effectively. 
Agnes Cotton died, unmarried, on 20 May 1899 at The Pastures, Leytonstone. She was buried in the Cotton family vault in St John's churchyard, Leytonstone, on 24 May. The bulk of her personal effects and property were bequeathed in trust to her ward, Mary Agnes Hope; Elizabeth Amelia Bragg, spinster of Clapton, who had for many years helped Cotton with her work, received an annuity of $50. By previous arrangement, the home was taken over by the sisters of the Community of St John Baptist, Clewer, one of the new Anglican orders involved in 'rescue work'. The home survived until 1940, when it was evacuated to Northamptonshire and then dissolved. 
Agnes Cotton's life's work shows a transition from informal charity undertaken with family members to the creation of a new kind of philanthropic institution which survived for eighty-five years. Initially supported by networks of family, friends, and clergy, by the 1880s her home was receiving much-needed state funding. However, in the long term a religious order proved to be a more secure form of support than the state. 


@@@@@


doc= 42131


Haggar, (Arthur) William (1851-1925), travelling showman and film-maker, was born in Stratford Road, Dedham, Essex, on 10 March 1851, the son of an unknown father and Mary Elizabeth Hagger ('b'. 1830). He had a hard childhood, despised for his illegitimacy, and brought up by various distant and uncaring relatives. He gained skills in carpentry through his employment in a sawmill, then when aged twenty he joined a touring theatrical troupe, encouraged by Sarah Hemming (1851-1909) of the Walton Theatre Company, whom he married at Fakenham, Norfolk, on 31 March 1871. They had eleven children, eight of whom survived into adulthood. 
The Haggars eked out a precarious existence touring the country with such everlasting productions as 'East Lynne' and 'Maria Marten'. William hawked picture frames when dates dried up, or put on puppet shows when he could not afford to hire actors. The family's fortunes turned when they moved to south Wales in 1890, where the swelling population brought about by the coal-mining boom brought them sufficient audiences to merit establishing a second portable theatre. Late in 1897 he purchased a cinematograph and magic lantern outfit from a dealer in Exeter, complete with a handful of films and slides, for the considerable sum of $80. He took his 'bioscope' film show around the fairgrounds of Wales. After a faltering start, when the show was threatened by a coal strike, the audience's unfamiliarity with what a cinematograph show actually was, and a serious fire, Haggar attracted increasing audiences. This allowed for investment in an electricity generator which added greatly to the professionalism of the bioscope show. Fairgrounds were the breeding ground of cinema exhibition in the UK, and for Haggar the route to fortune after a lifetime of hard travelling, penury, and at times near starvation. 
Haggar moved into film production in 1901 initially to provide his Welsh audiences with topical films of local news and sporting events. It was when he combined film-making with his theatrical inheritance that his great contribution to the early history of Welsh and British cinema was made. Between 1903 and 1908 he made around sixty films, including such titles as 'The Sign of the Cross' (1904), 'The Life of Charles Peace' (1905), 'A Message from the Sea' (1905), and 'The Dumb Man of Manchester' (1908). The cast were members of his extended family, the subjects either abbreviated versions of dramas they had performed on tour or knockabout comedies, the locations invariably in the open air (the peripatetic Haggars had no studio). The vigorous style of these multi-scene dramas showed a real understanding of the particular power of cinema, and of the tastes of his working-class audience. Haggar's theatrical background could have led him to produce photographic facsimiles of these works with a static camera, but instead he showed an instinctive grasp of cutting, action, and variety of shot as being the lifeblood of cinema. At least ten of his films are known to survive (some incomplete), among which 'The Life of Charles Peace', which illustrates the career of the famed burglar and murderer, concluding with a graphic enactment of his hanging, has been particularly admired for its vitality of theme and technique. 
Haggar toured with the films around the fairgrounds of Wales, his bioscope show now transported by steam traction engine and accompanied by an elaborate organ, with a troupe of dancing girls to attract custom. But the films were seen far beyond their south Wales base, being handled by the Warwick Trading Company and then by Gaumont. His exciting 1903 drama 'A Desperate Poaching Affray' sold the huge number of 480 copies and was distributed in America (as 'The Poachers') where it proved influential in helping create the taste for chase films. 
After 1908 Haggar retired from fiction film production, as more polished productions from American and European studios found greater favour with audiences. A few topical films were produced, but mostly the Haggars' show now featured films made by others. In 1914, however, his eldest son William (1871-1935) persuaded his father to help produce a feature-length version of 'The Maid of Cefn Ydfa', a work previously filmed by the Haggars and particularly popular with local audiences. The incoherent, stage-bound interiors (directed by the son) contrasted awkwardly with the livelier exteriors (directed by the father), and in any case the Haggar style was unsuited to the narrative demands of longer films. 
Haggar moved from fairgrounds to cinemas, setting up a small chain of cinemas in Wales from 1910, including the Kosy cinema in Aberdare (opened August 1915), where he finally settled down after a lifetime on the road. His wife, Sarah, had died in 1909, and on 19 March 1912 he married Mary Jane (May) Davies (1884-1924) in Aberdare -- the groom was sixty-one, the bride twenty-eight. He became a poor law guardian and local councillor. His second wife died, aged just forty, in 1924, and William died soon after, in Aberdare, on 4 February 1925. He was buried in Aberdare cemetery. A number of his large family followed him into cinema management. 
William Haggar was of the people and made films for the people. His surviving work captures the spirit of the fairground bioscope, where enthusiastic audiences booed the figures of authority and cheered the escaping renegades. The films were as rough-and-ready as their audiences, and to experience them now is to feel a great sympathy for those for whom they were made and to understand a little of how those people could, for a brief time, escape the hard times in which they lived. 


@@@@@


doc= 42132


Smith, George Albert (1864-1959), film-maker, was born on 4 January 1864 at 93 Aldersgate Street, Cripplegate, east London, the child of Charles Smith, ticket writer, and his wife, Margaret Alice Davidson. After the death of his father, his mother moved the family to Brighton. It was there, in 1882, that Smith received public attention for the first time as a result of his activities as a popular hypnotist. This led to a partnership with Douglas Blackburn, a local journalist, within which they developed a 'second-sight act' (Blackburn hid an object in the theatre and then Smith, blindfolded, led him to it) and feats of 'muscle-reading' (Blackburn transmitted to the blindfolded 'medium' on the stage, played by Smith, the identity of objects selected by the audience). Smith claimed that genuine telepathy was practised and representatives of the Society for Psychical Research believed that he had the gift of true 'thought reading'. Blackburn would later admit, however, that the act was a hoax. Smith became part of the society's circle and was appointed private secretary to its honorary secretary, Edmund Gurney. In 1887 Gurney carried out a number of 'hypnotic experiments' in Brighton, with Smith as the 'hypnotizer'. Smith was the co-author of a paper titled 'Experiments in thought-transference' published in the society's journal in 1889. 
In 1892, by which time he had left the employment of the Society for Psychical Research, Smith acquired the lease to St Ann's Well Gardens in Hove. This was only a short distance from Brighton and the seafront. He cultivated this site so that it became a popular pleasure garden and the home for his film-making activities. In 1896 Smith saw and appreciated the first Lumiere programme in London, and it is likely that he studied Robert Paul's films during their summer season in Brighton. At the end of that year he acquired his first camera. For Smith, the former hypnotist, film offered a new and very modern form of illusionism. He made only the studio shot of the train carriage in 'The Kiss in the Tunnel' (1899), but when he inserted it into Cecil Hepworth's phantom ride 'View from an Engine Front: Train Leaving Tunnel', he created an edited film which demonstrated a new sense of continuity and simultaneity across three shots. His filmic imagination was very adventurous and it continued to develop in the next year. 'As Seen through the Telescope', 'Grandma's Reading Glass', 'The House that Jack Built', and 'Let me Dream Again', all of 1900, were remarkable for their interpolated close-ups, subjective and objective point-of-view shots, the creation of dream-time, and the use of 'reversing' (by which action appeared to happen backwards). Through these experimental films Smith was instrumental in the development of continuity editing. He taught his contemporaries how to create a filmed sequence. James Williamson (1855-1933) was especially influenced by him. 
Smith's films in the years 1897-1903 were largely comedies and adaptations of popular fairy tales and stories. His work within these genres was influenced by his wife, Laura Eugenia ('b'. 1863/4), daughter of William Bullivant Bayley, a sadler. They had married in Ramsgate on 13 June 1888. Her life in popular theatre before 1897, particularly in pantomime and comic revues, provided Smith with an experienced actress who understood visual comedy and the interests of seaside audiences. Laura Bayley would star in many of Smith's most important films, including 'Let me Dream Again' and 'Mary Jane's Mishap' (1903). No other actress appears as frequently in British films of this period. 
At St Ann's Well, in 1897, Smith adapted the pump house into a space for developing and printing films, and in the grounds, probably in 1901, he built a glasshouse film studio. By the late 1890s he had developed a successful commercial film production and processing business with the assistance of the Brighton engineer Alfred Darling. Smith's largest customer became the Warwick Trading Company. Through this relationship Smith became part of the company and developed a long partnership with its managing director, Charles Urban (1867-1942). The two-colour additive process known as Kinemacolor would dominate the rest of his career in film. This was developed from 1903 from his new home, Laboratory Lodge, Roman Crescent, Southwick. On 8 July 1908 Kinemacolor was presented in Paris to a gathering of scientists and the Lumiere brothers. The first demonstration in England followed at the Royal Society of Arts in London on 9 December 1908. For the system Smith was awarded a silver medal by the Royal Society of Arts. Urban turned Kinemacolor into a new enterprise, the Natural Colour Kinematograph Company. It enjoyed success in the period 1910-13, when it produced over 100 short features from its studios in Hove and Nice, but the system was not taken up by the industry. A patent suit brought against Kinemacolor by William Friese-Greene in 1914 would lead to its collapse and end Smith's life in the film business. The widespread use of true colour film would not begin in the cinema for almost twenty years. 
In his later years Smith spent much time peering through his telescope from his Brighton seafront arch. He had long been a fellow of the Royal Astronomical Society. In the late 1940s he was 'discovered' by the film community. He was commemorated by Michael Balcon as 'the father of the British Film Industry' and in 1955 was made a fellow of the British Film Academy. He died, aged ninety-five, in the Brighton General Hospital on 17 May 1959 and was cremated five days later at the Downs crematorium, Brighton. He was survived by his second wife, Edith Kate. 


@@@@@


doc= 42142


Harriet Lepel Phipps (1841-1922), his younger daughter, was one of Victoria's longest-serving confidential attendants, as maid of honour (1862-89) and bedchamber woman (1889-1901). Used by the ageing queen as a go-between, she was privy to many secrets, political and personal, none of which she revealed. On her instructions, all her papers were burnt after her death. 


@@@@@


doc= 42154


Stephenson, William Lawrence (1880-1963), retail executive, was born on 13 January 1880 at Scarborough, Yorkshire, the son of Frederick James Stephenson and his wife, Eliza Toder. His father, the manager of a small upholstery business, was determined that his son should learn a trade and take up a commercial career. After leaving school in Hull, therefore, Stephenson was apprenticed at the age of seventeen to Edwin Owen, a Birmingham general merchant who concentrated on the export of British goods to American department stores. Stephenson's talent and drive took him through all the main sections of the business, and he was made chief buyer by the age of thirty. His first links with the Woolworth organization, of which he was to become the chairman in Britain, came in 1904, when he met and helped Frank Woolworth who was on a buying trip. In 1909 he married Lillian, the daughter of Joseph Drake, a provision merchant from Shipley; they had three daughters and a son. 
Stephenson's career underwent a major change when he was recruited by Woolworth in 1909 to be part of the management team for the organization's expansion into the British market. From the very outset Stephenson fitted in well with the ideas of Woolworth and he was eager to learn the business of store management and store development under the guidance of Fred Woolworth, Frank's cousin. He worked long hours and rapidly acquired the knowledge needed to run the new stores. Perhaps the major assets Stephenson brought to the organization were his flair for buying in bulk, matched by the excellent links he had with British manufacturers, skills he had honed as a buyer for Edwin Owen, where he learned the importance of having high turnovers associated with low margins. The premature death of Fred Woolworth in 1923 left Stephenson, who had been Woolworth's understudy, in charge of the organization's British venture. Stephenson proved to be an inspirational leader and a good judge of character which enabled him to build a strong team of store managers. He proved slightly less popular with employees when unionization in the stores was strongly opposed. Under Stephenson's management Woolworths expanded rapidly, increasing their stores from 100 in 1923 to 529 by 1933, and becoming a household name. Stephenson oversaw the expansion personally, inspecting as he did all the proposed new store locations. 
After 1932 Stephenson passed on some of his tasks to a new managing director, although as chairman he still retained overall control, and he was especially active during the war years. Indeed, it was his vision and planning that equipped the organization for a rapid post-war recovery. He was also active in many other areas and from 1936 held directorships on the boards of General Investment Trust, the Phoenix Assurance Company, and Porkellis Property. In 1933 he was also on the Board of Trade's council dealing with industry and art. During the war Beaverbrook asked him to be director-general of equipment in the Ministry of Aircraft Production, a position which Stephenson accepted with alacrity. To his great regret, he found it a frustrating time largely because of his incompatibility with the civil service staff. He finally resigned from the board of Woolworths in 1948. 
Stephenson was a complex character who never sought any personal fame or recognition but was content to see the Woolworth organization do well from his efforts. He was very much a family man, religious, who neither drank nor gambled. He had little time for politics and did not tolerate fools or boasters. Away from work he took enjoyment in golf and fishing; he also became interested in stock breeding, which he practised on his estates at Blandford and Bere Regis. His greatest passion, however, was yachting and he completed his first season in 1932 after the purchase of 'White Heather II' in that year. The following year he commissioned C. E. Nicholson to design the fast, all metal, cutter 'Velsheda', which was a contender for the America's Cup. For several years he was a commodore of the Royal Motor Yacht Club. 
Stephenson died at his home, Rudheath, 152 Canford Cliffs Road, Bournemouth, on 7 May 1963, following a debilitating stroke in 1959. 


@@@@@


doc= 42155


Fenston, Felix Donovan (1915-1970), property developer, was born on 21 April 1915 at 41 Cleveland Mansions, Paddington, London, the son of Joseph Fenston, a theatrical impresario and trader of Swiss-Jewish origin, and his wife, Mona Therese Donovan, who was Irish. He went to school at the Regent Street Polytechnic, sharing a desk at the age of eleven with Jack Rose, who also went on to be a major property developer. Fenston's father wanted the boy to become a concert pianist; he never reached concert standard but was nevertheless a competent player. Instead Fenston became an estate agent, working at several firms including that of the well-known Hampstead-based agent Max Joseph. He also attended evening classes at the College of Estate Management though, according to Marriott, he was often asleep during them (Marriott, 15). 
During the Second World War Fenston, who was then a corporal in the intelligence corps, had a serious motorcycle accident in which his leg was crushed. However, despite its replacement with an aluminium limb, he later engaged in shooting, squash, and underwater diving. The accident nevertheless ended his military service and in 1944 he moved back to commercial property. Following the war he set up a property-dealing business, occupying one room in Egyptian House, Piccadilly. His first deal was the purchase of a shoe repair shop at Watford, which he refurbished and leased back to the cobbler. The expanding scope of his operations allowed him to move in 1952 to 19 Hill Street, Mayfair, to which he transferred his headquarters. Later additional residences and estates included a country house in Wiltshire, a manor house in Guildford, and a shooting lodge in Scotland. 
Fenston foresaw the post-war office boom; he claimed that in 1945 he wrote a memo to his father suggesting that the largest possible fund should be assembled for investment in office property (Marriott, 100-101). During the immediate post-war years he cultivated close relationships with a number of commercial estate agents, including Dudley Witting of Jones Lang Wootton, and the brothers Jack and Philip Rose. Fenston was also associated with one of the best-known property developers of the time, Harry Hyams, who was later responsible for the notorious Centre Point building in London's Tottenham Court Road. Fenston offered such figures the opportunity to participate in the profits from his projects, in return for their valuable assistance in putting together deals; another frequent investor in his developments was the emigre Polish aristocrat Prince Stanislas Radziwill. While taking in outside investors diluted Fenston's profits from each venture, the extra capital accelerated the growth of his business empire. 
In 1956 Fenston and Hyams acquired the Baranquilla Railway and Pier Company, and used it as a vehicle for their property transactions. During 1957 Baranquilla announced a financing deal with Pearl Assurance, whereby the Pearl provided long-term debenture finance and obtained 10 per cent of Baranquilla's ordinary shares, with an option on a further 10 per cent. While such arrangements became common over the next few years, at the time this marked a pioneering innovation in property development finance. 
Fenston's developments included the Empress State Building in Earls Court, the BP head-office building in the Barbican, and Kensington's Royal Garden Hotel. By 1959 he was involved in three separate quoted property companies (Eron, Barranquilla, and Alquife) and had made a fortune estimated at $4 million. However, at about this time Fenston and Hyams had a shattering row, which resulted in the unravelling of most of their business alliances. Fenston became bored with his property activities and devoted the next couple of years to travelling and other leisure pursuits. When he resumed development he formed a larger team so that he did not have to play as great a role in day-to-day management. In 1963 he floated a new company, Metropolitan and Provincial, for $3.75 million; this was taken over by Star (Great Britain) in 1968. 
Marriott described Fenston as an atypical developer, 'more like an Edwardian dilettante, born to a cultivated life of pleasure, playing with a shrewd talent for property as a sideline' (Marriott, 101). His interests included playing the piano, shooting big game, and his estate in Wiltshire. An obituary in 'The Times' commented on his zest and enthusiasm for life: 'Business, music, the arts, politics, boxing, shooting, the countryside, were all his life and he was totally absorbed in each and every one of them' ('The Times', 16 Sept 1970). In a further tribute the Garter king of arms recalled his help in establishing a museum of heraldry adjacent to the College of Arms. Fenston became a trustee of the College of Arms Trust and was 'as magnanimous in his generosity as he was wise and discerning in his professional advice' ('The Times', 18 Sept 1970). 
While he enjoyed the pleasures of an affluent lifestyle and was less driven by business than most of his major contemporaries in the property world Fenston was, nevertheless, one of the most outstanding and successful developers of the post-war era. He died on 13 September 1970 of a coronary thrombosis while on a train journey from Inverness to London, leaving an estate worth over $12 million. He was fifty-five. His will named his wife, Margaret Anne (Greta), and two sons and a daughter, but other details of his family life are unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 42156


Sunlight, Joseph (1889-1978), architect and property developer, was born in Novogrudock, Belorussia, then part of the Russian empire, on 2 January 1889 NS (20 December 1888 OS), the son of Israel Schimschlavitch, afterwards Sunlight (1864-1945), and his wife, Minnie (died 1941). His father, like many Russian Jews, was anxious to evade conscription into the tsarist army and the family emigrated to Britain in 1890. Israel, who was a cotton merchant, and Joe became naturalized British subjects on 10 July 1900, adopting the surname of Sunlight, no doubt after Port Sunlight in Cheshire, but the family settled in Manchester. 
Sunlight's was a classic rags-to-riches life story. For his education it seems that he was sent to London to private school in Kingston upon Thames. Unusually for a first-generation Jewish immigrant, he trained as an architect, in the office of William Purdey of Brazenose Street, Manchester. He began his apprenticeship in 1904 earning 3 's'. a week. In 1907, at the age of eighteen, he had set up on his own at 4 St Ann's Square, 'and before he was 21 had designed and built more than 1000 houses in Prestwich' ('Manchester Evening News', 18 April 1978). He himself boasted that 'By 1921 [he] could account for one million pounds sterling worth of buildings from [his] plans' ('Sunlight House AD 1929', Sunlight papers). Sunlight acted as architect-developer, buying up land, planning, designing, and building whole estates and then selling or letting the properties. He also built factories and warehouses in Cheetham, many of them for Jewish clients, immigrant entrepreneurs like himself. His best-known building in Manchester is Sunlight House, Quay Street, just off Deansgate in the city centre. At fourteen storeys and 135 feet, this art deco steel and concrete building clad in Portland stone was claimed to be the first skyscraper in the north of England when erected in 1932-3 as the headquarters of Sunlight's building empire. The original scheme was scaled down from thirty storeys after being blocked by the city council. After the Second World War (1948-9) he designed a 40-floor extension, intended by Sunlight to be Manchester's answer to New York's Rockefeller Center; but this was never built. A decade later Sunlight House, rented out as offices to the Ministry of Works, had fallen into a dilapidated condition. Sunlight was criticized as a bad landlord and for allegedly overcharging his tenants, and in 1959 the dispute with the ministry led to a court case. Very late in the 1990s the grade II listed landmark was renovated and adapted for reuse as shops and offices. Sunlight became a member of the Institute of Registered Architects on 31 January 1942 but, it seems, never bothered to apply to become an FRIBA. 
At the age of twenty-four Sunlight won a limited competition, in which six architects participated, for South Manchester Synagogue, Wilbraham Road, Fallowfield (1913). This was his only known commission for a religious building. The synagogue was built in the style of a Turkish mosque with dome and minaret, in a simplified, almost cubist manner. Sunlight himself claimed to have used 'St Sophia of Constantinople' as his model, with the tower (which in execution had to be scaled down by 20 feet on grounds of economy) derived from Westminster Cathedral. In the estimation of the 'British Architect' the whole gave 'a very satisfactory effect of an Eastern place of worship' (20 Feb 1914, 157-8). While exhibiting a mix of stylistic influences, there can be no argument over the fact that the construction of South Manchester Synagogue was innovative. Reinforced concrete was used for the 35 feet span of the dome and for the lattice girders carrying the gallery, thus dispensing with the need for column supports beneath, probably the earliest application of this technology to synagogue architecture in Britain. Always a great publicist, Sunlight made sure that his work was written up in the architectural press. 
Sunlight had a brief political career, being elected Liberal MP for Shrewsbury in 1923 -- some achievement for a Russian-born Jew in a constituency with a staunchly conservative history and where his family origins had been made something of an election issue. In June 1924 he introduced a private member's bill to make all bricks a standard size. The ideal dimensions of a 'Sunlight brick' were 9 inches by 4 1/2 inches by 3 1/2 inches. He proposed that bricks used in all state-subsidized housing schemes conform to these specifications. The rationale was that the greater thickness would reduce the number of bricks required per unit, thus making building quicker and cheaper -- with the unarticulated additional benefit of facilitating Sunlight's own speculative housing schemes. Unfortunately he faced practical opposition from builders and bricklayers as well as ideological objections to the increased state interference in the building trade that the measure represented. The bill passed by a single vote but was lost, along with Sunlight's seat, in 1924. A contemporary newspaper lampooned: '
You will never quicken housing 

By such childish little tricks 

As a Bill for making people 

Manufacture bigger bricks. 

No; what's wanted, Mr Sunlight, 

Is a measure which contains 

Some provision which will give our 

Union leaders 'bigger brains'. 
(Sunlight's press cutting book, Sunlight papers, Portico Library, Manchester)' Sunlight's personality, like some of his buildings, was larger than life. He was fond of mythologizing his youth in Russia, where his family faced persecution and he himself on more than one occasion narrowly escaped premature death. He claimed to have survived being run over by a troika on a bridge at the age of two and subsequently being dropped into the river at the same spot. In Manchester his father, Israel, became well known as a committed Zionist, promoter of Jewish education, and founder of the Holy Law Synagogue. Joe Sunlight professed his 'great love for the Jewish faith' imbued in him by his Hebrew teacher in Russia, 'which I have always retained' (will). Yet his lifestyle, especially after the Second World War, was that of a moneyed English gentleman. In addition to his London address at 14 Victoria Square, Belgravia, he owned a large mansion called Hallside in Chelford Road, Knutsford, Cheshire. His wife, Edith Forshaw (1913-2000), though she identified with her father-in-law's Zionist causes, came from a fairly humble Church of England background; her father was a motor engineer. Edith was nearly half Joe's age and they finally married in a register office in Brighton on 8 May 1940. Their only son, Ben Sunlight, the artist, had been born in Brighton in 1935; he died in 2002. 
Sunlight died an eccentric millionaire at his home, Hallside, on 15 April 1978, and was remembered chiefly for Sunlight House and for his love of gambling and horse-racing. He left $500 to the minister at Wilbraham Road 'in recognition of his having looked after the South Manchester Synagogue (which I consider as my monument) with such loving care for so many years' (will). He was buried on 17 April in the Jewish section of the southern cemetery, Barlow Moor Road, Manchester. 


@@@@@


doc= 42166


Dennis, George (1814-1898), archaeologist, was born on 21 July 1814 in Ash Grove, Hackney, Middlesex, the fourth child of John Dennis (1779-1864), an official in the Excise Office, and his wife, Mary Hull. In 1828 Dennis was sent to Charterhouse School, but in the following year his father took him away from school and put him to work in his own office as a clerk, and he received no further formal education. Feeling the urge to travel, he went on a walking tour of Scotland in 1834. In 1836 he sailed from London to Portugal and southern Spain. The result of this trip was his first book, 'A Summer in Andalucia', which was published anonymously by Richard Bentley and received favourable reviews. Dennis left home again in July 1839 and travelled to Switzerland, Milan, and Venice; he returned via Zurich. In July 1840 he went to Paris and on to northern Spain, where he visited Madrid, Toledo, and Saragossa. In 1841 he decided to begin exploring ancient Etruria, and he left England in April 1842. His most constant travelling companion through Etruria was the artist Samuel Ainsley ('c'.1810-1874). They made three tours together between June 1842 and July 1843, exploring Tarquinia and most of the other important Etruscan sites, as well as spending a considerable time in Rome. Ainsley made many other visits to Italy without Dennis, and held two exhibitions of his paintings at the Royal Academy. Dennis himself was also a competent artist of pencil drawings. In 1845 Dennis published a short book, 'The Cid: a Short Chronicle, Founded on the Early Poetry of Spain'. More lengthy visits to Italy were carried out by Dennis between 1844, when he obtained the agreement of John Murray to publish his book, and 1848, when it at last appeared. 'The Cities and Cemeteries of Etruria', in two volumes, consisted of 114 plus 1085 pages of text, and gave the most detailed descriptions that had yet appeared in any language of all recorded Etruscan sites. It was heavily illustrated with Dennis's own drawings. 
Dennis's humble post at the Excise Office having come to an end, he was interviewed by the Colonial Office and offered a position as private secretary to the governor of British Guiana, a part of the world which was destined to be most uncongenial to him. He sailed from England in January 1849 and was in Georgetown from the following month until the winter of 1862, though he made several return trips to Europe on leave. At some time during this period of his life he married a woman whose first name was Honoria or Nora: nothing more is known about her and there were no children. The only piece of writing from his pen concerning South America was a lecture given by him many years later, in 1892, entitled 'The Aborigines of South America and speculations on their origin'. 
In the spring of 1863 Dennis and his wife arrived in Sicily, his fourth visit to the island. He carried out archaeological research at Girgenti and Gela, and from then on he was hard at work on a 'Handbook for Travellers in Sicily', a book of over 500 pages published by Murray in 1864. 
Dennis was then appointed vice-consul at Benghazi, where he arrived in February 1864. He hated the place, and his official duties there were uninteresting, but he made every effort to carry out at least some archaeological excavations in the neighbourhood, at Teucheira, Cyrene, and Ptolemais. In these he was in the main disappointed. He and his wife were able to leave Benghazi about the end of April 1868, having been transferred to Smyrna. In Turkey between 1868 and 1870 Dennis threw himself with renewed vigour into archaeological research, at Sardis, but he never produced a book on Turkey. As far as possible he worked for the British Museum, sending back consignments of terracotta figurines and other objects. He always enjoyed the support of Charles (later Sir Charles) Newton, keeper of Greek and Roman antiquities at the museum, but he frequently expressed his frustration at what he considered the lack of financial aid offered him by the trustees. In 1869 he was promoted consul for the island of Crete, but did not go there, and in 1870 he moved on to Palermo, a much happier posting. He resumed excavations in Sicily and Etruria, and in 1878, thirty years after its first appearance, a revised edition of 'The Cities and Cemeteries of Etruria' was published, this time with a dedication to Sir Henry Layard, whom he had known since 1839, and to whom he often wrote asking for advice or assistance. Having been appointed to Smyrna as consul in June 1879, he arrived there with his wife in May 1880, and whenever possible worked at Sardis and Bin Tepe. From time to time on these sites he met and entertained the archaeologists Sir W. M. Ramsay (1851-1939) and Professor A. H. Sayce (1845-1933), both from Oxford, and the Frenchman Salomon Reinach (1858-1932), with whom he exchanged many letters. In 1885, on a visit to England, Dennis received the honorary degree of doctor of civil law at Oxford, arranged for him by Sayce. 
Mrs Dennis died in Smyrna on 1 April 1888, and Dennis officially retired a month later, being in the same year appointed CMG. His last, lonely years were spent between London and Rome, with visits to Spain and Tangier. In Rome he gave several lectures on his past experiences in various countries. He died on 15 November 1898, in South Kensington, and was buried in Hampstead cemetery. In 1888 there was a reissue of 'The Cities and Cemeteries of Etruria', and in 1907 the great work was again published by Dent in a cheap edition as part of 'Everyman's Library'. The book has been translated into Italian, but so far only a few extracts from it have been published in that language. 
Dennis's younger brother John Dennis (1825-1911), with whom he kept on permanently good terms, was a prolific author and critic of English literature. Dennis had seven sisters, most of whom continued to write to him with family news during his long life spent mainly overseas. 


@@@@@


doc= 42183


Dick, Quintin (1777-1858), politician and socialite, was born in March 1777 in Dublin, the eldest of four children of Samuel Dick (died 1802), East India proprietor and merchant, and his wife, Charlotte, daughter of Nicholas Forster of Tullaghan, co. Monaghan, Ireland. Educated at Trinity College, Dublin, graduating BA in 1797, he became a barrister of King's Inns, Dublin, in 1800. He began his long parliamentary career as nominee of a relative, sitting in 1800 for Dunleer in the Irish parliament. He opposed the 'Act of Union'. After inheriting his father's wealth in 1802, however, he entered the British parliament by purchase at West Looe, Cornwall, a seat he held from 1803 to 1806. 
Dick became celebrated more for his political dinners than his parliamentary activities. He rarely spoke in the Commons, and gained his seats through money and influence, but, although a tory, he liked to maintain his independence. In 1807 he purchased Cashel through the administration, but, when unwilling to vote as they wished in 1809, he resigned. Under current patronage conventions, he was acting honourably, and was surprised when radicals pressed for an inquiry into governmental abuse of power. 
There were further charges that he was merely a wealthy cat's-paw for the tories when he unsuccessfully contested Maldon as an anti-Catholic in 1826, and Lord Hertford's interest, Disraeli implied, helped him to win Orford (which he held from 1826 until 1830). He sat for Maldon (1830-47), and in the 1840s was a peripheral (if elderly) Young Englander, figuring as the hospitable millionaire Ormsby in Disraeli's 'Coningsby' (1844). His protectionist record (in 1845-6) and money helped him to win Aylesbury (for which he sat 1848-52), but he finally retired after two defeats at Maldon (1852, 1854). 
Dick was dandified and stiff, old-fashioned in dress as in politics. He gave opulent Mayfair dinners, so lavishly illuminated that one guest called him 'Jolly Dick, the lamplighter', a nickname, Disraeli sardonically commented, completely unsuited to his habitual expression (Disraeli, 2. 682). Despite his wealth, 'carrotty Quintin' was unpopular and slightly ridiculous ('Harriette Wilson's Memoirs', 1929, 238). He never married. He died at his house at 20 Curzon Street, Mayfair, London, on 26 March 1858, leaving an estimated $2 million to $3 million in land, stocks, and cash. 


@@@@@


doc= 42184


Ferrand, William (1809-1889), politician, was born on 26 April 1809 at Cottingley Bridge, near Bingley, the eldest son in the family of thirteen of Currer Fothergill Busfeild (1777-1832) and his wife, Sarah, sister of Edward Ferrand of St Ives, near Bingley. He was educated at Bingley grammar school and briefly at Giggleswick School, and was articled to solicitors at Bradford and Keighley from 1825 to 1830. A liaison with Sarah Priestley, daughter of a retired army captain in Bradford, led to his marriage to her in 1831, some time before the birth in July of their son, William. Sarah died in December 1832 giving birth to a daughter, Sarah Harriette. When in 1837 Busfeild's mother inherited her brother's considerable property, he became her manager, residing at Harden Grange. In 1839 he took the additional surname of Ferrand and on succeeding to his mother's estate in 1854 dropped the name of Busfeild (though contemporary documents refer to him as William Busfeild Ferrand after this date). 
Busfeild entered public life in 1833 with his energetic support of Oastler's factory agitation in the West Riding and later encouraged local opposition to the 1834 'Poor Law Amendment Act'. Although defeated as tory candidate for Bradford in the general election of 1837, he continued active in Yorkshire politics, opposing the Anti-Corn Law League and helping to found a short time committee at Bradford. Elected as MP for Knaresborough in the 1841 general election, he attracted immediate attention by his vehement parliamentary attacks on Cobden and the league, poor-law administration, and Sir James Graham's factory legislation. By 1843 his distrust of the government, including its Irish policy, brought him into association with the Young England group of Lord John Manners, George Smythe, and Benjamin Disraeli. He opposed the grant to the Roman Catholic seminary at Maynooth in 1845, and in the corn-law crisis of 1846 supported Lord George Bentinck, though family affairs caused his absence from the crucial corn and Irish coercion debates. 
At the general election of 1847 Lord Harewood withdrew his support at Knaresborough and Ferrand was unable to find another constituency. Nevertheless, his marriage in August 1847 to the Hon. Fanny Mary Stuart (1816-1896), sister of Lord Blantyre, brought him into an influential circle of society and in 1850 he resumed his political career, campaigning for a national policy of protection and a Farmers Wool League to boycott cotton in favour of the native product. He unsuccessfully contested Aylesbury at a by-election in 1851 and was abroad with his invalid wife when Lord Derby formed his 1852 ministry. His subsequent efforts to start a labour league in the industrial north, uniting tory manufacturers, Anglican clergy, and working-class reformers, failed to attract popular support. 
When Lord Derby's second administration dissolved parliament in 1859, Ferrand was offered the Conservative candidature at Devonport and fought a lively but unavailing contest. After two further defeats at by-elections there the same year, he was finally elected at a third in 1863. In the Commons he resumed his attacks on whig officials and Liberal mill owners, secured an act in 1864 for compensating victims of industrial accidents, and was instrumental in forcing the resignation in 1865 of the lord chancellor, Lord Westbury, on charges of nepotism. Although re-elected for Devonport in the general election of 1865 he was unseated on petition. Defeats at by-elections at Coventry in 1867 and Devonport in 1868 proved the end of his parliamentary career. He died on 31 March 1889 at St Ives, which had been his home since 1854, and was buried on 4 April at Bingley church. 
A tall, broad-shouldered man with massive features and stentorian voice, Ferrand was described as 'Dantonesque' in appearance and a 'burly agitator'. Politically his numerous crusades failed more often than they succeeded; his strident language made him an often embarrassing colleague; and his perpetual quarrelsomeness, in local as well as national affairs, detracted from his reputation as a serious politician. Yet Lord John Manners remained his devoted friend and he enjoyed a loyal working-class following in Yorkshire. He represented a genuine if primitive strain of historic toryism and his career illustrates the many cross-currents in Victorian party politics. 


@@@@@


doc= 42185


Frail, John (1804-1879), election agent, was born on 1 May 1804 at Shrewsbury. A hairdresser by trade, he advanced himself through his own talents for organization, hard work, and venality. He began electioneering about 1830, under the tory whip William Holmes, among a dozen agents working to relate constituencies more closely to party. His specialities were the tedious but productive processes of voter registration and election petitions, but his other skill was 'the dirty work' ('Select committee on the Derby election', 1840; 'VCH Shropshire', 3.337) of bribery and influence. Under him, Conservatives topped the Shrewsbury polls for twenty years (1832-52), with two returned in 1835 and 1841. Disraeli benefited in 1841, although he had to protest sharply to Holmes about Frail's attempt to extract more than the pre-arranged payment. Frail was also clerk of Shrewsbury and five other racecourses (1842-79), and revitalized meetings with innovations such as handicapping and race-trains. He survived scandals over kick-backs and became the most important Conservative in Shrewsbury. 
From 1847 to 1848 Frail undertook party 'business' for William Beresford, the protectionist whip. Often this was undocumented, since it involved much covert negotiation, for which Frail (once an actor) sometimes assumed aliases and disguises. He acknowledged managing successful petitions against Liberals elected in 1847 at Carlisle and Derby, the resulting by-elections, and withdrawal of petitions against Conservatives at Colchester and Essex North (Beresford's own seat). From 1849 to 1852 he was the party's salaried agent at $300 a year plus expenses, with two London locations, Cecil Street and 391 Strand. He managed elections and petitions in the City of London, Westbury, Devizes, Kidderminster (1849), St Albans (1850), and Aylesbury (1851). At the Derby election of 1852, however, his own agent, Thomas Morgan, was arrested for bribery, with $300 and a letter of instructions from Beresford to Frail. At a select committee hearing in December, Frail's impassive denial of involvement undoubtedly contributed to Beresford's (qualified) exoneration, but both were removed from party management in 1853. 
Unofficially, Frail continued to supply information and advice, but his role in later elections was less detectable and, at Shrewsbury at least, less successful. Possibly he developed interests with Liberals; possibly, as he complained to Disraeli in 1859 and Corry in 1868, local associations were neglected for 'more expensive' boroughs (Frail/Corry, 26 Oct 1868, MS Hughenden B/IX/G/36) by the party organization centralized under Philip Rose and Markham Spofforth. 
Frail was married and had at least two sons, Charles Simpson Frail, a solicitor, and John Ernest Frail, both of whom succeeded him as clerks of the Shrewsbury racecourse. He died at Claremont Hill, Shrewsbury, on 9 March 1879, soon after becoming mayor. Even those who despised his tactics and sneered at his original social status admitted his 'sheer electioneering genius' (Sir Henry Lucy, 'Sixty Years in the Wilderness', 1912, 64). The extent of his activities indicates that statistics of party efficiency and organization in the post- 'Reform Bill' decades still owed much to bribery, compromise, and self-interest. 


@@@@@


doc= 42186


Hope, Henry Thomas (1808-1862), patron of the arts and politician, was born in London, probably in Duchess Street, on 30 April 1808, eldest of the three sons of Thomas Hope (1769-1831), of the Amsterdam banking family, and his wife, Louisa (died 1851), daughter of William de la Poer Beresford, first Baron Decies, and his wife, Elizabeth. Hope's inheritance of money, property, and art collections from his father and his uncle, Henry Phillip Hope (died 1839), led to bitter estrangement from his brothers, who included Alexander James Beresford Hope, but allowed him as 'one of the richest commoners of the kingdom' (Watkin, 26) to follow his political and cultural interests in a style of enlightened opulence. 
Hope was educated at Eton College ('c'.1823) and at Trinity College, Cambridge (1825-9). His first parliamentary seat was the rotten borough of East Looe (1829-32), purchased by his parents, who hoped to exchange his political services for a peerage for his father. The tactic failed, though Henry became briefly a groom of the bedchamber (1830). He opposed parliamentary reform, asserting that his constituents were under 'no other influence than that of kindliness and respect' ('Hansard 3', 22 July 1831). East Looe lost its separate representation in 1832, and Hope sought an alternative seat, standing unsuccessfully for Gloucester in December 1832 and Marylebone in March 1833, before being elected as a Conservative at Gloucester in April 1833, largely because of his spending and his whig opponents' squabbling. He represented it for fifteen years in all -- 1833-7, 1838-41, and 1847-52. He was, however, a shy man who seldom spoke in the Commons, and he is memorable, not as parliamentarian, but as patron and host. 
In spending and in commitment, Hope prided himself on always 'doing more rather than less of what I promised' (Hope to Disraeli, 23 Feb 1854). He had diverse interests, being a founder of the Art Union of London (1836) and the Royal Botanical Society, vice-president of the Society of Arts, and president of the Surrey Archaeological Society. He kept his own accounts and was an early promoter (1833) of the London and Westminster Joint Stock Bank. In his London house on Duchess Street, he entertained sumptuously among his art treasures; guests, Disraeli reported in 1834, 'supped off gold and danced in the Sculpture Gallery' ('Disraeli Letters', 1.322 and n.13). At Deepdene (demolished in 1969), in Surrey, visiting aristocrats, diplomats, and politicians occupied luxurious suites, and strolled among more statues and pictures; even so, their host's conversation, sophisticated and learned, was 'the finest thing in it' (L'Estrange, 2.305). From 1836 he continued his father's remodelling of Deepdene into 'the most perfect Italian palace' ('Disraeli Letters', 3.1104), adding (probably to his own design) impressive reception rooms and a spectacular two-storey galleried entrance hall. By 1840 his modifications made it a pioneering example of Victorian Italianate architecture and landscaping. 
In this appropriately picturesque setting, Hope played Maecenas to political idealists, such as Young England in 1842-4, or the Spanish Carlists in 1846. Disraeli began 'Coningsby' there in September 1843, but in dedicating it to Hope he was acknowledging more than hospitality and encouragement: in 1842, his seat in parliament had been saved by Hope's willingness to accede to an informal agreement between the party election agents that the Liberal candidates would drop their petition against Disraeli's election at Shrewsbury in return for Hope's withdrawing his petition against the successful Liberal candidates at Gloucester. Ten years later, he was still supporting Disraeli's political views with financial contributions to Disraeli's newspaper, 'The Press'. Nevertheless, it was as a Conservative free-trader that he was re-elected for Gloucester in 1847, and as a Peelite that he was defeated in July 1852. 
Meanwhile, Hope bought an 18,000 acre Irish estate, Castle Blayney, co. Monaghan, partly to show how to improve a neglected property. He was an organizer of the Great Exhibition of 1851, while constructing (1849-51) a palatial French-designed mansion at 116 Piccadilly (later the Junior Athenaeum). Lavishly decorated, it reputedly cost $30,000 (about one third of his annual income) and again anticipated architectural style rather than merely following contemporary taste. It housed his collection of Dutch and Italian masters, which he opened to the public. Also in 1851, he married Anne Adele Bichat (died 1887), daughter of Joseph Bichat; she was already mother of his daughter, Henrietta Adele (1843-1913). Shortly afterwards Isambard Kingdom Brunel persuaded him to chair the Eastern Steam Navigation Company, rightly judging that Hope's perseverance and ability to raise funds would surmount the problems which surrounded the building of Brunel's largest ship, the 'Great Eastern'. Henrietta Hope named it in November 1857. Hope thankfully resigned his position in 1858. 
In 1861 the family at last obtained the title which Hope's father had wanted, when Henrietta Hope married Lord Lincoln (later sixth duke of Newcastle). In effect, Hope saved the dukedom, paying Lincoln's debts with $35,000 and an allowance of between $10,000 and $12,000. Hope died, after a long illness, on 4 December 1862 at 116 Piccadilly, London. Probably to preserve them from his brothers, his money (sworn at under $300,000) and a life interest in his landed properties were secured to his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 42188


Michele, Charles Eastland de (1809-1898), newspaper proprietor and consul, was born at 63 Charlotte Street, Portland Place, London, on 27 February 1809, the youngest of five children, and the third son of Henry de Michele (1774-1828) and his wife, Susan Manning (1770-1854). His grandfather was Italian-born. Michele was educated at Westminster School from 1822 and practised as a solicitor until he became editor and part proprietor of the 'Morning Post', buying shares in the newspaper after the death of its owner, Nicholas Byrne, in 1832. He increased his holding to one-tenth in 1834. In 1841 Michele became the major shareholder, owning 121 of 240 shares, with overall control of the newspaper. On 28 February 1835 he married Mary, daughter of John Llewelyn of Morriston Hall, Swansea. Between 1836 and 1848 they had four sons and four daughters. 
The 'Morning Post', founded in 1772 by a group of tradesmen, was politically Conservative, articulating and representing the interests of Britain's landowners and fashionable society. According to the obituary of William Byrne, Michele's business partner, Byrne expanded the range of the paper beyond political reporting to reflect his interests in science and the arts. As editor Michele may also have contributed to the process, but his impact on the political direction of the paper was more profound. When the Protectionist Party, led by his friend Lord George Bentinck, opposed Sir Robert Peel's revision of the corn laws and the trend towards free trade, Michele championed their cause. 
Dismayed, Byrne sought to revise their partnership agreement in 1844, claiming that Michele had sacrificed the paper's independence, reducing its circulation and profits. The issue was resolved in June 1845 when Michele bought out Byrne with money borrowed on a mortgage from T. B. Crompton, the Lancashire paper manufacturer who supplied the 'Morning Post'. Michele invested in new machinery for the offices in Wellington Street and improved the premises, but in 1849 Crompton, citing his own trading difficulties, called in the mortgage. Michele turned to his political friends for financial assistance but they could raise only a few hundred pounds. The 'Morning Post' passed to Peter Borthwick, beginning his family's long association with the paper. 
The loss of the 'Morning Post' in 1849 was the defining moment in Michele's life. His subsequent appointment as Britain's consul to St Petersburg was viewed with suspicion by the tories, but there is nothing in Michele's many accounts of his departure from the 'Morning Post' to support their claims that he was being rewarded for not opposing Palmerston or being removed because he had 'inconvenient information' (Koss, 79-81). Fresh disaster beset Michele in the aftermath of the Crimean War. Since 1728 the salary of the post had been combined with duties levied on British shipping on the authority of the Russia Company, but neither British traders nor the Russia Company wished to resume the arrangement, which was subsequently prohibited by parliament. Without the levy, Michele's income was reduced by half, compounding the losses sustained during the war when he and his family had had to live on half pay in Brussels. Michele appealed to successive foreign secretaries (including Lord Malmesbury, whose assistance he had sought to maintain ownership of the 'Morning Post'), and to Napoleon III, whose cause he had backed during the emperor's exile in England. Eventually awarded a pension, Michele retired from the consular service in 1866. His ill-fated involvement in public and official life left him in financial difficulties for many years. 
On his retirement Michele invested in a London cement firm, Francis & Co., which his youngest child, Vitale, an engineer, managed, later becoming a partner. Reading was Michele's main leisure activity. He occasionally held play-readings at the consulate, and often copied extracts from newspapers and books into his diaries. He died at his home, Old Palace Gardens, Weybridge, Surrey, on 19 February 1898 from a renal coma, and was buried in Weybridge cemetery, his will stipulating that his burial should be as simple as possible. Among his papers in the Bodleian Library are two photographs of him as a consul and a photograph of a miniature on ivory of Mary de Michele. 


@@@@@


doc= 42189


Mott, Charles (bap. 1788, d. 1851), assistant poor law commissioner, was baptized on 28 August 1788 at Loughton, Essex, the tenth of eleven children of John Mott, keeper of The Crown inn, Loughton, and his wife, Ann Hewes. He was educated at Christ's Hospital, London, after his father secured a nomination. He left the school on 1 October 1803 to be apprenticed, first to Gascoigne, Dawson, and Dixon, sugar brokers, and then to Baring, Mair & Co., commission agents and insurance brokers. He then set up in business on his own in Limehouse. Mott married (the name of his wife has not been discovered), but the relationship was not a success and Mott later lived with Mary Cook, or Stanbury ('b'. 1800/01), with whom he had possibly twelve children. His private affairs provoked animosity, and after he had attained public prominence an anonymous letter to the poor law commissioners accused him of having previously operated a brothel, of fraudulent conduct, and of having attempted to incarcerate his wife in the asylum he then owned. 
Mott's major success during this period was to obtain contracts to manage paupers under the old poor law, first in the parish of Newington, Surrey, and then, after ten years, in the neighbouring parish of Lambeth. He became joint proprietor of the Peckham House Asylum, a private lunatic asylum for 300 mixed private and pauper patients, into which he directed the paupers from the parishes he was managing; he also invested funds in a brewery. These investments were funded by large sums borrowed from family members and acquaintances. Mott claimed that before the introduction of the new poor law system the turnover from his activities amounted to $50,000 per annum; this enabled him to buy a freehold house in Forest Hill, and to keep a carriage and suitable establishment. 
The coming of the new poor law ended Mott's contractual earnings but on 4 November 1834 he was appointed an assistant poor law commissioner, for which he received a salary of $700, plus expenses; he was, however, expected to relinquish his commercial interests. Much of his work with the poor law commission was in the north of England; here he proved a more emollient personality than Alfred Power, who had antagonized the poor law unions in industrial Lancashire and Yorkshire, but he was nevertheless involved in two major controversies. His report on the Bolton union was the target of an attack by John Bowring, Bolton's MP. Further controversy followed when a report which had been covertly compiled by Mott on the activities of the Keighley union was used by the home secretary, Sir James Graham, to attack William Ferrand, MP for Knaresborough and a former chairman of the Keighley Guardians. Although Ferrand subsequently claimed vindication after a parliamentary inquiry he retained an animus against Mott for some considerable time afterwards. Mott ceased to be an assistant commissioner, at the end of 1842, when their numbers were reduced. 
The loss of this post, together with financial problems besetting him from the failure of his brewery investment, the demands of his creditors for repayment of their loans, and his high living expenses meant that Mott was now financially hard pressed. First he took on the editorship of the 'Poor Law Guide', which appeared for the first time in March 1843 but folded nine months later; then he persuaded his friend George Coode, one of the assistant secretaries to the poor law commission, to invest in another private lunatic asylum at Haydock Lodge, near Newton-le-Willows in Lancashire, again accepting both private patients and pauper lunatics, who came from Lancashire, north Wales, and other areas. Mott was to be superintendent on a salary of $200, plus a share of the profits; to conceal the involvement of a civil servant with a private speculation the nominal proprietor was Coode's sister Louisa, a resident of Jersey. 
As neither Coode nor his sister could readily visit to supervise the venture Mott was given a free rein at Haydock Lodge, which opened for business in February 1844. He entertained lavishly in order to persuade overseers and guardians to send their lunatics to the asylum, and appointed several members of his family to positions within the establishment. Mott himself was frequently absent, having used his influence to secure an elected position as auditor to the local poor law unions for a further $379 per annum. 
Haydock Lodge quickly became the focus of a scandal, owing to the persistence of Dr Owen Owen Roberts, a radical Welsh anti-poor law campaigner, who petitioned parliament about the treatment that one of his patients received there. The commissioners in lunacy were forced, with some reluctance, to inquire into the operation of the asylum. In the ensuing furore Coode was required to resign his position with the poor law commission, whereupon he moved to Haydock to find that Mott had expropriated several thousand pounds of fees from the asylum. Dismissed by Coode in May 1846, and pursued through the courts by creditors, Mott fled to the Isle of Man in early October of the same year. He later returned to the mainland to depose evidence for the poor law commissioner, George Cornewall Lewis, in an action against Ferrand arising from the Keighley case, and to continue his work as auditor. It was while on his travels on these duties that Mott was seized by the sheriff's officer and brought before the insolvent debtors court at Lancaster. Released after making an arrangement with his creditors, Mott evidently retained a belief in his own worth as he was soon lobbying Edwin Chadwick to consider him for appointment as an assistant commissioner for the health of towns commission. The appointment, however, did not materialize and Mott ended his working life almost as he began it, working as a commission agent in Manchester. He died of apoplexy on 11 May 1851, at Moor Grove, Rusholme, Manchester. 


@@@@@


doc= 42194


Smythies, Harriette Maria Gordon (1813?-1883), poet and novelist, was born in Margate, Kent, the daughter of Edward Lesmoin Gordon and his wife, Jane, 'nee' Halliday. No further information on Smythies's parents or early life has been traced. On 1 March 1842 she married the Revd William Yorick Smythies, a Church of England clergyman who was unable to maintain a steady income and who engaged the family in financially crippling litigation. The couple had five children before Harriette Maria Smythies left her husband about 1860 and moved with her children to London. 
Harriette Maria Smythies struggled to support her family, and published two long poems and at least twenty-two novels under a number of variations on her married name. Some of her work was serialized in the 'London Journal' and 'Cassell's Family Magazine'. Between 1857 and 1860 she wrote advice columns for the 'Ladies' Treasury'. While her work has often been dismissed for its melodrama and didacticism, it is notable for its keen satire and sensitive renderings of the economic and sexual dangers besetting young and working women. 
Harriette Maria Smythies published her first work, a long poem entitled 'The Bride of Sienna', in 1835. In 1838 she published her first novel, 'Fitzherbert, or, Lovers and Fortune Hunters', and she continued to publish about one novel a year during the next three decades. Her most popular works were 'Cousin Geoffrey' (1840) and 'The Jilt' (1844). 
By the mid 1870s all but one of Harriette Maria Smythies's children had died. Her last novel was published in 1880, and she herself died on 15 August 1883 at her home, 24 Brunswick Square, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 42195


Marshall, Emily Esther (1832-1915), advocate of an ordained ministry for women and founder of an Anglican Franciscan third order, was born on 4 December 1832 at Upper Clapton, Hackney, Middlesex, the fourth of seven children, one son and six daughters, of Laurence Jopson Marshall (died 1845), underwriter, and his wife, Jane (1801-1866), daughter of Bernard and Ann Ogden of Sunderland. She was educated at home. After her father's death she settled in Sunderland and lived, unmarried, upon independent means. 
In 1889 Emily Marshall sent her pamphlet 'A Suggestion for our Times' to J. B. Lightfoot, bishop of Durham, who had stated that he wished to see the female diaconate restored to the Church of England. She suggested that an organization should be formed in his diocese specifically to prepare women for this ministry. According to her account, Lightfoot believed that her proposal 'should be productive of much good' and asked her to give it 'a practical form'. She was always adamant that her 'idea, encouraged in its embryo form by Bishop Lightfoot, suffered from his death' in December 1889 (Marshall, 'The Parochial, or Third Order', 7). 
On 27 October 1891 Canon George Body, who was responsible for training women to be 'church workers' in Durham, admitted Miss Marshall and five other women in Durham to the League of St Cuthbert. She soon learned that Canon Body intended to keep local development of the pastoral, charitable, and liturgical ministries of women firmly under his control. Indeed, in the Durham diocese the organization which Miss Marshall initiated became known as 'Canon Body's Third Order'. She was told not to speak in public or to ask others to speak on her behalf at the church congress. However, Canon Body was not wholly successful in silencing her. She wrote tracts, for example 'District Visitors, Deaconesses and a Proposed Adaptation, in Part, of the Third Order' (1891), disguising her identity as an anonymous 'author of 'A Suggestion for our Times'', and paid to have them printed and distributed by post. In them she revealed that Bishop Lightfoot had also spoken with her of the Franciscan third order formed in the thirteenth century for men and women, ordained and lay, married and unmarried, who served their local communities without 'cowl or cloister'. 
Miss Marshall's interest in the third order was further stimulated by reading Paul Sabatier's 'Vie de S. Francois d'Assise', which she bought on a visit to Paris in 1894. Captivated by the French Calvinist's controversial portrayal of the saint and his account of the origins of the Franciscan movement, she went to Assisi. There she met Sabatier, who clarified for her his view of the vision and intentions of St Francis and told her that the organization she envisaged for the Anglican communion was 'dans le sens de S. Francois' (Marshall, 'Dawn Breaking', 7). Her advocacy of a full and equal diaconate, a third order of Apostolic ministry for men and women, was thwarted when B. F. Westcott, Lightfoot's successor as bishop of Durham, commissioned the first deaconess (that is, not a woman deacon, and therefore not in the holy orders of the Church of England) in the diocese. This fell short of her objectives, but, undeterred, she wrote and distributed more pamphlets, the most important being 'The dawn breaking, and some thoughts on the third order of St. Francis, with translation from the French' (1896), in which she argued the case for the revival of the Franciscan order in the Anglican communion. 
Since the death of Lightfoot Emily Marshall had not been able to claim the authority of a bishop for her pioneering projects. This changed in 1893 when William Proctor Swaby, her brother-in-law, was consecrated bishop of Guiana. She had served a pastoral apprenticeship in his Sunderland parish, and with her assistance he fostered a Franciscan third order in his colonial diocese. In 1900 he was translated to the diocese of Barbados and the order grew rapidly there also. Fortunato Pietro Luigi Josa, an Italian priest, who became Swaby's archdeacon, the third order's priest-chaplain, and Miss Marshall's friend, brought the new Franciscan order into the public arena with the publication in England of 'St. Francis of Assisi and the Third Order in the Anglo-Catholic Church' (1898). He paid tribute to the foundress without naming her and quoted extensively from her anonymous tracts. Miss Marshall meanwhile had recruited members in England and abroad who joined the order with the consent of their parish priests. In 1901 she set up to protect the order an Inter-Provincial Council, which H. C. G. Moule, Westcott's successor at Durham, joined at her request. There are no complete extant lists of members but it seems that by the outbreak of the First World War there were several hundred Franciscan tertiaries (as the members now called themselves) distributed across the Anglican communion. 
Miss Marshall died at her home, Whitcliffe Lodge, Ripon, Yorkshire, on 23 June 1915. Although others considered that she 'saw the desire of her heart being fulfilled' in that 'she did start anew' the Franciscan third order, which 'spread far and wide in the British Empire' ('The Guardian'), her own writings reveal her sadness that her 'Suggestion for our Times' had not resulted in women being ordained to the diaconate. 


@@@@@


doc= 42205


Thornton, James (1787-1854), cook, was born on 15 March 1787, the sixth of the seven children of William Thornton (1747-1814) and Ann Morris, at 17 Bryanston Street, Portman Square, London. After attending a local school he was apprenticed to a Mr Farrance, a prosperous cook at Charing Cross, at the age of thirteen, and then to John Escudier, a hotel-keeper in Oxford Street. James's employers were probably French emigres from the revolution. The pay was good and so were the prospects (male cooks were then employed by some four hundred wealthy families, the duke of York paying the highest salary, $500). On 6 January 1809 Thornton married Sarah Oakley at St James's, Westminster. They had two children, James and Sarah, both cooks, as were four of the fourteen grandchildren. 
Adventurous and restless, Thornton was engaged by Major Colin Campbell (1776-1847) on 20 August 1811 to be the duke of Wellington's cook in the Peninsula, where the war was in its second year. Thornton's service to the commander-in-chief was his road to success, though his skills were not fully exploited by Wellington, a notoriously moderate eater. On 5 September Thornton sailed for Lisbon, joining Wellington in his winter quarters on the borders of Portugal and Spain. Few cooked luncheons were required, since Wellington preferred to carry a hard-boiled egg in his pocket. He breakfasted alone, but dinner was convivial, despite the monotonous 'cold meat' after a specially long march (Thornton, 27). Normally Thornton, assisted by the son of Lord Enniskillen's cook and a scullery-man, would serve two courses to Wellington and his staff, heaping their plates with food all mixed together, roasts with dessert. He would not have been encouraged to serve up to eight elegant, separate courses, as was the practice of leading French cooks. Thornton himself procured vegetables and fruit, paying the peasants for everything, whereas Napoleon's armies requisitioned their supplies, often provoking fierce retaliation. Thornton's later account provides many insights into Wellington's campaigning: descriptions of balls, earth ovens, and of Wellington's famous boots being kissed by admiring crowds. By 1814 victory was won and Thornton was sent home. He took a winter job with Sir Patrick Murray in Scotland and in 1815, after Napoleon's escape from Elba, Campbell again engaged him to cook for Wellington, in Brussels. 
At 4 a.m. on 18 June 1815 Thornton was woken by the butler, did his marketing, rode to Waterloo and cooked Wellington's 'hot dinner' after the battle. Soon after the duke's death in 1852, a French cook claimed the honour, but Thornton refuted him in a letter to 'The Times': 'Having seen in your widely circulated paper that the late and ever-to-be-honoured Duke of Wellington had a French cook at Waterloo who is reported to have said, 'He knew that the Duke would return to his dinner'. I beg most respectfully to inform you that I cooked his dinner on the day... his Grace rode up after the battle, and on getting off his horse Copenhagen he saw me and said, 'Is that you? Get dinner.' (Thornton, 49)' In 1818 the duke returned to England after being ambassador in Paris, where he 'kept French Cooks' (Thornton, 95). Thornton had rejoined his service, becoming steward at Apsley House in 1820, a prestigious post. However, he resigned on 29 December after a disagreement with the duchess, herself an embarrassingly inefficient housekeeper, over his alleged extravagance: 298 pounds of meat, excluding lamb, calves' feet, and sweetbreads, had been ordered for thirteen people for three days. He subsequently served as cook in a number of great households. 
Documentary evidence of Thornton's later career is scarce, but he wrote from Lowther Castle, Westmorland, to his daughter on 21 October 1841, enclosing a recipe for white fish. He had been too busy to write sooner, having twenty for dinner most days and 'an Enormous Quantity of Servants to feed every Day'. Recipes followed for curry and strawberries, with news of a wedding breakfast and a supper in Regent's Park on the same day. Thornton spent about five years as cook to Lord Frederick Fitzclarence, lieutenant-governor of Portsmouth in succession to Wellington's brother-in-law Sir Hercules Pakenham, and in 1852, during that time, he answered questions about his wartime experiences. When Thornton moved on, Fitzclarence recommended him highly in a character reference: 'I can not give him 'too' good a character' (Thornton, 51). 
Thornton's recollections of his time in Wellington's service were published in 1985, but much of his life remains obscure. His wife is presumed to have predeceased him. Thornton died on 12 August 1854, at 8 Caroline Street, Belgravia, London, thirty hours after contracting cholera. 


@@@@@


doc= 42206


Schinkel, Karl Friedrich (1781-1841), architect, was born in Neuruppin, Mark Brandenburg, on 13 March 1781, the son of a pastor, Johann Cuno Christian Schinkel (died 1787), and his wife, Dorothea, 'nee' Rose (died 1800). He studied with the architect David Gilly, between 1798 and 1800, and at the Bauakademie, Berlin, in 1799-1800. In 1809 he married Susanne Berger (1782-1861); they had four children. He had travelled to Italy in 1803-4 and was to go again in 1824, but made only one visit to Britain, between 24 May and 5 August 1826. As Prussian privy councillor for public works he went to Paris and London to study the construction of museums, especially the British Museum, then at an early stage of construction, in preparation for his own work on the Berlin Museum (now the Altes Museum). The study of the British Museum was only one episode in a wide-ranging and eventful visit that took him from London through England, Scotland, and Wales. It is recorded in the manuscript travel diary of seventy-five sides and accompanying letters and additional drawings, known as 'The English journey' ('Die englische Reise', Nationalgalerie, Berlin). 
Schinkel's many visits to workshops and factories were set up by his travelling companion Peter Beuth, director of trade and industry in the Prussian finance ministry, whose agenda was to buy samples of and to observe innovative British technology. Consequently their route through Britain was strongly biased towards workshops, factories, and commercial buildings, though Schinkel was able to view the buildings of London and cities on the route. He was generally disdainful of British architecture and speculative building, but was deeply impressed by the innovative use of iron-frame construction he saw almost everywhere. He responded admiringly to engineers he met, such as Henry Maudslay, but had little contact with architects. 
Schinkel arrived in London, after three weeks in Paris, on 24 May, and stayed in the capital until 14 June. He visited numerous buildings, workshops, and factories, with trips to the Brighton Pavilion, Greenwich, and Windsor. On 15 June he, Beuth, and Count Danckelmann, went north, passing through Oxford, Birmingham, visiting the Thomason workshop, Dudley -- the chimneys here he described as 'smoking obelisks' (Bindman and Riemann, 128) -- the Gospel Oaks ironworks, and the Badnal cotton mill at Leek. Admiringly they passed by the Belper mills, and then through Sheffield to Leeds, where they met the industrialist Benjamin Gott at Armley House. Their next extended stop was Edinburgh, where Schinkel expressed a grudging surprise at the quality of the city's new architecture. He made two splendid panoramic drawings of the city (ibid., plates 140 and 142), and after two days there the party went on to Glasgow, via Robert Owen's New Lanark. In their one full day in Glasgow they visited Charles Tennant's chemical works, Charles Todd's textile mills, and the Hunterian Museum, before heading north-west for a short holiday towards the Hebrides, or 'Ossianic Islands' as Schinkel called them. Their objective was the romantic site of Fingal's Cave, where the Prussians sang in harmony to the sound of the waves (ibid., 170). 
Following this break of one week the party returned to London via the west of England and Wales. They reached Manchester on 16 July and Schinkel was appalled by the prospects the industrial city offered of overproduction, financial slump, and dreadful living conditions. He describes the 'dreadful and dismal impression' (Bindman and Rieman, 175) made by the huge cotton mills of Ancoats, but the brilliant drawings he made in the journal of them and the Manchester canal system reveal their fascination for him (ibid., plates 164 and 165). He conversed in Liverpool with the city architect John Foster the younger, before the party left for Wales. They went through Conwy as far as the Menai Bridge, before returning to England via the great Pont Cysyllte viaduct. Here Schinkel expressed unequivocal enthusiasm for the designer of these two works and the Conwy suspension bridge, noting that they are 'All the work of Mr Telford, whose road construction is so arranged that from the Menai Bridge all his great works can be observed' (ibid., 188). The party went towards Bristol, and Schinkel remarked appreciatively on the ironwork in the Stanley Mill at King's Stanley, near Stroud. They spent a busy day in Bristol and two hours in Bath, which Schinkel found 'rather boring and wholly in the mean English style' (ibid., 197), before arriving back in London on 30 July. They remained in London until 5 August, then returned to Berlin by way of Calais and Belgium. 
The effects of Schinkel's experience of British industrial buildings are clearly to be seen in his later architecture, in the Bauakademie (1831-6) and the Neue Packhof warehouses (1829-32), and the influence of his experience of ancient buildings is visible in many neo-Gothic works, but the most profound effect of 'the English journey' was perhaps in his later emphasis on function as a determinant of architectural design. He continued to live in Berlin, a high official of the Prussian government, until his early death, brought about, it was widely believed, by overwork, on 9 October 1841. He was buried three days later in the Dorotheenstadt cemetery, Berlin. 


@@@@@


doc= 42207


Cocks, William Alfred (1892-1971), clockmaker and bagpipe scholar, was born on 8 October 1892 at St Mary's Terrace, Ryton, co. Durham, the son of John Cocks, banker's clerk, and his wife, Elizabeth Cummings, 'nee' Dunlop. As a small boy he conceived what proved to be a lifelong interest in the pipes after being given a toy set as a present. He worked as a master watch- and clockmaker but in his leisure became an expert craftsman and skilled player of the bagpipes. Over the years he made many fine sets of Northumbrian small pipes, taking pride in doing everything himself, down to sewing the bags and bellows. From the time of the First World War onwards, he travelled the country in search of instruments made by others. The important collection which he gradually acquired is now held at the Chantry Bagpipe Museum, Morpeth, Northumberland, on loan from the Society of Antiquaries of Newcastle upon Tyne. 
As a pioneer member of the Northumbrian Pipers' Society, Will Cocks provided a set of pipes as a trophy in the annual Newcastle Musical Tournament. As a leading expert on the instrument he was a member (later fellow) of the Society of Antiquaries (Scotland) and an honorary member of the Galpin Society. He contributed bagpipe articles to 'Grove's Dictionary of Music and Musicians' (1954 edn) and wrote for Oxford University Press a 'Tutor for the Northumberland Half-Long Bagpipe' (1925). In 1931 he produced, with Gilbert Askew, a revised edition of J. W. Fenwick's 'Instruction Book for the Northumbrian Small-Pipes', which had originally appeared in 1896. In his later years he renovated many old sets of pipes and also conducted extensive experiments in the use of new materials and methods of working. His book 'The Northumbrian Bagpipes' (1967), jointly written with J. F. Bryan, is the definitive work on the construction of the instrument. 
Cocks died at Hexham General Hospital on 31 March 1971 as a result of an accidental overdose of barbiturates; the inquest recorded a verdict of misadventure. Photographs show him as tall, slim, dark-haired, and moustached, yet he remained a bachelor throughout his long life, which he single-mindedly devoted to a passion for the sweet-sounding pipes of his native region. In 'Bagpipes' Anthony Baines paid tribute to Cocks's 'vast store of knowledge and material', and assessed him as being 'one of the bagpipe's leading historians' (Baines, 14). 


@@@@@


doc= 42208


Allan, James (1734-1810), Northumbrian piper and rogue, was born at Hepple, Northumberland, probably in March 1734, and baptized at Rothbury, Northumberland, on 21 April 1734, the son of William Allan or Allen, also known as Wull Faa, a noted vermin hunter and performer on the Northumbrian small pipes. Allan's 'mother was a gypsy' (Morpeth Chantry Bagpipe Museum display notes) and he was the second youngest in the family, which had links to the Faas, a clan of Gypsies noted for roving the Anglo-Scottish border. His father taught him to play the Northumbrian small pipes and, in a restless life, music was to remain one of few steadying influences. It is possible that he was the James Allan who married Isabel Muffat at Rothbury on 1 March 1763, and that they had at least one child, a daughter, Philis ('bap'. 4 November 1765). As Allan's interest in music developed, he was taken by seeing the band of the Northumberland militia at Alnwick, Northumberland, and enlisted as a substitute. 
He kept up his links with Alnwick and eventually succeeded in becoming official piper to Elizabeth Percy, countess of Northumberland, a post he held for two years. In October 1769 he was appointed one of the town musicians at Alnwick but the following Michaelmas he misbehaved and was dismissed and eventually lost the favour of his benefactor. 
Most of Allan's adult life was taken up with rambling and it is here that 'the line between fact and fiction becomes thin' (Askew, 63). He made his livelihood out of piping and stealing and, beyond that, by 'enlisting as a soldier and deserting -- often having received his bounty money' (ibid.). He was eventually arrested in 1803 at Jedburgh, Roxburghshire, for stealing a horse from Matthew Robinson of Gateshead, co. Durham, after a night drinking in Newcastle upon Tyne. From Jedburgh he was taken to Durham city where, described as 'the famous piper' ('Newcastle Courant', 6 Aug 1803), he was tried and sentenced to death at the assizes in August 1803 for horse stealing. The death sentence was commuted to transportation at the end of the assizes, but on account of Allan's age and poor health he remained in England. 
Allan was imprisoned first in Durham gaol for seven years, and then in the Durham house of correction, where he died on 13 November 1810. News of a royal pardon arrived a few months after his death, reportedly one of the first signed by the prince regent, afterwards George IV. He was buried in the churchyard of St Nicholas, later covered by part of Durham's central market place, although it is said that one of his last requests was for his body to be returned to Rothbury. 
Allan's infamy survived him, and in the years after his death numerous tales of his deeds appeared in print. When compiling a brief biography of the piper in the late nineteenth century Richard Welford noted that the sources on Allan available to him included chapbooks based on the piper's life and hawked to shepherds and milkmaids in Northumberland and a series of books of varying reliability produced in the early nineteenth century. Writers generally described Allan as a man of many diversions with a great love of drinking and gambling and an eye for pretty women. He was said to have married three times (Morpeth Chantry Bagpipe Museum display notes). Cattle, sheep, and horse stealing as well as robbing his companions were among his identifiable vices. Drawings were published depicting episodes taken from his mythologized life, including an escape from armed guards, being rescued by a young lady in Batavia, and piping in the runners at a horse race in northern England. 
Allan was remembered as a virtuoso on the bagpipes, an expert at the double hornpipe played at 3/2 or 9/4 pace, and closely associated with the music of his native Cheviot hills. Woodcuts of his playing both the Northumbrian small pipes and the highland pipes have survived but the veracity of any surviving sketches of him was brought into question by the researches of the bagpipe historian Gilbert Askew in the 1930s. In the early twenty-first century, a dance tune known as 'Jimmy Allen' remained one of the most popular tunes played at traditional music sessions, used at barn dances and ceilidhs across the English-speaking world. The piece is firmly in the vein of Northumbrian rant-type reels; it is uncertain whether it was written by the piper or composed in his memory. Another tune entitled 'Coffee and Tea' or 'Jamie Allen's Fancy' has also survived. A case at the Chantry Bagpipe Museum, Morpeth, Northumberland, dedicated to his life both inside and outside piping, was still being maintained in 2007. His ghost, playing the pipes, is said to wander the area around the western end of Elvet Bridge, Durham, near the remains of the house of correction. The early twenty-first century saw a renewal of interest in Allan as a hero of Northumbrian cultural identity. An opera, 'The Ballad of Jamie Allan', composed by John Harle with a libretto by Tom Pickard, premiered at The Sage, Gateshead, in 2005. 


@@@@@


doc= 42212


Beverley, Robert of (d. 1285), master mason and sculptor, is first recorded in 1253, when he received $1 12's'. for carving four vault-bosses for Westminster Abbey. In 1259 he was paid 3's'. per week while working at Westminster Palace under Master John of Gloucester whom, late in the following year, he succeeded as master mason of Westminster Abbey. Robert was not granted a general appointment as master mason of the king's works such as John of Gloucester held from 1257, presumably because, unlike the latter, he was employed only in London. This changed in 1271 when he became surveyor of the king's works at the Tower of London and six specified castles and manors in Berkshire, Essex, Kent, and Surrey. The smaller number and geographical spread of the residences in his care, compared to those for which John of Gloucester had been responsible, probably explains why he was paid only half the fee of 12died per day taken by his predecessor. In 1273 he had charge of the making of the tomb of Edward I's infant son John, the earliest documented instance of the designing of royal tombs at Westminster by the king's chief mason -- a pattern which persisted for a hundred years and more. Following Edward I's return to England in 1274, Beverley oversaw the erection at Westminster of a number of wooden halls and kitchens ancillary to the new king's coronation on 19 August. Thereafter the volume of work carried out at the Tower and other London sites greatly increased and, presumably in recognition of this, Robert's fee rose to 12died per day and 16died when working elsewhere. In 1276 he received $3 6's'. 6died for his work in turning 300 lb of wax into an image of Henry III, for purposes which are not recorded. From 1278 Robert audited works accounts, which suggests that his Latinity was better than that of most medieval master masons. 
Early in 1278 Beverley sat on a commission 'ad quod damnum' which considered how the south-west part of London's wall should be extended so as to take in the new precinct which was about to be established for the Dominicans. Although the new priory buildings were not king's works in the strictest sense, Edward I was heavily involved in this project, and it is highly likely that Robert was the architect. The nave of the church incorporated high arcades but lacked a clerestory or vault, and it was therefore a forerunner of the many structurally light and open 'preaching naves' built in late medieval England by mendicant orders and parishes alike. The least altered part of Robert's work at the Tower is St Thomas's Tower, which consists of a watergate and an upper floor housing the king's lodgings. The timber rear wall of the lodgings is borne on a segmental arch whose extraordinary width makes space for royal barges to turn. At Westminster Abbey the most important changes to the design adopted at the start of work in 1245 are those by John of Gloucester, but Robert also made some less conspicuous revisions. Cordial relations with the abbey are suggested by its grant to Robert 'c'.1270 of a lifetime's supply of wine. Beverley died on 11 April 1285. He had a wife named Cecily. 


@@@@@


doc= 42215


Canterbury, Michael (fl. 1275-1321), master mason, appears to have been a native of Canterbury, where he is first recorded as master mason to the cathedral priory. In 1275/6 and 1277 the treasurer of the priory paid him wages and travel expenses for his work on the new 'prior's house' (in reality a row of high-quality stone-built houses for rent) in Cheapside, London, to the north of the church of St Mary-le-Bow. In 1290, and in other years which cannot be fixed, he was renting from the priory several properties in the Northgate parish of the city. Most of Michael Canterbury's later documented works were in or near London, but that he continued to be active in Canterbury is suggested by his purchase of a messuage there in 1293 and by the existence in and around the city of several works of 'c'.1292-1308 which are in his style, including the tomb of Archbishop John Peckham (died 1292), the choir enclosure and chapter house ('c'.1304), all at the cathedral, and the chancel of Chartham church (of which the cathedral priory was rector), in progress by 1294. 
The London 'prior's house' may well have served to advertise Canterbury's work to Edward I, for by Michaelmas 1291 he was making the penultimate and second most costly of the series of great crosses built to the memory of Queen Eleanor, that which stood in Cheapside barely a stone's throw from St Mary-le-Bow. No doubt the Cheapside cross was in its turn a recommendation to further employment by the king, for in April 1292 work started on Canterbury's most important commission, St Stephen's Chapel in Westminster Palace. Although building advanced very rapidly on what was clearly a high-priority project, it was halted by the financial crisis of 1297 and was not to be resumed until 1320. The 1292-7 campaign encompassed the ground-floor chapel of St Mary and the lower parts of the walls of the main upper chapel, and also generated many hundreds of worked stones which were carefully stored for eventual use. It seems likely, therefore, that the chapel was completed essentially to Canterbury's designs. 
Despite its simple format and relatively small size, St Stephen's was the most complex and innovatory design of its time. Much of the formal repertory of the English Decorated style, and indeed of European late Gothic architecture generally, was pioneered here, including lierne vaults, curvilinear tracery patterns, and walls treated as tabernacle-work. The principle underlying the formal complexity -- that of treating the two interiors and the exterior of the chapel as a means of generating three highly contrasted 'modes' or styles -- was grasped by only a handful of leading early fourteenth-century English architects. One of its earliest and most sophisticated applications is on a work almost certainly by Michael Canterbury himself, the gatehouse of St Augustine's Abbey, Canterbury, whose crenellations received royal licence in 1308. Here the three modes of St Stephen's Chapel have their counterparts on a single facade: the heavy supporting mode of the lower chapel on the storey containing the entrance arch; the tabernacle-clad treatment of the interior of the upper chapel on the niche-encrusted first floor; and the flat linear mode of the lateral exterior elevations on the uppermost parts of the octagonal turrets, which are themselves modelled on the corner turrets of St Stephen's. In its overall form, though not in its rich treatment, the St Augustine's gatehouse is the prototype of the kind of structure built at the entrance to many ambitious domestic and collegiate complexes from the fourteenth to the sixteenth centuries. Canterbury's work as a designer of tomb architecture is likely to have included the two most ambitious English funerary monuments of 'c'.1300, those of Edmund Crouchback, earl of Lancaster (died 1296), at Westminster, and Bishop William of Louth (died 1298) in Ely Cathedral. 
Documentary evidence for Canterbury's later years is sparse. In 1306 he prepared Wolvesey Palace, Winchester, for the lying-in of Queen Margaret and in 1315 he had charge of building a wall round Eltham Manor in Kent. Although not strictly a royal project, the works at the London Dominicans, where Canterbury is mentioned in 1312 heading a team of twenty-four masons, were almost certainly patronized by Edward II, who occasionally resided there. Possibly a London citizen since the 1270s, Canterbury was serving in 1313 as one of the city's sworn surveyors of masons' work and in March 1316 he was a member of a commission of masons appointed to oversee paving in the city. He is last heard of at Michaelmas 1321, when he received a robe in his capacity as master mason of St Stephen's Chapel. 

Thomas Canterbury (fl. 1323-1335), master mason, may have been the son of Michael Canterbury, who was married to a woman named Mary. Thomas was master mason at St Stephen's from 1323 until the cessation of work early in 1326, and again from 1332 to 1335. For unspecified works at the chapel of the London Guildhall he was paid $6 17's'. in 1332. His authorship of one of the two earliest works of Perpendicular architecture -- the first phase of the remodelling of the eastern parts of St Peter's Abbey (now the cathedral) at Gloucester, the south transept of 'c'.1331-7 -- is suggested by its formal indebtedness to St Stephen's and by the involvement of the king. The probability that Thomas Canterbury died in or soon after 1335 also favours the attribution, for the next phases of work, the choir and presbytery built 'c'.1337-60, were clearly designed by a different architect. 


@@@@@


doc= 42216


Simon Clerk (d. 1489), then master mason of King's College chapel, in association with a contract for work on the church at Walden, Essex. Considering Clerk's great age, Wastell may have been guarantor for the completion of the contract. Wastell dined with the fellows at King's on several occasions from 1486, and by at least 1496 was master mason for King's Hall (now Trinity College), where contemporary work includes the lower facade of the present great gate. Concurrently, he probably designed the new nave for the college's town church, Great St Mary's. The elevations of St Mary's display common and unusual links with the nave of Walden church, built after Clerk's death. Between 1486 and 1490 Wastell settled in Bury St Edmunds, where Clerk had been master mason for the abbey since 'c'.1445. Wastell's continued residence in Bury, and his documented role in its public life, might suggest that he succeeded Clerk as the abbey's master mason. Certainly, he received a corrody or pension from the abbey at some date after 1514. 


@@@@@


doc= 42223


Reginald Ely (d. 1471), with only minor amendments, but the awkward fit of the vault, plus alterations made to the upper sections of the choir bays completed by Clerk before 1485, make it clear that the fan vault is Wastell's alone. The close design links with Canterbury are obvious. 


@@@@@


doc= 42233


William Herland (d. 1375), master carpenter to Edward III. William first appears 'c'.1332 as a sawyer of moulds at St Stephen's Chapel, Westminster, where William Hurley was master carpenter. He was also employed at the Tower, where his duties involved the maintenance of siege engines, and in 1338 he conveyed a 'great engine' to Scotland. By 1347 Herland's status had risen to that of Hurley's warden ('apparillator') at St Stephen's; later he held the same post at Windsor 'c'.1350, receiving the normal warden's salary (6died to 8died a day) for his work on the choir stalls of St George's Chapel and the ceiling of the chapter house between October 1351 and July 1352. Herland was simultaneously employed on the stalls at St Stephen's Chapel, Westminster. Upon Hurley's death in 1354, Herland received the full master's salary of 1's'. a day, succeeding Hurley as head carpenter both at Westminster and at Windsor, where he worked in the 1360s on Edward III's new apartments in the upper bailey. William Herland's designation as 'chief carpenter' suggests he was in charge of the major Windsor carpentry, which included a new hall, kitchen, kitchen gate, alterations to the chapel, and the conversion of Henry III's hall into a chamber. He certainly made the roof of the cloister in the lower bailey (1355-7) and, although it is not documented, it is probable that he designed ('c'.1361) the elaborate open-timber roof of St George's hall (now destroyed, but its appearance is recorded in an engraving by W. Hollar, 1663), executed by his warden following the completion of the undercroft in 1362/3. It is not known whether Hugh Herland was among the carpenters involved with this important decorative roof. 


@@@@@


doc= 42235


Hurley, William (d. 1354), master carpenter, is first recorded 'c'.1315 in the exchequer plea rolls, among a list of London craftsmen acting as 'sureties' on behalf of imprisoned masons employed at the king's manor of Eltham, Kent. Although no works can be associated with Hurley before 1322/3, his status and income must already have been substantial for him to act as a financial guarantor in 1315. In 1322/3 Hurley's name appears in the royal accounts for works at the Tower of London and at Westminster Palace, where between 1323 and 1325 he was employed upon St Stephen's Chapel. Thereafter it is possible to trace Hurley's career as a designer and overseer of major carpentry structures undertaken for royal, noble, urban, and ecclesiastical patrons; his achievements made him a typical member of a high-status artisan class which was closely associated with court culture and aristocratic households and allow him a place in the first rank of English craftsmen of the fourteenth century. 
As master carpenter at Westminster, Hurley's tasks at the palace chapel included the erection of scaffolding and work tables, designing the roof, the complex timber vault, and later (in 1351) the choir stalls. As was customary, the structural carpentry was prefabricated, all timbers marked, and the whole stored until the time of assembly. However, political circumstances in Edward II's reign and the resulting hiatus of works at St Stephen's Chapel delayed the erection of Hurley's ornate vault and roof until 1345-8, some twenty years after their original fabrication. In the meantime, Hurley undertook carpentry works for Edward II's favourite, Hugh Despenser the younger, at Caerphilly Castle, where he may well have designed the great hall roof, 'c'.1325/6. 
In 1336 Hurley was appointed for life to be Edward III's chief carpenter at the Tower and the overseer of all works of carpentry in the king's castles south of the Trent; in that capacity he was responsible for maintenance and transport of the siege engines, as well as domestic works such as Edward III's new chapel and chamber in the privy palace at Westminster, begun in 1342. Before the king's grandiose projects at Windsor, Hurley was engaged by the city of London to work on the Guildhall Chapel and received in 1331-3 the large payment of $8 14's'. 2died for his services. At this time, John Pulteney, mayor of London, lent money to the Guildhall for repairs and also built himself a grand residence at Penshurst, Kent. Because of Hurley's employment at the Guildhall when Pulteney was mayor (1330-37), it has been suggested that Hurley may have designed the great roof of the hall; however, this must remain only a tempting speculation. 
Hurley's work at Ely is documented with certainty from 1334 until 1354, but considerable disagreement remains as to what role, if any, he played in devising the ingenious support system for the octagonal lantern, with its span of just over 70 feet. The general dates of construction can be firmly established between 1322, when the Norman crossing tower collapsed, and 1340/41, when the lantern windows were glazed. How early Hurley was employed at Ely cannot be resolved because of lacunae in the accounts for the critical years 1326 to 1334. It is known, however, that the stone octagon, which provides grooves for seating the framing, was finished in 1328 and archaeological evidence demonstrates that the masonry and carpentry must have been designed together. The sacrist rolls for 1322/3 name several carpenters and masons, including an anonymous 'quidam' ('someone') who came from London to ordain the new work and who was paid a total of 3's'. 4died, that is, half a master's normal salary of 6's'. 8died to 7's'. a week (which was Hurley's salary as chief carpenter at Windsor). Efforts have been made to identify Hurley with this unnamed Londoner, in a desire to credit him with the octagon and its brilliant engineering, but the documents cannot support this interpretation. But the sources do permit the assigning to Hurley of the tierceron (lower) vault of the crossing which conceals the structural framing of the lantern and which was painted in 1334/5; also the upper star-patterned vault of the lantern and the roof of the entire 'campanile'. 
At Windsor Castle, where Edward III provided a model for the international chivalry of Europe, Hurley was engaged in various projects until his death in 1354. His largest work there was certainly the tournament pavilion, or 'domus' of the Round Table, erected between 1344 and 1345. The purchase of 40,000 tiles and vast quantities of laths, pegs, and nails demonstrate that this immense 'house' was to be roofed, at least partially, in order to provide Edward's court with a sheltered space to observe the jousting. The sources, however, do not indicate the plan, or, indeed, whether the structure was ever actually completed. Apart from this romantic project, Hurley, assisted by his warden, William Herland, was responsible for carpentry works in general and particularly for the choir stalls of St George's Chapel ('c'.1350-52). Hurley had a chamber in Windsor Castle and also a 'house' where it was said that he 'turns the chapiters [capitals] for the stalls' ('History of the King's Works', 1.873, n. 4). As well as his salary, robe, and privileges as a member of the king's household, Hurley received $1 annually from the Ely fabric accounts until his death in 1354. 


@@@@@


doc= 42237


Janyns, Henry (fl. 1453-1483), master mason, was probably the son of Robert Janyns senior, master mason of the tower of Merton College chapel, Oxford (begun 1448), and warden of the masons at Eton College from 1449. By 1453/4 John Clerk was the warden at Eton and Henry Janyns was his apprentice. Under Clerk's will of 1459 Henry was left his master's tools and designs, together with 26's'. 8died in cash. Apart from a possible reference to him in 1463/4 in connection with carvings for the gatehouse at Merton, he is next heard of in 1478, by which time he was master mason of Edward IV's new chapel of St George in Windsor Castle. Probably in charge since 1475, when work began, he is last mentioned in 1483. In 1481 a house of his at Burford was leased for use by the king's masons, who were no doubt occupied in the nearby Taynton quarries which supplied practically all the stone for the chapel. 
St George's Chapel was the most ambitious new church begun in late fifteenth-century England. Of cathedral format but restricted scale, its main sources are the two outstanding church buildings of the preceding century, the choir of St Peter's Abbey, Gloucester (now the cathedral), and the nave of Canterbury Cathedral. The exceptionally consistent use of flattened four-centred arches imparts a distinctive rigour and elegance to the elevations, and the fan vaults in the aisles display complete mastery of the problems of designing a vault type which was much used in the Oxford region. 




@@@@@


doc= 42238


Robert Janyns junior (d. 1506), master mason, probably Henry's son, is first recorded in 1499 as master mason of the extension to the king's lodging in Windsor Castle known as Henry VII's Tower. Its outstanding feature is its multi-tier bay windows of complex form, some of which change plan at each level. Robert probably succeeded Henry Janyns as master mason of St George's Chapel, but there is unfortunately no documentary evidence for the identity of the holder of this post during his lifetime. He is also the master mason most likely to have designed Henry VII's most important architectural commission, the lady chapel built at Westminster Abbey from 1503. The main elevations and many other aspects of the design show a thorough understanding both of the originality of St George's and of its indebtedness to earlier designs. The attribution of the Westminster chapel to Robert Vertue, which has sometimes been advanced, founders on the dissimilarity of its vaults to those at Bath Abbey, which are Vertue's only documented and extant work. Robert Janyns's short and simple will, proved on 9 October 1506, shows that Burford was his home town. 


@@@@@


doc= 42245


Stephen Lote (d. 1417/18), master mason, had a longstanding association with Yevele which may have begun in 1381, when Lote was warden at St Paul's Cathedral. In the mid-1390s he was co-contractor with Yevele for the architectural components of the tombs of Cardinal Langham and Richard II, but a more personal bond is suggested by his witnessing a charter at Yevele's estate at Wennington in 1398 and by his participation in the execution of Yevele's will. His appearance in the list of those given esquire's livery by the prior of Canterbury Cathedral priory in 1398, which also includes Yevele, is evidence that he oversaw the completion of the latter's work on the nave and cloister there. Although employed by Anne of Bohemia and other members of the royal family in the 1390s, Lote is not known to have worked on the king's buildings until after 6 October 1400, when he succeeded Yevele as master mason at Westminster and the Tower of London. His most important royal building was the sumptuous rebuilding of Shene Manor, Surrey, from 1414 (destroyed). Lote died during the winter of 1417-18. His will of 31 October 1417 leaves his 'patrons' (architectural designs) to Thomas Mapilton, who succeeded him as master mason both to the king and to Canterbury Cathedral. Like all other London-based architects active in the early fifteenth century, Lote and Mapilton adhered closely to the style of Henry Yevele. 


@@@@@


doc= 42254


Henry (fl. 1243-1253), master mason, was invariably called 'Henry' or 'Master Henry' during his lifetime. However, a charter issued by his son Hugh in 1261 refers to him as 'de Reyns'; and following much discussion it is now generally agreed that this refers to Rheims in Champagne, whose cathedral was a major influence on Henry's most important work, the rebuilding of the abbey church of Westminster. Despite that church's many French-derived features, it seems clear that it is the design of an architect trained in the English Gothic tradition. The most likely significance of Henry's sobriquet is therefore that it commemorates a period of work at Rheims, perhaps as a journeyman in the 1220s or 1230s. He disappears from the records after June 1253 and the brevity of his 'floruit' suggests that he may have died young. 
The earliest mention of Henry occurs in 1243, when he was granted a robe of office as master mason at Windsor Castle. The work in hand was a complex of buildings in the lower ward which had been begun in 1240. These comprised chambers for the king and queen, a large chapel dedicated to St Edward, and a cloister linking the chambers and chapel. Only the north wall and west porch of the chapel survive, the former sufficient to indicate that the chapel proper was rectangular in plan and divided into five bays. In a letter of August 1243 Henry III ordered that the vault was to be of timber simulating stonework. Clearly, a chapel which lacked a stone vault and an apse was no slavish copy of any French prototype; however, the treatment of the bases in the arcading on the external face of the north wall derives specifically from Rheims Cathedral. A hint that the windows of the chapel anticipated those of Westminster Abbey in containing Rheims-derived bar tracery is the reference in a 1295 schedule of glazing repairs to at least one circular cusped opening. 
In March 1245 Henry was sent to York to inspect the castle defences. The outcome was the building from 1246 of the existing keep on the motte (Clifford's Tower). Its quatrefoil plan, which has no English precedent but resembles the hundred-year-old towers at Etampes and Ambleny, presumably reflects Henry's knowledge of French architecture. Its detailing includes English Gothic ornaments not found in Henry's documented works and was doubtless due to a locally recruited master. Apart from acting as 'viewer' (inspector) of a tower built at the Tower of London in 1250, the remainder of Henry's career seems to have been devoted entirely to the greatest enterprise of Henry III's reign, the rebuilding of Westminster Abbey. 
Demolition of the eastern parts of the Romanesque abbey church began in July 1245, by which time Henry must have produced a design for the king's approval. The progression to the more space-demanding activity of drawing the full-size details needed for the execution of the masonry is probably reflected in the king's grants of May and June 1246 of two houses in Westminster to be used for Henry's work. Since Henry III did not see for himself any of the Gothic cathedrals of northern France until 1254, he may well have imagined that he was about to become the patron of a great church in the French style. If so, he was mistaken. Admittedly, the basic format and many of Westminster's details were fairly authentically French and would have registered as novel to someone familiar with only English architecture, but Henry, whether at his royal master's prompting or not, was clearly attempting a synthesis of the two national traditions. The great height, the elongated proportions of the bays, the apsidal plan of the east end, the tracery -- especially that of the rose windows in the transepts -- and the cavernous portals of the north transept facade all bespeak a determination to emulate French prototypes; yet their effect is transformed by Henry's adherence to the key characteristics of English Gothic, namely thick-wall structure and its concomitant ornamental complexity. The one feature of the abbey which suggests that Henry III had an informed knowledge of French Gothic is the use throughout the upper and lower levels of the lateral elevations of two-light-and-oculus windows. Their purpose was evidently to evoke the French church functionally analogous to Westminster, the coronation cathedral of Rheims (begun 1211), a building which was out of date in stylistic terms. Left to himself, it is likely that Master Henry would have made more prominent use of recent Parisian tracery patterns, which the chapter house and the north part of the east cloister walk show that he knew. Although Henry's work was impossible to imitate wholesale, by virtue of its exceptional size and sumptuousness, its influence proved sufficient to end the insularity hitherto characteristic of thirteenth-century English Gothic architecture. 


@@@@@


doc= 42264


John Sponlee (d. 1382?), who had become master mason there in 1350. The work then in progress was the royal lodgings block in the upper ward, the chief part of the costliest building project undertaken in late medieval England. The pressures of organizing an exceptionally large workforce probably account for the departure from the usual practice of appointing only one warden, and perhaps also for Wynford's promotion to joint 'ordainer' with Sponlee in April 1361. Only in 1366 did Wynford spend the whole year at Windsor. Sponlee probably retained responsibility for the design, as he was paid at the exceptional rate of 2's'. per day, twice the normal pay of a master mason. In 1369 Sponlee walked in Queen Philippa's funeral procession among the royal household's esquires of greater estate (whereas Wynford was ranked as an esquire of lesser estate) and he retained overall control of the works at Windsor until at least 1377. Wynford had commissions to impress masons for royal works in 1371, 1372, and 1378, the last being for Southampton Castle, where he was master mason of a great cylindrical keep hurriedly erected in response to the growing threat of invasion from France. Wynford's latest known royal work was the remodelling in 1394-5 of the aisles of the thirteenth-century great hall of Winchester Castle. 


@@@@@


doc= 42268


Vertue, Robert (d. 1506), master mason, was the son of Adam Vertue ('fl'. 1475-1485), an ordinary working mason at Westminster Abbey and Eltham Palace. Robert's younger brother 
In 1502 Robert was also involved in the rebuilding of St Mary-at-Hill, London, and in 1501-2 'V[e]rtu the mason', doubtless Robert, was paid for a new window in the master's lodging at St Antony's Hospital, also in London. Robert's architecturally most ambitious work was the vaulting in the new church of Bath Abbey, rebuilt from 1501. A letter of the patron, Oliver King, bishop of Bath and Wells, which was probably written in 1503, notes that at a meeting with Robert and William Vertue the brothers had assured him that by comparison with 'the vaute devised for the chancelle... ther shal be noone so goodeley neither in england nor in france' (Westminster Abbey Muniment 16040). In fact the design, particularly of the aisle vaults, is notably less accomplished than that of the contemporary vaults in Henry VII's Chapel at Westminster. In 1506 Robert was one of three master masons responsible for drawing up an estimate for the stonework of Henry VII's tomb, and on 10 May of that year he witnessed the will of the designer of Henry VII's Chapel, Robert Janyns. The fact that Janyns and Robert Vertue both died in the summer of 1506 raises the possibility of a common cause: plague is perhaps the most likely. 
Robert's will, proved on 12 December 1506, reveals that he was a citizen of London, that he was a parishioner of St Paul's, Canterbury, and that his wife was called Eleanor. They had two sons. The will's request for burial inside St Augustine's Abbey, Canterbury, and its bequests to monks of the abbey suggest that Robert was responsible for the major projects in hand there in 1506, the lady chapel and the bell-tower. 
On 5 June 1506 William Vertue contracted jointly with the London master mason John Aylmer for the main vault and flying buttresses of the choir of St George's Chapel, Windsor. It is highly unlikely that William would have been put in charge of this work if either his brother or Robert Janyns had been alive and in good health. The design was to follow in most respects the recently constructed vault over the nave (almost certainly designed by Janyns) and the work was to be finished by Christmas 1508. A second contract of December 1511, undertaken by William alone, was for the completion of the lady chapel of St George's, specifically for its vault, its parapets, and the vault of its vestibule. Only the last two elements were ever executed. In 1512, together with the master carpenter Humphrey Coke, Vertue made a 'platt' (probably a complete set of drawings rather than just a plan) for each of the two main storeys of Corpus Christi College, Oxford, and in 1516 he participated in the devising of the plat for the west range of the inner court at Eton College. Since this second plat consisted of an entire paper book there can be no doubt that it encompassed much more than plans. 
William Vertue had been king's chief mason from 28 July 1510, but on 12 September 1519 he received a new appointment to this office jointly with Henry Redman. Vertue's documented royal works, like those of Redman, must represent only a part of what he did for Henry VIII. They amount to no more than some alterations made to Woking Palace in 1512, the modest rebuilding of St Peter ad Vincula in the Tower of London in 1519-20, and a scheme for the adaptation of the Calais exchequer to provide lodgings for Francis I during his meeting with Henry VIII at the Field of Cloth of Gold in 1520. William Vertue's will is dated 15 March 1527, evidently the day of his death. In it he bequeaths property in Kingston upon Thames and desires burial in the parish church there, where his unnamed wife already lay. 
That the most ambitious of William Vertue's documented works, those at St George's, Windsor, should have been stylistically wholly dependent on designs by Robert Janyns was almost inevitable, given that they were continuations of projects begun or continued by the latter. However, the picture is not very different if one takes account of the most important of the buildings whose design has been attributed to Vertue, the crossing vault at St George's (which bears the date 1528) and the two-storeyed cloister of St Stephen's Chapel in Westminster Palace, built 'c'.1526-1529, for their emphasis on densely panelled surfaces enlivened by copious small-scale sculptured ornaments derives unmistakably from Janyns's chief work, Henry VII's Chapel. 
Robert Vertue had two sons, William and 


@@@@@


doc= 42269


Robert Vertue (fl. 1506-1555). The latter was the younger and held the post of master mason to Evesham Abbey at the time of its dissolution in 1539. He can probably be credited with all or most of the splendid series of works undertaken there by Abbot Clement Lichfield (1514-39). Those still extant are the detached bell-tower and the chantry chapels in the adjacent parish churches of St Lawrence and All Saints, the latter built before 1514 while Lichfield was prior. The chapels have richly decorated fan vaults heavily indebted to Robert Janyns's aisle and radiating chapel vaults in Henry VII's Chapel. 


@@@@@


doc= 42271


Winchcombe, Richard (d. in or before 1439?), master mason, is first recorded in payments to him by New College, Oxford for 'forming stones' at Swalcliffe, Oxfordshire, in 1404/5 and 1405/6. These references probably concern the extant tithe barn built there in 1403-6. His most important work for New College was the chancel of Adderbury church, Oxfordshire, built 1408-18. An absence from Adderbury in 1410/11 points to employment elsewhere. He may be identical with the Richard Winchcombe whom Richard Beauchamp, earl of Warwick (died 1439), employed in 1408/9 as master mason of the undercroft of a new and expensively finished tenement at the corner of the High Street and Castle Street in Warwick. 
On 4 August 1430 the University of Oxford formally appointed Winchcombe master mason of its Divinity School and made a house in the city available to him and his dependants. Work on the Divinity School had started in the early 1420s, but it seems certain that Winchcombe had been in charge from the outset, as the design shows the closest affinity with his documented work at Adderbury. The most prominent traits common to both buildings are the exaggeratedly flattened four-centred arches and the attenuated proportions of all members, especially bases. Presumably Winchcombe was dead by 1439, for in January 1440 the university contracted with Thomas Elkin for the completion of the Divinity School, on which Elkin was already at work. Elkin was ordered to eschew the over-elaboration of the parts already completed, whose complexities were said to have been criticized as inappropriate by many magnates and other knowledgeable persons. This critique has often been interpreted as evidence of a general shift in mid-fifteenth-century architectural taste, a further instance of which is said to be Henry VI's instruction of 1448 that the chapel of King's College, Cambridge, be kept plain. However, both references are not so much statements of aesthetic preference as assertions of the importance of matching architectural means to function. That the exceptionally elaborate character of the earliest work on the Divinity School was discovered by the university authorities to have breached their notion of decorum only after its execution was well under way, suggests they had failed to follow the normal procedure of agreeing a design with the architect before work began. No doubt the deteriorating economic climate in the mid-fifteenth century made it expedient to simplify the original ambitious scheme. Among the still-visible effects of this retrenchment are the abrupt and unconcealed change to a simpler form of window reveal. Although it was executed late in the fifteenth century, the existing pendant lierne vault of the Divinity School appears to conform in its general disposition to that intended at the outset. 
Winchcombe's authorship of the most ambitious non-ecclesiastical structure built in fifteenth-century England is likely to have brought his work to the notice of other patrons. Attributable to him on stylistic grounds are the Milcombe Chapel at Bloxham and the delicately fan-vaulted Wilcote Chapel at North Leigh, both in Oxfordshire. Winchcombe's work, arguably the most individual of its period, is prime evidence that in the early fifteenth century the city and county of Oxford supported a tradition of perpendicular architecture equalling in creative vitality that of any English region. 


@@@@@


doc= 42277


Vaughan, Dame Janet Maria (1899-1993), haematologist and radiobiologist, was born on 18 October 1899 at 4 Albert Road, Clifton, Bristol, the eldest of the four children of William Wyamar Vaughan (1865-1938), schoolmaster, and his first wife, Margaret, 'nee' Symonds (1869-1925), third daughter of John Addington Symonds (1840-1893), writer and historian. She had two younger brothers, and a younger sister who died in childhood. At the time of her birth her father was an assistant master at Clifton College; he was later headmaster of Giggleswick School (1904-10), master of Wellington College (1910-21), and headmaster of Rugby School (1921-31). 
Janet Vaughan was educated at home until she was fifteen, and then at North Foreland Lodge, a school for young ladies. At school she developed an interest in history, politics, current affairs, and questions of poverty and social justice, but not in the foreign languages that she was supposed to learn, causing the headmistress to tell Janet's father that she was 'clearly too stupid to be worth educating' (Vaughan, 'Jottings'). She determined, nevertheless, to become a doctor, in the hope that this would give her a background that would enable her to influence society, and she applied for entry to Somerville College, Oxford. After twice failing she passed the compulsory Oxford entrance examination in Latin, Greek, and arithmetic, and entered Somerville in Michaelmas term 1919 to read medicine, with the full support of her parents. Tutored by J. B. S. Haldane, she was introduced into the Huxley and Haldane families in Oxford and, despite having no previous knowledge of science other than 'a little lady-like botany' (ibid.), she obtained first-class honours in physiology in 1922. 
Vaughan completed her clinical studies at University College Hospital (UCH) in 1925 but when, in the same year, her mother died she abandoned her intention to become a physician and trained at UCH as a clinical pathologist, so as to have time to run her father's home at the weekends. Learning of Professor George Minot's work in the USA on the effect of liver in pernicious anaemia, she surreptitiously arranged for liver to be given to a patient, who then made a remarkable recovery, which the treating physician attributed to his prescription of arsenic. Encouraged by Sir Charles Harington, she prepared extracts from minced liver at home and, after trying them herself (because dogs vomited them up), she obtained permission to test them on further patients. The results were uniformly good and provided her with the material for her DM, obtained in 1931. 
In 1929 Vaughan's father remarried and she felt able to travel abroad; a Rockefeller fellowship enabled her to work with Minot for a year in Boston. On her return Beit Memorial and Leverhulme fellowships enabled her to conduct research at the London Hospital medical school on the relationship of disorders of haematopoiesis to changes in bone. On 13 September 1930 she married David Gourlay (1889/90-1963), then a civil servant in the Post Office and, later, founder of the Wayfarer's Travel Agency; he was the son of David Gourlay, building contractor, and had been a co-resident in the multiply occupied house in which Vaughan had lived when working at UCH. They had two daughters, Mary ('b'. 1933) and Priscilla ('b'. 1935). In 1934 Vaughan was appointed assistant in clinical pathology at the new British Postgraduate Medical School, which put her in charge of the routine haematological and blood transfusion services at the Hammersmith Hospital. In the same year she published her book 'The Anaemias', which rapidly became the standard text on the subject. 
Vaughan's socialist sympathies had been strengthened by the appalling conditions of life that she saw in the London slums during her clinical training and by her subsequent experience of the frequency of nutritional anaemia, and they led her to take an active part in the Committee for Spanish Medical Aid in support of the government forces in the Spanish Civil War. She learned in consequence that stored blood had been successfully used in treating casualties. Blood transfusion was still a primitive process in the UK, requiring fresh blood to be obtained for each patient, and she made preparations for storing blood on a small scale at Hammersmith Hospital. Convinced of the imminence of war after the Munich agreement, she drew up plans, with a few like-minded colleagues, for a national transfusion service. These were accepted by the government; the Medical Research Council (MRC) was made responsible for running the service and Vaughan was put in charge of the north-west London depot for the duration of the war. As the end of the war approached the MRC sent her to Brussels to help to resuscitate liberated but famished British prisoners, and then to Belsen to assess the value of concentrated protein preparations for former prisoners on the verge of dying from starvation -- an experience that she described as 'trying to do science in hell' (Vaughan, 'Jottings'). 
Vaughan meanwhile had been elected principal of Somerville, which had emerged from the war with increased undergraduate numbers, a reduced teaching strength, run-down buildings, and precarious finances. She brought to the task energy and persistence, and a sense of optimism that was of crucial importance in overcoming the difficulties of the period. She left the college, twenty-two years later, greatly enlarged in numbers and buildings, with sound finances and a commitment to science as well as to the humanities. She was remembered by students as someone who valued them as individuals and was deeply concerned about their personal welfare. Her comment in 1992 on Somerville's decision to admit men is characteristic: 'I think the time had come for it. I am not sorry at all. I think it's very exciting actually' ('The Times', 4 Feb 1992, 4). 
Despite her college commitments Vaughan found time for active scientific research and external social responsibility. The explosion of nuclear weapons had focused attention on the effects of irradiation from ingested radionuclides, and she headed a small multi-disciplinary group, funded by the MRC, to investigate the biological effects of bone-seeking radioisotopes. The work revealed important differences between the effects of the different radioactive elements, and Vaughan was soon recognized as a world authority on the effects of plutonium. After retirement in 1967 she published 'The Physiology of Bone' (1970), which went to three editions, and 'The Effects of Radiation on the Skeleton' (1973). 
Vaughan served on many local and national committees -- as founding trustee of the Nuffield Foundation (1943-67); as a member of the royal commission on equal pay (1944-6), of the Phillips Committee on the Economic and Financial Problems of the Provision for Old Age (1953-4), and of two task groups of the International Committee for Radiological Protection (1967 and 1969); and as chairman of the Oxford Regional Hospital Board (1950-51). She was appointed OBE in 1944 and DBE in 1957, elected FRCP in 1939, and FRS in 1979, and awarded honorary degrees by seven universities. She died on 9 January 1993 at the Churchill Hospital, Oxford, of bronchopneumonia. She was survived by her two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 42297


London Corresponding Society (act. 1792-1799), radical society, was founded in January 1792 by Thomas Hardy and owed its origins to his rereading, in late 1791, of the political writings first published by the Society for Constitutional Information during the American War of Independence as well as to the enthusiasm generated by the French Revolution and the publication of Thomas Paine's 'Rights of Man'. The London Corresponding Society (LCS) had a somewhat tenuous beginning. Only nine men attended its first meeting at The Bell tavern in Exeter Street, London, but its popularity grew quite rapidly, and within two weeks a further fifteen had joined. By May 1792 the LCS comprised nine separate divisions, each with a minimum of thirty members. Unfortunately there are no records of the exact number who joined, and some estimates by contemporaries seem unrealistic -- with figures varying from 28,000 to 80,000 members. It is known that at its lowest point in mid-1794 the LCS numbered only 241 paying members, while at its peak it probably counted some 5000 men among its ranks. Of the thousands who joined the society, occupational details of only 347 men are known; a significantly smaller number of personnel have left behind a traceable career, and it is, in these relative terms, that the LCS remains, by and large, an obscure and elusive group. 
However, in addition to the thousands of LCS members who remain unknown or known only by name, there were also those who had significant careers and held professional positions. 


@@@@@


doc= 42315


Marie Sinclair, countess of Caithness (1830-1895), who was created 'suo jure' duchess of Pomar in the papal nobility in 1879 by Pope Leo XIII, was prominent in spiritualist circles, being vice-president of the British National Association of Spiritualists; she also founded the first Theosophical Society in France in 1884. Notable for her attempts to reconcile theosophy, spiritualism, and Catholicism, on which she published a book in 1876, she died at her house, 124 avenue Wagram, Paris, on 3 November 1895. She was buried on 26 November in the Chapel Royal, Holyroodhouse, Edinburgh. 


@@@@@


doc= 42322


Luce, Sir William Henry Tucker (1907-1977), colonial administrator and diplomatist, was born on 25 August 1907 at Odcombe, Anglesey Road, Alverstoke, Hampshire, the son of Admiral John David Luce (1870-1932) and his wife, Mary Dorothea, 'nee' Tucker (1873-1965). He was one of four sons; his elder brother (John) David Luce served from 1963 to 1966 as chief of naval staff and first sea lord. Educated at Clifton College, Bristol, and Christ's College, Cambridge, where he read history and modern languages, he married Margaret Napier (1908-1989), daughter of Vice-Admiral Sir Trevylyan Napier, on 7 April 1934. They had two children, Richard ('b'. 1936) and Diana ('b'. 1939). 
Despite his naval background Luce spurned a career at sea in favour of one in colonial administration, entering the Sudan political service in 1930. Something of an anomaly in the British empire, Sudan, under an agreement signed in 1899, was in theory administered jointly by Britain and Egypt, although in practice the former was firmly in control. Luce rose steadily through the Sudan political service, becoming private secretary to the governor-general in 1941, deputy governor of Equatoria province in 1950, governor of Blue Nile province and director of the Sudan Gezira board the following year, and finally adviser to the governor-general on constitutional and external affairs in 1953. It was in this last position that he perhaps exercised his greatest influence in Sudan as it moved rapidly towards full independence. An astute observer of the political scene, he developed good working relations with members of the first Sudanese government, which came into being at the beginning of 1954. He also prudently informed Sudan's first prime minister, Ismail al-Azhari, that 'every British official desired that the Sudanese should govern themselves' (Johnson, 2.310). 
The systemic fault lines that divided the primarily Arab, Muslim north from the African, Christian south threatened not merely to fracture Sudan's fragile unity but also to derail the country's progress towards independent status. A mutiny on 18 August 1955 of southern soldiers based at Torit -- first reported to London by Luce -- appeared to confirm the worst fears of those who doubted Sudan's future as a single state. Luce, however, baulked at the idea of British and Egyptian troops being deployed to restore order, arguing that their appearance would 'destroy all hope of any settlement between the North and the South in the foreseeable future' (Johnson, 2.440). Luce himself travelled to Torit to try to negotiate the mutineers' surrender. Despite the fact that many of them either fled to the bush or crossed into neighbouring Uganda, Sudan's progress towards independence was not slowed. This was entirely to Luce's satisfaction. A month before independence he had impressed upon the Foreign Office that 'the sooner self-determination is completed, the better the future of the Sudan as a whole, and for Anglo-Sudanese relations' (ibid., 2.498). 
Once Luce left the Sudan political service on Sudanese independence, it made sense for him, as an Arabist, to serve in the Arab world, and in 1956 he was appointed governor of Aden. His predecessor, Sir Tom Hickinbotham, had championed a constitutional scheme that would have federated the small states, or protectorates, in Aden's hinterland. Initially Luce was sceptical, arguing that: 'So far there has been no really effective support for federation among the [protectorate] Rulers and any attempt to impose it upon them would only bedevil our relations with most of them, and so weaken our influence with them. (Smith, 'Rulers and residents', 518)' Once a number of protectorate rulers began calling for a British-backed federation to safeguard themselves in the face of hostility from neighbouring Yemen (which had joined Egypt and Syria to form the United Arab States in March 1958) Luce, once more showing the flexibility that defined his approach to colonial problems, abandoned his previous caution. 'I believe that federation now offers the best hope of retaining our influence in the Protectorate for a number of years to come, and thus enable constitutional development to self-government and self-determination to proceed as peacefully as possible. (ibid., 519)' On 11 February 1959 the much-delayed federation of western protectorate states was formally established. As a means of protecting British interests in southern Arabia, Luce also strongly backed the concept of merger between the federation and Aden colony, which eventually came to fruition under his successor, Sir Charles Johnston. Although Luce's hopes were largely dashed (Britain withdrawing from southern Arabia at the end of 1967 against the background of the toppling of its monarchical allies and the crumbling of the federal structures he had helped to put in place), from the perspective of the late 1950s the creation of a federation from disparate territories in an effort to sustain British influence was an entirely pragmatic and shrewd enterprise. 
Luce's departure from Aden in 1960 was followed by his appointment as political resident in the Persian Gulf in 1961. This role required him to co-ordinate British policy towards, and relations with, the states of the region, especially the small Gulf sheikhdoms with which Britain still enjoyed treaty relations as the protecting power. During his tenure he was a staunch defender of Britain's continuing military and political presence in the gulf in the face of growing scepticism in Whitehall, not least from the Treasury. He was also not averse to engaging in old-style colonialism more akin to that of the nineteenth century in order to preserve British interests. The most glaring example of this was his agitation for the removal of Sheikh Shakhbut, ruler of oil-rich Abu Dhabi, and his replacement with his more progressive brother, Sheikh Zayed. Shortly after Luce's departure from the Gulf in July 1966 Shakhbut, with the blessing of British officials, was ousted by Zayed in a bloodless coup. 
In retirement Luce took up a number of commercial directorships, but retained his interest in the Persian Gulf. With the announcement in early 1968 by the Labour government of its intention to withdraw British troops from east of Suez by the end of 1971, the necessity of fostering unity among the small gulf sheikhdoms became still more urgent. Shortly after Labour's announcement Luce visited the gulf, concluding that 'in spite of all these great difficulties, I am convinced that federation offers the best hope' (notebook, 'Tour of the gulf', 18 April-6 May 1968, Luce papers). 
Luce was tempted out of retirement in 1970 by the newly elected Conservative government, becoming the foreign and Commonwealth secretary's personal representative for gulf affairs. In opposition the Conservatives had committed themselves to reversing Labour's withdrawal decision. The pragmatism that had become Luce's hallmark, however, ensured that this unrealistic commitment was dropped. In his report, submitted towards the end of 1970, Luce argued that British withdrawal should take place as planned and that failure to honour this would create 'dangers for the stability of the area' (Smith, 'Britain's Revival and Fall', 36). Even if a viable union of small British-protected sheikhdoms of the lower gulf proved elusive, Luce argued, the notion of extending British protection and responsibility for their external affairs should be rejected. On the one hand it would be a 'fallacy to think that the prolongation would provide further opportunity to bring about a viable Union'; on the other, 'HMG would be entering into a hazardous commitment with no positive advantages to be gained' (ibid., 37). Luce's views carried considerable weight with the Conservative government, which resolved to enact withdrawal according to the timeframe established by its predecessor. Luce was left with the task of fostering unity among the small sheikhdoms of the lower gulf and resolving long-standing territorial disputes, not least Iran's claims to the gulf islands of Abu Musa and the Tunbs. That he was only partially successful is more a reflection of the intractability of the problems he faced than of genuine failure on his part. 
During his second retirement Luce once more held a number of commercial directorships as well as occasionally entering into lively correspondence over gulf matters. For instance he remonstrated with the author Leonard Mosley about the gulf chapter in his book 'Power Play' (1973), observing 'I see you have written books on a wide variety of subjects. If they are all as inaccurate as this chapter your record for misleading the public must be unique' (Luce to Mosley, 28 Dec 1973, Luce papers). 
Although to some extent overshadowed by his elder brother, Admiral Sir David Luce, William Luce was one of the more significant figures in British decolonization, playing an important role in the end of empire in Sudan and southern Arabia, and a seminal one with respect to the Persian Gulf. He was appointed KBE in 1956, KCMG in 1957, and GBE in 1961. He died of a heart attack on 7 July 1977 at his home, Brook House, Fovant, near Salisbury; a memorial service was held at St Margaret's Church, Westminster, on 27 July. In commemoration of his long and distinguished career a memorial fund was established in his name at the University of Durham. His son, Richard, was a Conservative MP before following his father into colonial administration, becoming governor of Gibraltar in 1997, and being made a life peer in 2000. 


@@@@@


doc= 42324


Romanes, Ethel (1856-1927), writer and religious activist, was born at Ashfield, Wavertree, Lancashire, on 15 August 1856, the daughter and heir of Andrew Duncan, a general merchant, and his wife, Gertrude, 'nee' Radcliffe. She was educated privately. On 11 February 1879 she married George John Romanes (1848-1894), son of George Romanes and his wife, Isabella Gair Smith. Romanes, a physiologist and a close friend and disciple of Charles Darwin, had met Ethel in the house of her cousin and guardian, Sir James Malcolm of Balbedie and Grange, Fife. 
The marriage was one of 'extreme happiness', and the Romanes had six children, five boys and a girl, to whom George Romanes was 'an ideal father, tender, sympathetic' ('Life and Letters', 92, 143). The family lived in London and, from 1890, Oxford, holidaying at Geanies, a rented house in Ross-shire. With her husband, Ethel Romanes read French scientific books, lent by Darwin, and she furthered a progressive education for her children: they were taught to swim at an early age, and Ethel Georgina, their only daughter, attended Wycombe Abbey School and Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford. Mrs Romanes herself sat on the council of the Froebel Society, where, she said, 'with the exception of Mr Claude Montefiore and myself, no one... ever smiled' (Romanes, 'Story of an English Sister', 2). After her husband's early death on 23 May 1894, she solaced herself by writing 'The Life and Letters of George John Romanes' (1896), an appealing biography which went into several editions. 
The Romanes had been moving in intellectual, scientific, and Anglo-Catholic circles, often based in Oxford: friends -- with whom Ethel Romanes continued to associate after her husband's death -- included the Moberley family, Charles Gore, Elizabeth Wordsworth, Sir John and Lady Burdon-Sanderson, G. W. E. Russell, and Lord Halifax. Her spiritual commitment seems to have deepened in these years, and she published a series of short devotional works, including 'Thoughts on the Penitential Psalms' (1902), which had a preface by Henry Scott Holland, 'Meditations on the Epistle of S. James' (1903), and 'Thoughts on the Beatitudes' (1910). In 1905 she attended a meeting of the Church of England's National Union of Women Workers with her daughter, and in 1908 she sat on the councils of the Pan-Anglican Congress, on which she subsequently lectured in Edinburgh and Glasgow. Both she and Ethel Georgina were members of the Christian Social Union, and Mrs Romanes also attended conferences on missions and rescue work, at which she sometimes spoke. She had built up a reputation as a lecturer on Dante and theological subjects, and in spring 1914 she had been invited to speak as far afield as New York, Boston, and Philadelphia. 
In 1907 Ethel Romanes published her 'magnum opus', a popular account of the seventeenth-century Jansenists entitled 'The Story of Port Royal'. As several contemporary reviewers pointed out, she had little to add to the magisterial work on the subject (1840-59) by Charles Augustin Saint-Beuve. Nevertheless, the work is very readable and contains a sympathetic commentary on Pascal's 'Pensees', which George Romanes had been reading shortly before his death. The critic of 'The Athenaeum' disliked the 'consistent drawing of the moral in favour of the High Church party in the English church', but admired her 'industry and enthusiasm for her subject' ('The Athenaeum', 8 June 1907, 696). 'Port Royal' was followed in 1908 by the best-known of her publications, 'Charlotte Mary Yonge: an Appreciation', an affectionate but not uncritical memoir of a much admired friend which supplemented the more extensive biography by Christabel Coleridge. Her daughter, Ethel, found it 'quite delightful... so enthusiastic and living' (Romanes, 'Story of an English Sister', 141). Mrs Romanes also contributed articles to James Hastings's 'Dictionary of the Bible' and wrote for the 'Church Quarterly'. 
The second decade of the new century was a troubled one for Mrs Romanes: her eldest son, Ernest, died in 1910, and in 1915 his brother Giles was killed in the Dardanelles. In 1918 Ethel Georgina, who had recently entered an Anglican sisterhood, died after a painful illness. In the wake of these griefs, Ethel Romanes became a convert to Roman Catholicism in 1919. As a Catholic she published two novels, 'A Great Mistake' (1921) and 'Anne Chichester' (1925), served on the committee of the Catholic Truth Society, and was active in the Converts' Aid Society. In the last half of her life she lived in a flat in London, frequently staying at Pitcalzean in Ross-shire, which was inherited from her husband's family. She died on 30 March 1927 at Santa Margherita in Italy. Her son Norman Hugh, who was converted to Catholicism in 1927, became the head of the Chiswick Press. 


@@@@@


doc= 42325


Sharpe, Sir Alfred (1853-1935), colonial governor and big game hunter, was born on 19 May 1853 at Quarry Hill, Lancaster, the third son and youngest of the five children of Edmund Sharpe (1809-1877), architect, local government representative, and railway engineer, and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1876), daughter of Colonel Ralph Fletcher of Bolton-le-Moors. His early education in Switzerland and France was followed by Haileybury College from 1867 to 1870. He then studied law and was admitted as a solicitor in 1876 at Westminster. On 19 April 1881 he married Rosamund Bolling, daughter of Edward James Bolling, vicar of Leverbridge, Lancashire. 
In 1883 Sharpe moved with his wife and their young son, Edmund, to Fiji, where he and his cousin purchased large areas of freehold and leasehold land on which they began to grow sugar cane. The enterprise failed, his cousin departed for Australia, and Sharpe secured a temporary post locally as stipendiary magistrate which was terminated in 1885. His wife left for England where she gave birth to their second son, Reginald, and Sharpe went to Africa. Declining an appointment as district commissioner in the Gold Coast, he instead took up hunting in central Africa, where, between 1887 (when his third son, Maurice, was born) and 1892 he established himself as one of Africa's most renowned big game hunters. He took part with Lugard in fighting the Arab slave traders at the north end of Lake Malawi and then returned to hunt in southern British Central Africa, where in July 1889 he met Harry Johnston, the new British consul in that country. Johnston, recognizing Sharpe's ability, persuaded him to undertake expeditions on behalf of the British South Africa Company, and between them they negotiated treaties with local leaders in the Lake Malawi area to ensure that they did not cede their land to other countries, principally Portugal. Sharpe notably failed, however, to secure a treaty with Msiri, the powerful chief of Katanga. 
In February 1891 Johnston was appointed commissioner and consul-general of British Central Africa, over which Britain now declared a protectorate. The following month he appointed Sharpe as his vice-consul and there followed five years of intense activity, setting up the machinery of government in the new protectorate. With his knowledge of the country and its main languages, legal training, and (albeit limited) business experience, he was invaluable to Johnston. Together they settled land claims, with the purpose of protecting African rights while encouraging European agricultural development, and securing crown rights so that some of the profits of development could accrue to the government. Together, too, they virtually brought an end to the slave trade (including by successful military action against the Yao chieftaincies) and created the basic machinery of government, setting out a taxation system, developing the basic road infrastructure, and creating embryo departments of state: military, postal, judicial, public works, and district administration. Sharpe was promoted consul in 1894, acted as commissioner when Johnston was on leave, was appointed deputy commissioner on his return, and succeeded him on his departure in 1897. He remained commissioner until 1907, for the first seven years employed by the Foreign Office, and for the last three by the Colonial Office. 
Sharpe's main tasks during his period as head of government were to improve the quality and remuneration of his administrative officials; continue the expansion of the machinery of government; bring more of the country, especially the northern parts, under effective administrative control (which he achieved by means of a peaceful accommodation with the northern Ngoni, in contrast to Johnston's more forceful methods); draft laws on a wide variety of topics; regulate labour both internally and externally through emigration from the country to southern Africa, including the mines; encourage the building of a railway in the southern part of the country to link the agricultural areas of the Shire highlands to the lower Shire River, which was the principal means of transportation into and out of the country; and encourage agricultural expansion and exports, particularly of cotton, tobacco, and tea. 
Sharpe was appointed CB in 1897 and knighted KCMG in 1903. He helped to draft the Nyasaland order in council of 1907, which changed the name of the country from British Central Africa to Nyasaland and changed his title from commissioner to governor and commander-in-chief. Executive and legislative councils were also created under his presidency. He left Nyasaland on retirement in March 1910, was made an honorary LLD of Edinburgh University in 1911, and spent the following years writing and travelling. He published 'The Backbone of Africa' (1921) and thirty journal articles, including twenty-two in the 'Geographical Journal'. He was credited with explaining correctly the cyclical nature of the water levels of Lake Nyasa and the Shire River, which had baffled earlier observers (and led, inter alia, to a costly diversion of the railway from Blantyre to the lake, for fear that it would be flooded). His travelling, frequently by rail or on foot or bicycle, and often combined with hunting, took him to the Congo, north-eastern Rhodesia, German East Africa, Uganda, Egypt, and Liberia. He died of heart failure at his home, 16B Trebovir Road, South Kensington, London, on 10 December 1935 and was cremated at Golders Green crematorium on 13 December. 
Sharpe was a modest, fearless, solitary man, who was far more comfortable in the bush than in an office. His accomplishments were those of both a great hunter and an outstanding administrator who played a vital part in the early government and development of Nyasaland. 


@@@@@


doc= 42326


Kropotkin, Peter (1842-1921), anarchist and scientist, was born on 27 November 1842 OS at 26 Shtatny pereulok in Moscow, the son of Prince Aleksey Petrovich Kropotkin (1805-1871), an army officer who came from an old aristocratic family, and Yekaterina Nikolayevna Sulima (1810-1846), who was of a Cossack military family. He was educated at the Corps of Pages, the elite military school in St Petersburg, and served as an officer in the Far East, spending much time in geographical exploration. As a boy he repudiated his title, and as a man he soon became alienated from the tsarist regime, and resigned his commission in 1867. He studied mathematics at St Petersburg University (1867-8) and worked as a professional geographer, specializing in the orography and glaciology of Asia. He adopted populism and then socialism, and during a visit to western Europe in 1872 he turned to anarchism. On his return he joined the revolutionary movement in St Petersburg, working in the Tchaikovsky circle until he was arrested in 1874. He was held without trial, but escaped from prison hospital in St Petersburg in 1876 and went into exile in the West. On 8 October 1878 he married Sofiya Grigoryevna Ananyeva-Rabinovich (1856-1938), a biologist and writer from a Ukrainian Jewish family, in Geneva. 
Kropotkin soon took a leading part in the international anarchist movement, helping to shift it from the mutualism of Proudhon and the collectivism of Bakunin to a more ambitious ideology which became known as anarchist communism. After speaking and writing actively in several countries, he was arrested in France and imprisoned in 1883. When he was given amnesty in 1886 he took refuge in England, where he earned a living as a scientific journalist but also continued to develop and expound his social and political philosophy. This was a combination of biological evolution, naturalistic ethics, populist historiography, integral education, economic decentralization and self-management, political anarchy, and self-government, the final stages to be inaugurated through mass insurrection and popular revolution. He explained his ideas in lucid language and attractive arguments, remaining the best-known and best-liked figure in the anarchist movement for more than forty years, and exercising considerable and even excessive influence over it. 
Kropotkin contributed both to leading liberal magazines and to radical papers, and he collaborated on several anarchist periodicals in several languages, helping to found 'Freedom' in Britain in 1886. Some of his huge number of articles were reprinted as pamphlets and many were collected in a series of books: 'Words of a Rebel' (1885), 'In Russian and French Prisons' (1887), 'The Conquest of Bread' (1892), 'Fields, Factories and Workshops' (1899), 'Mutual Aid: a Factor of Evolution' (1902), 'Modern Science and Anarchism' (1901, 1913), 'Ideals and Realities in Russian Literature' (1905), 'The Great French Revolution' (1909), and 'Ethics: Origin and Development' (1922). 'The Conquest of Bread' was his most impressive exposition of anarchist communism, and 'Mutual Aid' was his most influential book of all. During a visit to the United States in 1897 he was commissioned to write his autobiography, 'Memoirs of a Revolutionist' (1899), which became his most popular book. He contributed several scientific articles to the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica', and also the authoritative 'Anarchism' to the eleventh edition (1910). 
In Britain, Kropotkin had a wide circle of friends and admirers in all walks of political and social life, and he did much to make anarchism almost respectable in progressive circles. At the end of his life he moved towards liberalism, and in the First World War he favoured the allies against the central powers, which alienated him from most of his former comrades. He was amiable and charming in company, but could be dogmatic and intolerant in controversy. 
Kropotkin was a leading member of the Russian revolutionary movement in exile, and he supported the abortive revolution of 1905 and the successful revolution of 1917. He returned to his native land in June 1917 and settled in Moscow. He followed a moderate line and opposed the Bolshevik regime which took power in November 1917, occasionally protesting against its excesses. He moved to the village of Dmitrov, near Moscow, where he died on 8 February 1921 NS. His funeral in Moscow on 13 February was the last open anarchist demonstration in Russia for more than sixty years; he was buried at Novodevichye cemetery. Kropotkin's wife, Sofiya, died in Moscow in 1938. Their only child, Alexandra, who was born in Harrow in 1887, lived in several European countries before settling in the United States, where she died in 1966. 


@@@@@


doc= 42327


Adams, William Edwin (1832-1906), radical and journalist, was born in humble circumstances in Cheltenham, Gloucestershire, on 11 February 1832, the son of John Adams, a tramping plasterer, and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Wells. He was raised by his widowed maternal grandmother, Anne Wells, and her three unmarried daughters, all of a radical political persuasion, at 250 High Street, from which dwelling they worked as washerwomen to Cheltenham's wealthy residents. He was educated briefly and intermittently at a dame-school, a private seminary (Gardner's academy) paid for by doing laundry work, and then, towards the end of 1844, at a Wesleyan day and Sunday school in Cheltenham; he was not religious later in life. In adult years he attended evening classes of the London and Manchester branches of the Working Men's College. 
Adams started work as a bookseller's errand boy, but in 1846 was apprenticed for seven years as a printer to the proprietor of the 'Cheltenham Journal'. Before completing his indentures, he was chairing branch meetings of the National Charter Association, the Fraternal Democrats, and the People's Institute, a literary and debating society that he founded. Apart from the works of Thomas Paine, the greatest political influence on him was the republican internationalism of Giuseppi Mazzini, whom he long afterwards spoke of as 'the greatest teacher since Christ'. In 1851 he founded the Cheltenham Republican Association, came into close contact with the leading English disciple of Mazzini, the Chartist W. J. Linton, and raised funds to assist European refugees. 
In 1854 Adams went to work as a printer on the production of Linton's 'English Republic' at Brantwood, a mansion beside Lake Coniston and future home of John Ruskin. When that journal ceased in 1855, he tramped to London, where he found work on the 'Illustrated London News' and became active in Chartist-radical circles and debating clubs; here he participated in discussions that formed the basis of his pamphlet 'Tyrannicide: is it Justifiable?', which appeared on 13 February 1858. A spirited defence of Felice Orsini's vain attempt to assassinate Napoleon III a month earlier, the pamphlet contributed to the hostile political climate that led to the fall of Palmerston's government on 19 February 1858. The prosecution of the publisher of the pamphlet, Edward Truelove, caused a controversy about the extent of freedom of political discussion. John Stuart Mill, one of Adams's supporters, made the affair the subject of a note in his second chapter of 'On Liberty' in 1859. 
Adams's talents were recognized both by the secularist Charles Bradlaugh, for whose 'National Reformer' he wrote radical-republican and anti-slavery articles between 1861 and 1863 under the pseudonym Caractacus, and then by Joseph Cowen jun., the Tyneside radical, industrialist, and newspaper proprietor, who employed him as editor of the 'Newcastle Weekly Chronicle' from 1864 until his retirement in 1900. Under Adams's editorship the 'Weekly Chronicle' was transformed. Politically, the paper's advanced radicalism, support for trade union rights, co-operatives, 'Lib-Labism' and internationalism, exemplified by Adams's series of articles signed Ironside, earned it a reputation as the 'Pit-men's bible'. More generally, Adams succeeded in creating a family newspaper and magazine in one by including a range of special interests such as a 'literary supplement', antiquarian features, a 'ladies' column', and a very large 'children's corner' run by Adams himself as the avuncular Uncle Toby and centred on the 'Dicky Bird Society'. Adams married Elizabeth Jane Owen Smith (1835/6-1907) in London on 25 May 1858; they had two sons and five daughters. 
As a lifelong radical and Mazzinian internationalist who laid stress on duties rather than rights, Adams came to deplore the emergence of socialism in the 1880s. Following serious illness and a tour of the north-east USA, the experiences of which were serialized in the 'Weekly Chronicle' and then published as a travelogue entitled 'Our American Cousins' (1883; repr. 1992), Adams largely abandoned politics. Instead, he used his editorial power to concentrate on a range of local cultural concerns and conservation interests. He was a founder member of the Newcastle Tree Planting Society, a campaigner for the spread of bowling greens for working men and parks for the people, a committee member and benefactor of the Newcastle Free Library (1880), and a tireless supporter of the preservation and collection of north-east folk music and literature. In June 1893, at a public ceremony in recognition of his public-spiritedness, Novocastrians presented him with a cheque for 450 guineas. Bad health forced him during the English winters to the warmer climes of Funchal, Madeira, where he wrote his 'Memoirs of a Social Atom' (1903). He died at the Bella Vista Hotel, Funchal, Madeira, on 13 May 1906 and was buried there. On the first anniversary of his death a marble bust was unveiled in Newcastle Public Library by the miners' leader Thomas Burt MP. 


@@@@@


doc= 42328


Baird, John (1788-1820), radical, was, with 
Baird eventually returned to Condorrat and joined his father and brothers in the weaving trade. He could read and write very well, began to devour radical literature, and joined his local circulating library, becoming a radical reformer seeking the universal franchise, annual parliaments, and the repeal of the 'Act of Union' with England of 1707. He became a prominent figure among the Condorrat radicals. 
Many Scottish radical leaders saw armed insurrection as the only way to achieve their ends. Conditions were right as the post-war depression and unemployment created great unrest in the industrial south of Scotland, particularly among weavers. Government agents, however, were at work among the radical leadership. John King of Anderston, sometimes calling himself John Andrews, appeared to be their chief agent. The Glasgow police commander, James Mitchell, reported to home secretary Lord Sidmouth in March 1820 that the radicals were preparing a general rising in Scotland. A few days later, on King's advice, Mitchell arrested the entire 28-man radical central committee in Gallowgate. He then wrote to Lord Sidmouth suggesting that the agents provocateurs take over and issue a call to the rank and file for the rising on, significantly, 1 April 1820 (All Fools' day). The idea, explained Mitchell, was 'to catch them abroad and undefended' so that the troops in Scotland could 'quench all thoughts of [Scottish] patriotic pride and Radical feeling among the disaffected' (Ellis and Mac a' Ghobhainn, 1989, 140). The 'Proclamation of the provisional government' (the authorship of which is clearly English) was duly issued (ibid., plate opposite p. 96). Some armed radicals answered the call, to be immediately arrested by the military. 
On the evening of 4 April at about 11 p.m. King, the agent, had arrived at the house of John Baird's brother, Robert (baptized 8 April 1787 at Stirling), and his wife, where John Baird was lodging. Baird had been elected commander of the Condorrat insurgents. King told him that he had 'orders from the central committee'. Baird was to take his men and join with a larger contingent in an attack on the Carron Iron Works near Falkirk, which was the largest single ironworks in Europe, employing 2000 men and supplying all the main artillery pieces to both navy and army. There was, in fact, no larger contingent on the way, and a company of the 80th regiment were at the works waiting for the hapless radicals. 
At 5 a.m. Baird was joined by Andrew Hardie with twenty-five men who had marched up from Glasgow on King's instructions. Baird and his ten men combined forces with them under his command. They set off towards the Glasgow and Edinburgh Canal. King was never seen again after this. Baird split his forces in case he missed the supposed main force, and he and Hardie took separate routes to a point about a mile and a half beyond Bonnybridge village. Here they rejoined forces. 
A troop of the 10th hussars, commanded by Lieutenant Ellis Hodgson, and the Kilsyth troop of the Stirlingshire yeomanry, commanded by Lieutenant John James Davidson, a tory lawyer from Edinburgh, were converging on their position. Baird's men were resting on a hill in the area known as Bonnymuir. Hodgson and the 10th hussars led a sabre charge against them. Baird instructed his men to take defensive positions. Hardie wrote: 'Mr Baird defended himself in a most gallant manner; after discharging his piece he presented it at the officer [Hodgson] empty, and told him he would do for him if he did not stand off. The officer presented his pistol at him, but it flashed and did not go off. Mr Baird then took the butt end of his piece and struck a private on the left thigh, where upon the sergeant of Hussars [Sergeant Saxelby] fired at him. Baird then threw his musket from him and seized a pike, and while the sergeant was in the act of drawing his sword, wounded him in the right arm. (Ellis and Mac a' Ghobhainn, 1970, 172-3)' But with the reinforcement of yeomanry troops under Davidson, Hodgson called on the insurgents to surrender, and Baird, seeing the futility of a prolonged struggle, agreed. Several of the insurgents were sabred by yeomanry troops after their surrender. Significantly enough, Hodgson already knew the name of the insurgent's leader. King had done his work well. 
The wounded were placed on a cart and the prisoners marched to Stirling Castle, where Baird told the commander, Major W. Preddie: 'Sir, if there is to be any severity exercised towards us, let it be on me. I am their leader, and have caused them being here. I hope that I alone may suffer' (Ellis and Mac a' Ghobhainn, 315). Preddie observed: 'Throughout he [Baird] never shrunk from the position he assumed' (ibid., 176). Baird wrote several letters from prison and appeared to have developed a friendship with Miss Isobella Condy of Stirling, who had nursed some of the prisoners. 
The unrest was over within a week and numerous other radicals were arrested elsewhere in Scotland. There were to be eighty-eight charged with high treason. The trials started in July. To ensure convictions the lord president of the court of sessions, Charles Hope, accepted that all trials would be held under English law and not under Scottish law, contrary to the 'Act of Union' of 1707. Sir William Rae, the lord advocate, prosecuted with the aid of a leading English lawyer, Mr Serjeant Hullock, who advised on English law. The trial of Baird and Hardie, with the Bonnymuir prisoners, began on 13 July at Stirling. Francis Jeffrey (1773-1850) led for the defence. 
Baird was convicted on two of the four counts of high treason charged against him. On 4 August Baird, Hardie, and twenty others were sentenced to death. The twenty others had their sentences commuted, and a total of twenty-two were transported to the penal colonies for life. Throughout Scotland the other trials resulted in only one other death sentence. This was on 63-year-old James Wilson, a weaver of Strathaven. 
On Friday 8 September 1820 Baird and Hardie were led to a public execution platform at Stirling Castle in front of a crowd of several thousand. Before his execution Baird told the crowd: 'What I have hitherto done, and which brought me here, was for the cause of truth and justice' (Ellis and Mac a' Ghobhainn, 279). The sympathy of the crowd caused the officer commanding to order his troops to present arms and a panic ensued. Sheriff Ranald MacDonald of Staffa refused to let the speeches continue. Both Baird and Hardie were hanged, their bodies cut down after half an hour, and their heads severed and held up with the cry: 'Behold the head of a traitor!' 
When details of how the insurrection had been initiated by government spies and agents provocateurs were revealed by Peter Mackenzie in his 'An Exposure of the Spy System Pursued in Glasgow' (1832) a protest movement forced the whig government of 1835 to ask William IV to grant absolute pardons to all the 1820 insurgents who had been transported for life. It was not until 1847 that the bodies of Baird and Hardie were exhumed from Stirling Castle and placed in Sighthill cemetery, Glasgow. Wilson was commemorated in his native Strathaven. 


@@@@@


doc= 42329


Andrew Hardie (1792-1820) and 


@@@@@


doc= 42330


Ashurst, Elizabeth Ann (c.1814-1850), translator and campaigner for women's rights and against slavery, was born in Muswell Hill, Middlesex, the eldest child of William Henry Ashurst (bap. 1791?, d. 1855), of Muswell Hill, and his wife, Elizabeth Ann, 'nee' Brown (died 1854). Matilda Biggs, Caroline Stansfeld, and Emilie Venturi were her sisters. The family were Unitarians and Ashurst senior, a successful lawyer, was a supporter of radical causes, in particular the anti-slavery movement and the campaign for the rights of women. His four daughters were encouraged to be independent and politically minded women. With their parents and brother William (1819-1879) they achieved collective notoriety as the 'clan' or the 'Muswell Hill brigade'. 
In her youth Eliza helped her father's anti-slavery efforts, met the American abolitionists Lucretia Mott and W. L. Garrison, and attended the world anti-slavery convention held in London in June 1840. Her feminism was stirred by the treatment of the female abolitionists, who were not allowed to participate in the convention's proceedings, and was further stimulated by the novels of George Sand, which were read avidly in the original French by all the Ashurst sisters during the 1830s. Sand's passionate treatment of sexual relations, her criticism of the marriage laws, and her questioning of orthodox views on the role of women in society powerfully influenced Eliza, who became a disciple of the French novelist. She conceived a plan to emulate Sand as a professional woman of letters -- initially by bringing Sand's work to a wider British audience. In the early 1840s she translated Sand's 'Spiridion' and in 1844 she published 'The Mosaic Workers' together with 'The Orco: a Tradition' in Clarke's 'Cabinet Series' -- considered one of the more successful among the early translations of Sand's work. 
In July 1844 Eliza began a close friendship with the Italian republican exile Giuseppe Mazzini, then living in London. Jane Carlyle, who had known Mazzini since the 1830s, noted that he had 'got up to the ears in a good twadly family of the name of Ashurst -- who have plenty of money -- and help 'his things' and toady him till I think it has rather gone to his head. A Miss Eliza Ashurst -- who does strange things -- made his acquaintance first -- by going to his house to drink tea with him all alone etc., etc. (Thomson, 35)' Mazzini's correspondence with Eliza was intensely emotional, and there were rumours of a sexual relationship. Mazzini held back from any suggestion of marriage -- he wrote to her in August or early September 1846: 'Alas! for all plans! Yours is a kind and beautiful one; but it cannot be realised... Build never up plans with me and for my benefit... Be good and kind and friendly and sisterly, if you can and if I deserve it... but leave ['sic'] future in the dark and never attempt to lift its veil or conquer it. ('Mazzini's Letters to an English Family', 1.36)' Eliza sent Mazzini copies of her translations and, being a friend and admirer of Sand, he encouraged her to continue with this work. This led on to a larger scheme to translate all Sand's novels under the general editorship of Matilda M. Hays, a feminist colleague of Eliza's. In 1847 she contributed to this series translations with the titles of 'Andre', 'The Mosaic Workers' (reissued together with 'Franchette' in one volume), and 'Letters of a Traveller', to which Mazzini provided an introduction. In support of this venture Mazzini also acted as a go-between with Sand by passing on drafts of the translated work; he also wrote several review articles in the radical press. But the sales were disappointing and the project was discontinued after six volumes had been published. 
In April 1848 Eliza Ashurst wrote to Sand proposing to visit France, to which Sand responded positively. Eliza expressed support for the recent political uprising in Paris and passed on an offer of financial assistance from her father for Sand's short-lived political weekly 'La Cause du Peuple'. She also sought (and was granted) an authorization from Sand on behalf of the latter's friend and political ally Louis Blanc, then a member of the provisional government, to translate one of his works into English. The result may have been 'The Organization of Labour', published in London in 1848 by H. G. Clark & Co., with an anonymous translator. By the time of her arrival in Paris in mid-July 1848, events had moved on and the cause of a radical socialist republic had been lost. Sand wrote in dismay to her friend Charlotte Marliani, with whom Eliza was staying in Paris, 'How did Miss Ashurst arrive in the middle of this tragedy? Poor child... she arrived too late, she won't have seen the republic' ('Correspondance', 8.545). 
Eliza finally met Sand face to face during a visit to Nohant in mid-September, but the 33-year-old disciple made an ambivalent impression. The more worldly and experienced Frenchwoman was taken aback by her strident feminism, and wrote to Mazzini on 30 August 1848: 'I'm afraid that reading my novels hasn't done her any good and has helped, to some extent, to make her take off in a direction totally alien to me. 'Man' and 'Woman' are everything for her and the question of sex... wipes out for her the idea of the human being. The effect on her of this preoccupation is a sort of state of hysteria, of which she is unaware, but which lays her open to be taken in by the first rascal that comes along. (Thomson, 36)' Sand's words came to be seen as prophetic. In late November 1848 she informed Mazzini that Eliza had introduced her to a 'very common man', Jean Bardonneau, whom she was shortly to marry, a Parisian dealer in secondhand goods, 'whose profession..., physiognomy and language promise nothing which would be in harmony with the intelligence and sophistication of this girl' (letter of 22 Nov 1848, 'Correspondance', 8.716). Her family did not take the news well and a period of estrangement followed. After her marriage she remained in Paris and suffered a miscarriage. Pregnant once more, she returned in July 1850 to London, where a rapprochement of sorts was achieved. 
But tragedy followed Eliza's return to France. She died following the still birth of her child at four o'clock in the morning on 25 November 1850. Caroline and William Ashurst rushed to Paris, where recriminations arose from the manner and place of her burial. Mazzini wrote to her younger sister Emilie at Genoa, 'I knew of the grave and of all that you write.... I cannot forgive that last act of paltriness... To me that marriage has been a silent, perennial cause of antagonism, and morally or physically I knew it would be her ruin' (letter of 1 Jan 1851, 'Mazzini's Letters to an English Family', 1.185-6). Several months later her body was returned to Britain and buried in the family vault at Highgate cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 42331


Barrie, Michael Maltman (1842-1909), journalist and tory-Marxist, was born in Glasgow, the son of Edward Barry, a shoemaker. Little is known of his early life except that he was educated at Glasgow grammar school. In 1864 he moved to London and became a journalist on 'The Standard', a newspaper with which he was to be associated throughout his life, although he also worked for other papers. Barry reported from the parliamentary gallery and lobby as well as covering labour matters. On 19 July 1869 he married, at the Bloomsbury chapel, Julia Charlotte, daughter of Robert London, cheesemonger. 
In the later 1860s Barry entered radical circles in London and became a friend of Karl Marx, who provided him with information for newspaper articles and who was to become his patron on the left. Barry stood out among radicals because of his hostility to the Gladstonian sympathies of most contemporary labour leaders. Barry was converted to Marx's views and on Marx's death he told Eleanor Marx that 'he was more than my master, he was my political maker' (C. Tsuzuki, 'The Life of Eleanor Marx, 1855-1898', 1967, 71). 
In October 1871 Barry became provisional chairman of the federal council of the International Working Men's Association (IWMA). His chairmanship was largely negative and the following year, after intriguing against other members, he was forced to leave amid accusations that he was a spy and an 'ultra moderate'. He published (1873) a report of the IWMA's fifth annual congress, held at The Hague in September 1872. Despite his acrimonious relationship with the IWMA, Barry became a notable figure in London's radical clubs of the 1870s both as an activist and as a speaker at meetings. In 1876 he edited 'The People's Advocate', a radical paper that advocated land nationalization, republicanism, and Irish nationalism but which lasted only five issues. 
In the later 1870s Barry apparently began his shift towards the Conservative Party without relinquishing his Marxism. This was partly because of his hostility to Liberalism, partly because of the Conservatives' record on social reform, and partly because of his support for Beaconsfield's foreign policy during the Eastern crisis of 1875-8. Barry became an extreme Russophobe, and supported Turkish resistance to Russian intervention. He launched the small-scale radical anti-Russian movement that attempted to capitalize on the jingoism of these years. Barry actually claimed that Marx himself taught him to be a jingo. Barry became secretary of the National Society for the Resistance of Russian Aggression and the Protection of British Interests in the East and organized a series of meetings in 1876 and 1877, several of which ended in riot. He published 'The Catechism of the Eastern Question' (1890). 
In the early 1880s Barry became active in Conservative Party circles, and attended meetings of the National Union of Conservative Associations. At the same time he became an ally of Henry Hyde Champion in advocating the formation of an independent political party for working-class representation. The two were involved in the 'tory gold' scandal of November 1885, in which Barry received $340 from Conservative central office to fund two candidates of the Social Democratic Federation in the general election. The Conservatives hoped to split the Liberal-radical vote but the candidates polled badly. The ensuing crisis harmed the reputation of the Social Democratic Federation but also reinforced Barry's reputation for untrustworthiness. 
Barry had by this time become involved in the politics of his native Scotland and changed his name to the Scottish spelling, Barrie. In 1888 he edited 'The Labour Elector' (which lasted for two years) and, with Champion, attempted to launch an anti-Liberal alliance of labour based in Aberdeen. In August 1890 he addressed the Aberdeen Trades Council, advocating an eight-hour day and a halt to alien immigration (he was an antisemite). In July 1892 he unsuccessfully contested Banffshire as a Conservative Democrat. 'The Labour Elector' was revived in January 1893 with a local supplement for Aberdeen. It was as short-lived as its predecessor, and lasted only until July 1894. The paper supported the newly formed Independent Labour Party. Standing as a Conservative, Barrie contested Morpeth in 1895 and 1900, in opposition to Thomas Burt, and North Aberdeen in 1906. On each occasion he was defeated. He died of pneumonia on 5 April 1909 at his home, Roseneath, 51 Beauval Road, East Dulwich, London, and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. His wife, two sons, and two daughters survived him. 
Barrie's tory-Marxism marks him out as an eccentric in the early labour movement, but he was not wholly unusual. Henry Hyndman among other early socialists also had strong tory leanings. Barrie is usually derided as an opportunist but his constant attachment to Marxism suggests he was more principled than his detractors allow. His main importance was as a journalist covering labour affairs and as an advocate of independent working-class representation. 


@@@@@


doc= 42333


Johnstone, Henry Alexander Butler- (1837-1902), politician, was born in Edinburgh on 7 December 1837, the only son of the Hon. Henry Butler-Johnstone (1809-1879) and his wife, Isabella, only daughter of Sir Alexander Munro. She was the niece and heir of General Johnstone of Auchen Castle in Dumfriesshire, which Butler-Johnstone inherited. In 1874, following the death of his mother the previous year, Butler-Johnstone adopted the surname Butler-Munro-Johnstone. He was educated at Eton College and matriculated in 1856 at Christ Church, Oxford, where he gained a first in classics in 1861. In May 1862 he was elected as Conservative MP for Canterbury, the constituency that his father had represented between 1857 and 1859. He spoke against the extension of the franchise during the parliamentary debates of 1866-7. Otherwise he often supported liberal causes, such as the disestablishment of the Irish church. In his pamphlet 'Ireland' (1868) he rejected demands for the creation of an Irish republic but allowed the possibility that a Dublin parliament might be created with powers to legislate on specifically domestic issues, as long as Westminster retained control of financial and foreign policy matters. After 1868 he declared himself independent of any party identification. 
Butler-Johnstone's main interest as an MP was foreign affairs. He urged a maritime alliance with France and was on the council of the Maritime League for the Resumption of Naval Rights, a pressure group demanding Britain's withdrawal from the declaration of Paris (1856) with its abolition of privateering. He was an ardent imperialist and advocated the maintenance of a strong army and navy. During the Eastern crisis of 1875-8 he became a leading Russophobe and philo-Turk, influenced by David Urquhart. He warned against Russia obtaining access to the Dardanelles and supported the work of Turkish constitutional reformers. In 1876 he answered Gladstone's pamphlet on the Bulgarian atrocities by denying the responsibility of the Turkish government and by claiming that Gladstone's portrait of the Turks was a travesty. In 'The Turks' (1876) he countered the popular view of the Turks as barbarians and went on to defend such institutions as the harem (which he pointed out was only the name for a Turkish home). During the Russo-Turkish War, he actually lent money to the Turkish government for attacks on the Russian army and sent over military advisers (who were not employed). He resigned his parliamentary seat in 1878 in order to visit Turkey but later came to despair of the nation. 
In the early 1880s Butler-Johnstone became an acquaintance of Karl Marx. He gave his friend Henry Hyndman a copy of 'Das Kapital', which led to Hyndman's conversion to Marxism. Butler-Johnstone was present in 1881 at the early meetings of the Democratic Federation, which was to become the Social Democratic Federation in 1884, the first major organization in the revival of British socialism. However, it seems unlikely that Butler-Johnstone was ever a socialist. 
On 17 November 1877 Butler-Johnstone married Maria Irma Gabrielle, countess of Soyres, who died in 1880. In 1896 he married a widow, Mrs Skipp Lloyd. He was a JP for Dumfriesshire, where he owned nearly 3000 acres, though he spent the last twenty years of his life on the continent, writing for British and European newspapers on the need for a British imperial federation. Butler-Johnstone died at a hotel in Paris on 17 October 1902; his body was returned to England. Butler-Johnstone was a maverick figure on the right who ironically played a brief role in the origins of British socialism. At one time, he was 'the hope of the Conservative party' according to Henry Hyndman, who believed that he misused his talents and 'made a sad end of his promising life' (Hyndman, 207, 209). 


@@@@@


doc= 42334


Clarke, William (1852-1901), journalist and socialist, was born on 22 November 1852 in Norwich, the son of John Scott Clarke, a small businessman of Scottish background, and his wife, Mary Ann Pigg. He attended King Edward VI Commercial School in Norwich and then a private school in Cambridge, where his family moved in 1866. In 1872, after working for several years as a clerk, he entered Cambridge University as a non-collegiate student. He remained in Cambridge after he graduated in 1876, supporting himself as a lecturer and writer. After travelling widely in the United States in 1881-2, he settled in London as a freelance journalist. 
As a young man, Clarke supported political radicalism, particularly universal manhood suffrage -- women, he believed, lacked men's 'intellectual power' and were destined by 'Nature' to care for family and household -- and free trade: he saw England's 'feudal and monarchical remains' as the main obstacles to the 'free growth of the New Commonwealth' (W. Clarke, 'The future of the Canadian dominion', 'Contemporary Review', 38, November 1880, 819). In the democratic United States he saw proof that such a commonwealth could be created. 
In the early 1880s Clarke gradually moved from radicalism to socialism. He became more concerned with poverty, less with issues such as religious equality or temperance. Carlyle, Ruskin, and other Victorian social critics, as well as Mazzini, helped him to reject bourgeois individualism as 'the evil of the nineteenth century' (W. Clarke, 'Walt Whitman', 1892, 34). Events in Ireland showed him how existing economic arrangements could be altered beneficially, while Henry George influenced him to support land nationalization. Above all, the growth of political corruption and monopoly capitalism in the United States led him, as he wrote in 1884, to 'take stock of [his] whole category of political beliefs and to revise [his] judgments' (W. Clarke to H. D. Lloyd, 22 Oct 1884, Henry Demarest Lloyd MSS). 
While undergoing this political metamorphosis, Clarke had a spiritual crisis. He had steadily moved away from his youthful evangelicalism, as an undergraduate to Unitarianism and in the late 1870s to Emersonian transcendentalism. Between 1882 and 1884, however, he temporarily lost all faith, much to his dismay. He overcame this crisis through membership of the Progressive Association, a utopian ethical society that sought to stimulate a 'moral awakening' as the basis of 'political and social improvement' (Mackenzie and Mackenzie, 21), and through the influence of the philosopher Thomas Davidson, who helped him to find in social reform and progress a secular substitute for his lost faith. 
In late 1883 Clarke and some members of the association founded the Fellowship of the New Life to cultivate 'a perfect character in each and all' by subordinating 'material things to Spiritual' (W. Knight, ed., 'Memorials of Thomas Davidson', 1907, 19). Other members, however, wanted to engage social issues more directly and in January 1884 branched off to found the Fabian Society. Although Clarke participated in the Fabian-dominated Hampstead Historic Club, which undertook a systematic study of Marx's 'Capital', he only joined the Fabian Society in 1886, after he had become convinced that socialism was a 'truly spiritual question' and that only a radical reorganization of society would free men to develop their 'moral natures' (W. Clarke, 'Ethical societies and the labour question', 'Ethical Record', 3, July 1890, 92, 103). 
Clarke's most important contribution to early Fabian socialism was an analysis of the evolution of monopoly capitalism that he derived from Marx and his own observations of the United States. He presented this analysis in 'The industrial basis of socialism', his contribution to the famous 1889 'Fabian Essays in Socialism', where he argued that the economic process itself had made possible the future 'Co-operative Commonwealth' because corporations were now run by professional managers and could therefore be taken over by the state without any loss of efficiency. 
Like most Fabians, Clarke had looked to the Liberal Party, rather than an independent socialist organization, to bring about reform. But after the Liberal defeat of 1895 he and like-minded reformers founded the 'Progressive Review', with Clarke as editor, to facilitate the creation of a new 'progressive' party. When the 'Review' failed after little more than a year, Clarke became increasingly bitter and disillusioned. He had already drifted away from the Fabian Society because it failed to fulfil his fundamental spiritual and ethical goals. Now the collapse of his own political project and the growth of imperialist sentiment, which he abhorred, filled him with such despair that he withdrew from active involvement in political causes to concern himself with philosophy and art. Politics and economics he now saw as 'barren questions' (W. Clarke to S. Webb, 21 Nov 1899, Passfield MSS). He resigned from the Fabians in June 1897. For Clarke, both democratic radicalism and socialism had been a kind of religious faith. When the grounds of that faith, visible progress toward a spiritual ideal, failed, so did Clarke's belief in it. 'The masses are such fools' (W. Clarke to H. D. Lloyd, Henry Demarest Lloyd MSS), he wrote in 1897. 
The bitterness of Clarke's last years was made worse by serious physical and emotional illness. A diabetic, he was subject to bouts of influenza and insomnia. Prone to self-pity, he complained frequently about his own lack of success and need to work so hard. In his last years, he suffered as well from serious depression, made worse by loneliness, the death of his mother, and financial setbacks. His life at times, he wrote, was 'well nigh insupportable' (W. Clarke to H. D. Lloyd, 25 Jan 1894, Henry Demarest Lloyd MSS). Clarke died, unmarried, on 8 May 1901 in Mostar, Herzegovina, while on holiday in south-east Europe. 
Clarke's importance lies in his contribution to Fabian socialism and to the 'new Liberalism' that emerged after 1906; his life also exemplifies the vicissitudes of late Victorian radicalism and loss of faith. 


@@@@@


doc= 42335


Cleave, John (1794/5-1850), radical publisher, was born probably in Ireland and certainly of Irish parents. It is known that he served in the navy and visited America; otherwise his early life is obscure. By 1828 he was working as editorial assistant on the 'Weekly Free Press', a London radical paper. Soon afterwards he became a committee member of the British Association for Promoting Co-operative Knowledge. Here he met Henry Hetherington, William Lovett, and James Watson, who were to remain his closest friends and political associates. Cleave led the Westminster Co-operative Society, the largest in London, supporting himself through a coffee house and radical news room in Smithfield. Politically, he supported Henry Hunt, through the Radical Reform Association and the Metropolitan Political Union. Becoming more militant he achieved national prominence as an organizer, speaker, and provincial lecturer for the National Union of the Working Classes (1831-5). Here his republicanism, Irish nationalism, and support for the unstamped press were much in evidence. The 1832 'Reform Act' he simply dismissed as 'the production and idol of the enemies of the working classes', declaring that 'a war between labour and property had commenced' ('Poor Man's Guardian', 23 June 1832). In 1834 he visited northern industrial centres in a covert attempt to maintain the revolutionary momentum briefly achieved by Owenism in its trade unionist phase. 
As a Baptist, Cleave sought to exclude religious controversy from political proceedings. Equally he was strongly opposed to 'the odious Law Established Church' ('Poor Man's Guardian', 29 Sept 1832), a stance plainly evident in 'A Slap at the Church', a periodical he assisted in 1832. When it closed Cleave helped Watson edit the republican 'Working Man's Friend'. When this, too, folded he moved to another unstamped paper, Charles Penny's 'People's Police Gazette' ('a most disgusting mass of trash and depravity', according to 'Tait's Edinburgh Magazine', new ser., 1, 1834, 734). This proved a seminal career move. In January 1834 he commenced newspaper publishing on his own account with 'Cleave's Weekly Press Gazette', a move designed, successfully, to drive Penny out of business. With Hetherington, Cleave became one of the folk heroes of the unstamped press. He was twice imprisoned for his newspaper activities (briefly -- on each occasion the fine he refused to pay was met by admirers). The circulation of the paper reached 30,000-40,000, according to a supportive Edward Bulwer-Lytton ('Hansard 3', 30, 18 Aug 1834, 624). Principled yet populist, it was the most successful unstamped paper and it laid the basis for Cleave's subsequent career. 
In June 1837 Cleave was one of the six working men who first signed the 'People's Charter'. He toured England as a missionary for the London Working Men's Association, sometimes in the company of his future son-in-law Henry Vincent, whose temperance views he shared. But, like Lovett's, Cleave's revolutionary fervour began to dim. He signed Lovett's call for the 'new move' and joined his National Association. He also published the moderate 'English Chartist Circular' (1841-3), closely associated with so-called 'moral force' Chartism. Yet Cleave sat on the executive of the National Charter Association, was London agent for the 'Northern Star', and stood surety for Fergus O'Connor at his trial in 1842. He did not break with O'Connor until 1847. Perhaps the explanation for this balancing act lay in Cleave's business acumen. He was now relatively affluent and his news agency made him indispensable to O'Connor. Increasingly his political energies were eroded by the time he devoted to publishing, especially once he turned to fiction. Cleave revealed a scant regard for the niceties of intellectual property in an output dominated by pirated Gothic romances. As early as February 1838 'Cleave's London Satirist' had carried lengthy transcripts of Dickens's 'Oliver Twist' (along with pastiche material by 'Bos' and advertisements for works by 'Poz'). Cleave continued to publish other material, however, including birth-control literature, Owen's 'New Moral World', and several more ephemeral socialist periodicals. Another reason for his lower political profile was a personal scandal: in 1840 Cleave apparently introduced his mistress into his marital home. His wife, Mary Ann Cleave, who had hitherto been a strong supporter of his endeavours, suffered a nervous breakdown shortly afterwards. It was an unsatisfactory context within which to pursue the politics of moral persuasion. She, however, survived him; he died at his home, 22 Stanhope Street, London, on 19 January 1850. 
Cleave's career presents several contradictions. He was an avowed Christian, yet closely associated with Owenite socialism. He was cut-throat in business yet readily sustained heavy losses as a political publisher. His cultivation of a democratic readership required a catholicity of taste too generous for stringent reformers. He was a friend of O'Connor and Lovett yet cannot readily be placed in either strand of Chartism they epitomize. In this he was perhaps closer to grass-roots opinion than historians have allowed, which mirrors his shrewd assessment of the English common reader. 


@@@@@


doc= 42336


Collet, Collet Dobson (1812-1898), radical and tax reformer, was born on 31 December 1812 in London. He was the eldest son of John Dobson (1778-1827), a London merchant, and his wife (and first cousin), Elizabeth Barker (1787-1875). Collet assumed the name of his maternal grandparents, as did his sister, Sophia Dobson Collet. He was educated at Bruce Castle School, north London, and then studied law at University College, London, where he took third prize in the subject in 1833. Lacking the independent means that would have enabled him to study at the bar, Collet instead pursued musical studies at the Royal Academy of Music, and was a member of the choir at Drury Lane, under William Macready, and then at the Royal Opera House in Covent Garden. In 1841 he was appointed director of the choir at South Place Chapel, Finsbury Square, then under the ministry of W. J. Fox. 
At South Place, Collet began his lifelong association with the milieu of Finsbury radicalism. In February 1848 he went to Paris with W. J. Linton and other members of the Democratic Committee of Observation of the French Revolution in order to congratulate the French on the overthrow of Louis-Philippe and the declaration of the republic. Back in London in April 1848, Collet joined with other Finsbury radicals in the People's Charter Union (PCU), the main purpose of which was to oppose Feargus O'Connor's leadership of the Chartist movement. In February 1851 the PCU evolved into the Association for Promoting the Repeal of the Taxes on Knowledge (APRTK), and Collet became its secretary. 
Supported in parliament by Thomas Milner Gibson and Richard Cobden, the association spearheaded the campaign to repeal those remaining indirect taxes which affected the newspapers -- not only the newspaper stamp itself, but also the advertisement and paper duties. The association also campaigned against the security system, which in order to discourage libel and blasphemy required that newspapers be registered so as to make proof of liability easier. Collet and, to a lesser extent, Richard Moore, undertook virtually all of the organization of the association themselves. Collet gave evidence to the select committee on the newspaper stamp in 1851, and during 1853-4 deliberately tested the limits of the law by publishing (along with G. J. Holyoake) unstamped papers that carried news. The duty on advertisements in newspapers was abolished in 1853 and the stamp duty in 1855. In 1854 Collet married Mrs Jane Marshall, 'nee' Sloan, widow of a Dunfermline newspaper proprietor. 
During the Crimean War, much to his colleagues' surprise, Collet became associated with David Urquhart, the Russophobe and vehement enemy of Lord Palmerston. Collet joined with Urquhart in the Turkish Association, and then in August 1855, when the Urquhartite 'Free Press' moved from Sheffield to London, he became its editor (and, when it became the 'Diplomatic Review', its publisher as well), a connection he retained for over twenty years. Collet also became Urquhart's unofficial secretary, dealing with the correspondence and the organization of the self-styled working men's foreign affairs committees which were established between the mid-1850s and early 1860s. Collet's work with the 'Diplomatic Review' brought him into contact with Karl Marx, and during the 1860s and 1870s the two men's families became friendly with one another. 
When the 'Diplomatic Review' folded in 1877, Collet found another outlet for his considerable propagandist energies. In October 1877 he became secretary of the Travelling Tax Abolition Committee, which was set up to press for the repeal of the railway (and tramway) passenger duty -- a repeal which had been recommended by a parliamentary select committee in 1876. The publicity that the committee gave to the issue undoubtedly contributed to the partial repeal of the duty in 1883. 
Collet's journalism spanned some forty years, and a handful of newspapers and reviews. As well as publishing the 'Potteries Free Press', and editing the 'Diplomatic Review' and the APRTK's 'Gazette', and the Travelling Tax Abolition Committee's 'Gazette', he also contributed to G. J. Holyoake's 'The Reasoner', the 'Industrial Review' (formerly 'The Beehive'), the 'Anglo-American Times', and 'Vanity Fair' (as Diplomaticus). He was a well-known music critic, and wrote for the 'Musical World'. (He also sang in the annual Handel festival at the Crystal Palace until well into his eighties.) Collet wrote a number of pamphlets connected with the campaign to repeal the passenger duty, and towards the end of his life he wrote what remains a worthy account of the repeal of the newspaper taxes: 'History of the Taxes on Knowledge' (2 vols., 1899). 
Collet died three days short of his eighty-sixth birthday at 7 Coleridge Road, his home in Finsbury, on 28 December 1898; he was survived by his wife. Among their five children were Clara Elizabeth Collet (1860-1948), the educationist, and Wilfred Collet (1856-1929), the colonial administrator, who was created KCMG in 1915. 


@@@@@


doc= 42337


Gast, John (c.1772-1837), trade unionist and radical, was born in Bristol, the son of Robert Gast, a seller of milk. He had at least two brothers, and at some time married Elizabeth, who outlived him, but nothing else is known of his family. Soon after finishing his apprenticeship he left Bristol, and after a short spell at Portsmouth Royal Dockyard in 1797, where he acted as the workers' spokesman in complaints against one of the quartermen, he went to London. He worked there in the Thames dockyards for the rest of his life. He was a leader in the great shipwrights' strike of 1802, of which he wrote and published a remarkable account; he also became a publican between 1810 and 1812, and was for a time a dissenting preacher in Deptford. In 1814 he was imprisoned for fortune-telling. 
As a political reformer, Gast organized support for Sir Samuel Romilly in his candidacy at Bristol in the 1812 general election, but voted for both Romilly and the more radical Henry Hunt, whose ally he became. In 1818 he led the formation of the Philanthropic Hercules, a very early attempt at a general union of trades, a cause he supported for the rest of his career. He also became a leading member of the group of radical revolutionaries led by James Watson and Arthur Thistlewood that eventually in 1820 organized the Cato Street conspiracy, although it is unclear how far Gast was involved in this. He then took the leading role in organizing artisan support for the great campaign in favour of Queen Caroline against her husband, George IV. 
In 1824 Gast was one of the leaders of the new Thames shipwrights' union, which organized a great strike in 1825. Gast also formed a committee of trades' delegates in 1825 to campaign against the move to repeal the legalization of trade unions the previous year. This committee went on to establish the world's first trade union paper, the 'Trades' Newspaper', of which Gast was manager. In the later 1820s he formed a new general trades organization, and was also one of the leaders in a campaign that in 1828 secured the defeat of a bill to control friendly societies; they went on to draw up a bill of their own, which was passed into law in 1829. In 1830 he was active in the new co-operative movement, and a deist lecturer in a group of radicals, freethinkers, Spenceans, and Owenites that met at various places during the next few years. He was also a prominent member of the National Union of the Working Classes between 1831 and 1833, and in 1836 was a founder member of the London Working Men's Association that drew up the famous 'People's Charter'. 
Gast died of a cerebral haemorrhage at Rotherhithe on 5 November 1837, after a long and exceptionally full career that made him one of the outstanding working-class leaders of his time and a pioneer of the labour movement. 


@@@@@


doc= 42338


Glasier, Katharine St John Bruce (1867-1950), socialist and politician, was born on 25 September 1867 in Stoke Newington, London. She was the second of seven children of Samuel Conway, a Congregationalist minister based at Ongar, Essex, and his wife, Amy ('nee' Curling), of a well-to-do Stoke Newington family. The classical scholar Robert Seymour Conway was her elder brother. She was christened Katharine St John (pronounced 'Saint John') Conway. 
The family moved to the Congregationalist manse in Walthamstow when Katharine was young. Although by middle-class standards her father's income was low, she and her brother and sisters were brought up with the assistance of servants. She was taught by her mother until ten, when she went to Hackney High School for Girls. In 1886 she went to Newnham College, Cambridge, with a clothworkers' scholarship in classics. There she was influenced by Helen Gladstone, who held strong high-church and feminist views. In 1889 she was placed in the second class of the classical tripos. Although Cambridge University refused to award degrees to women, Conway thereafter usually listed BA after her name in defiance of this sexual discrimination. 
Conway went to Bristol to teach at Redland high school. While senior classics mistress there, she became a socialist after witnessing striking female cottonworkers demonstrating during a service in All Saints, Clifton, in November 1890. She was briefly a member of the Bristol Socialist Society, an offshoot of the Marxist Social Democratic Federation (SDF). After leaving Redland high school, having either resigned or been sacked for attending a socialist meeting, she taught briefly, from autumn 1891, at a board school in the working-class St Phillips area of Bristol. That autumn she went to live with Dan Irving, a leading Bristol socialist, his invalid wife, and their children. 
Conway joined the Clifton and Bristol branch of the Fabian Society, a branch which before 1891 had been a Christian socialist society. As a daughter of Congregationalist manses, she found the views of this group more congenial than the class-war beliefs of the SDF. Edward Pease, the secretary of the Fabian Society, later commented of such early branches that they were 'from the first 'ILP' in personnel and policy and were Fabian only in name' ('The History of the Fabian Society', 1916, 102). 
Conway was soon put on the national panel of Fabian lecturers by W. S. De Mattos, the society's lecture secretary. She lectured for the Fabians from the autumn of 1891, and did so on a regular basis from April 1892; she received 5's'. a lecture plus travel and other expenses. She was a Bristol delegate at the Fabian Society's first annual conference in February 1892. Afterwards she became a member of a group of provincial Fabians, who were among the founders of the Independent Labour Party, a group started by S. G. Hobson, a fellow member of the Bristol Socialist Society. Conway's speaking engagements in 1892 included general election meetings in support of Ben Tillett in Bradford, the Manchester Labour church, and fringe meetings at the Trades Union Congress (TUC) held in September in Glasgow (where she first met John Bruce Glasier). 
At a separate meeting held during the TUC, she was one of six appointed to an arrangements committee to organize a conference to found a national Independent Labour Party (ILP). At the resulting conference held in Bradford in January 1893 she was one of fifteen elected to the ILP's first national administrative council. Although she did not stand for re-election, she remained a leading figure. Of the ILP's early days, Henry Pelling has observed that 'the 'new woman' was almost as important an element in the leadership as the new unionist' (Pelling, 164). Katharine Conway, like Caroline Martyn, Enid Stacy, Isabella Ford, and Emmeline Pankhurst, was an able middle-class propagandist for the party. Her speeches were highly emotional, preaching an ethical 'Come-unto-Jesus' style of socialism. She was much influenced by Edward Carpenter and William Morris. Of the former she wrote that 'he gave me Jesus Christ's teaching in its wholeness and truth for the first time'. 
She continued making lengthy speaking tours after her marriage on 21 June 1893 to John Bruce Glasier. Both she and her husband were great favourites of socialists in west Yorkshire, Nottinghamshire, and elsewhere. She also campaigned for nursery schools, pithead baths, poor-law reform, and, later, the Save the Children Fund. 
Katharine Glasier edited the 'Labour Leader' from mid-1916, after Fenner Brockway left to oppose conscription, until April 1921. She took over when its anti-war stance had reduced its circulation. Under her editorship it reached a new peak of 51,000 in 1917 and by early 1918 its circulation was over 62,000, but from 1920 it fell steeply. Her editorship was notable for a clash with Philip Snowden, with Glasier dissociating herself from his anti-Bolshevik writings. The strains of the editorship plus the delayed stress of nursing her terminally ill husband led to a nervous breakdown in April 1921. After her recovery she was appointed national ILP propagandist. When the ILP disaffiliated from the Labour Party in 1932, she left it and continued her propaganda work for the Labour Party. 
Katharine Glasier combined her activities as socialist propagandist with family life. She had three children: Jeannie, Malcolm, and John Glendower (Glen). She was much hurt by the deaths of her mother (1881), her husband (1920), and her younger son, Glen (1928). Like her husband, she aspired to be a poet. As well as socialist pamphlets she published three novels ('Husband and Brother', 1894; 'Aimee Furniss, Scholar', 1896; and 'Marget', 1902-3) and a collection of short stories ('Tales from the Derbyshire Hills', 1907). In later life she found support not only in her socialist faith but in her memberships of the Society of Friends and the Theosophical Society. Her home, Glen Cottage, Earby by Colne, Lancashire, where she lived from 1922 until her death on 14 June 1950, was preserved in her memory by the labour movement. 


@@@@@


doc= 42339


Hammond, (John) Lawrence Le Breton (1872-1949), historian and journalist, was born on 18 July 1872 at Drighlington, Yorkshire, the second of the eight children of Vavasour Fitz Hammond Hammond (1842-1897), the local rector, and his wife, Caroline (1849-1925). Neither parent was from Yorkshire. Caroline Hammond had grown up in Wimborne, Dorset, where her father, William George Webb, was a maltster. Vavasour Fitz Hammond Hammond was from Jersey, where his father, John Hammond, was bailiff, the highest-ranking civil officer on the island. Drighlington at the time of Hammond's birth was a mere village, but it lay within 5 miles of both Bradford and Leeds, the twin centres of the still-thriving woollen and worsted trades. Politically, Drighlington formed part of the Spen valley division and shared its Liberal commitment. Hammond's father, a keen home-ruler and a member of the Liberal Churchmen's Union, made Gladstone into 'a sort of fourth person of the Trinity' (Weaver, 11), and Hammond himself, from a very early age, felt some confusion over the distinction between God and the Grand Old Man. His earliest memories, he once recalled, were of the early stages of the home-rule struggle. Gladstone's speeches, along with the letters of Joseph Mazzini, the Italian nationalist, and the sermons of F. D. Maurice, the English Christian socialist, made up his earliest serious reading. 
From 1886 to 1891 Hammond attended Bradford grammar school where, along with his friend and classmate Sir William Rothenstein, he earned a reputation as a fiery radical. He went up to St John's College, Oxford, in 1891, to read classics with Sidney Ball, the Fabian disciple of T. H. Green and the recognized leader of university socialism. Ball's was a formative influence; 'I cannot imagine', Hammond later wrote, 'what my Oxford life would have been like without him' (Weaver, 265). But collectivism generally was on the wane among undergraduates in the early 1890s. A Liberal revival was under way in which Hammond, together with his friends J. A. Simon, Francis Hirst, and Hilaire Belloc, played a prominent part. An accomplished debater, Hammond was elected secretary of the Oxford Union in November 1894. This and the presidency of the Palmerston Club distracted him from his studies, and Hammond went down with a disappointing second in Greats in 1895. 
Shortly thereafter, he succeeded Tom Ellis, the new chief Liberal whip, as private secretary to Sir John Brunner, co-founder of Brunner, Mond & Co. and Liberal MP for the Cheshire division of Northwich. Hammond's first book was a revision of Brunner's 'Education in Cheshire' (1896). In 1897 he contributed to the 'Essays in Liberalism by Six Oxford Men' and started writing leaders for the 'Leeds Mercury' and the 'Liverpool Post'. His life in journalism began in earnest two years later, when he assumed the editorship of 'The Speaker', a weekly alternative to the Liberal Unionist 'Spectator'. At a time when imperialism was all the rage, the vital stuff of tabloid sensation, Hammond courageously upheld an older, nationalist tradition. Week in and week out he provided a forum for J. A. Hobson, L. T. Hobhouse, John Morley, James Bryce, and other 'pro-Boers', who opposed the war in South Africa and deplored the army's resort to what Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman famously called 'methods of barbarism'. With Francis Hirst and Gilbert Murray, the prodigal classicist-cum-liberal internationalist who was to prove a lifelong friend, Hammond at the same time joined in the writing of 'Liberalism and the Empire' (1900), a lonely protest in the name of reason against the imperialist excesses of the age. 
In 1901 Hammond married (Lucy) Barbara Bradby [(Lucy) Barbara Hammond (1873-1961)], the seventh and last child of the Revd Edward Henry Bradby (1826-1893) and his wife, Ellen Johnson (1836-1918). Born on 25 July 1873, Barbara (as she was always called) Hammond had grown up at Haileybury College, where her father, a product of Thomas Arnold's Rugby and Benjamin Jowett's Balliol, was headmaster. When aged ten she had moved with her family to Toynbee Hall, Samuel Barnett's mission settlement in Whitechapel, London, and there been steeped in the late Victorian culture of altruism. After rigorous training in the corporate virtues at Jane Frances Dove's pioneer boarding-school for girls, St Leonard's, at St Andrews, Fife, she followed her sister Dorothy to Oxford, entering Lady Margaret Hall in 1892. Besides meeting Lawrence Hammond she studied with L. T. Hobhouse and was the first woman to earn first-class honours in both classical moderations and Greats. As ardent a Liberal as her husband, she too was a committed 'pro-Boer', a suffragist, and a pillar of the Women's Industrial Council until 1905, when ovarian tuberculosis forced a move from Battersea Park to Hampstead and condemned the Hammonds to childlessness. 
It was only on coming down from Oxford in what he later regarded as an appalling state of ignorance that Lawrence Hammond began to read history in any systematic way. His first historical work was an admiring, not to say worshipful, study of 'Charles James Fox' (1903). Journalism remained his main occupation until 1907, when he surrendered the editorship of 'The Speaker' (henceforth 'The Nation') to H. W. Massingham and became secretary to the civil service commission, a post that evidently (and somewhat scandalously) afforded sufficient leisure for his scholarship. In perfect partnership -- hers the research, his the writing, in the main -- the Hammonds now entered into an intensive study of the social history of the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. The first fruit of their collaboration was 'The Village Labourer' (1911), a passionate indictment of the socially dislocating effects of eighteenth-century enclosure, which long remained the most widely read work of English rural history. 
In 1912, after seven years in Hampstead, the Hammonds retreated further from London still, to Oatfield, a farmhouse at Piccotts End near Hemel Hempstead, Hertfordshire. Though handsome and vigorous people -- Barbara especially was known for her intensely penetrating blue eyes and her beautifully abundant, copper-red hair -- they were never robust, and Oatfield became their sanatorium, a refuge from the miseries and miasmas of the world. Lawrence Hammond's work took him frequently to town, but apart from occasional forays to the Public Record Office, Barbara Hammond avoided it as much as possible, always preferring the quiet of Oatfield, where between paragraphs she pottered about an extensive garden, tended all manner of domestic animals, and brilliantly maintained a caustic correspondence with a wide circle of family members and friends. 
At war's outbreak in 1914, Lawrence Hammond, after much political soul-searching, accepted a commission in the Royal Field Artillery. He was an indifferent soldier, however, and in July 1916, on being declared unfit for service overseas, he left the army for Asquith's committee on (later ministry of) reconstruction. Here he joined Vaughan Nash, Edwin Montagu, Beatrice Webb, and others in the work (as Beatrice Webb described it) of 'surveying and unravelling the whole tangle of governmental activities introduced by the war' (Weaver, 132). Barbara Hammond, meanwhile, brought to completion the book that remains 'the classic study of the social and economic conditions of the working people during the industrial revolution' (Clarke, 189): 'The Town Labourer' (1917). Appearing when it did, in the gloomy depths of the First World War, this famous indictment of the excessively commercial spirit of one age contributed decisively to the socialist spirit of another. With the publication of 'The Skilled Labourer' two years later, the Hammonds completed their famous trilogy -- the effect of which was massively to confirm the catastrophic version of the industrial era -- and established themselves as the leading social historians of their time. 
Lawrence Hammond returned to journalism in 1919 as special correspondent to the Paris peace conference for the 'Manchester Guardian', C. P. Scott's great Liberal daily. Discouraged by the vengeful spirit of the proceedings, he wrote his own J. M. Keynes-like denunciation of the treaty of Versailles, and then turned his mind to Ireland, past and present. In two famous 'Nation' supplements of 1921, he exposed both the futility and the barbarity of the Anglo-Irish war and contributed to the change of heart that brought Lloyd George to the negotiating table. Hammond covered the negotiations ending the war for the 'Manchester Guardian', met and admired Michael Collins, and for the next two years conspicuously supported Collins's effort to reconcile Ireland to partition and dominion status. 
The labourer trilogy, meanwhile, had led the Hammonds naturally to their interestingly ambivalent life of 'Lord Shaftesbury' (1923) and to 'The Rise of Modern Industry' (1925), a work of synthesis that R. H. Tawney once described as 'the most instructive and most original introduction to the social and economic aspects of history available in English' (Weaver, 187). But Tawney was a friend and like-minded admirer. In truth, the Hammonds were liberal moralists whose economic arguments were coming under increasingly critical scrutiny in the 1920s by a new generation of more statistically minded historians led by J. H. Clapham. In the first volume of his 'Economic History of Modern Britain' (1926), Clapham assailed 'the legend that everything was getting worse for the working man' in the early nineteenth century and in its place made the statistical case for material improvement. This the Hammonds ultimately begrudgingly conceded, but only after falling back on the more qualitative genealogy of misery that was to inform their last substantial collaborative effort, 'The Age of the Chartists' (1930). 
In belated tribute to their collaboration, the University of Oxford conferred honorary degrees on both Hammonds simultaneously in 1933. Barbara Hammond was by then at work on her never-to-be-published history of commons preservation, Lawrence Hammond on his magisterial study 'Gladstone and the Irish Nation' (1938, reissued with an introduction by M. R. D. Foot, 1964). Conceived and commissioned as a vindication of Gladstone's Irish policy, this great work remains 'the most striking of many works treating aspects of Gladstone's later career' (Matthew, 395); but, appearing as it did in the shadow of the Munich crisis, it found few readers at the time and it remained the least known of Hammond's major works. 
At the outbreak of the Second World War in September 1939, the Hammonds let their house at Hemel Hempstead and moved to Manchester, where Lawrence Hammond, now aged sixty-seven, assumed a permanent place on the staff of the 'Manchester Guardian'. A lifelong Francophile, he was pained by Vichy, an aberration born of a moment of national bewilderment, he felt, and for four long years he sustained an encouraging series of leaders subsequently published under the suggestive title 'Faith in France' (1948). Twice in his life, in 1931 and 1946, Hammond declined honours from his own government, but he proudly accepted appointment to the French Legion d'honneur in 1948. An honorary fellow of St John's College, Oxford, since 1937, he was elected to a fellowship of the British Academy in 1942 and received a second honorary degree of DLitt, from the University of Manchester, in 1944. 
The Hammonds returned to Oatfield at the end of the war in 1945. Despite the modest reception accorded 'Gladstone and the Irish Nation', Hammond had not despaired of his romantic notion of bringing the wisdom of Gladstone to bear on his own illiberal age, and in 1946 he began a short life of the Grand Old Man that he did not live to complete. (Eventually completed by M. R. D. Foot, it appeared posthumously as 'Gladstone and Liberalism' in 1952.) A long-time sufferer from angina and related maladies, Lawrence Hammond died of heart failure at Oatfield on 7 April 1949. Barbara Hammond survived him, and everyone else she knew, by many years, dying sadly demented at St Paul's Hospital, Hemel Hempstead, on 16 November 1961. 
Comparing the collaboration of the Hammonds to that of Sidney and Beatrice Webb at the time of Lawrence Hammond's death, Gilbert Murray noted that the Hammonds were more 'Victorian' in that they based their politics on ethical judgements, not simply on economics or supposed social results. 'They asked first not what would pay but what was true, what was right, and what was humane'. For all his political engagement, moreover, there was in J. L. Hammond especially, Murray said, 'a sort of radiation of personal goodness, of quick sympathy and kindness, combined in a rare way with unswerving integrity and courage', and thus it had been well said of him that 'amid the hottest political controversies, he never made a personal enemy or lost a personal friend' (Weaver, 259-61). 


@@@@@


doc= 42340


Harney, (George) Julian (1817-1897), Chartist and journalist, was born on 17 February 1817 at Deptford, Kent, the son of George Harney, sailor, and his wife. Brought up in poverty, he was educated at dame-schools and by his own reading. In 1828 he entered the Boys' Naval School, Greenwich, to train as a merchant seaman; but the ill health that dogged him throughout his life -- he suffered from congenital quinsy and impaired hearing -- kept him in the infirmary for much of the time and, after six months as a cabin-boy, he quit in 1831 and became a pot-boy in London. He joined the National Union of the Working Classes, worked as a shop-boy for Hetherington, and completed his education in what he was to describe as the 'radical school of the 'thirties' (Schoyen, 6). He served three prison sentences, lastly at Derby for six months in 1836, for selling unstamped papers. His major intellectual influence -- his 'guide, philosopher, and friend' (ibid., 12) -- was Bronterre O'Brien, yet whereas O'Brien was drawn to Robespierre, Harney came to identify with Marat, frequently signing himself, throughout the Chartist years, as L'Ami du Peuple or A Friend of the People. Harney also learned from the group of old Spenceans and in 1837 formed with some of them the East London Democratic Association, which the following year was reorganized as simply the London Democratic Association in opposition to the Working Men's Association. 
One result of this conflict was that in the first Chartist convention Harney sat not for London but for Norwich, Derby, and Newcastle. It was his opinion, in December 1838, that 'as the Gallic Convention of 1793 required a jacobin club to look after it, so will the British Convention of 1839 require the watchful support of the Democratic Association' (Goodway, 'London Chartism', 31); but his efforts to swing the convention behind physical force and immediate preparations to take power failed, earning him the censure of other delegates and a reputation among some historians as a mindless hothead. During his extensive travels outside London in 1838-9 this still very young man, recognized as the foremost spokesman of the most radical, physical-force Chartism, was permanently admitted to the hearts of the new movement's rank and file. He was of 'ruddy complexion, of medium height', with 'grey eyes, and a plentiful shock of dark-brown hair' (Cole, 299); and Gammage, while criticizing him for vanity and vindictiveness, conceded that to 'those whom he considered his friends no man could be more warmly or devotedly attached' (Gammage, 30). 
In April 1840 the case against Harney for a seditious speech at Birmingham the preceding May was dropped; and, equally paradoxically, he failed to be implicated in the conspiracies culminating in and following the Newport rising. As he admitted in January, 'he was much wiser in the year 1840 than he had been at the commencement of 1839' (Schoyen, 97). After his acquittal he spent almost a year in Scotland, and in September 1840 married Mary Cameron, of Mauchline, Ayrshire, 'tall, beautiful, and of high spirit' (Holyoake, 1.106) and the daughter of a radical weaver. It was a meeting of minds and an immensely happy union (although there were to be no children). On his return to England he worked as full-time Chartist organizer in Sheffield, and acted as local correspondent for the 'Northern Star'; he moved to Leeds in 1843 to become sub-editor, and was formally appointed editor two years later. This was Harney's finest and most influential period: he was until 1850 the great editor of a great newspaper. Throughout the 1840s Chartism cohered around the weekly 'Northern Star'; and under Harney its unrivalled coverage of domestic working-class affairs was supplemented by an authoritative presentation of international radicalism and revolutionary movements, together with a strong emphasis on literature. Harney himself was a bibliophile and a voracious reader, especially of poetry, above all that of Byron. 
The 'Northern Star' moved to London in 1844 and Harney proceeded to build up the Fraternal Democrats, a London society (with country members) of Chartists and European exiles, and his new revolutionary internationalism exercised a much broader appeal, attracting key Chartist militants, than had the sterile Jacobinism of 1838-9. His concern with foreign affairs led him to contest Tiverton, Palmerston's seat, in 1847, dissecting in a two-hour speech on the hustings the policy of the foreign secretary, who responded with what was judged the 'most lengthy and plain-spoken account of his stewardship ever given to the British public' (Schoyen, 151). In 1843 Engels visited Leeds to meet Harney; they became lifelong friends and Engels a contributor to his journals. From 1848 Harney, with Ernest Jones, was instrumental in moving the Chartist left to a socialist position. Still editor of the 'Northern Star', he brought out his own 'Democratic Review' (1849-50) until the inevitable break with O'Connor. He then edited the 'Red Republican' (1850), in which the first English translation of the 'Communist Manifesto' appeared. This became the 'Friend of the People', absorbed into the 'Northern Star' when Harney acquired it in 1852, but by the end of the year the resulting 'Star of Freedom' had folded. Mary Harney died on 11 February 1853; and in December Julian was obliged to move to Newcastle and compromise by assisting Joseph Cowen with his 'Northern Tribune' (1854-5). 
In 1855, aged only thirty-eight, Harney left Britain and working-class politics to settle in the Channel Islands, where he edited the Jersey 'Independent' (1856-62). Here in 1859 he married, secondly, Marie Le Sueur Metivier ('nee' Le Sueur), widow of a prosperous shopkeeper, and acquired a stepson, James ('b'. 1853). The family emigrated in 1863-4 to the United States, where, in Boston, Harney edited briefly his final newspaper, the abolitionist 'Commonwealth', and then spent the remainder of his working life as a clerk in the secretary's office at the Massachusetts State House. He returned permanently to England in 1888 to live by himself, but nine years later his wife nursed him in his final illness. The last surviving member of the 1839 convention, he died on 9 December 1897 at Richmond, Surrey. He was buried in Richmond cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 42341


Lowery, Robert (1809-1863), Chartist, born on 14 October 1809 at North Shields, was the eldest of a sailor's four sons; his mother was the daughter of a local master shoemaker. Educated at North Shields, Banff, and Peterhead until aged nine, he took a pithead job when illness threw his father out of work. His mother, who opened a school for girls, encouraged ambition in a son who was mischievous as a child but alert and inquisitive as a teenager. Thirteen when his father died, Lowery got himself apprenticed as a sailor, but within two years a rheumatic illness had lamed him for life. 
Long convalescence brought wide reading, which was carried further with the encouragement of his wife, a cousin whom Lowery married at eighteen. With two daughters before he was twenty-one, he was apprenticed to a Newcastle tailor, trained himself in public speaking, and became secretary to the North Shields Political Union. An active trade unionist, he was secretary to the tailors' branch of the Consolidated Trades' Union, lost his job, and was at times very poor, but published his pamphlet 'State Churches Destructive of Christianity and Subversive to the Liberties of Man' in 1837. 
After being elected Newcastle delegate to the Chartists' Palace Yard meeting of 17 September 1838, he became a Chartist lecturer. Over-optimistic and somewhat stagy in style, he displayed the provincial Chartist's jaunty irreverence and delight in taunting authority. Fascinated by history and admiring the seventeenth-century puritans, he was proud of his class. As Newcastle delegate to the Chartist convention at Christmas 1838, his actions were more moderate than his speeches. His autobiography (penetrating on the art of oratory and alert to regional contrasts) vividly describes a Chartist missionary's experience in Cornwall and Dublin. In 1839 his published address recommended exclusive dealing, and he opposed physical force during the Frost rising and at the Chartist convention's second session in 1839-40. He relished Scottish intelligence and religiosity and lectured there, managing to evade arrest. 
Serious illness in 1839-40 launched Lowery on religious conversion, political quietism, and commitment to moral reform. Urquhartites -- influential in Newcastle, with a programme that required class harmony -- helped him through this personal crisis, and sent him on a Russophobe mission to Paris in autumn 1840. Defeated as radical candidate at Edinburgh and Aberdeen in the general election of 1841, he was persuaded by Aberdeen teetotallers to take the pledge, and temperance lecturing became his new route to respectability. He supported the Complete Suffrage Union in 1842 and drifted away from Chartism via Lovett's moralistic and gradualist 'new move'. In 1848 he was first secretary to Lovett's People's League, which aimed to head off revolution through a wider franchise and lower taxes. Less prominent as a temperance reformer than as a Chartist, Lowery was a respected lecturer for several temperance organizations until rheumatism and a failing voice compelled him to retire in 1862. With a public subscription raised for his support, he emigrated in September to his daughter Sarah Edwards in Canada, and died at Woodstock, Ontario, on 4 August 1863. He was buried in the Baptist cemetery there, together with his daughter, son-in-law William Edwards, and some of his grandchildren. 
In his public life Lowery was neither as distinctive nor as prominent as some, but no Chartist published an autobiography of such quality so soon after the event. Vivid, evocative, and reflective, the thirty-three anonymous instalments of his 'Passages in the life of a temperance lecturer... by one of their order' in the 'Weekly Record of the Temperance Movement' for 1856-7 recount his life up to 1841. Somewhat wistful in tone, his autobiography shows zest for dramatic scenery, historic events, and the Romantic poets, and displays shrewd insight into personality. Lowery's taste for anecdotes, his ear for dialect, and his fine visual memory reveal an attractive personality who consistently pursued the Chartist aim of justifying his own class to society at large, fair-mindedly and without apology. Chartism, he insisted, was a respectable movement, and its supporters' actions should be judged in contemporary context. But his career fitted awkwardly into the pedigree that led from Chartism to socialism and the Labour Party, so he sank from public view until he was rediscovered in the 1960s. 


@@@@@


doc= 42343


O'Neill, Arthur George (1819-1896), reformer and minister of religion, was born in Chelmsford, Essex, in September 1819. His father, Arthur O'Neill, a coachmaker, was an Irish protestant refugee, and his mother, Ann, claimed descent from John Rogers, a protestant martyr in Mary Tudor's reign. The father died three months before Arthur's birth, and the mother married an army quartermaster named Cooper. Destined for the army, O'Neill was employed by the 73rd regiment as a hospital dresser and compounder, during which time he attended the University of Malta and the college at Corfu. In 1835 he entered Glasgow University to study medicine but experienced a religious conversion and took up divinity. 
As a student, O'Neill was influenced by J. A. Roebuck's defence of the Canadians who rebelled in 1837; in his own words, he became 'a peace man and a Chartist unchanged through nearly half a century' ('Birmingham Post', 24 Nov 1885). During the late 1830s he supported himself as a public lecturer and Chartist lay preacher. He was one of the leaders of the Christian Chartist movement which developed in Scotland. In 1840 he settled in Birmingham as the minister of a Christian Chartist chapel in Newhall Street. O'Neill's insistence that Christianity should be 'the sole standard of government, commerce, education, and of every other pursuit of man' ('National Association Gazette', 12 Feb 1842) offended many Chartists. William Lovett attacked his 'cant and sentimentality' (ibid., 18 June 1842), and Feargus O'Connor denounced Christian Chartism as a divisive force. His closest collaborators were John Collins and Henry Vincent, who shared his religiosity. He co-operated with Joseph Sturge and the 'moral radical' dissenters who devised a complete suffrage bill that incorporated the six points of the 'People's Charter'. After Lovett and O'Connor rejected the bill at a conference in Birmingham in December 1842, O'Neill continued to associate with Sturge and was increasingly identified with him. In the meanwhile O'Neill had become involved in the strikes that swept across the midlands in mid-1842. He was prosecuted for sedition and conspiracy, tried in August 1843, and gaoled for nearly twelve months. 
Imprisonment deepened O'Neill's religious commitment, and he wrote that henceforward he would work for 'the speedy appearance of the kingdom of Christ' (letter from A. G. O'Neill, 3 Feb 1844, Sturge MSS, priv. coll.), as revealed by scripture prophecy. On his release he resumed his Christian Chartist ministry in Birmingham, but the development of his religious beliefs convinced him of the need for adult baptism by immersion, and in 1846 he became a Baptist minister. The new status did not abate his political fervour. He had joined the Peace Society before his imprisonment, and from the mid-1840s, together with Joseph Sturge, Henry Richard, Elihu Burritt, and Richard Cobden, he promoted arbitration as a means of resolving international disputes. Late in life he attended peace congresses in European cities between 1889 and 1893. True to the ideals that had led to his imprisonment, he helped to set up trade unions and became a member of the Reform League during the 1860s. Towards the end of his life he was calling, not only for the full implementation of the 'People's Charter', but also for parliamentary suffrage for women ratepayers and a version of home rule that would devolve legislative powers on parliaments elected in all the regions of the British Isles including the midlands. He also opposed slavery, the 'Contagious Diseases Acts', and the regulations governing the religious aspects of public education. As a teetotaller for over half a century, he advocated temperance as part of a programme of working-class self-help. 
A strong, burly man, O'Neill had 'soft and tender-looking blue eyes' ('Birmingham Faces and Places') and a mellifluous voice. Until very late in life he enjoyed excellent health. He married on 17 June 1845 Esther Piddock Fallows, who predeceased him by sixteen years. O'Neill died at his home, 55 Hall Road, Handsworth, Staffordshire, on 14 May 1896 of 'a valvular trouble of the heart and a serious liver disorder' ('Handsworth Herald'). He was buried in Handsworth Old Church beside his wife. Two daughters and a son survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 42344


Maria Emily Seymour-Conway, marchioness of Hertford (1770/71-1856), society hostess]. She was the daughter of the Marchesa Fagnani (died 1804), and a great heiress on account of the rival claims to her paternity by George Selwyn (1719-1791) and William Douglas, fourth duke of Queensberry (1725-1810), who both left their fortunes to her. Their first two children were a daughter, Frances Maria, later marquise de Chevigne (1799-1822), and a son, Richard Seymour-Conway (1800-1870), who succeeded as fourth marquess of Hertford. The couple were detainees of Napoleon in France (1802-5), and during that period a third child, Lord Henry Seymour (1805-1859), was born to Maria; his father was probably Count Casimir de Montrond (1768-1843). After this period the marriage had effectively ended and the future third marchioness never returned to England, dividing her time between Paris and Boulogne. She played an important part in the upbringing of her elder son's illegitimate son, the future collector and benefactor Sir Richard Wallace. Lord Yarmouth was involved in a series of minor diplomatic missions after his return from France and he became an intimate of the prince of Wales who appointed him vice-chamberlain in 1812. He was appointed knight of the Garter on his accession to the marquessate in 1822 so as to secure to the government interest the eight pocket boroughs that he controlled. However, despite charm and obvious intellectual ability, his interests in politics were diverted substantially in later years by the gambling and debauchery that earned him sufficient notoriety to be satirized by Disraeli as Lord Monmouth in 'Coningsby' (1844) and by Thackeray as the marquess of Steyne in 'Vanity Fair' (1847-8). He was the first major art collector in his family and also commissioned Decimus Burton to build St Dunstan's Villa in Regent's Park. His taste was similar to that of his friend the future George IV, and some of the miniatures, paintings, and French furniture and sculpture held today in the Wallace Collection derive from his acquisitions. Hertford died at Dorchester House, Park Lane, London, on 1 March 1842 and was buried at Arrow on 19 March. His wife died in rue Taitebout, Paris, on 2 March 1856, where she was buried in what became a family vault in the cemetery at Pere Lachaise. 


@@@@@


doc= 42346


Baker, Florence Barbara Maria, Lady Baker (1841-1916), traveller in Africa, was born on 6 August 1841, probably in a German-speaking region of Hungary. She was the sole survivor of an attack on her home in which the rest of her family died during the disturbances of 1848. Nothing more is known of her antecedents or early life. She is next recorded in January 1859 in the Turkish town of Widden, later in Bulgaria, being offered for sale in the slave market; at that time she was using the name Finnian. Samuel White Baker (1821-1893), who was in Widden on a hunting excursion, offered the highest bid and made off with his prize. He told no one of Florence's existence, and, rather than return to England, took her off with him on his quest for the source of the Nile. He later hinted that they had been married abroad, but it seems certain that they were not married until 4 November 1865, soon after they arrived in England, at St James's Church, Piccadilly, London. Despite Samuel Baker's attempts to keep the story of their meeting and subsequent relationship secret, rumours spread sufficiently for Queen Victoria to refuse to receive his wife at court. 
Despite its inauspicious beginning, theirs was to be a very happy partnership. As her husband was later to write, Florence Baker possessed 'a share of sang-froid admirably suited to African travel' and particularly 'was not a 'screamer'' (Baker, 'Albert Ny'anza', 67). She was slight and small and, in spite of her long golden hair, was often mistaken for a boy, since she dressed in blouse, breeches, and gaiters. She was as active physically as she was mentally alert and coped with African exploration as well as did her husband, a man renowned for his strength. The first lap of their journey, exploring the Abyssinian tributaries, was easy going, allowing her time to decorate their camps with 'many charms and indescribable comforts that could only be provided with a lady's hand' (Baker, 'Nile Tributaries', 251). She also learned enough Arabic to be an effective partner in their joint enterprise. The hard work began at Gondokoro, the navigable head of the Nile, where traders in slaves and ivory made strangers unwelcome. A mutiny among the porters was quelled by Florence Baker's appeal to the men for loyalty and to her husband for clemency. The dramatic appearance of Speke and Grant dashed Baker's hopes of being the first at the source of the Nile, but they urged him to find his way to a second lake said to be linked to the Victoria. Speke and Grant were surprised and rather shocked to meet Florence and neither mentioned her in his account of their travels. The Bakers left Gondokoro and after a gruelling journey lasting a year, in which both suffered from fever and Florence nearly died from sunstroke, they reached the lake (which they called Albert), the first travellers from the outside to do so. 
On their arrival in England in 1865 Florence Baker was to need all her composure to face Victorian society and the Baker clan, which included her husband's four daughters by his first marriage, the eldest of whom was only six years her junior. However, she was soon at home in Hedenham Hall, Norfolk, and on good terms with the Baker family. Her husband was knighted in 1866, and, although she did not welcome his appointment in 1869 as commander of the khedive of Egypt's expedition into the country south of Gondokoro to annex territory to Egypt and abolish the slave trade, she went with him. She maintained high domestic standards on the houseboat from where the mission was directed, took charge of the health of the party, did what she could for the victims of the slave hunt, and found time to keep a meteorological record. When her husband's attempt to raise the Egyptian flag over Bunyoro brought fierce opposition and they were driven out under a rain of spears, Lady Baker marched 'close to [Samuel] with some ammunition for a large rifle... two bottles of brandy, two drinking cups, and two umbrellas and my pistol in my belt' (letter to Agnes Baker, quoted in A. Baker, 157, 160). They reached safety in one of their old camps where they were welcomed and Lady Baker was given the name Myadu or Morning Star. 
On their return to England in 1873 Sir Samuel bought the small estate of Sandford Orleigh, at Newton Abbot in Devon, where Florence proved as good a chatelaine as in their African camps. Here in October 1883 she effectively vetoed Gordon's suggestion that her husband go out to the Sudan to restore order, broken down by the Mahdist uprising: she would not return to Egypt and he had promised not to go without her. After Sir Samuel's death in 1893 she was at first inconsolable, but she mustered her courage to live on cheerfully until her death at Sandford Orleigh on 11 March 1916. She was buried with her husband in the family vault at Grimley, near Worcester. 


@@@@@


doc= 42347


Cumming, Constance Frederica Gordon- (1837-1924), travel writer, was born on 26 May 1837 at Altyre, Moray, twelfth child and youngest daughter of Sir William Gordon Gordon-Cumming of Altyre and Gordonstown, second baronet (1787-1854), and his first wife, Eliza Maria (died 1842), eldest daughter of John Campbell the younger of Shawfield and Islay. In addition to her eleven siblings (one of them the lion hunter Roualeyn Gordon-Cumming) Constance had three half-siblings from her father's second marriage. She was educated at home and at school in Fulham, Middlesex. In 1867 she was invited to spend a year with a married sister in India and this proved the start of twelve years of travel and a longer period of travel writing. She was well off and well connected, and 'her globe trotting took on the air of a series of rather far-flung social calls' (Robinson, 94). After a year in India with her sister and brother-in-law she spent 'Two Happy Years in Ceylon' (2 vols., 1892), where she knew the bishop of Colombo. She then found herself 'At Home in Fiji' (2 vols., 1881), the guest of its first governor. In Fiji she met and accepted the invitation of the bishop of Samoa to join him on his rounds, much enjoying 'A Lady's Cruise in a French Man-of-War' in the South Seas (2 vols., 1882). A visit to the 'Granite Crags' of California (1884) was followed by 'Wanderings in China' (2 vols., 1886). After a brief return to Britain in 1879 she set off again for California at the invitation of General and Mrs Ulysses Grant, later finding herself among the 'Fire Fountains' of Hawaii (2 vols., 1883). 
In later years Gordon-Cumming settled in Scotland, where she spent some time arranging for exhibition the numerous watercolours she had produced in her travels and working on travel books and articles which have been described as 'almost unreadable, so informative are they' (Middleton, 5). However, her time and her pen were increasingly taken up with furthering the development of numeral type for blind and sighted Chinese in Mandarin-speaking areas of China, for she had been inspired by her visit to William Hill Murray's mission to blind people on her visit to China. She died in Crieff, Perthshire, on 4 September 1924. 
Gordon-Cumming's reputation as a traveller has sunk somewhat and she is not now regarded as being on a par with her acquaintance Isabella Bird. Nor are her competent watercolours the equal of the paintings of her friend Marianne North. Her style of writing is so turgid that her works are generally left out of travel anthologies. None the less, the distances she travelled, the exotic locations she reached, and the sheer quantity of her output gain her a place in the history of travel. 


@@@@@


doc= 42348


Marsden, Kate (1859-1931), traveller and nurse, was born on 13 May 1859 at the Parade, Edmonton, Middlesex, youngest of the eight children of Joseph Daniel Marsden, solicitor, and Sophia Matilda Willsted. She was educated at home, except for a brief stay at a boarding-school in Margate. Her father's death on 4 August 1873 plunged the family dramatically from affluence to poverty. In 1876 or 1877 Kate was accepted to train as a nurse at the Tottenham Hospital, Snell's Park, Edmonton, a protestant evangelical institution which gave equal weight to evangelism and nursing in the training of its 'deaconesses'. In 1877 she volunteered to join a party of nurses going to Bulgaria to tend Russian soldiers wounded in the Russo-Turkish War. Here she had her first encounter with leprosy, an event which had a lasting impact on her life. She returned to Britain to take up a nursing position at the Westminster Hospital and in 1878 became sister in charge of the Woolton Convalescent Home in Liverpool. Ill health forced her retirement in 1882. 
In November 1884 Kate went with her mother to New Zealand to look after a sister dying of consumption. There is no full record of how she spent her time in New Zealand but the visit cannot have been a happy one. A 'serious accident' terminated her short period as lady superintendent of Wellington Hospital. During her service there, however, she had greatly improved the hospital. 
Kate decided to dedicate her life to the care of sufferers from leprosy. When she returned to Britain in 1889 she was presented at court to Queen Victoria and obtained an introduction from the princess of Wales to her sister, the empress of Russia. She set off for Russia, using the presentation of a Red Cross medal for her work in Bulgaria as the occasion to investigate the incidence of leprosy throughout Russia and the Near and Middle East. Finding that the lot of the Siberian leprosy sufferers was particularly bad, on 1 February 1891 she set out for Siberia with a Russian-speaking friend, Ada Field. Travelling by sledge in bitterly cold weather and great discomfort they reached Omsk, where Field gave up and Kate pressed on alone to Irkutsk, via Tomsk and Krasnoyarsk, visiting prisons as she went. She reached Yakutsk by barge and from there, in June, left on horseback for Vilyuysk, a zigzagging ride of 2000 miles. Pestered by mosquitoes and summer storms, she rode through forests and swamps and over land burning below the surface so that there was 'always danger of a horse breaking the crust and sinking into the fire' (Middleton, 142). On this most arduous section of her journey she found the plight of the leprosy sufferers truly piteous. She gave what immediate relief she could and interested civil and church authorities in her mission. After returning exhausted to Moscow, she continued to canvas for support, raising through a London committee some $2400 to build and equip a leprosy hospital which was opened in Vilyuysk in 1897. 'On Sledge and Horseback to Outcast Siberian Lepers' (1893) described her remarkable journey. 
In 1892 Kate Marsden was elected one of the first female fellows of the Royal Geographical Society. On 16 August 1894, however, a letter to 'The Times' from Alexander Francis, pastor of the St Petersburg British-American church and the secretary of a committee of investigation into Kate Marsden's work, destroyed her reputation in Britain, though not in Siberia, and brought to an end her humanitarian work. The powerful British Charity Organization Society wrote an unfavourable report on her fund. Quite what it was that led to Kate's fall from grace has never been clear. Hints of financial impropriety and lesbianism cannot explain why Isabel Hapgood, an American translator, worked so remorselessly for her destruction. Kate tried to defend herself in the press but she abandoned her libel action against Francis in 1895, perhaps because of lack of money, perhaps because she wanted to be spared a damaging cross-examination. Some continued to believe in her: in 1906 she was presented for a second time at court and in 1916 she received the rare distinction of honorary life fellowship of the Royal Geographical Society. These, a sympathetic biography of 1895, and her own 'My Mission in Siberia: a Vindication' (1921) failed to re-establish her good name, and she died poor, unmarried, and forgotten at Springfield House, Beechcroft Road, Wandsworth, London, on 26 March 1931, having been an invalid for thirty years. 
In her prime, however, Kate Marsden must have had a magnetism and urgency which are not conveyed by the stilted phrases of Johnson's 'Life of Kate Marsden', which speaks of her tall stately appearance in her 'nurse's garb'. The real Kate Marsden, who charmed the tsarina and her ladies-in-waiting and blasted her way through the embattled bureaucracy of imperial Russia, must have been a very different and infinitely more impressive figure. 


@@@@@


doc= 42351


Barry, William Francis (1849-1930), Roman Catholic priest and novelist, was born in London on 21 April 1849, the third son (of four children) of William Barry, an Irish Catholic immigrant labourer, and his wife, Ellen, 'nee' Downey, who signed the birth certificate with her mark. The sympathies of Barry's later work suggest a childhood familiarity with metropolitan radicalism and Irish nationalism. He was educated first at Hammersmith College, where he was recruited for training for the priesthood by Frederick William Faber; then at Old Sedgley Park and Oscott College, near Birmingham, and at the Venerable English College in Rome, where he saw the First Vatican Council and the city's fall to the Italian army. In 1868 he matriculated at the University of London. He graduated from the Gregorian University with the degrees of BD and DD, and was ordained deacon in Rome in 1872 and priest in 1873. He was appointed vice-rector and professor of philosophy and church history at Bishop William Bernard Ullathorne's new seminary at Olton, then, in 1877, professor of dogmatic theology at Oscott. 
Barry's literary career began with reviews in W. G. Ward's 'Dublin Review'. His fluency in French, German, and Italian, and his fascination with the post-Enlightenment rejection of Christianity in literature, led on to his career as a prolific intellectual journalist, contributing essays to the 'Fortnightly Review', the 'Contemporary Review', the 'Quarterly Review', the 'Nineteenth Century', and the 'Edinburgh Review'. He defended the aged Newman against A. M. Fairbairn's charge of scepticism in the 'Contemporary Review' in 1885, winning a warm encomium from the cardinal himself. 
Newman was the chief influence on the formation of Barry's prose, which has a singular grace, liveliness, and lucidity. But the inspiration of his fiction came from George Eliot, whom he compared favorably with the 'immoral' French novelists of his time like George Sand, Flaubert, and Zola, though unlike some of their English critics, he paid them the compliment of reading them. Some of his literary criticism was republished in 'Heralds of Revolt: Studies in Modern Literature and Dogma' (1904). His superiors had noted his intellectual interests, and in 1883 he was sent to the mission of St Birinus, Dorchester-on-Thames, which came with minimal pastoral duties, a beautiful house and garden, and a troublesome lay trustee. He remained at Dorchester until 1907, when he was briefly appointed to St Catherine's, Birmingham, with the title of canon, but in 1908 he was given a much busier parish than Dorchester, St Peter's, Leamington, having by then completed a substantial body of literary work. 
Barry's first novel was his most successful, 'The New Antigone: a Romance' (1887), which had the double theme of a Spanish religious image, the Madonna of San Lucar, and a revolutionary free-thinking feminist, Hippolyta, who refuses to marry her lover, but then becomes a convert to Roman Catholicism and a missionary nun. A more conventional author might have concluded with a marriage, but the popularity of the active orders of independent-minded religious women in the period saves from implausibility the transformation of Hippolyta's uncompromising idealism from its secular form into a religious one, as does the word painting of the intrinsic power attributed to the image of the Madonna. There is a very Victorian tangle attending the secret family history of the central characters, as well as social comment on the condition of the poor and on the debates among revolutionaries: one character, Ivor Mardol, was to Barry his ideal self, 'the dreamer, reformer, enthusiast for the Reign of Justice among men' (Barry, 183). Barry afterwards recalled the publication as the hour of his glory, with praise from Gladstone and 'The Times' and England at his feet. 
A speech by Barry in 1890 in the presence of Bishop Vaughan raised a storm for urging that the social question had priority over the religious one: the poor must be civilized before they could be Christianized. He embodied his views on the nightmare of the financial markets in a further novel, 'The Two Standards' (1898), about a corrupt financier. The atmosphere of another, 'The Wizard's Knot' (1901), with an Irish setting, drew on his mother's tales of the mythology of Celtic Ireland. In 'Arden Massiter' (1900) he painted the portrait of yet another idealist, who dreams of uniting Catholicism and revolutionary socialism as agents of social regeneration, in opposition to the corruption of the governing Italian liberal elite. Barry depicts both the pervading violence of Italian society, with its cut-throat but superstitious Camorra, and the backward hunger-stricken Italian hill villages, in a mixture of realism and Gothic romance. 'The Dayspring' (1903) is based upon the 1871 rising of the Paris commune, with as hero a romantic Irish nationalist who has killed the evicter of his mother from her cottage. Here is a tale of the two cities in Paris, the light-filled society of the upper class and the revolutionary underworld, which explodes in violence. 'The Place of Dreams: Four Stories' (1893) belongs to the genre of Catholic supernaturalism. 
Barry's works of scholarship included two books on the history of the papacy, 'The Papal Monarchy from St Gregory the Great to Boniface VIII, 590-1303' (1902) and 'The Papacy and Modern Times: a Political Sketch, 1303-1870' (1911); a slight book on Newman (1904, revised from earlier efforts), probably his most popular learned work; entries in the 'Catholic Encyclopedia'; a chapter, 'Catholic Europe', in the first volume of the 'Cambridge Modern History' (1902); and a memoir, 'Ernest Renan' (1905), which he called 'my Hermes of Praxiteles -- a single figure, well-nigh faultlessly drawn' (Barry, 239). 'The Tradition of Scripture: Its Origin, Authority and Interpretation' (1906) demonstrates the author's critical interest in recent biblical scholarship. He was a founder member from 1896 of Wilfrid Ward's learned Synthetic Society, and he sympathized with Ward, from 1906 the editor of the 'Dublin Review', over the latter's difficulties with Newman's executors in writing his biography of the cardinal. But though Barry was impatient with the inadequacy of modern Catholic apologetic, and unsympathetic to Pius X's campaign against modernism, he disagreed with modernism itself. 
Barry contributed to the allied war effort 'The World's Debate: an Historical Defence of the Allies' (1917), containing a polemic against the deified state, which he traced to Lutheranism and identified with Prussia, distinguishing it from the Germany and the German literature that he loved. President Wilson is said to have ordered 1000 copies. Rome appointed him a protonotary apostolic in 1923 on his golden jubilee of priesting. In 1926 he published his 'Memories and Opinions', reviewing his long life and literary labours. 'Roma Sacra: Essays on Christian Rome' (1927) republished some of his old articles from the 'Dublin Review'. 'The Triumph of Life, or, Science and the Soul' (1928) assessed certain Victorian agnostic scientists and philosophers like Huxley and Spencer on the relations of science and religion on controverted points, while 'The Coming Age of the Catholic Church: a Forecast' (1929) predicted its happy future. Barry died at 14 Park Crescent, Oxford, on 15 December 1930. 


@@@@@


doc= 44628


Lienhardt, (Ronald) Godfrey (1921-1993), anthropologist, was born on 17 January 1921 at 19 Fernbank Road, Bradford, Yorkshire, the elder of the two sons of Godfrey Lienhardt, a textile merchant from Switzerland, and his Yorkshire wife, Jennie, 'nee' Benn. He was educated at Eastborough council school, Dewsbury, and Batley grammar school. In 1939 he went up to Downing College, Cambridge, on an open major scholarship to read English; his tutor there was F. R. Leavis, who was to have a lifetime influence on him. Having obtained a first in part 1 of the tripos, Lienhardt joined the Royal Army Ordnance Corps in 1941 and was appointed an army driving instructor (despite not being able to drive). In March 1943 he was commissioned as a lieutenant in the Royal Army Service Corps and posted to east Africa. 
Lienhardt returned to Downing College in 1945 and read for the archaeological and anthropological tripos, in which he achieved first-class honours (with distinction) in 1947. Between 1947 and 1950 he carried out fieldwork among the Dinka of Sudan. In 1948 he migrated to Oxford, following his friend and colleague Edward Evans-Pritchard, to become a graduate student at Exeter College. The following year he was appointed research lecturer (later lecturer and then, in 1955, senior lecturer) in African sociology. He obtained his doctorate in 1952 and then conducted further research in Sudan among the Anuak in 1952-4. In the academic year 1955/6 he received leave from Oxford to help set up a department of sociology and social anthropology at the college of arts and sciences in Baghdad and in 1964 he was visiting professor at the University of Ghana in Accra. In 1967 he was elected to a governing body fellowship of the recently founded Wolfson College, of which he was vicegerent in 1973-5. In 1972 he was appointed to an 'ad hominem' readership in social anthropology and in 1983 he received an honorary DLitt from Northwestern University, Illinois. He acted as external examiner for universities in both Britain and Africa, and between 1968 and 1976 was chief examiner in social anthropology for the international baccalaureate. He retired in 1988, when he became an emeritus reader of Oxford University and an emeritus fellow of Wolfson College. 
Although Lienhardt published extensively, his anthropological reputation was above all made by 'Divinity and Experience: the Religion of the Dinka' (1961). This book was immediately heralded as a masterful and outstanding contribution both to African ethnography and to the anthropological study of religion, and quickly took on the status of a classic work. He also wrote a highly successful textbook, 'Social Anthropology' (1964), which was translated into Portuguese, Spanish, Japanese, Italian, and Greek. His earliest publications, dating back to 1941, were mainly literary in nature and were published in 'Scrutiny'. From 1949, however, anthropology became the subject matter and his articles appeared in such academic journals as 'Africa'. As well as his scholarly publications he gave a number of radio talks, many of which were subsequently published in 'The Listener'. He was also invited to give numerous public lectures, including the Malinowksi memorial lecture in 1961, the Spalding memorial lecture in 1969, and the Frazer lecture in Cambridge in 1992, the year before his death. This last was on Sir James Frazer himself, in whom he had had a long interest. 
Lienhardt never married. However, his generous and sociable character was such as to attract a large circle of devoted friends. Many of these were present and former students, because for Lienhardt his tutorial duties were a lifetime commitment. Those who gathered round him for a drink came, however, from a much wider variety of backgrounds and countries, and people from all over the world came to visit him in Oxford. Indeed Lienhardt, who was of frail appearance, particularly during his last years, and by no means tall, was a memorable sight as he walked through Oxford surrounded by towering Dinka. He was a delightful and amusing raconteur but, as is often the case with such people, his wit was occasionally at other people's expense. 
It is probable that Lienhardt was converted to Roman Catholicism while at Cambridge. If in his later life his practice fell away his faith did not, and one of his last requests was for a requiem mass. He died from bronchopneumonia at the John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, on 9 November 1993 and was cremated at Oxford crematorium on 16 November after a mass in St Aloysius's. 




@@@@@


doc= 44629


Maude, Angus Edmund Upton, Baron Maude of Stratford upon Avon (1912-1993), journalist and politician, was born on 8 September 1912 at 44 Temple Fortune Lane, Hendon, Middlesex, the only child of Alan Hamer Maude (1885-1979), journalist and army officer, and his wife, Dorothy Maude Upton, only daughter of Frederic Upton, civil servant. The Maudes were an old-established family of Yorkshire gentry and included several notable bankers and naval officers; one of Maude's forebears was an officer in Cromwell's army at Marston Moor, and another was a godson of William IV. Maude's father was a sub-editor on 'The Times' and later a colonel in the Royal Army Service Corps, serving with great distinction in the First World War. 
Like his father, Maude was educated at Rugby School (where he was a classical scholar) and at Oriel College, Oxford, where he served on the committees of both the Union Society and the Conservative Association and from where he graduated with a second-class degree in philosophy, politics, and economics in 1933. He then joined his father's profession, working on 'The Times' (1933-4) and then the 'Daily Mail' (1934-9) as a financial journalist. Commissioned as a Territorial Army officer four months before the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939, he saw action in north Africa but was captured in January 1942 and spent the rest of the conflict as a prisoner of war. Although shy, he helped to organize theatrical activities. On 2 January 1946 he married Barbara Elizabeth Earnshaw ('b'. 1915/16), daughter of John Earnshaw Sutcliffe, artist, of Bushey, Hertfordshire. They had two sons and two daughters. 
After the war Maude found an outlet for his restless intelligence at an independent think-tank, Political and Economic Planning, where he served as a deputy director. It was an unusual posting for a man who was later associated with the anti-statist wing of the Conservative Party; the group's work suggested an active (if not directive) role for government. But the job seemed to fit Maude for a post-war Conservative Party which had accepted a more interventionist state than had existed previously. In 1949 he was chosen as the Conservative candidate for South Ealing, and in the same year his researches bore fruit in his most popular book, 'The English Middle Classes', a perceptive account of social change which he wrote with Roy Lewis. This collaboration also produced 'Professional People' (1952). 
Maude was returned at the general election of 1950 with a comfortable majority. As a prospective candidate he had met another young Conservative intellectual, Cuthbert ('Cub') Alport, and they had discussed forming a ginger group if they both won their seats. This was the first suggestion of what became the One Nation group -- formed with seven other MPs including Edward Heath, Iain Macleod, Enoch Powell, and Robert Carr. Maude played a key role in co-ordinating the work on the group's first (eponymous) pamphlet, which was widely touted as a distinctive Conservative approach to the social services at a time of economic stringency. Maude was also heavily involved in the group's next production, 'Change is our Ally' (1954), which indicated a more sceptical view of the state. By the time the Conservatives returned to power in 1951, membership of One Nation was already seen as a likely passport to ministerial office. But Maude and Powell were repeatedly overlooked, suggesting that the Conservative whips had already noted them as mercurial characters. Neither was prepared to suffer fools. In Maude's case the failure to secure a footing was particularly significant, since in addition to his One Nation work he served as director of his party's educational wing, the Conservative Political Centre, for four years after 1951. He was also an effective Commons speaker, if not quite up to the standard set by his friends Macleod and Powell. His main handicap seems to have been an inability to court influential allies; his son later described him as 'the world's worst networker' (private information). 
By 1956 Maude was a disappointed man. A member of the Suez group, he resigned the Conservative whip in May 1957 and sat for a year as an independent Conservative, in protest against British policy towards Cyprus. The fact that Maude, who had always concentrated on domestic policy, should choose to associate with his party's imperialist wing revealed how disillusioned he had become. In 1958 he took this emotion to its logical conclusion, resigning his seat (much to the embarrassment of Harold Macmillan's government) and accepting the post of editor at the 'Sydney Morning Herald'. Nevertheless the Australian exile lasted only three years. Before his departure friends warned him that he would be disappointed if he expected to enjoy full editorial independence, and so it proved. But he enjoyed Australia, where he also hosted an important televised discussion programme. In 1961 he was back in England, actively searching for a seat. Fortunately for him, in October 1961 Iain Macleod became chairman of the party, and by November 1962 Maude had been chosen to fight a by-election in a safe Conservative seat, South Dorset. Ironically, another old acquaintance thwarted his comeback. Viscount Hinchingbroke, whose elevation to the Lords had created the vacancy, was a fellow Suez rebel, but unlike Maude he could no longer support a Conservative leadership which was anxious to join the Common Market. Hinchingbroke threw his weight behind an independent Conservative, Sir Piers Debenham, who won 5000 votes; Maude was defeated by a narrow margin. During the by-election campaign Maude's abrasive personality attracted unfavourable press attention, and even he thought that his career was at an end. But in August 1963 he was allowed another attempt, at Stratford upon Avon, which had been represented by the disgraced minister John Profumo. Maude won the seat with a greatly reduced majority, but this was a creditable performance, since the Macmillan government was more than 10 per cent behind Labour in the national opinion polls. 
After the Conservatives fell from power in 1964 there were signs that Maude was willing to play a more orthodox role within his party. When Enoch Powell stood for the leadership in July 1965 Maude voted for Reginald Maudling. Earlier Alec Home had appointed Maude opposition spokesman on aviation. It was some surprise when the new leader, Edward Heath, kept him on in this role; after all, Heath had been chief whip during the Suez crisis. A falling-out could be predicted, and it came remarkably quickly. In January 1966 'The Spectator' published an article by Maude, entitled 'Winter of tory discontent'. The author, now spokesman on colonial affairs, warned that his party risked being regarded as an 'irrelevance', and attacked the timidity of its policy proposals. Since Maude lacked a parliamentary following, Heath could dismiss him without fearing the consequences; if the decision made the party look disunited, the errant minister had created this impression already. To underline his political innocence, he was genuinely puzzled by the furious reaction of the leadership. 
Since Maude's oft-frustrated hopes of preferment were unlikely to be satisfied while Heath was leader, his decision to fight the general election in 1970 testified to his addiction to parliamentary life. He also continued to write intelligent articles, and in 1969 produced 'The Common Problem', a substantial volume which proved him a rigorous and original thinker. Combined with more tact -- and, perhaps, a less forbidding aspect -- these qualities should have secured high office. Instead, he seemed to be competing with Powell for the role of chief prophet without honour; 'The Common Problem' has remained an unjustly neglected work of political thinking. By contrast, Maude's contribution to the 'Black Papers', which challenged current educational theory, was well publicized; but it did nothing to endear him to a party leadership unwilling to oppose the introduction of comprehensive schools. He also joined Powell in voting against the 'Race Relations Bill' (1968). During the Heath government he was an occasional rebel, particularly over EEC membership (although he avoided a serious clash with his constituency party by abstaining, rather than voting against the British application). His main influence was exerted through a critical and widely read 'Sunday Express' column. Although he had passed his sixtieth birthday by the time of the general election of February 1974, he stood again. But only the prospect of a radical change in the party's direction can have induced him to seek election in the second 1974 contest, held in October. 
When Thatcher contested Heath's leadership in January 1975, Maude was an enthusiastic supporter, and he drafted the impressive statement of principles published under her name in the 'Daily Telegraph' just before the election. When Thatcher won the leadership on the second ballot Maude was appointed chairman of the Conservative Research Department. In theory it was an apposite choice; Maude could be relied upon to uphold the 'Thatcherite' line in an institution which the new leadership deeply distrusted. As usual with Maude, there was an element of irony in the appointment because Powell, whose brilliance had helped to make the reputation of the research department in the late 1940s, had by this time joined the Ulster Unionists -- an act of self-immolation which surpassed even the gestures of his old friend. Maude did make a significant contribution, but morale in the research department was low throughout his chairmanship, and his precise role was difficult to define since Sir Keith Joseph had been given overall charge of policy research. Maude's main achievement was to help with the drafting of 'The Right Approach' (1976), which cleverly steered a middle course to paper over the divisions between Conservative 'wets' and 'dries'. 
When the Conservatives won the general election in 1979 Maude was made paymaster-general, with a seat in the cabinet and membership of the privy council. It had been a tortuous career path, but at last it seemed that Maude had reached a destination suited to his talents. But he would have preferred a departmental post, preferably in education, and it was his ill fortune to be given responsibility for government policy at a time when there was no cheering news to impart. At the end of Thatcher's first year in power ministers had to admit that they had failed to meet expectations, but in the search for scapegoats Maude was always likely to be vulnerable. In January 1981 he stood down from the cabinet. Thatcher later claimed that this was at his own request, but he was most reluctant to leave. He remained on good terms with the prime minister, who awarded him a knighthood. Before the next election he was appointed chairman of a government committee on questions of policy, but this was his last official appointment. He left the Commons at the 1983 election, and was made a life peer, as Baron Maude of Stratford upon Avon, shortly thereafter. 
Maude remained an active member of the Lords for many years, able at last to lend consistent support to the policies of his own party. He also had the satisfaction of seeing his son Francis rise within the ranks, becoming financial secretary to the Treasury in 1990, although his final years were touched by tragedy when his other son, Charles, died from an AIDS-related illness. Maude himself was already unwell. He died peacefully of old age and haemochromatosis at the Foscote Hospital, Banbury, on 9 November 1993 and was buried at South Newington, Oxfordshire. He was survived by his wife, Barbara, his son Francis, and his two daughters. 
The leading theme of Maude's life was that of talent unfulfilled. Too self-willed to reach the top in politics, he could have achieved lasting fame as a writer but seemingly lacked sufficient application. There was some satisfaction in the success of his party, which at the time of his death seemed destined for many more years in power. But he was ill suited to the role of unthinking loyalist, and had he written a follow-up to 'The Common Problem' his idiosyncratic ideas might have helped to inject much needed intellectual excitement into his party. 


@@@@@


doc= 45454


Read, Mary (c.1695-1721), pirate, was born in England, according to the account of her early life in Captain Charles Johnson's 'History of the... Pyrates'. Her mother had married a sailor named Read and had a son, but the sailor disappeared, leaving her on her own. She had an affair and became pregnant again. To conceal her condition she left her husband's relatives and went to stay with friends in the country, where she gave birth to Mary Read. Some time later the son died and she decided to pass her daughter off as her son and to ask her wealthy mother-in-law for financial assistance. Mary was dressed as a boy and the mother-in-law agreed to provide a crown a week towards the child's maintenance. When the old woman died Mary was thirteen, and was sent to work as a foot-boy for a French lady. However, she tired of this menial life and, 'growing strong and having also a roving mind' (Johnson, 119), she went across to Flanders and joined a foot regiment as a cadet. She fought in several engagements and then fell in love with a handsome young Flemish soldier in her regiment. She revealed to him that she was a woman and they subsequently married, left the army, and set themselves up as proprietors of the Three Horse Shoes, an eating-house near Breda. Her husband died soon after this and Mary decided to assume men's clothing again and seek her fortune elsewhere. 
After a brief spell in the army Mary Read boarded a ship and sailed to the West Indies. Her ship was captured by English pirates and she was persuaded to join their crew. In September 1717 a proclamation was issued in the name of George I that declared that any pirates who surrendered themselves should be pardoned. The crew of Mary's ship decided to take advantage of the pardon and made their way to Nassau, in the Bahamas. There Mary met up with a group of pirates led by Captain John Rackam, otherwise known as Calico Jack. One of the members of his crew was Anne Bonny, who, like Mary Read, was dressed as a man. Anne Bonny took such a liking to the handsome Mary Read that she let her know that she was a woman and was greatly disappointed when Mary admitted that she too was a woman. Considering how few women went to sea at that period it is extraordinary that two female pirates should have ended up on the same ship, but their subsequent pirating exploits are borne out by a number of documents. These include the transcript of their trial in Jamaica and a proclamation that was issued by Captain Woodes Rogers, the governor of the Bahamas, on 5 September 1720, in which he announced that John Rackam, several men, 'and two Women, by name Ann Fulford alias Bonny, & Mary Read' had stolen a 12 ton sloop from the harbour at Providence, had committed robbery and piracy, and 'are hereby proclaimed Pirates and Enemies to the Crown of Great Britain' ('Boston Gazette'). Towards the end of October 1720 Calico Jack and his crew were intercepted off the coast of Jamaica by an armed merchant ship. After a brief fight in which the two women put up a spirited resistance the pirates were captured and taken ashore to Spanish Town for trial. Rackam and the men were found guilty and hanged. A separate trial of the women took place on 28 November, and they too were found guilty of piracy and condemned to death. However, 'the prisoners informed the Court that they were both quick with child and prayed that execution of sentence might be stayed' ('Tryals of Captain John Rackam', 19). When examined they both proved to be pregnant and thus escaped the death penalty. Mary Read died a few months later, in prison; the parish registers of the Jamaican district of St Catherine record that she was buried on 28 April 1721. 


@@@@@


doc= 45460


Martin, Emma (1811/12-1851), socialist and freethinker, was born in Bristol, the fourth child of William Bullock, a cooper, and his wife, Hannah Jones, whose family owned a tea-dealing business in the city. Emma's father died in her infancy, and a year later her mother married her second husband, John Gwyn, and the family moved into the middle-class area of Clifton. 
In later years Emma wrote of the strong Christian faith of her youth 'to which a naturally sedate... and a melancholy turn of mind greatly inclined me' (Martin, 'A Few Reasons', 4). This resulted in her decision, at the age of seventeen, to join the Particular Baptists -- a sternly Calvinist wing of the Baptist church then undergoing a revival. She remained in the church as a ''zealous' disciple of Jesus' (Martin, 'God's Gifts', 14) for twelve years, busy distributing evangelical tracts and collecting for the Bible Society. In 1830, at the age of eighteen, she also became the proprietor of a short-lived ladies' seminary and later a ladies' boarding-school which survived for several years; in 1835 she became the editor of the unsuccessful 'Bristol Literary Magazine'. She married Isaac Luther Martin, also a Baptist, in 1831; they had three daughters. He was, however, 'a husband... whose company it was a humiliation to endure' (Holyoake, 4), and in the years after their marriage, despite all her religious and educational activities, Emma Martin became miserable and restless. She began delivering lectures on women's social status. In 1839 she attended her first Owenite socialist meeting and -- astounded to hear 'so close a transcript of many of the thoughts that had passed in my mind' (Martin, 'A Few Reasons', 7) -- prepared to embrace the socialist cause, only to discover that the socialists denied the divine origins of the 'Bible'. Infuriated by this, she challenged the socialists to public debates on the validity of Christianity. Several accepted, only to find themselves in verbal combat with a very capable opponent. 'She is a lady of considerable talent', one such opponent wrote to the Owenite central board in May 1839, adding a plea that 'some able advocate of the Rational System' be sent to tackle her ('Proceedings of the Fourth Congress', 28). 
By this time, however, Emma Martin's religious beliefs were also beginning to crumble. Faced with the arguments of the freethinking Owenites -- whose ideas on women's rights so strongly echoed her own -- and made wretched by her personal circumstances, she felt the ground of Christian conviction begin to give way beneath her. Finally the crisis came. In the winter of 1839 Isaac Martin moved his family to London and Emma, seeing her opportunity, bolted, leaving behind not only her husband but also her church, her respectability, and the God in whom she no longer believed. She took the leap of faith and joined the socialists as a declared freethinker. Within a year she was one of the movement's best-known women adherents, lecturing, writing, and debating anti-socialists, particularly clerical ones, all over Britain. From having been a vigorous campaigner in Christ's cause, she became one of the church's most vociferous opponents, notorious for her knockabout style of free-thought polemic and for her hostility to conventional Christian views on women and marriage. It was as a patriarchal institution that the church particularly attracted her opprobrium, and it was the Owenites' commitment to non-patriarchal social institutions which won her strongest support. In 1841 the Owenite annual congress was addressed by one leading member, a man, who reminded those present that Owenism 'claimed for woman full, free and equal enjoyment of all those privileges which belonged to her as a human being' ('New Moral World'). He was followed in the speakers' list by Emma Martin, who rose to say that 'she had grown up from infancy with high thoughts and strong hopes of an improvement in the condition of her sex', but that: 'all institutions for mental improvement were confined to males, and that even the morals of the female sex were of a different stamp to those of the male. She saw no remedy for this till she saw the remedy of Socialism. When all should labour for each, and each be expected to labour for the whole, then would woman be placed in a position in which she would not sell her liberties. (ibid.)' In the years that followed, Emma Martin's struggle to win others to this creed became inseparably bound up with her personal fight for an independent life. Any property which she would have had at the time of leaving her marriage was lost, and raising her children on the small salary paid by the Owenite central board must have been very difficult. When she went on lecture tours she usually left her daughters with friends, but this too must have had an emotional and financial cost. She did take one of her daughters with her on one occasion, but they encountered an anti-Owenite mob who began stoning them, and were forced to flee. 
Emma Martin's years in Owenism coincided with the peak of the movement's ideological war against what they regarded as ignorance and error. Between 1839 and 1845 Owenites all over Britain confronted their opponents in person and in print, hammering out their message of utopian-communist ideals in the teeth of increasingly hysterical responses from political and religious conservatives. Newspaper reports of Emma's lectures described audiences of up to 3000, strongly divided in their views and expressing their opinions in raucous and sometimes violent forms. Emma's strident atheism was particularly provocative -- so much so that even some of her fellow socialists objected. In 1842, angered by this lack of support from the movement, she and her fellow atheist George Jacob Holyoake set up the Anti-Persecution Union to defend freethinkers charged with blasphemy. Emma herself ended up in court on several occasions, and was forced to hide from the police on others; but unlike many militant atheists, she avoided imprisonment. 
During these years Emma Martin was also one of Owenism's more prolific pamphleteers, producing tracts with titles such as 'The Bible No Revelation' (1845?), 'Religion Superseded' (1844?), and 'Baptism a Pagan Rite' (1844) -- all calculated to inflame clerical opinion. Unlike most other women Owenites she did not write pamphlets specifically on women's issues, but her style of feminist argument can be gauged from newspaper reports in the Owenite press and elsewhere. Like other campaigners for women's rights, Emma assigned great importance to the role of education in women's advancement, but in common with other socialists she also believed that only a propertyless, communal society would provide the conditions for genuine sexual equality. Appropriately for such a fierce freethinker, she frequently took issue with scriptural representations of women (the story of the fall was a favourite target). Her language in these lectures was usually quite measured, but under provocation could become much less so. In 1844 a particularly savage confrontation between Emma Martin and the police in Manchester was reported in the Manchester press accompanied by descriptions of her as 'a humiliating spectacle of human form... and of woman's character' (Martin, 'The Missionary Jubilee Panic', 16). Emma's response was explosive: 'and what is woman's most glorious character? Is it not to kiss the hand that strikes her, to honour and obey her lord and master, and be the tame servant of the priest? To have no will of her own. To be the football of society thankful for its kicking. You know it is! Is it not dreadful when one of the sex begins to think for herself? Why others will follow the horrible example! and where will it end?... Common sense will usurp the place of spiritualism, and liberty and love will replace priestcraft. I fear I shall live to see that dreadful day! (ibid., 16-17)' By the time this episode occurred, however, Emma Martin was tiring of the battle. Before leaving on a Scottish tour in 1845 she had begun living with Joshua Hopkins (died 1852), an engineer. Returning from the tour, ill and exhausted, she found that the Owenite leadership -- itself weakened and divided by internal feuding -- were accusing her of alienating support through her extremism. Emma Martin had had enough. She left the movement to begin training as a midwife. In 1847, the year in which her fourth daughter was born, she graduated in midwifery and, having been refused hospital positions because of her atheism, began practising privately from her home at 100 Long Acre, Covent Garden, London, where her daughters also ran a surgical bandage shop. She lectured to women in gynaecology, gave courses in midwifery, and probably offered contraceptive advice. Life was financially hard, but quiet, and her common-law union with Hopkins (who called himself Martin) seems to have been a happy one. 
Emma Martin died of tuberculosis at Holly Vill, Finchley Common, Whetstone, Middlesex, on 8 October 1851. 'We have lost the most important woman... on our side', her friend Holyoake wrote (Holyoake, 2), and called for subscriptions for her gravestone for which hundreds gave, including many women who offered remembrance of 'that advocacy of women's social elevation which Mrs Martin so ably rendered' ('The Reasoner', 12, 1852, 4). She was buried in Highgate cemetery. 'Ah!', Holyoake wrote after the quiet secular ceremony at the grave, 'what do we not owe to a woman who, like Emma Martin, takes the heroic side and teaches us... the truth of a gentler faith?' (Holyoake, 7). 


@@@@@


doc= 45461


Stewart, Edith Helen Vane-Tempest-, marchioness of Londonderry (1878-1959), political hostess and writer, was born on 3 December 1878 at Blankney House in Lincolnshire, the second of three children of Henry Chaplin, later first Viscount Chaplin (1840-1923), and his wife, Lady Florence Sutherland-Leveson-Gower (died 1881), eldest daughter of the third duke of Sutherland. Edith Chaplin's mother died shortly after giving birth to her third child in 1881; thereafter, while her father concentrated on Conservative politics, Edith and her siblings were brought up by their uncle Lord Stafford and their maternal grandparents. 
Edith Chaplin married Charles Stewart Henry Vane-Tempest-Stewart, Viscount Castlereagh (1878-1949), on 28 November 1899 and gave birth to the first of five children in 1900. Although supportive of her husband's political career throughout her life, as a young woman Edith was a nervous public speaker and canvasser. As she said of herself: 'I was very shy and reluctant..., nothing except the cause of Woman Suffrage would have launched me off as a platform speaker' (Londonderry, 'Retrospect', 76). Indeed such were Edith's convictions on this topic that she flouted family disapproval by becoming an ardent constitutional suffragist, addressing meetings, writing pamphlets and letters to the press. More in line with her family's political stance, however, was her involvement in Conservative and Unionist politics. She served as president of the women's advisory committee of the Northern Counties National Union of Conservative and Unionist Associations, and of North Down and Newtownards Women's Unionist Associations. She was also a vice-president of the Ulster Women's Unionist Council from 1919 to 1959. 
The marchioness of Londonderry (as she became in 1915) was very involved in war work, serving from 1914 as colonel-in-chief of the Women's Volunteer Reserve. She resigned this position in 1915 to establish the women's legion, an organization designed to train women to release men for active service; initially providing cooks for the army, it developed administrative and clerical branches, and an agriculture section, in which she took particular interest. In 1934 Lady Londonderry initiated the merger between the women's legion and the other women's voluntary services, which in 1938 resulted in the formation of the Auxiliary Territorial Service, with which women served in the Second World War. Edith was appointed DBE (military division) for this work in 1917, the first woman to receive this honour. 
In the inter-war period Lady Londonderry became a political hostess, entertaining many influential figures at the family estates of Mount Stewart, co. Down, Wynyard Park, co. Durham, and Londonderry House in Park Lane, London. In the latter Edith had established, during the war, the Ark, an exclusive weekly club which under her leadership developed into an important meeting-place for politicians, royalty, artists, and writers. Regulars adopted the names of animals, such as Arthur (Balfour) the Albatross, and so on; there was also Winston (Churchill) the Warlock while Lady Londonderry was Circe. From 1924, despite their different politics, she was a confidante of Ramsay MacDonald (Hamish the Hart in the Ark). This friendship became increasingly controversial in the early 1930s after MacDonald accepted leadership of the National Government in 1931 and appointed Edith's husband as secretary of state for air. Rumours abounded about the political influence which Edith exerted on MacDonald, and he was criticized, as a Labour politician, for making the aristocratic Londonderry House the social centre of his government. Further controversy was forthcoming in the late 1930s when Edith accompanied her husband on several trips to Nazi Germany in a well-meaning, though widely criticized, attempt to improve relations between the two countries. In addition to her work as a political hostess, Lady Londonderry wrote numerous articles, many alluding to the changes in women's position, and several books, including her autobiography, 'Retrospect' (1938) and memoirs of her father, 'Henry Chaplin' (1926), and her predecessor, Frances Anne, marchioness of Londonderry (1958). 
Throughout her life Lady Londonderry was involved in public affairs and a myriad of charitable organizations, such as the Red Cross, the Queen's Institute of District Nurses (Northern Ireland), and the Personal Services League. She also served as chairman of the Ex-Servicewoman's Association, an organization which aimed to find suitable employment for demobilized women. She was one of seven women appointed to a government advisory committee to choose women magistrates in 1920 and later in this year she became the first female magistrate in co. Durham. From 1922 she also worked as a magistrate in co. Down. In 1922 she was asked by the Northern Ireland government to form the Ulster Women's Volunteer Association to enlist and train women to replace men in an emergency situation. In recognition of her work she was awarded an honorary doctorate in law from the Queen's University of Belfast in 1949. 
Lord Londonderry died on 11 February 1949. Ten years later on 23 April 1959 Edith Londonderry died at the family estate of Mount Stewart in co. Down. She was buried beside her husband at the family's private burial site, Tir N'an Og, in the grounds of Mount Stewart. Edith Londonderry was widely recognized as the last great political hostess, possessing 'a perfect house, great personal popularity, untiring energy and a very deep-rooted interest in things political' ('Pall Mall and Globe', 25 Oct 1925). 


@@@@@


doc= 45462


MacDonald, Margaret Ethel Gladstone (1870-1911), socialist and feminist, was born on 20 July 1870 at 17 Pembridge Square, London, the only daughter of John Hall Gladstone (1827-1902), professor of chemistry at the Royal Institution, and his second wife, Margaret Thompson King (died 1870), daughter of a Presbyterian minister and niece of Lord Kelvin. Margaret's mother died soon after her birth and she was brought up with half-sisters from her father's previous marriage in a religious and socially aware household. John Gladstone was a committed Liberal who served on the London school board for twenty-one years and was a founder member of the Young Men's Christian Association. Margaret Gladstone was educated at the Doreck College for Girls in Bayswater and the women's department of King's College and studied political economy under Millicent Fawcett. She was attracted to evangelicalism and taught a weekly class for servant girls at the Nassau Senior Training Home when she was seventeen. In 1889 she took Sunday school classes for boys and worked in boys' clubs. By the age of twenty-three she had become manager for several board schools, secretary of the Hoxton and Haggerston Nursing Association, and a visitor for the Charity Organization Society in Hoxton. 
This was a common pattern of activities for young women who wished to lead purposeful lives. In Margaret Gladstone's case, however, contact with working-class poverty led to more radical political ideas. Initially influenced by the Christian socialists Charles Kingsley and F. D. Maurice, she was drawn further towards socialist politics in the 1890s by the speeches of the trade union leader Ben Tillett and by reading 'Fabian Essays' (1893). Her work for the Charity Organization Society and the influence of an old schoolfriend, Lily Montagu, the organizer of the West London Jewish Girls' Clubs, brought her into contact with the Women's Industrial Council (WIC), a body which investigated women's working conditions and promoted policies to improve them. Inspired by Amelia Jane (Amie) Hicks and Mrs Hogg, both active members of the WIC, she acknowledged by 1895 that she was now a socialist. It was in the same year that she met her future husband, (James) Ramsay MacDonald (1866-1937), who, after her death, was to become the first Labour prime minister. Margaret Gladstone joined the Independent Labour Party in April 1896 and was married in November of the same year. The MacDonalds set up home at 3 Lincoln's Inn Fields which became a centre for labour activists at home and from abroad. They had three daughters, including Ishbel MacDonald, political hostess and local politician, and three sons, including Malcolm John MacDonald, and David, who died in 1910. 
Margaret MacDonald had a private income of $460 a year and is most often remembered for the financial and emotional support and security that she gave to her husband. However, the importance of her own contribution to the labour movement has come to be recognized. She was one of a small group of middle-class women who concentrated on improving the lives of female industrial workers. The Women's Industrial Council, which she joined in 1894, provided a focus for her activities. She was secretary of the council's legal and statistical committee, and a member of its investigations and education committees. On behalf of the WIC she carried out investigations into home working in London, the results of which were published in 1897, and gave evidence to the 1906 select committee on home work. She helped to produce a series of studies on women workers, one of which, 'Women in the Printing Trades' (1904), was edited by her husband. In the early 1900s Margaret MacDonald drew attention to the needs of unemployed women. Through her efforts the central unemployment board of London appointed a special women's work committee which established municipal workrooms for clothing workers. She helped to organize a march of unemployed women in Whitehall in 1905 and in 1907 initiated a national conference on the unemployment of women dependent on their own earnings. In the same year she gave evidence to the royal commission on the poor laws and provided a memorandum on women's unemployment. Industrial education for women and girls was another interest of Margaret MacDonald. She was partly responsible for the decision of the London county council to establish the first trade school for girls at the Borough Polytechnic in 1904 and organized national conferences on the industrial training of women and girls in 1907 and 1908. 
Alongside her work for the WIC Margaret MacDonald also took an active part in the National Union of Women Workers. As chairman of the industrial committee and secretary of the legislation committee she was involved in a wide range of issues including housing, the registration of midwives and nurses, the early closing of shops, and the appointment of women probation officers. She gave many lectures on these subjects, and between 1899 and 1909 wrote most of the industrial section of the 'Englishwoman's Year Book'. One of her last campaigns was to attempt to gain better terms for women under the 'National Insurance Act' of 1911 by urging Lloyd George to include non-working wives and married home workers. In the last few years of her life Margaret MacDonald was president of a new organization, the Women's Labour League, which was established in 1906 to encourage women to become involved in Labour politics and to seek improvements in the work and family lives of working-class women. Margaret MacDonald supported women's enfranchisement from an adult suffrage position, but was never willing to give the issue priority. Despite her long-standing interest in working conditions, and her own attempts to combine motherhood and public activities, she believed that women's most important role was in the home and she was consistent in her opposition to married women's paid employment. 
With so many causes to pursue and several young children to bring up it is little wonder that Margaret MacDonald's life at Lincoln's Inn Fields was chaotic. Margaret Bondfield, the trade union leader and socialist, recalled that she would beg Margaret MacDonald: 'Come back to my rooms, then I can be sure of getting your attention! What with babies, telephones and callers, etc.... it is impossible at your home' (Collette, 44). Margaret MacDonald was eulogized by her husband in a sentimental memoir published in 1912, but other contemporaries remembered her as a strong-minded campaigner who could be tenacious in her opinions. Her opposition to the 'Trade Board Bill', which would have set a minimum wage for home workers, led to a fundamental disagreement between herself and Clementina Black, president of the WIC, which split the council. Margaret MacDonald's involvement in the relationship between George Belt, a married organizer for the Independent Labour Party, and Dora Montefiore, a wealthy socialist and suffragist, in which she was sued for libel, showed a moralistic side to her character which was also revealed in her crusade to abolish the employment of women as barmaids. 
Margaret MacDonald died unexpectedly, aged forty-one, on 8 September 1911 at her home, 3 Lincoln's Inn Fields, from blood poisoning due to an internal ulcer. Overwork and stress were thought to have contributed to her early death. After months of controversy, she had been obliged to sever her connections with the Women's Industrial Council, and this caused her acute distress. Services were conducted on 12 September at her home and at Golders Green crematorium, where she was cremated. Two services were also held for her at Leicester (where her husband had his parliamentary seat) and her ashes were buried at Spynie churchyard near Lossiemouth. Three memorials were created: a baby clinic was set up in her memory at North Kensington and a new ward was named after her at Leicester Children's Hospital by the Women's Labour League; a bronze statue, designed by her husband, was unveiled in Lincoln's Inn Fields, on 19 December 1914. 


@@@@@


doc= 45463


Manning, Dame (Elizabeth) Leah (1886-1977), educationist and politician, was born on 14 April 1886 at Burrish Street, Droitwich, the eldest of twelve children of Charles William Perrett and his wife, Harriet Margaret Tappin, both officers in the Salvation Army. Her mother had been a teacher and her father worked for a time in the family timber business. After her parents emigrated to Canada, Leah was brought up in Stamford Hill, London, in her grandfather's family, a household of evangelical Methodism and radical Liberal politics. She attended St John's School, Bridgwater, and then the Misses Thorns' Select Academy for Young Ladies in London, where she met the Revd Stewart Headlam, whose Christian socialism had an important influence on her own beliefs. In 1906 she entered Homerton Teacher Training College, Cambridge. She was introduced to the university Fabian Society by Hugh Dalton, who became a lifelong political friend, and also joined the Independent Labour Party. Her first teaching post was in a slum school in Cambridge, where her indignation at the poverty and malnutrition of the children contributed to the development of her socialism and commitment to progressive education. She set up an after-school play centre and campaigned (through her membership of the Cambridge Trades Council and of the National Council of Women) for the provision of milk for the schoolchildren, almost losing her job when she condemned the policy of the education committee in unequivocal terms. 
On 26 July 1913 Leah Perrett married William Henry Manning (died 1952), who worked at the university solar physics laboratory. Their only child, a daughter, was born in 1918, but lived for just three weeks. At the outbreak of the First World War, the Cambridge education authority relaxed the marriage bar, enabling Leah Manning to continue in her teaching post. As a pacifist and internationalist she abhorred the war and its consequences and made annual visits to Germany from 1918, building links with socialists there. 
In 1920 Leah Manning was appointed head of the new Open Air School in Cambridge for undernourished children, a post in which she achieved success and fulfilment. She continued to be deeply involved in Labour Party and trade union activities in Cambridge in the 1920s, supporting the general strike (despite her position as a magistrate), and attempting to unionize women manual workers in the city. She was elected in 1924 to the national executive committee of her own union, the National Union of Teachers (NUT), and was also active in the left-wing Teachers' Labour League and its successor from 1928, the National Association of Labour Teachers. 
In 1930 Leah Manning served as president of the NUT, only the fourth woman to be elected to that position. At this time she sought a parliamentary seat, and won East Islington for Labour in a by-election in February 1931, losing it, however, in the general election in October. In the same year she also lost her seat on the national executive committee of the Labour Party, which she had held since 1930. She was appointed assistant education officer to the NUT, and continued in this post until 1942. 
Always on the left of the Labour Party, Leah Manning became increasingly involved in opposing the threat of fascism in the 1930s and served as joint secretary of the Co-ordinating Committee against War and Fascism from 1934. She visited Spain at the outbreak of the civil war in 1936, and took a major part in organizing British fund-raising for medical supplies and transport. In 1937, at the request of the Basque government, she travelled to the besieged city of Bilbao and successfully arranged the evacuation of 4000 children to Britain. By this time she had modified her anti-war views and accepted the idea of collective military security. During the Second World War, Leah Manning severely criticized the government's handling of evacuation. She was promoted in 1943 to head the organization department of the NUT, and was involved in the preparation of the 1944 'Education Bill'. 
In the 1945 Labour landslide Leah Manning won the marginal seat of Epping and returned to the House of Commons. As in 1931 she made foreign affairs and education her particular interests as a back-bencher, as well as the agricultural concerns of her constituency. She supported the idea of a federated Europe and criticized the increasing anti-Soviet policy of the West. She was also known as a forceful advocate of women's rights. Although she described herself as 'never outstandingly feminist', Leah Manning was well aware of male hostility towards powerful women, both in the NUT and the House of Commons, but she did not allow it to cramp her activities. She had worked for equal pay and birth control from the 1920s, and during her post-war parliamentary career pressed the government on equal pay, took up the issue of analgesia in childbirth, and raised a number of other questions concerning women's rights. 
Leah Manning lost her seat in 1950 and failed to regain it in the two following elections. After her political career ended she returned to teaching, in a friend's private school in Harlow, until her eventual retirement in 1970. A major post-war commitment was family planning, and in 1964 she started a controversial new clinic in Harlow providing contraception for unmarried couples. She was made a DBE in 1966 for political and public services. Dame Leah Manning died at home at the NUT Home for Retired Teachers at Elstree Manor, Barnet Lane, Elstree, Hertfordshire, on 15 September 1977, aged ninety-one. She and her husband (who predeceased her on 22 January 1952) lived apart in their later years. 
Leah Manning was a tall and well-built woman, a hugely energetic campaigner, and a fiery orator. She was a left-wing socialist whose political outlook rested on a warm humanitarian commitment rather than a theoretical position. Her lifelong passion was education and the creation of a more just society for women, men, and children. She bequeathed her body for medical research. 


@@@@@


doc= 45464


Nevinson, Margaret Wynne (1858-1932), women's rights activist, was born at Vicarage House, Lower Church Gate, Leicester, on 11 January 1858, the daughter of the Revd Timothy Jones ('c'.1813-1873/4) and his wife, Mary Louisa ('c'.1830-1888). Her father, vicar of St Margaret's Church, Leicester, was a classical scholar who taught her Latin and Greek alongside her five brothers. Her mother had more traditional notions of appropriate pursuits for her only daughter. A brief, unhappy spell in an Oxford Anglican convent school was followed by finishing school in Paris. The unexpected death of her father increased Margaret's wish to live independently. She tried governessing, then went to Cologne as a pupil teacher in a professor's family. In the early 1880s she became a classics mistress at South Hampstead high school, London. She also studied for examinations in Education, German, and Latin, becoming one of sixty-three women who gained the title and diploma of lady literate in arts in 1882 from St Andrews University. 
On 18 April 1884 in London Margaret Jones married a childhood friend, the journalist Henry Woodd Nevinson (1856-1941). They spent a year in Germany, Henry studying at Jena University while Margaret resumed teaching English. Their daughter (Mary) Philippa, who became a talented musician, was born in Germany. After returning to London (encouraged by Samuel and Henrietta Barnett) they moved to workmen's flats in Whitechapel. Margaret Nevinson taught French evening classes at Toynbee Hall and helped with St Jude's Girls' Club. She then became a rent collector in artisans' dwellings. In 1887 the Nevinsons moved to Hampstead. Their son, born in August 1889, was the artist Christopher Richard Wynne Nevinson. His autobiography describes growing up as part of the Hampstead intelligentsia. His mother was 'always a pioneer', from her shingled hair and hatred of lace curtains to her espousal of modern art, European outlook, and commitment to social justice (C. R. W. Nevinson, 6). In 1901 the Nevinsons bought a house in Downside Crescent, Haverstock Hill, where Margaret lived for the rest of her life. By now Margaret and Henry's lives were running along separate grooves, not least because of the latter's night newspaper work. Henry also became a war correspondent so was frequently away for months. The marriage suffered though they never formally separated. 
Margaret Nevinson was a school manager for twenty-five years, initially for the London school board in the East End, then for the London county council (north St Pancras). In 1904 she became a Hampstead poor-law guardian, determined to root out inefficiency and expose anomalies, particularly where they had an impact on poor women. Her greatest contribution was probably not so much through the weekly meetings she attended so regularly as in publicizing the problems of the poor law. She did this through talks to women's suffrage groups, articles, and stories. In 1918 she published twenty-six tales known as 'Workhouse Characters'. These included one story which had earlier been turned into a one-act play called 'In the Workhouse'. Performed in 1911 in the Kingsway Theatre by Edy Craig's Pioneer Players, it dramatized the fact that a married woman could be compelled to remain in a workhouse simply because of her husband's marital authority. The stir this provoked helped change the law in 1913. Gender-specific legislation discriminating against married women was increasingly the focus of Margaret Nevinson's writings whether through pamphlets such as 'The Legal Wrongs of Women' (Women's Freedom League, 1923) or via her thinly disguised autobiographical stories, 'Fragments of Life' (1922). 
Margaret Nevinson joined a number of women's suffrage groups. A committed Christian, she was a member of the Church League for Women's Suffrage, spoke for the Cymric Suffrage Union (her father, originally from Lampeter, was a Welsh speaker) and was treasurer of the Women Writers' Suffrage League. Her main commitment was, however, to the Women's Freedom League (WFL). She was a founder member in 1907, became treasurer of the Hampstead branch and was widely known as a witty speaker with a good stock of stories. She frequently invoked classical and biblical themes to illustrate points. She participated in passive resistance such as the suffrage picket outside parliament. 
An early trainee in massage, during the war Margaret Nevinson treated wounded Belgian soldiers. Although she had refused to speak on behalf of parties or causes other than suffrage prior to gaining the vote, once enfranchised she supported the Liberal Party. She also lectured on the League of Nations and became a vice-president of the Women's Peace Crusade. In 1927 she was elected to the committee of the Society of Women Journalists. Her most significant post-war public service was, however, as a pioneer female justice of the peace. Nominated by the WFL, in June 1920 she became the first woman in London to adjudicate at criminal petty sessions. With her experience and self-confessed 'passion for justice' and 'devotion to logic' (M. W. Nevinson, 254), she again played a crucial role in Hampstead's affairs. She also visited the United States to study the American probationary system. In 1921 she was one of three women appointed to the lord chancellor's London county justices advisory committee. Margaret Nevinson's autobiography was published in 1926. Her final years were lonely ones, plagued by depression. She died of kidney failure at her Hampstead home, 4 Downside Crescent, on 8 June 1932. She was buried on 11 June at St Stephen's, Rosslyn Hill, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 45465


Turbervill, Edith Picton- (1872-1960), social reformer, was born on 13 June 1872 at Lower House, Fownhope, Herefordshire, the daughter of Captain John Picton-Warlow ('b'. 1838), an officer in the Indian army, and his second wife, Eleanor Temple (died 1887). She and her twin Beatrice were the third and fourth children of the eight sons and three daughters (including three sets of twins) born of this marriage; her father had also had two children from a previous marriage. Edith and several siblings spent their early years in Brighton in the care of a maiden aunt, but in 1883 her parents returned from India and after a brief spell in Bruges moved the family to the Vale of Glamorgan in Wales. There Edith passed a happy and vigorous country childhood, seemingly little marred by the death of her mother in 1887 and her father's remarriage two years later. Initially educated by governesses, she was sent to the Royal School in Bath in her late teens. 
In 1892 John Picton-Warlow inherited the Ewenni Priory estate and took the name Picton-Turbervill. The family now entered a period of real affluence, and Edith led the life of a country squire's daughter, attending house parties and balls, and teaching Sunday school at the local church. On 13 June 1895, however, in the unlikely venue of an express train from London to Bridgend, she had a conversion experience, and from that date entered on a life of religious activism. She began by proselytizing to the navvies building the Vale of Glamorgan Railway, and then secured her father's consent to train for a year in mission work at a Mildmay school in London (a training that included 'practical work' in the Shoreditch slums) and then to take a post with the Young Women's Christian Association (YWCA) in India. With the exception of a year's return to England following a bout of typhoid in 1905, Picton-Turbervill remained in India from 1900 until 1908, where she in turn lectured on English literature at a women's college in Calcutta, founded (with Mary Dobson) a settlement for university women in Kamballa, opened a holiday home for Indian girls in Simla, and (with Marjorie Hobbs) co-ordinated YWCA work in Bangalore. Picton-Turbervill enjoyed this mix of social service and evangelism, and left India only after a severe attack of malaria. 
She returned to a country and to friends much preoccupied by questions of social reform, and in that atmosphere her own concerns widened. She continued to work for the YWCA, as the chairman of its foreign department in 1909 (and hence responsible for the training of workers sent all over the world) and its national vice-president from 1914 to 1920 and from 1922 to 1928, but she found her theological convictions changing. Believing that women could bring a new spirit of devotion and service to both religious and public life, she joined with Maude Royden to call on the Church of England to open the ministry to women, and published several essays and books -- including 'Christ and Woman's Power' (1919), 'Musings of a Lay Woman' (1919), and, with Canon Streeter, 'Women and the Church' (1917) -- calling for a return to Christ-centred doctrine and for wider lay involvement within the church. She also became active in the non-militant wing of the women's suffrage movement, and while she worked to set up hostels, canteens, and clubs for women workers during the war (for which she was made an OBE in 1917), she was troubled by the government's bellicose attitude and in 1915 was one of the women who sought unsuccessfully to attend the International Women's Peace Conference at The Hague. 
In January of 1919, having concluded that its programme was most in keeping with Christian ethics, Picton-Turbervill joined the Labour Party. Well known in reform-minded circles, she unsuccessfully contested North Islington in November 1922 and Stroud in October 1924, before being returned for The Wrekin in Shropshire in the general election of June 1929. One of only fourteen women MPs (nine of them Labour members) in the 1929-31 parliament, Picton-Turbervill's influence as a back-bencher was limited, but she successfully sponsored a private member's bill outlawing the pronunciation of a sentence of death on a pregnant woman, served on the ecclesiastic committee of the Commons and the Lords and, perhaps equally important, insisted that women MPs (like their male colleagues) be provided with bathing facilities in the Commons. On friendly terms with Ramsay MacDonald, Picton-Turbervill abstained from the 'no confidence' motion supported by Labour MPs on the formation of the National Government but declined to join the 'National Labour' camp. Remaining in the party, she was defeated in a straight fight against a 'national' candidate in October 1931. 
In the thirties Picton-Turbervill withdrew from some of her earlier philanthropic involvements but remained active in women's international organizations, leading the British delegation at the International Alliance of Women congresses in Istanbul in 1935 and Copenhagen in 1939. In 1936 she was appointed by J. H. Thomas, then colonial secretary, to a three-member commission to investigate the much-discussed problem of indentured girl servants, known as 'mui tsai', in Hong Kong and Malaya. Fears that the 'mui tsai' were essentially slaves had been expressed in the Commons on several occasions (including by Picton-Turbervill), and the testimony she heard in Hong Kong and Malaya did not allay them. Breaking with her malleable co-members, she wrote a minority report calling for the registration and inspection of all transferred children; more remarkably, she was able to bring the governor of Malaya, and ultimately the Colonial Office, around to her position, resulting in an expansion of child welfare services in both colonies. During the Second World War she worked for a time for the Ministry of Information. 
Picton-Turbervill's life resists easy summary, for she was active in many arenas. Yet all of her commitments -- from feminism to labour politics -- stemmed from her religious beliefs. Espousing a 'Christ-centred' faith, she remained critical of the church, calling for liturgical reform and for the ordination of women long before such positions had much support. And while her religiosity, her philanthropic concerns, her support for sexual purity campaigns, and even her singleness might appear to mark her out as a rather Victorian figure, she was in many respects forthright, pragmatic, and modern. Vigorous, tall (5 feet 10 inches), and physically active, she was very close to her twin sister, Beatrice (who for many years ran a girls' hostel), and maintained a wide circle of women friends, among them Frances Balfour, Chrystal Macmillan, Lilian Baylis, Cicely Hamilton, and Emily Kinnaird, with whom she for a time lived. Distressed by the propensity in the twenties and thirties to label such friendships as 'unwholesome' or perverse, in her autobiography published in 1939 Picton-Turbervill insisted 'with a ring of challenge' that women's loving friendships could be 'as deep, as beautiful, and as exhilarating as any human relationship' ('Life is Good', 94). Having spent the last years of her life living near Cheltenham, Edith Picton-Turbervill died at Barnwood House Hospital, Barnwood, Gloucestershire, on 31 August 1960. 


@@@@@


doc= 45466


Ward, Irene Mary Bewick, Baroness Ward of North Tyneside (1895-1980), politician, was born at 28 St Stephen's Mansions, Westminster, London, on 23 February 1895, the only child of (Alfred) John Bewick Ward (1855/6-1901), an architect who designed some of the mosaics in Westminster Cathedral, and his wife, Elvina Mary Ellis (died 1944). After the death of her husband, who left his family in straitened circumstances, Elvina moved with Irene to Newcastle upon Tyne, and eventually settled in Gosforth, where an uncle paid for their lodgings and Irene's education at Newcastle Church High School. Elvina ensured that her daughter grew up aware of the wider world, including women's suffrage -- an issue which interested mother more than daughter. Despite the lack of money, Irene had elocution and dancing lessons, acted in amateur dramatics, and was taken by her mother to the theatre. At sixteen she wanted to be a writer -- some of her stories were published in the local press -- but she earned her living as a secretary, her work for the coalowner and Liberal MP Sir Cecil Cochrane being the most significant of her various posts. He gave her financial support in the early stages of her career. During the First World War she delivered her first public speech, deputizing for the head of the Voluntary Aid Detachment unit of the St John Ambulance Brigade to address stretcher-bearers leaving for the front. 
Acting as a poll clerk in the 1918 general election probably marked the beginning of Ward's political activity. Her friendship with Sir George Renwick MP and Lady Renwick led in 1920 to an invitation to be the central Newcastle Conservative association's honorary secretary. At the 1923 Conservative Party conference at Plymouth her public-speaking skills brought her to the attention of the party leadership. She was invited to contest Morpeth in the 1924 general election (despite being too young to vote) after she had failed to be selected for Wansbeck. The party's chief organizer, Sir T. J. Leigh Maclachlan, was impressed by the manner in which she took the Wansbeck rejection and advised the Morpeth constituency association that the party would pay her election expenses. The seat was unwinnable in 1924 but Irene put up a spirited fight, and came second to the Labour candidate. Her bravery in dealing with the unorthodox tactics of some of her opponent's supporters won her electorate's regard and instilled in her a lifelong respect for miners. 
Undeterred by another unsuccessful contest at Morpeth in 1929, Ward was one of the sixty-two women candidates to stand at the 1931 general election. In one of the two all-women contests at that election she defeated her Labour opponent, Margaret Bondfield, at Wallsend. On the night of her victory she vowed never to forget her obligation to maintain the trust of those constituents who were not natural Conservative voters. Despite her later description of herself as a progressive Conservative and membership of the Tory Reform Group, her own brand of Conservatism was essentially pragmatic and too personal to lead to ministerial office. But she thrived as a back-bencher. Before the war she was one of the two most frequent women speakers from the 1931 intake. 
Ward's maiden speech in May 1932 during the debate on the 'Coal Mines Bill' criticized the government for failing to guarantee miners' wages. She was not the only woman MP to master 'masculine' topics such as shipbuilding, engineering, and mining, but this mastery, and her tenacity and zest, contributed to her re-election for Wallsend in 1935. That result was very much a personal triumph, for several of her male colleagues in the north-east lost their seats and the number of Conservative women MPs was cut from twelve to six. 
Ward's lifelong campaign against injustice and in defence of the individual stemmed from her belief that though she had known 'hard luck', many others had known harder luck and she had a duty to them. The first of the four private members' bills which she successfully introduced (still an unbroken record at the end of the century) was an amendment in 1937 to the 'Poor Law Act', allocating 2's'. weekly pocket money to elderly inhabitants in poor-law institutions. She championed international as well as national and constituency causes. Between 1933 and 1935 she campaigned to ensure that Indian women's suffrage was incorporated into the 'Government of India Bill'. In 1937 and 1938 she was a member of a committee of MPs concerned with the evacuation of women and children during the Spanish Civil War; and she represented Britain at the League of Nations. During the Second World War she was concerned with issues of women's employment and equal pay; she chaired the women's power committee, which advised the Ministry of Labour, and visited factories and Auxiliary Territorial Service bases. From August 1943 to February 1944 she travelled through China, India, and the Middle East on behalf of the Ministry of Information, explaining the British war effort; later she visited newly liberated France. 
After losing her Wallsend seat in the 1945 general election Ward embarked on more official speaking tours overseas; she also toured camps for displaced persons in Palestine and Germany and attended the Nuremberg trials with her friend Thelma Cazalet-Keir. This work and her appointment as a Newcastle JP absorbed some of her prodigious energy until she was adopted by the Conservatives as prospective parliamentary candidate for Tynemouth in 1946. She was returned to parliament in 1950. The 1950s and early 1960s saw Ward actively campaigning for women's economic rights, mainly through the Equal Pay Campaign Committee. She published an account of the Women's Transport Service, 'F.A.N.Y. Invicta' (1955), and lobbied for an official history of the Special Operations Executive, an organization in which she had had many friends. She promoted the interests of nurses, service widows, pensioners, and others living on small incomes. Her 1954 private member's bill 'Right of Entry (Gas and Electricity Boards)' protected householders' rights. She was also active on behalf of the Carl Rosa touring opera. She became the longest serving woman MP, holding the Tynemouth seat until the February 1974 general election, when she stood down. Her contribution to political life was acknowledged in a series of awards: CBE (1929), DBE (1955), CH (1973), and a life peerage (1974). 
Irene Ward lacked the personal ambition of many of her contemporaries. Her manner had always been direct and she never lacked courage, but in later life her understanding of the complexities of an issue was sometimes imperfect and her political judgement questionable. Her political style and willingness to harry governments, even to the extent of being excluded from the house for five days by the speaker in 1968, made her a popular but also, in the eyes of some commentators, a slightly odd national figure. The large hats, capacious handbags, and bold jewellery she favoured might appear to mirror her personality but her character was more complex. Some found her difficult to know but her kindness was remembered fondly by many. Although several men were attracted to her, she does not appear to have had any intimate relationships. She once remarked enigmatically (Sleight, 107) that she would have liked to marry, though only if she could have married the man she wanted. An undated note in her papers records her belief that work and charity could compensate for the absence of love. The pivotal figures in her life were her mother and Sir Cecil Cochrane. Outside politics her great interest was travelling. Domestic bases were a flat in Gosforth, shared with her mother until the latter's death in 1944, Thelma Cazalet-Keir's house in Eaton Place, the Ladies' Carlton Club, and the Sloane Club in London, but her natural habitat was the houses of parliament. She died on 26 April 1980 in the Knaresborough Nursing Home, 7 Knaresborough Place, Kensington, London, following a fall. She was cremated and her ashes were transported by a fishing boat from her old constituency and scattered in the North Sea. 


@@@@@


doc= 45467


Petzold, Gertrude von (1876-1952), Unitarian minister and public lecturer, was born in Thorn, East Prussia, of aristocratic ancestry. Her father was an officer in the Prussian army, while her mother instructed her thoroughly in the Lutheran catechism. After teacher training at a seminary, she soon became impatient of the limited opportunities afforded to women in Germany, and at the same time grew increasingly critical of the literal interpretation of Lutheran dogma. Not yet twenty, she made her way first to St Andrews University in Scotland (1895-7), then to Edinburgh University, where she spent four years, and thence in 1901 to Manchester College, Oxford, where she became the first woman to train for the ministry in England, and so qualified in 1904. 
In order to pursue her vocation, von Petzold needed a church both sufficiently liberal in its theological stance and willing to accept a woman as its minister. The Free Christian (Unitarian) church in Leicester was to fulfil this role when -- in competition with seven male candidates -- the church's 150 members, determined to rise above convention, invited her unanimously to their pulpit. R. A. Armstrong wrote in 'The Inquirer' (10 September 1904): 'We recognize the courage of her who tonight breaks a perverse and mischievous tradition'; while Joseph Wood at her induction as the first woman minister in England wondered if women might not have special qualities for ministry, 'considering that there were some 100,000 sermons delivered every Sunday by men' ('The Inquirer', 8 Oct 1904). 
Eloquent in the pulpit and on many a suffragist platform, von Petzold became a 'cause celebre' and her photo was sold on the streets of Leicester. She visited Berlin in 1906, lecturing on liberal Christianity, and conducted a German service in the American church there, the first woman ever to do so in Berlin. In 1907 she was the only European woman delegate to attend the Fourth International Congress of Religious Liberals in Boston, and in a lecture which outlined the role of women in the early Christian church she argued powerfully that in the twentieth century women's right to prophesy and minister should be restored. 
In 1908 Gertrude von Petzold left Leicester for the United States and allied herself to a group of radical Unitarian women ministers working in Iowa and Illinois; she deputized for the Revd Mary Safford as chaplain in the state legislature in Des Moines. On returning to England in 1910, she became minister at Small Heath in Birmingham, where she declared her conviction 'There is no work in the world, except perhaps the slaughtering of other people, that a woman cannot do as efficiently as a man if she is given the same training and opportunity' ('Christian Life', 7 Jan 1911). She attracted large congregations and was much in demand as a speaker: notably at King's Weigh House Church in London, where she lectured on Luther, Calvin, and Wycliffe; and in 1911, on another visit to Germany, when she preached at the Lutheran church in Bremen and at the Swiss Reformed churches in Zurich and Basel, speaking generally on the ministry of women. In England R. J. Campbell, proponent of the New Theology, thought her 'one of the most brilliant women speakers of the day, a scholar of repute' (newsletter of Macclesfield Congregational Church, 1911). She freely associated with religious liberals of all denominations and stated that she was keen to unite 'Trinitarians, Unitarians, Baptists, Methodists, Swedenborgians, Churchmen, Agnostics and avowed Atheists'. Unitarians, she thought, were sometimes too conservative! 
By now the First World War was in progress and von Petzold's application for naturalization had lapsed because of her time in America. Despite the support of civic leaders in Leicester and Birmingham both for her and 'her friend and helper' Rosa Widmann, her application and Rosa's were turned down and they had to return to Germany. Here, at length (1917), she became pastor of the Free Evangelical congregations in Konigsberg and Tilsit -- the only free churches in East Prussia -- before taking a PhD and becoming a lecturer in English at Frankfurt University. 
As a committed internationalist von Petzold promoted Anglo-German relations whenever possible, even in the first year of the First World War before she was deported, and anti-German feeling resulted in arson at the Small Heath church. Between the wars she made several trips to England motivated by the desire for reconciliation. And soon after the Second World War she wrote an article for 'The Inquirer' (9 August 1947) entitled 'English refugees in Germany', having observed among the bombed ruins of Frankfurt the shell of the Weissfrauenkirche, which in the sixteenth century had sheltered a congregation of English refugees of the reformed faith who had fled persecution in the reign of Mary Tudor and had found there 'a large-minded benevolence and understanding which would never be wiped out of the hearts of the English people' ('Christian Register', Sept 1952) -- a silver goblet presented by the English community in 1558 still testifies to the fact. Gertude von Petzold saw it as a significant reminder of the deep-rooted associations between England and Germany. Her large sympathies remained clear at the time of her death in 1952, when she was devoting her energies to the cause of refugees then flocking into West Germany from eastern Europe. She died at Bad Homberg, near Frankfurt, West Germany, on 14 March 1952. 
Gertude von Petzold's involvement as a woman in liberal religious developments in Britain, Germany, and America in the first half of the twentieth century, and in the women's movement, especially with regard to suffrage, earns her a niche of no little significance and interest. 


@@@@@


doc= 45468


Taylor, Clementia (1810-1908), women's activist, was born on 17 December 1810 at Brockdish, Norfolk, one of twelve children of John Doughty (died 1837), a farmer and tanner, and his wife, Mary ('nee' Simons). The family's faith was Unitarian and it was probably through a Unitarian connection that Clementia (known to her friends and family as Mentia) was employed as governess to the daughters of a Unitarian minister, J. P. Malleson (1796-1869), who ran a boys' boarding-school in Hove. On 27 September 1842 at West Gate Chapel, Lewes, she married Peter Alfred Taylor (1819-1891), a cousin of her pupils. Her obituarist was to describe her as: 'somewhat tall as well as slight; the features were refined and regular -- the head well formed and carried, the hair bright blonde, the brow broad, the speaking grey eyes rather deep set, the nose slightly acquiline ['sic'], a certain firmness about the mouth, a delicately pointed chin. ('Englishwoman's Review', 157)' P. A. Taylor was a partner in the family firm, Courtaulds, a wealthy man and radical Liberal MP for Leicester (1862-84). After their marriage, which was childless, the couple were involved in the main social and political movements of the day. Clementia Taylor was, from 1845, a close friend of Mazzini, helping him by organizing concerts and bazaars for the benefit of the school for poor Italian children which he had established, and by finding employment for Italian exiles. The Taylors were both concerned that slavery should be abolished: Clementia took under her wing, and into her home, Sarah Parker Remond (1824-1894), a young black woman who toured Britain lecturing on the slavery issue. On the outbreak of the American Civil War she formed the Freedmen's Aid Association and in 1863 founded and became honorary secretary of the newly formed Ladies' London Emancipation Society, the first national female anti-slavery society. 
In 1860 the Taylors had rented Aubrey House in Kensington, and in 1863 bought its freehold. This early eighteenth-century house, once the country home of Lady Mary Coke, became a centre for mid-nineteenth-century radical movements. Elizabeth Malleson, the daughter-in-law of J. P. Malleson, wrote: 'Those monthly [other sources say fortnightly] parties during the London season were unique and very enjoyable, for Mentia and her husband... were admirably free of class prejudice in persons and opinions, so that all kinds of literary people -- refugees from several countries -- artists and humble lovers of social enjoyment, mingled with supporters of 'causes' of all kinds. ('Elizabeth Malleson', 98)' The American author Louisa May Alcott also described the charm of Clementia Taylor's salon: 'I consider her a model Englishwoman -- simple, sincere and accomplished, full of good sense, intelligence and energy. Her house is open to all, friend and stranger, black and white, rich and poor. Great men and earnest women meet there.... Though wealthy and living in an historical mansion... the hostess [is] the simplest dressed lady. (Alcott, 281-2)' In 1846 Clementia Taylor had been on the committee of the Whittington Club, a radical Unitarian venture launched in 1846 which offered working people rational recreation and amusement, while providing libraries, reading-rooms, and lecture halls. Following this initiative, and that of Elizabeth and Frank Malleson in founding the Working Women's College in 1864, the Taylors opened in 1869, in the grounds of Aubrey House, the Aubrey Institute, to give young men and women the opportunity of rectifying a deficient education. Mary Grant, wife of P. A. Taylor's secretary, was employed as a teacher and the Taylors equipped a lending library and reading-room with over 500 books. Their friends, many eminent, were volunteer lecturers at the institute, which continued successfully until the Taylors were forced, by P. A.'s ill health, to sell Aubrey House and move to Brighton. Clementia carried on her philanthropic work by establishing in 1875 a Home for Young Women Servants in Pimlico. 
Clementia Taylor was on the organizing committee of the 1866 petition in favour of women's suffrage that J. S. Mill presented to parliament; the 1499 signatures were collated in Aubrey House. She was treasurer of the London Provisional Petition Committee set up in 1866 to capitalize on the momentum created by the Mill petition. It was in Aubrey House that this committee's successor, the Committee of the London National Society for Women's Suffrage, held its first meeting on 5 July 1867. Clementia Taylor took the chair in July 1869 at the first public women's suffrage meeting ever held in London. She was joint secretary of the London Society for Women's Suffrage until 1871, when she resigned from the society with other radical members, after a conflict with Mill. At this time George Eliot, a good friend, wrote 'Welcome back from your absorption in the franchise! Somebody else ought to have your share of work now, and you ought to rest' ('George Eliot Letters', 5.150). However, she carried on supporting the cause, chairing meetings and in 1878 rejoining the executive committee of the central committee of the National Society. 
In addition, in the 1870s Clementia Taylor was on the executive committee of the Married Women's Property Committee (1876-82); a member of the committee of the Ladies' National Association for the Repeal of the Contagious Diseases Acts; treasurer of the Personal Rights Association; and on the general committee of Dr Garrett Anderson's newly founded Woman's Hospital in London. She was a member of the council of the Women's Franchise League when it was formed in 1889, and later joined the Women's Emancipation Union, still being a member in 1897. In all her associations Clementia Taylor demonstrated a commitment to a radical interpretation of women's rights. She died at the age of ninety-eight, on 11 April 1908, at her home, 16 Eaton Place, Brighton, after some years of failing health and memory. 


@@@@@


doc= 45469


Tarrant, Dorothy (1885-1973), classical scholar, was born on 7 May 1885 at 6 Craven Terrace, Wandsworth, London, the only daughter (there were two sons) of the Revd William George Tarrant (1853-1928), Unitarian minister and journalist, and his wife, Alice, daughter of Henry Stanley of Manchester. She was educated at home until 1895, then at Wandsworth high school (1895-8) and the Girls' Public Day School Company's Clapham high school (1898-1904). While still at school she was placed in the first class of the examination for a London University external pass degree in classics. In 1904 she won a scholarship to Girton College, Cambridge, where she achieved firsts in the classical tripos, part one (1907) and part two, ancient philosophy (1908). While at Girton she won the Agnata Butler and Therese Montefiore prizes and was awarded the Gilchrist fellowship for research, 1908-9. Cambridge did not then award degrees to women, but as a student of Bedford College, London, she was awarded the University of London BA with first-class honours in classics (1906), followed by an MA in 1909 with a thesis entitled 'The genesis of Plato's theory of ideas'. She took a London PhD in 1930. 
Tarrant became assistant lecturer in classics, Bedford College, University of London, in 1909, and in Greek in 1915. She was also acting head of Latin (1913-14) and was promoted to lecturer in 1921 and to university reader in 1929. In 1936 she became university professor of Greek and head of the department of Greek. Her inaugural lecture was 'Plato and the Greek genius'. She was the first female professor of Greek in Britain and after retiring in 1950 held the title of professor emeritus. She became an honorary fellow of Girton College in 1955 and of Bedford College and of Manchester College, Oxford, in 1969. She was president of the Hellenic Society in 1953-6 and president of the Classical Association in 1957-8. 
Tarrant's academic publications centre on Plato and on Greek conceptions of the soul and their applications to ethics. Her major work, 'The Hippias Major Attributed to Plato' (1928), includes a substantial introduction and commentary. She related the disputed authorship of the dialogue to study of Plato's early metaphysical theory, arguing from her analysis of content, style, and vocabulary that the work belonged to the Platonic period but was not written by Plato. This work together with her 'Imagery in Plato's 'Republic'' ('Classical Quarterly', 1946) and her later article 'Plato as dramatist' ('Journal of Hellenic Studies', 75, 1955) pioneered the analysis of Plato's style. Other significant academic publications by Tarrant include articles, notes, and reviews, mostly on Plato, and 'Early Greek ideas of the soul: Homer to Anaxagoras' ('Transactions of the Society for Promoting the Study of Religion', 1932). Her presidential address to the Classical Association, published in 1958 as 'The long line of torch-bearers', discussed authors and other aspects of the classical tradition. Within this field she included copyists and translators. Her address analysed and compared versions of the 'Odyssey' by Pope, Samuel Butcher and Andrew Lang, and E. V. Rieu, with special attention to the challenges to the translator who wished both to convey the language and ideas of the past and also to relate them to contemporary concerns. 
This interest in the relationship between ancient and modern also infused Tarrant's lectures and publications on Unitarian topics. She explored Plato's contribution to free religious thought, while her writings on temperance, of which she was an advocate, examined biblical and classical sources for evidence of social attitudes to alcohol and to the practical and ethical shortcomings of policies of moderate drinking. 
Tarrant's father had been editor of 'The Inquirer' as well as a major contributor to several hymnals. She followed in this tradition as a contributor to the 'Hibbert Journal' and 'The Inquirer', and to 'A Golden Treasury of the Bible' (1934). She undertook extensive administration and committee work for the Unitarians, and was president of the Unitarian Temperance Association from 1948 to 1951. Her Essex Hall lecture in 1949 was published as 'The Contribution of Plato to Free Religious Thought'. As president of the Unitarian Assembly in 1952-3, her presidential address, 'The visible witness of free religion', which was published in 'The Inquirer' (19 April 1952, 123-4), examined the parallels between religious and personal freedom ('diversity of views is the inevitable concomitant of our freedom'). Her Sims Woodhead memorial lecture (1951) is a valuable document for the social history of Unitarianism in which she commented on her upbringing as a minister's daughter and on changes in the temperance tradition among nonconformists. Alongside her discussion of the drunken Heracles episode in Euripides' 'Alcestis' and the passage in 'Odyssey', xiv on wine ('a crazy thing. It sets the wisest man singing and giggling like a girl'; line 463), she also meditated on the impact of advertising in setting role models for young people. She was visitor to the Unitarian College, Manchester, from 1955 to 1958, its president from 1961 to 1963, and the first woman trustee of Dr Williams's Trust from 1945 to 1973. From 1924 to 1971 she compiled the prayers and readings for the bi-monthly newsletter of the Unitarian Women's League. 
Tarrant was notable as one of the first women to develop a full academic career and also as an example of the links between Unitarianism, women's education, and classical scholarship (particularly in the context of Bedford College). Her published work shows her at the interface between the nineteenth-century tradition of using classical sources as quasi-biblical models for ethical insight and a modern awareness of social change. She lectured on classical subjects to women's groups and to inmates in Holloway prison. Published works and formal photographs represent her as socially conservative and morally earnest. However, friends and colleagues testified to her sense of fun and disarming humour (obituary in 'The Inquirer', 29 September 1973). Her unpublished handwritten lecture notes and some photographs also suggest a rounded personality. As early as 1926 she was lecturing to passengers on a Mediterranean cruise. Her wartime lecture on the history of Bedford College affirms the humanism and international values of scholarship and ruminates on 'what our College stands for and what it can and should achieve'. In the same period of evacuation to Cambridge she lectured, humorously, in May 1941 on a manuscript, 'Socrates and a Friend', supposedly recently discovered. The fragmented document revealed that most of the members of the ancient Academy were women, evacuated from the city to cold and windswept conditions, instituting previously unknown rituals such as 'the hour for making black' and relieved only by the symposia to which they were invited by male sophists (in this connection she inferred that the term 'maidens' in the document might refer merely to the youth of the women). 
In retirement Tarrant lived in Wandsworth, London, lecturing at least until her late seventies and continuing to proof-read for the Lindsey Press. In the year before her death she addressed envelopes for an appeal for 'The Inquirer'. She died of pneumonia and old age at St James's Hospital, Balham, London, on 4 September 1973. She never married. 


@@@@@


doc= 45470


Cunnington, Maud Edith (1869-1951), archaeologist, was born on 24 September 1869 at Vernon House, Briton Ferry, Glamorgan, one of the seven children of Charles Pegge, formerly Pigg ('b'. 1834), surgeon, and his wife, Catherine Milton Leach ('b'. 1837), fifth of the fourteen daughters of Robert Valentine Leach of Devizes, Wiltshire. When Robert Leach's business as a corn merchant failed, he established a private asylum at Briton Ferry where his future son-in-law was a doctor. By the time Catherine married, her father had been able to return to Devizes, where he bought and restored Devizes Castle. Maud was educated briefly at Cheltenham Ladies' College. On 9 July 1889 she married (Edward) Benjamin Howard Cunnington (1861-1950), the son of Henry Cunnington, a wine merchant. Benjamin, who had been a journalist before joining his father's business, was the fourth generation of his family to record and preserve the antiquities of Wiltshire and was for sixty years the honorary curator of Devizes Museum. Maud's involvement with archaeology is said to have developed through the interest of their only child, Edward, whose death in the First World War was a grief from which she never recovered. 
In 1897 the Cunningtons settled at 33 Long Street, Devizes, where Maud spent each winter writing articles and excavation reports and sorting and mending pottery, at which she was expert. To the chagrin of later archaeologists she left no original notes, but her detailed articles in the 'Wiltshire Archaeological Magazine', 1909-42, provide a good overview of her work. In the early days she recorded the destruction of barrows for such purposes as a golf course near Warminster, providing stone for a cowshed floor, and levelling the 'flying course of the new Aviation School on the downs above Upavon' ('Wiltshire Archaeological Magazine', 37, 1912, 603). 
Maud Cunnington's most important contribution was not in rescue work but in original excavations. Most notable of these were the first known Neolithic causewayed camp at Knap Hill, Alton Priors, 1908-9; a village site of the Hallstatt period at All Cannings Cross, 1911 and 1920-22; West Kennet Long Barrow, 1925; Woodhenge, which was named by the Cunningtons, 1926-8; and the Sanctuary on Overton Hill, 1930. She rediscovered the Sanctuary, lost since the eighteenth century, by standing at Stukeley's viewpoint and counting the telegraph poles to a distant glimpse of the site. Woodhenge was first identified from the air since nothing of the former timber structure was visible on the ground. Both Woodhenge and the Sanctuary are the subject of books by her (1923 and 1929). The sites were purchased by the Cunningtons and presented to the nation. 
The Second World War brought excavations to a close, but Maud Cunnington and her husband continued their long-standing involvement with Devizes Museum and with the Wiltshire Archaeological Society, of which she had been elected president in 1931. Their finds were deposited in the museum, and Maud was co-author of the museum catalogue (1934). She is known to have had disagreements with other notable archaeologists; but she was respected for her dedication and integrity and she earned the gratitude of many. 
In recognition of her pioneering work Maud Cunnington was made an honorary life member of the Cambrian Archaeological Association and of the Society of Antiquaries, Scotland. In 1948 she was made CBE for services to archaeology, the first woman to be so honoured; but she probably never knew this. Bedridden since 1947, she suffered from Alzheimer's disease. She and her husband, who predeceased her by three months, were nursed at home by a family friend. She died at her home, 33 Long Street, Devizes, on 28 February 1951, and was cremated on 3 March at Arnos Vale, Bristol. She left almost all her property ($14,000) to Devizes Museum, so enabling a professional curator to be appointed according to her wishes. 


@@@@@


doc= 45472


Langridge, Edith (1864-1959), settlement worker and missionary in India, was born at 36 Marlborough Hill, Marylebone, London, on 21 March 1864, the first daughter and second of seven children (four girls and three boys) of Henry Langridge, a merchant, and his wife, Flora Jane, 'nee' Pope. She was educated at Queen's College, Harley Street, and at Lady Margaret Hall (LMH), Oxford, where she was awarded a scholarship and read classics (1885-8), obtaining second-class honours in honour moderations. Although mathematics had been her best subject at school Miss Wordsworth, the principal of LMH, decided 'Not mathematics, you simply can't come to Oxford and do mathematics' (Mother Edith, 'LMH, 1885-8', 48), and arranged for her to learn Latin from scratch to take the university's responsions examination just six weeks later. She was tall, moved swiftly, and had striking grey-green eyes. Fellow students regarded her as an accomplished all-rounder -- academic, athletic, and practical. She enjoyed the informality of LMH life, and was thoroughly at home in its high Anglican ethos, while displaying a taste for silence that friends often attributed to the influence of her maternal grandmother, a Quaker. 
In 1895 Edith returned briefly to LMH as acting vice-principal (student warden) for one term. In 1897 she was appointed first warden of the Lady Margaret Hall Settlement at 129 Kennington Road, Lambeth, a post she held until 1902. She had first discussed this project with a fellow LMH student, Maggie Benson, in 1886, two years after the opening of Toynbee Hall. They and others continued to work towards its realization even after the opening of the non-denominational Women's University Settlement in Southwark in 1887, and the former students of LMH formally adopted the specifically Anglican initiative in 1896. The bishop of Rochester, Edward Talbot, founder of Lady Margaret Hall, decided to found the proposed LMH Settlement in his diocese, which then included parts of south London now in the diocese of Southwark. Edith gained experience of church and secular social work agencies in the area in preparation for the new project. More than anyone else she established its early character, organization, and range of work among the poor of Lambeth. 
Edith decided that she had a missionary vocation, and studied Swahili with a view to serving with the Universities' Mission to Central Africa. Through Bishop Talbot and Canon Charles Gore she was directed instead towards the Oxford Mission Brotherhood of the Epiphany, founded by Edmund Linwood Strong, to work with them in India and to found a sisterhood. She began to learn Bengali, she and three other volunteers were blessed by Bishop Talbot on 15 October 1902, and they sailed for India soon afterwards. Despite initial health problems she spent the rest of her life with the Oxford Mission Sisterhood of the Epiphany in India, apart from occasional periods of leave in England, including one in the summer of 1928 when she attended the golden jubilee celebrations of LMH in Oxford, and was presented to the duchess of York. She was elected an honorary fellow of LMH in 1933. 
For thirty-two years Edith Langridge lived in Barisal, east of Calcutta. The bishop of Calcutta appointed her sister superior in 1903. She designed the sisters' habit, and helped devise the rule, based on Benedictine principles, which was adopted in 1907, and which placed the sisterhood under the direct religious and financial control of a warden from the brotherhood. She took final vows on 12 January 1913 and was immediately elected mother of the sisterhood, a position she retained until 1943. The community's task at Barisal was to help the brotherhood build up the Christian church in the district, through a girls' boarding-school, a home for needy girls and women, medical work, and outreach in the locality, often by boat. Mother Edith's responsibility, however, was the spiritual, personal, and practical development of the community. Her style was quiet, reserved, and non-authoritarian, but for some of the sisters, too austerely remote and impersonal. In 1928 and 1931 the regular election of the mother superior was deadlocked, with Edith being reinstated only by the action of the warden, followed up by a change in the constitution. 
Mother Edith visited the foundations made elsewhere by the community, including one guiding the early development of a sisterhood in the Orthodox Syrian church, in Malabar. Other projects faced insuperable cultural problems. An equivalent of the Oxford Mission Sisterhood, for Indian women, failed. When instead the original community was opened to Indian women, only two persevered in Mother Edith's long lifetime. In a refuge for girls in Calcutta, the Christian influence of the sisters was mistrusted by the local community. But the sisterhood gradually grew modestly, attracting, among others, two former students of LMH. In 1934 Edith moved to a new venture, a student hostel in Calcutta, then in 1938 to a home for women and small boys in Behala on the city's outskirts. The Calcutta hostel closed in 1940. Political and religious circumstances in the final years of British India prevented the sisters' proposed women's college there from ever finding favour with the authorities, ending Mother Edith's hopes of involvement in higher education in India. In 1943, a new mother superior was elected, and had to face the effects of independence and partition in 1947. 
Mother Edith spent her last years, 1952-9, in Shillong, high in the Assam hills, the final eighteen months in a hospital there run by a Welsh Presbyterian mission. She died at the hospital on 6 May 1959. She compiled some devotional works and wrote some articles on missionary themes. 


@@@@@


doc= 45473


Foxcroft, Helen Charlotte (1865-1950), historian and literary editor, was born on 12 December 1865 at Hinton House, Hinton Charterhouse, Somerset, the eldest of the seven surviving children (two sons and five daughters) of Edward Talbot Day Jones (1837-1911) of Hinton House and his wife, Wilhelmina Colquhoun (1841-1910), daughter of Robert Robertson-Glasgow of Montgreenan, Ayrshire, and Mary Campbell. In 1868 Edward Jones adopted the name of Foxcroft on inheriting the Foxcroft property of Halsteads, in Ingleton, Yorkshire. 
Like many daughters of Victorian gentry Helen Foxcroft was educated at home but by 1886 she had enrolled for 'instruction by correspondence' at Newnham College, Cambridge. From these modest beginnings she developed a passion and a gift for historical research, which in the early 1890s she focused on the life and writings of the Restoration statesman George Savile, first marquess of Halifax (1633-1695), 'the Trimmer'. She was an unusually quick and efficient researcher. Though only a private scholar, in two years she amassed from public and private archives a huge body of material, with the ambitious objective not only of completing a 'Life and letters' of Halifax but an edition, too, of his writings, of which the best known are 'The Character of a Trimmer', 'A Letter to a Dissenter', 'Advice to a Daughter', and 'A Character of King Charles the Second'. 
It was difficult to find a publisher for such an undertaking; during 1894-6 Foxcroft negotiated with John Murray, Macmillan, and the Clarendon Press, but all declined. At last Longmans, Green & Co., to their credit, took it on, and in September 1898 they published in two volumes 'The life and letters of Sir George Savile, bart., first marquis of Halifax &c. With a new edition of his works now for the first time collected and revised'. Longmans, Green & Co. soon found (1901) that this already old-fashioned example of a 'life and letters' was slow to sell. The book's complex documentation, and perhaps the elevated formality of Foxcroft's style, deterred the common reader; more than half the 1000 copies printed were eventually remaindered or destroyed. But her work was welcomed by scholars. Even before publication Thomas Seccombe made substantial use of her manuscript for his article on Halifax in the 'Dictionary of National Biography'. C. H. Firth reviewed it in the 'English Historical Review' (vol. 14, January 1899). He recognized that it would not attract the general public but he judged it 'a contribution of very great value to the history of the later Stuarts and the Revolution' and noted 'much hitherto unpublished or uncollected material'. An example of this was Halifax's record of conversations with William III, discovered by Foxcroft in the Spencer archives. Over the years she continued to receive friendly encouragement from Firth. 
Though not easy to come by, Foxcroft's edition of Halifax's writings (265 pp. in part 2 of the 'Life and Letters') held its own for ninety years as the standard edition, textually superior to the editions by Raleigh (1912) and by Kenyon (1969). It has now been superseded by Mark N. Brown's edition of the works (3 vols., 1989), which incorporates extensive new material unknown to Foxcroft, from drafts in Halifax's hand. 
As a biographer of Halifax, Foxcroft believed in the greatness of her subject, though not uncritically. The occasionally distorting effects of this predisposition in Halifax's favour have been demonstrated, and amply offset, in Brown's own commentaries in his edition. Nevertheless the biography has not been superseded as the quarry for others that she intended it to be. The 'short life' of Halifax that she published in her old age, 'A Character of the Trimmer' (1946), is essentially a condensation of the original work, with some updating. 
Foxcroft was also an authority on the historian and bishop Gilbert Burnet, Halifax's one-time ally and correspondent. In her 'Supplement to Burnet's History of my Own Time' (1902), still important, she revealed what was gained and lost when Burnet revised his manuscript memoirs of the 1680s for his later history. She edited Burnet's letters to Halifax (1907) and contributed a major part to a life of Burnet (1907), with T. E. S. Clarke. 
Helen Foxcroft spent almost all her life at Hinton Charterhouse, where her strong sense of civic duty led her to give much time to political and welfare causes. She supported her brother Charles Talbot Foxcroft, MP for Bath, as speech-writer and researcher, from 1919 until his death in 1929. A devoted Conservative, she lectured and wrote widely on political subjects. She served as a magistrate from 1930 to 1945, and for forty-five years worked for the Soldiers', Sailors' and Airmen's Families Association. A neighbour who knew her well thought her 'a fine lady, but reserved, not a gossip; and absent-minded' (private information). She was in many ways eccentric: determined to fly, she found an airman to pilot her round Salisbury Plain in 1913. She loved Somerset, its history, its countryside, and its people. Losing her sight towards the end, she died, unmarried, at Hinton House on 6 July 1950; she was buried on 8 July at the church of St John the Baptist, Hinton Charterhouse. 


@@@@@


doc= 45474


Barker, Cicely Mary (1895-1973), artist and writer, was born on 28 June 1895 at West Croydon, Surrey, the daughter of Walter Barker (1866-1912), a seed merchant, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Oswald (1869-1960). Barker suffered from epilepsy and was a frail child, spending much of her youth housebound. She showed an early talent for drawing, encouraged by her father's talent for wood-carving, and, in 1908, enrolled in the Croydon Art Society. Her father's death dealt a financial blow to the family. Her only sibling, Dorothy Oswald Barker (1893-1954), opened a kindergarten in the Barker home, while Barker turned to drawing pictures, often using the kindergarten children as her models. From the 1920s she attended evening classes at Croydon Art School as both student and teacher. She was a devotee of the Pre-Raphaelites, particularly Edward Burne-Jones, and her work owes a debt to Beatrix Potter and Kate Greenaway. 
Sir Arthur Conan Doyle's publication of 'The Coming of Fairies' (1922) fed a public interest in fairies and Barker's interest in children and nature ensured that her talents were well in demand. Blackie's publication of 'Flower Fairies of the Spring' (1923) was quickly followed by the other seasons. Barker's poetry was published in several magazines as well as being collected in 'Old Rhymes for All Times' (1928), for which she did her own illustrations. The flowers in Barker's books are intricately drawn and botanically correct. 
Barker was a devout Church of England Christian and her faith informed her works, whether religious or secular. She designed several memorial pieces, including the 'Art of Great Tribulation' in the memorial chapel at Norbury Methodist Church and the reredos triptych 'The Feeding of the Five Thousand' for the chapel at Llandaff House, Penarth (1929). 'A Flower Fairy Alphabet' (1934) described a fairyland wherein Christian values are fundamental. Several books for children followed, the best-known being 'The Lord of Rushie River' (1938), which details the adventures of a child who communicates with swans. During the Second World War Barker published 'Flower Fairies of the Trees' (1940) and 'Flower Fairies of the Garden' (1944). She also illustrated many texts, including R. L. Stevenson's 'A Child's Garden of Verses' (1944). 
Barker never married. She lived with her sister and her mother for most of her life. After their deaths, Barker's health deteriorated and she spent much of her time in nursing homes. She died at Storrington, Sussex, on 16 February 1973, and was buried there on 1 March. Her fairy books remain very popular and have been collected in many anthologies, while her flower and fairy paintings continue to be the focus of collectors. 


@@@@@


doc= 45476


Martyn, Caroline Eliza Derecourt (1867-1896), Christian socialist, was born on 3 May 1867 in Manson Street, Lincoln, the eldest of the nine children of James William Martyn, a police superintendent, and his wife, Kate Eleanor ('nee' Hewitt) (died in or after 1896). The Martyns were devout high Anglicans, and active Conservatives. After attending Beaumont House School, Lincoln, Caroline became a governess at the age of eighteen. In common with many other young girls of her class she found this unsatisfying and opted for schoolteaching, first at a church school and then in 1890 at a board school in Reading. 
Caroline Martyn's first political involvement was with the Primrose League. This altered during her stay in Reading when she lodged with her mother's sister, Mrs Bailey, a lady of more leftward views. The combination of her influence and a sustained reading of the 'New Testament' made Caroline Martyn increasingly aware of other political ideologies and she flirted briefly with radicalism before committing herself to socialism. In 1891 she moved to London. She went to take up a post as governess at the Royal Orphanage Asylum in Wandsworth, and also to be in a location where she could more fully involve herself in socialism. She joined the London Fabian Society on arrival. The following summer, when a health breakdown forced her to resign her post, she was able to devote herself completely to the socialist cause. She never married. 
The religion in which she was raised always remained an important part of Caroline Martyn's political beliefs. She violently opposed the 'hard and bitter materialism' of her Marxist contemporaries (Mayo, 'Recollections', 226). She relied on 'Bible' teachings more than revolutionary or economic rhetoric, and 'The social teachings of Jesus', 'The brotherhood of man', and similar titles featured heavily in her lecture list. Religion and socialism constantly intertwined in her work, allowing her politics to surface in unusual places. From the spring of 1893 she wrote regularly for the 'Christian Weekly' on social questions of the day. However those who knew her well noted that socialism often forced her to compromise some of her religious beliefs. Her friend Isabella Fyvie Mayo sadly commented that Caroline, who always sought to help those in trouble, was often 'less than loyal to her own best instincts... (and showed) apparent approval of some whom I know she despised and mistrusted' (ibid., 227). 
A feminism which stemmed from a belief in the equality of all also underpinned Caroline's political life. As a socialist she rejected a distinct campaign for 'women's rights as something separate and apart from all other rights'. She believed instead that men and women should work together to remove the 'false social and economic conditions' that oppressed both sexes ('Women in the world', 'Labour Prophet', July 1895). She believed women were of 'different but equal value' from men ('Women's work and wages', 'Christian Weekly', 23 Sept 1893), and her writings urged women socialists to expand their superior female influence into all spheres of life. 
Although she published widely in radical journals it was as a lecturer rather than a writer that Caroline Martyn was best known to her contemporaries. Ironically, despite her teaching background, she initially feared public speaking, and only the encouragement of friends persuaded her into lecturing. This brought her national recognition, and she attracted large audiences whenever she appeared. One Independent Labour Party (ILP) member who often heard her speak claimed that at her meetings: 'she reaches the mind of the dullest by her simplicity and by her pathos and religious fervour she carries the whole argument upward to the plane of unworldliness and self-sacrifice. She makes the 'smart' man of commerce feel mean, and the man whose object is to get on meaner still. The effect of her teaching is to... enlarge and ennoble the motive and aims of the socialist reformer. ('Labour Chronicle', 1 Aug 1895)' Unfortunately the lifestyle of an itinerant speaker did not suit Caroline Martyn's health. She confided her emotional dissatisfaction to friends such as Mrs Mayo on more than one occasion: she missed the stability of a fixed home and felt she was merely a speaking machine. Long journeys by third-class rail, poor sleeping accommodation, and a sense of always having to move on also took their toll physically. Her 1896 election to the ILP's national executive added to her schedule. She died suddenly of pneumonia at 107 Murraygate, Dundee, on 23 July 1896 and was buried the next day in Dundee at Balgay cemetery. 
Caroline Martyn's unexpected death at the age of twenty-nine shook the socialist movement. Keir Hardie wrote that she was the leading socialist of her day, with 'a power of intellect and moral-force' that was unmatched ('Labour Leader', 1 Aug 1896). The 'Glasgow Commonweal', referring to her work in a recent Aberdeen by-election, remarked that all ILP branches in the area had lost their best member. A subscription in 'The Clarion' raised money for a mobile propaganda van which bore her name. Added poignancy came from the fact that Caroline Martyn had just taken over the editorship of 'Fraternity', the journal of the International Society for the Brotherhood of Man, and was about to commence as trade union organizer among Dundee's women. In many senses it appeared her best work was about to begin. 


@@@@@


doc= 45478


Attaway, Mrs (fl. 1645-1646), Baptist preacher, was of unknown parentage and background. Her early years are obscure but by 1645 she was said to have been a London lacewoman with a husband in the army. 
A member of Thomas Lambe's Baptist congregation, Attaway became convinced that she was filled with the presence of the Holy Spirit. Believing that none 'in the world this day living, had any Commission to preach', she began to 'Exercise her gifts' with her 'Sister'. At first this 'Exercise' was restricted to women, but afterwards Attaway was persuaded to admit 'of all that pleased to come' (Edwards, 1.88). According to an informant of the heresiographer Thomas Edwards, on Tuesday 9 December 1645 Attaway and two other women came before 'some company' assembled in a room in Bell Alley, Coleman Street: 'These women came with 'Bibles' in their hands, and went to a Table; the Lace-woman tooke her place at the upper end... Then the Lace-woman began with making a speech to this purpose, That now those dayes were come, and that was fulfilled which was spoken of in the Scriptures, That God would poure out of his Spirit upon the handmaidens, and they should prophecy, and after this speech shee made a prayer for almost halfe an hour. (ibid., 1.85)' Appalled by the 'confusion, horror, and disorder' (Edwards, 1.86) that he witnessed at the meeting, Edwards's informant departed before its conclusion. The following Tuesday there reportedly came 'a world of people, to the number of a Thousand first and last to Bell-Alley, to hear these women Preach' (ibid., 1.86-7). Perhaps to accommodate the 'multitude' that flocked to hear them, the women preached later that day at the home of a gentlewoman living in the Old Bailey. On Tuesday 30 December 1645 the women preached again, this time 'in a house near the French Church'. A minister who heard them reported that he saw 'a great deal of lightnesse and vanity among some that were at that Exercise'. On Thursday afternoon, 8 January 1646, 'near the French-Church at one Mrs. Hills', Attaway was said to have 'delivered many dangerous and false' doctrines: '1. That it could not stand with the goodnesse of God to damne his own creatures Eternally. 2. That God the Father did raign under the Law; God the Son under the Gospel; and now God the Father and God the Son are making over the Kingdom to God the Holy Ghost, and he shall be powred out upon all flesh. 3. That there shall be a generall Restauration, wherein all men shall be reconciled and saved. 4. That Christ died for all. (Edwards, 1.87)' Edwards was to note that 'upon complaint' Attaway was questioned by the parliamentary committee of examinations (Edwards, 1, appx, 120). Elsewhere, he related how 'out of novelty' two gentlemen of the inns of court 'went to hear the women preach' and afterwards engaged Attaway in debate (ibid., 2.10). Among 'other passages' she spoke to them of John Milton's 'The Doctrine and Discipline of Divorce' (1643), saying: 'she for her part would look more into it, for she had an unsanctified husband, that did not walk in the way of 'Sion', nor speak the language of 'Canaan'' (ibid., 2.11). 
On 26 February 1646 Edwards was informed by two 'godly understanding' men (Edwards, 1, appx, 120) that about two weeks before Attaway had deserted her children of six and seven, conveyed 'away' all her goods of 'worth' (ibid., 1, appx, 121) and 'run away with another womans husband, with whom she had bin to familiar along time' (ibid., 1, appx, 120-21). This man was William Jenney, one of Attaway's hearers and 'a preacher too'. It was 'commonly reported' that they had gone 'beyond seas'. Edwards added that: ''tis given out she met with a Prophet here in 'London', who hath revealed to her and others that they must go to Jerusalem, and repair Jerusalem, and for that end Mrs 'Attaway' hath gotten money of some persons, ten pounds of one yong maid, and other money of others towards the building up of Jerusalem. (ibid., 1, appx, 121)' It was said that this prophet was to 'come forth' in the summer of 1646 with 'power to preach the generall Restauration of all things' (ibid., 2.176); doubtless he was the ''Iew'' of London who had previously been visited by some 'Sectaries' of Colchester who believed that 'the day of Iudgement was suddenly come' (ibid., 1.89). Although the identity of this prophet is unknown, it seems that he sent letters to Attaway. He was also said to have 'given a roll forth' in which 'many things are written, and who-ever hath that roll hath the spirit of prophecie' (ibid., 2.176). This 'great parchment role' fell into Attaway's hands (ibid., 3.26). 
Attaway, Jenney, and 'some of their Tribe' supposedly maintained that there was 'no hell but what was in the conscience' and that 'the soules mortall'. Attaway, in addition, allegedly held that: 'the Book of 'Esdras' and some other Apocryphall Books were Canonicall Scriptures; that she should never dye, and that she should bring forth Children at 'Jerusalem', and that at 'Jerusalem' she should meet with Christ, and enjoy him visibly. (Edwards, 3.26)' Nothing more is known of her. 


@@@@@


doc= 45479


Abigail Baldwin (bap. 1658, d. 1713)] in St Botolph, Aldersgate; the couple had at least one child, Mary. Erroneously named Anne in some sources, Abigail was baptized in St James's, Clerkenwell, in October 1658. Until Richard's death in 1698, her publishing career was inextricable from that of her husband. 


@@@@@


doc= 45480


Anderson, Sir Donald Forsyth (1906-1973), shipowner, was born in London on 3 September 1906, the younger son and second of the four children of Sir Alan Garrett Anderson (1877-1952), a partner in the family shipping firm of Anderson, Green & Co., managers of the Orient Line, and of his wife, Muriel Ivy, daughter of G. W. Duncan of Richmond, Surrey. Educated at Eton College and Trinity College, Oxford, he graduated in 1928 with a third class degree in modern history and entered Anderson, Green & Co., which, with the Orient Line, had become part of the Peninsular and Oriental Steam Navigation Company (P. & O.). He transferred to P. & O. in 1934 and was appointed an assistant manager in 1936. In 1935 he married Margaret Elaine, daughter of Sir David Richard Llewellyn, first baronet, who was a colliery chairman; they had four daughters. 
On the outbreak of war in September 1939, Anderson moved to the Ministry of Shipping (subsequently the Ministry of War Transport) and joined the British merchant shipping mission to the USA in Washington, DC, in 1941. He returned to P. & O. as a member of the board in 1943, becoming a managing director in 1946, deputy chairman in 1950, and chairman in succession to Sir William Currie in 1960. He retired from the P. & O. board on his sixty-fifth birthday in 1971. 
Anderson's years at P. & O. saw fundamental change in the company. Before the war, the group was mainly a passenger liner concern with a large number of subsidiaries. After huge war losses, rebuilding was the most urgent task. But, looking ahead to a time when cheap long-distance air transport was likely to become available, Anderson knew that diversification was the only way to secure a future for the company. This meant new types of sea transport and different ways of handling cargo. A P. & O. programme of tanker building, of which he was the principal architect, was ready to begin by 1955. This innovation was extended under his chairmanship by similar programmes for bulk carriers and carriers of oil, bulk, and ore. Further innovation included the development of closer co-operation between existing P. & O. subsidiaries and the formation of new companies. As a result, the P. & O. fleet spread into almost every area of shipping. 
Anderson also played a leading role in the creation of Overseas Containers, a consortium of P. & O., Ocean Steam Ship, Furness Withy, and British and Commonwealth. This established a radically new international cargo handling infrastructure beyond the financial capabilities of any one line; nor did any other shipping group develop such a wide range of marine enterprises. For this alone, Anderson deserved to be called the outstanding shipping man of his generation. His foresight and courage took the P. & O. group out of the lassitude of the early 1950s into an era of renewed energy. He remained cautious, however, about expanding into land-based business: in 1972, he came out of retirement to help save P. & O. from an expensive merger with Bovis, a company of property developers. 
Elsewhere in the world of shipping, Anderson's talents were highly valued. From 1950 to 1962 he was chairman of the British Shipping Federation, president of the International Shipping Federation, and joint chairman of the National Maritime Board. He was president of the chamber of shipping (1953-4), of the Institute of Shipping and Forwarding Agents (1955), and of the Institute of Marine Engineers (1956-7); chairman of the British Liner Committee (1956-8); president of the Institute of Export (1961-3); and a member of the shipping advisory panel to the minister of transport (1962-4). 
Anderson also had non-marine business interests. He was a director of the Bank of Australasia, later Australia and New Zealand Banking Group (1936-73), the National Provincial Bank, later the National Westminster Bank (1944-73), and Times Newspapers (1967-73). As the grandson of Elizabeth Garrett Anderson, he had a personal interest in the Royal Free Hospital School of Medicine that she had founded in 1874. He served as its treasurer and was chairman of its council (1964-73). He was also a member of the governing body of the London Graduate School of Business Studies. 
Anderson's single-mindedness and incisive decision making were characteristics that could, at times, be disconcerting and misunderstood by those who did not share his broad view. But his achievements were formidable and his reputation internationally recognized. 
Tall, spare, and with an air of distinction, Anderson did not seek popularity. To many people he appeared to be aloof, arrogant, and aggressive; though they respected him, they also feared him. With close friends, however, he was excellent company. Without preparation or notes, he could make a brilliant speech and never failed to entertain his audience. His London home was 105 Park Lane; Notgrove Manor near Cheltenham, Gloucestershire, was his country home, and he took a great interest in his farm at Moreton in Marsh. His principal leisure pursuit was hunting and he was a good horseman. 
Anderson was knighted in 1954, and received honours from the Dutch government in 1946 and the Italian government in 1959. He was a deputy lieutenant for Gloucestershire in 1969, an honorary captain in the Royal Naval Reserve, an honorary member of the Honourable Company of Master Mariners in 1964, an elder of Trinity House in 1965, and an honorary brother of Hull Trinity House. He died of cancer in Oxford on 20 March 1973. He was survived by his wife. 


