@@@@@


doc= 45481


Beeton, Samuel Orchart (1831-1877), publisher and journalist, was born on 2 March 1831 at 39 Milk Street in Cheapside, London, the only son of Samuel Powell Beeton (1804-1854), warehouseman and publican, and his first wife, Helen (died 1831), daughter of Thomas Orchart, a baker. Because his mother died soon after his birth, Samuel was brought up by his Beeton grandmother. His only formal education was at Pilgrim's Hall Academy, a small private school in Brentwood, Essex, which he attended aged twelve to fourteen. He was then apprenticed to a paper merchant in the City for seven years during which apparently he had 'quite a gay time' but must also have laid the foundations for his subsequent career (Spain, 42). 
At twenty-one, with some money from his father, Beeton set up as a publisher in partnership with Charles H. Clarke. Through a series of accidents they immediately had the opportunity to publish 'Uncle Tom's Cabin' by an unknown American, Harriet Beecher Stowe. Beeton saw the novel's potential for the British market and its message chimed with his politics. He seized the chance to publish, showing that combination of energy, financial shrewdness, and faith in popular print as a medium for social improvement which was to characterize his career. The immense sales of this book helped underpin his innovative publishing ventures. In April 1852, the same month as 'Uncle Tom's Cabin' appeared, Beeton launched the first magazine for middle-class women, a twopenny monthly, the 'English Woman's Domestic Magazine'. He followed it in January 1855 with another pioneering journal, the 'Boy's Own Magazine'. 
In the following year (10 July 1856) in Epsom parish church, Beeton married Isabella Mary Mayson (1836-1865) ['see 'Beeton, Isabella Mary], the eldest daughter of Benjamin Mayson, a linen merchant, and his wife, Elizabeth, whose second husband was Henry Dorling, clerk of the Epsom racecourse. The marriage of Sam and Bella proved a happy partnership in both personal and business terms. He encouraged her to write the work for which the name Beeton is still remembered, 'Beeton's Book of Household Management', which was first issued in parts between 1859 and 1861. She played an increasingly active role in the business, from which Clarke now departed, and with her support, Beeton entered the happiest stage of his career, producing a series of Beeton titles including dictionaries, guides, and 'All About It' books, as well as a 'Christmas Annual'. Together they built on his earlier successes with women's and boys' magazines, launching new titles and expanding existing ones. 
Beeton's private life was more clouded, despite his happy marriage. Neither of the couple's first two children -- both sons called Samuel Orchart -- survived, the first dying immediately, the second aged three. However, they had another son, called simply Orchart, born on new year's eve 1863 in Greenhithe, Kent, to which they had just moved from Pinner, Middlesex. He survived, as did their fourth son, Mayson, born on 29 January 1865. However, as a result of this last confinement Isabella developed puerperal fever and died on 6 February, aged twenty-eight. 
This was a professional as well as a personal tragedy. Beeton's publishing and writing continued but his financial position was undermined by the collapse in May 1866 of the house of Overend and Gurney in which he had substantial investments. He was forced to sell his titles and his name to his rivals, Ward, Lock, and Tyler, for whom he undertook to work exclusively in future. He continued to produce Beeton titles with enormous energy, publishing nearly thirty in the next five years. However, from 1867 the 'English Woman's Domestic Magazine' was caught up in controversy over a correspondence on tight-lacing and on beating. More seriously, in 1872 Beeton's relationship with Ward and Lock (as it now was) deteriorated sharply over his use of the 'Beeton Christmas Annual' to satirize the royal family. The legal tangle over the name Beeton led to two court cases in 1874 and 1875, which left him free but without possession of his earlier titles. His return to independent publishing was hampered by ill health and he died at Sudbrook Park, Petersham, Richmond, Surrey, on 6 June 1877 of pulmonary consumption, which had affected him for years. 
Physically slight, but attractive, and prodigiously energetic, Beeton was a republican, a supporter of women's suffrage, and anti-establishment in religion and politics, as well as an innovative publisher, editor, and journalist. His achievement is difficult to assess; firstly, because these roles tended to overlap in his work and, secondly, because of the sale of his name and titles. Nevertheless he stands as one of the pioneers of popular print -- particularly for women and boys. 


@@@@@


doc= 45482


Fitzwarine family (per. c.1145-1315), landowners, were a leading family on the Welsh marches. 


@@@@@


doc= 45483


Conyngham, Elizabeth, Marchioness Conyngham (1769-1861), royal mistress, was born in London, the eldest of the three known children of Joseph Denison (c.1726-1806), cloth merchant and banker, and his wife, Elizabeth Butler. Little is known of her early life, but her father made a fortune in banking, and in 1787 purchased an estate in Surrey and another near Scarborough. Her brother, William Joseph Denison, went into the family banking business, and her sister, Anna Maria, married in 1793 Sir Robert Wenlock, later created Baron Wenlock. The following year, on 5 July, Elizabeth married Henry Conyngham. 


The Conynghams were neither particularly wealthy nor particularly well connected in the early years of their marriage. In the exclusive, not to say snobbish, circles of the aristocracy, Elizabeth's mercantile origins were always held against her, and she was generally considered rather vulgar. According to Creevey, Lady Conyngham 'owed her first introduction to Dublin high life exclusively to Lady Glengall' (Maxwell, 371). She was, however, accounted a beauty, and acquired lovers and admirers including Lord Ponsonby and Tsar Nicholas I. (She was on the continent during the peace talks of 1814-15.) She had five children who survived to adulthood, the second son becoming second Marquess Conyngham and the third, Albert Denison, succeeding to her brother's fortune and being created Baron Londesborough. 
According to the duke of Wellington, Elizabeth Conyngham had decided as early as 1806 to become the mistress of George, prince of Wales (Oman, 191). There were rumours that she was becoming his favourite by 1819, but she did not become 'maitresse en titre' until the summer of 1820, when, according to Lady Jerningham, she finally ousted her predecessor: 'Lady Hertford's day is closed and Lady Conyngham is now the meteor' (Melville, 277). She was the latest (and, it proved, the last) of the series of women with whom George IV fell in love. His passion and devotion are undisputed, although even contemporaries doubted whether the relationship was physically consummated. Caricaturists and wits found the idea of the fat, ageing king and his large, ageing mistress hilarious, and the king's behaviour in public fed their humour. He was besotted with his new companion, and 'sits kissing her hand with a look of the most devoted submission' (Surtees, 155). During his attempt to divorce Queen Caroline in 1820 he could not keep company with Lady Conyngham, and was in consequence 'bored and lonely' (Lady Cowper, 17 Oct 1820, quoted in Smith, 'Queen on Trial', 122). His determination to exclude his wife from the coronation was matched by his desire to have Lady Conyngham close at hand, and throughout the ceremony he 'was continually nodding & winking at Ly. Conyngham & sighing & making eyes at her', compounding his behaviour at one point by taking off a diamond brooch and kissing it at her. Some, like Mrs Arbuthnot, found his behaviour disgusting, but the more charitable Lady Cowper, writing on 20 July 1821, thought that the king had struggled to get through the service, and that 'a cheering draught in the shape of a look from Ly. C.... revived him like Magic or Ether' (Smith, 185). A peculiarity of the affair was that Lady Conyngham pined for the respectability her situation as a mistress fundamentally denied her, and affected great piety. She 'seemed to think that by the forms of religion she could atone for everything else', said the duke of Wellington (Oman, 204). 
Lady Conyngham, who quickly earned the nicknames La Regnante and the Vice Queen, wielded great influence over the king. Although thought to be whiggishly inclined she had no political ambition, and her power was wielded exclusively to further the personal and financial ambitions of herself and her family. Lord Conyngham was given a United Kingdom peerage in 1821, was sworn of the privy council, and appointed lord steward of the household, and captain, constable, and lieutenant of Windsor Castle, while their second son was appointed first groom of the chamber and master of the robes. The entire family lived with the king (although not directly under his roof) and at his expense, and Lady Conyngham was the recipient of constant gifts of jewels, including some sapphires from the crown jewels. Lady Granville was shown her Christmas presents in 1823: 'A magnificent cross, seized from the expiring body of a murdered bishop in the island of Scio. An almanack, gold with flowers embossed on it of precious stones. A gold melon, which upon being touched by a spring falls into compartments like the quarters of an orange, each containing different perfumes. (Surtees, 178)' But although she had no real political ambition, Lady Conyngham's feelings and actions had political repercussions. In May 1821 her attempt to have her sons' tutor, Charles Sumner, appointed a canon of Windsor almost caused a ministerial crisis, with the prime minister, Lord Liverpool, threatening to resign if the king went ahead with the appointment. The refusal of the wives of the king's ministers to receive Lady Conyngham worsened the relationship between king and government; in particular, her feud with Lady Castlereagh (wife of the foreign secretary) caused constant political difficulties, especially concerning projected royal visits abroad. She also disliked the keeper of the privy purse, Sir Benjamin Bloomfield, and was instrumental in his removal. With his successor, Sir William Knighton, she struck up a mutually beneficial alliance. 
Having achieved her ambition, Lady Conyngham was frequently dissatisfied with her lot. The company of the querulous, over-dependent king, who was frequently unwell, grew wearisome, and she was kept in her place only by renewed gifts of jewels. The king too grew bored, but he disliked change and with Lady Conyngham he had the comfort of a habit, and rumours of the favourite's fall from grace were always premature. George IV's death early in the morning of 26 June 1830 brought her reign to a rapid conclusion. She spent the remainder of the night packing, and by the following morning had left Windsor for her brother's house, 'en route' for Paris. Society believed that she was accompanied by 'wagonloads' of plunder; but although the king had bequeathed her all his plate and jewels (some of which, as family heirlooms, were not his to give) she refused the entire legacy. 
Lord Conyngham, who was made a general in 1830, broke his staff of office at the king's funeral and held no further royal office. He died at his house in Hamilton Place, Piccadilly, on 28 December 1832 and was buried in the family vault at St Mary's Church, Patrixbourne, Kent. Following the death of the king, Lady Conyngham virtually disappears from the historical record. Lady Granville notes that Paris was agog to see her in August 1831, and found her to be 'still beautiful' (Surtees, 246). The duke of Wellington was still speaking darkly of her to his friends in the later 1830s, but thereafter the tongues that had wagged for so long fell silent. Lady Conyngham herself lived for another thirty years, enjoying the sometimes bitter fruits of her labours, dying at the age of ninety-two at her home, Bifrons, Patrixbourne, near Canterbury, Kent, on 11 October 1861. She had outlived all but one of her children. Her estate was proved at under $200,000: she left her real estate to her only surviving son, Francis Nathaniel, along with her diamonds, pearls, and emeralds, which she desired should become family heirlooms. She made provision for her granddaughters out of the $30,000 left to her by her banker brother, and left them her other jewels. Although Lady Conyngham was 'persona non grata' at Queen Victoria's court, her son, the second marquess, had been lord chamberlain to William IV, and as such brought news of her accession to the young queen and retained his post until 1839. His daughter, Jane, Lady Churchill, was one of the queen's ladies of the bedchamber and among her closest friends. 


@@@@@


doc= 45488


Goschen, Sir (William) Edward, first baronet (1847-1924), diplomatist, was born at Eltham, Kent, on 18 July 1847, the youngest of the twelve children of Wilhelm Goschen (1793-1866) and his wife, Henrietta (died 1895), daughter of Wilhelm Ohmann and Henrietta Sim. Wilhelm Goschen, the son of a distinguished Leipzig publisher, had migrated to London and made a successful career in merchant banking. Five sons, of whom George Joachim Goschen was the eldest, and five daughters reached maturity, and dropped the umlaut from the family name. Edward Goschen was educated at Rugby School and Corpus Christi College, Oxford, and twice represented the university at tennis. He was a member of the Church of England, and a regular attendant at morning service. In 1869 he entered the diplomatic service, serving briefly in the Foreign Office and thereafter in various capital cities around the world. In 1874, at Lyons in New York state, he married (Harriet) Hosta (1849-1912), daughter of Darius Clarke. They had two sons. From 1891 until 1914 he kept a diary, the principal source for his life, parts of which were published in 1980. In 1900 he inherited Schloss Tentschach in Carinthia, Austria. He was made KCMG in 1901, GCVO in 1904, GCMG in 1909, and GCB in 1911. 
Goschen's career included appointments to a succession of sensitive posts in the period before the outbreak of the First World War. From November 1898 to June 1900 he was minister in Belgrade, where he learned 'that in Servia Russia was always called 'L'Oncle' and Austria 'La Tante'' ('Diary', 22 July 1899). Between 1900 and 1905 he was minister in Copenhagen, and in June 1905 he became ambassador in Vienna. The day after taking up his appointment in Vienna he called on Goluchowski, the Austro-Hungarian foreign minister, with whom he discussed Morocco: 'I expect his arguments came from over the way and were made in Germany', he noted (ibid., 24 June 1905). As regards foreign policy, he informed Sir Edward Grey on 13 December, Austria-Hungary was 'well under the thumb of Germany' (TNA: PRO, FO 800/40). To this opinion he adhered when, in the following year, Goluchowski was succeeded by Alois von Aehrenthal. 
On 12 August 1908, in the royal train, Edward VII informed Goschen that he was to be ambassador at Berlin. The king, Goschen recorded, 'did what he could to gild the blackest and most nauseous of pills' ('Diary', 12 Aug 1908). While he was still in Vienna, in the autumn of 1908 British press denunciation of the annexation of Bosnia-Herzegovina provoked a reaction: Goschen's Viennese friends tended to be 'out of town'. On 4 November, at a state banquet, Goschen had a 'turn up' with Aehrenthal, who complained of British encouragement of the Serbs. Goschen told him he was 'responsible for the whole situation'; Aehrenthal's riposte was to begin to talk about the Boers, for which Goschen 'gave him snuff'. The next day Goschen went to take leave of Aehrenthal 'and found him all smiles' (ibid., 5 Nov 1908). 
On arrival in Berlin on 8 November the Goschens were 'much depressed': they did not care for either the climate or the embassy. Goschen presented his credentials on 20 November. At first the Kaiser's demeanour was daunting, but after Goschen had improvised a speech, he smiled, shook hands warmly, and expressed friendly sentiments. Goschen was unenthusiastic about the various approaches made by Kiderlen-Waechter and Bethmann Hollweg, the chancellor, with a view to reaching an understanding: he thought that what was needed was an understanding by the Germans that Britain intended to maintain her naval superiority. Nothing significant came of successive conversations. Then, on 2 February 1912, amid deteriorating relations with Germany over Tirpitz's plans for naval expansion, the Foreign Office telegraphed, informing Goschen that communications with the Kaiser and the chancellor had taken place through Albert Ballin and Ernest Cassel, and summoning him to London immediately. He arrived three days later, saw Arthur Nicolson, the permanent under-secretary, and found that 'it is worse than I feared'; his own position was 'most disagreeable'. That evening he saw Grey, who told him Haldane was going to Berlin: Goschen's verdict was 'Pah! Underground work'. Haldane arrived in Berlin on 8 February. Goschen had few hopes of his success, correctly not believing that Haldane could persuade Tirpitz to reduce his programme. 
On 28 June 1914 Goschen was at Kiel for the regatta when news of the assassinations at Sarajevo arrived. He was apprehensive as to what this 'dreadful business' might lead to, as he believed that 'the Austrians have for ages been looking for an excuse to trample on Servia'. On personal grounds, too, he was 'very sorry' as the archduke had always been 'nice and kind' and his wife 'charming'. Two days later Goschen left for England. On 27 July he was back in Berlin, where there was little he could do, except carry out instructions and report. On the afternoon of 4 August, he asked Jagow (secretary of state at the imperial foreign office) for an assurance that Germany would respect Belgium's neutrality. The request was refused. That evening he saw Jagow again, repeating his previous request and requiring a satisfactory answer by midnight. He again met with a refusal. He then had an unpleasant interview with Bethmann Hollweg. That evening the British embassy was stoned. Early on 6 August Goschen left Berlin. After his return to London, Goschen composed a report on his last days in Germany, which included an account of the interview with Bethmann Hollweg, who, Goschen related, expressed his anger that Britain should go to war over 'a scrap of paper'. 
Goschen retired from the diplomatic service in 1916 and was created a baronet. His wife had died in 1912, and his second son was severely wounded in the early days of the war. In retirement he lived near Christchurch, Hampshire. He died at 27 Lennox Gardens, Chelsea, on 20 May 1924 and was buried six days later at Flimwell, Sussex. 
Goschen was a vigorous upholder of British policy. He did not identify himself with his father's country of origin: on the contrary, his diary and letters abound with animadversions on the German national character and nostalgic references to life in England. He was a devoted family man and an enthusiastic violinist; he engaged in numerous sporting activities. Except when a prey to lumbago, which made him irascible, he was of a genial disposition, and enjoyed the affection of his subordinates. In his later years he had abundant grey hair, bushy eyebrows, and a mainly white moustache and beard. 


@@@@@


doc= 45489


Murrell, Hilda (1906-1984), environmentalist and peace campaigner, was born on 3 February 1906 at Shrewsbury, the elder daughter of Owen Charles Murrell, nurseryman, and his wife, Lily Maria Lowe. She was educated at Shrewsbury High School for Girls (1918-23), winning a scholarship to Newnham College, Cambridge, where she read English and French (1924-7), gaining a 2:1 in both the English tripos and French. She joined the firm of rose growers founded by her father and uncle, and there developed her knowledge of business and of horticulture. In 1943 she became an associate of the Chartered Institute of Secretaries. From 1930 to 1970 she was a director, and later the proprietor and sole manager, of the family firm, Portland Nurseries, Shrewsbury, until she sold the business to Percy Thrower. She was an internationally acknowledged authority on rose species, old varieties, and miniature roses, regularly winning gold awards at Chelsea, and her rose catalogues were masterpieces of evocative yet scientifically accurate description. A new (David Austin) rose was named after her, following her death. During and after the Second World War, Hilda Murrell was actively concerned with the care and resettlement of wartime refugees, working with the Jewish Refugee Children's Society. She raised money for the cause by organizing concerts by such artists as Jelly d'Aranyi and Myra Hess and also took immense trouble herself to help desperate individuals. 
Hilda Murrell was a devoted hillwalker and fell climber with a special love of both sides of the Welsh marches -- 'sheer bliss [to] be greeted by perfection -- to be able to look 'over' some hill-tops' ('Hilda Murrell's Nature Diaries', 198), she recorded in her posthumously published 'Nature Diaries' (1987). In 1962 she became a founder member of the Shropshire Conservation Trust and she also worked vigorously for the Shropshire branch of the Council for the Protection of Rural England. She took a naturalist's interest in the varied habitats in Anglesey and the marches, as attested in her 'Nature Diaries', illustrated by her own meticulous botanical line drawings and colour photography. After her retirement in 1970 she built her retreat, The Shack, Maes Uchaf, on a plot of land at Fron Goch, near Llanymynech Hill, Oswestry. The Shack was mysteriously damaged in an arson attack on 26 January 1985. 
Increasingly, Hilda Murrell became deeply concerned by the threat of mass extermination posed by the uncontrolled nuclear weapons race and by the irreversible damage to the environment risked by the nuclear power industry. She was a member of the European Nuclear Disarmament Movement founded by E. P. Thompson in 1981, a member of the Shropshire Peace Alliance, a supporter of the women demonstrators against cruise missiles at the American airbase at Greenham Common, a founder member of the nuclear freeze movement in Britain, and, finally, a private researcher seeking to understand and argue against the implications of building another nuclear reactor at Sizewell B in Suffolk. At the age of seventy-eight she completed her paper criticizing the government white paper ('Parl. papers', 1981-2, Cmnd 8607) on radioactive waste management. The paper was accepted and eventually read to the public inquiry on Sizewell in September 1984. 
On 21 March 1984 Hilda Murrell returned home from shopping and was surprised by one or more intruders who had systematically searched her house and papers and disconnected her telephone (in such a way that she could not ring out but anyone ringing in would believe the line was still working). There was a struggle; she was apparently abducted in her own car and driven out 6 miles into the countryside, where she was taken from the car, attacked with a breadknife, and left to die of her wounds and exposure. Three days later her body was discovered. At the end of the century West Mercia police reported that the murder file on Hilda Murrell was still open. 
In May 2005, however, a 37-year-old labourer was convicted of murdering Hilda Murell; a resident of a children's home at the time of the murder, he had killed her during the course of a burglary. Until then there had been composite and conflicting theories, including both conspiracy and incompetence, for her terrible end. The most anodyne explanation, that a little old lady had been surprised by a burglar who panicked, though it turned out to be largely correct, was questioned because Hilda Murrell was no ordinary little old lady. She had told several people before her death that she had fears for her personal safety. Two possible motives emerged for the systematic search of her house -- a wish to check out her case against Sizewell B and/or a wish to find any possibly 'sensitive' documents concerning the Falklands War that might have been left in her safe keeping by her nephew Commander Rob Green (though Green, who had resigned from the navy after the Falklands War, categorically denied having left naval documents of any kind with his aunt). 
Hilda Murrell's murder roused intense speculation in the press, as well as many attempts to pay her adequate tribute. A fictional variation on her character, her beliefs, and her fate is detectable in Maggie Gee's eponymous 'Grace' (1988). Also in 1988 a 'Summer forum to celebrate the countryside interests of Hilda Murrell' was inaugurated in Shropshire, and was held there every June until the tenth anniversary of her death. 
Shy, tough-minded, humorous, kind, and possessing an exceptional responsiveness to nature, Hilda Murrell was enjoyed and admired by her friends for her many gifts, for her intellectual and moral courage, and for her refusal to be handicapped either by her arthritis or by the fact that she had lost the use of her right eye in infancy. Her life as a rose grower, plantswoman, writer, and environmental activist was a constructive and creative one; she deserves to be remembered for that life quite apart from the longstanding mystery of its brutal end. Her ashes were scattered on 25 August 1984 near the standing stone in Bwlch Maengwynedd -- the open roof of Wales. 


@@@@@


doc= 45490


Boyce, Joanna Mary (1831-1861), genre painter, daughter of George John Boyce (died 1853) and his wife, Anne Price, and younger sister of the watercolourist George Price Boyce (1826-1897), was born in Gray's Inn Terrace, Bloomsbury, London, on 7 December 1831. Joanna's father was a wine merchant and pawnbroker in London. The Boyce family lived in Gray's Inn Terrace until 1840, when they moved to Park Place Villas in Maida Hill. As a child Joanna Boyce showed an interest in art, in which she was encouraged by her father, who took her to exhibitions and lectures (and in 1851 to the funeral of J. M. W. Turner). At the age of seventeen she was allowed to enrol at Cary's school of art. In April 1852 she visited Paris with her father so that she might study contemporary French painting. Later in the same year father and daughter, with George Price Boyce, stayed at Betws-y-coed in Wales. George Boyce's death in September 1853 was a great loss to Joanna; by contrast, Anne Boyce was not supportive of her daughter's ambitions as an artist, and there were occasions when Joanna was close to giving up painting. 
Joanna Boyce received advice on her painting from Henry Tanworth Wells (1828-1903), who had been a friend of George's since 1849. However, Wells, who was already established as a portraitist and miniaturist, seems to have little understood the progressive and challenging character of Joanna's painting, and his point of view contrasts significantly with that of her brother, with whom Joanna seems to have had a truer sympathy in artistic matters. In 1853 Joanna Boyce transferred to Leigh's school of art and in 1854 she attended classes at the Government School of Design. In the spring of 1854 Joanna Boyce was contemplating a period of training in either Dusseldorf or Munich. This did not materialize, but in the autumn of the year she did travel in Belgium and the Netherlands. During the early 1850s she was introduced to members of the London-based Pre-Raphaelite circle by her brother. 
In September 1855 Joanna Boyce returned to Paris, on this occasion in company with her mother and brother Bob. She hoped to be able to attend painting classes under Rosa Bonheur, but for some reason -- perhaps to do with her mother's or Wells's influence -- she went instead to the studio of Thomas Couture, where she attended life classes in the atelier reserved for female students. In her two-part article 'Remarks on some of the French pictures at the Paris Exhibition, 1855', which appeared in the 'Saturday Review' (1 and 29 December 1855), Joanna Boyce deplored the influence of Ingres on contemporary French painting and praised works by Constant Troyon and Couture. She was commissioned by the same periodical to write a three-part review of the 1856 Royal Academy exhibition ('Saturday Review', 10, 17, and 24 May 1856). Here she praised Millais's 'Autumn Leaves' and Holman Hunt's 'Scapegoat', and also took her opportunity to lambaste the works of the academicians: 'In truth, there are but three or four out of the whole number to whose works we annually look forward with anything like longing or curiosity' (ibid., 24 May 1856, 79). 
Joanna Boyce first exhibited in public at the National Institution in 1854 and in 1855 her painting 'Elgiva' (priv. coll.) was shown at the Royal Academy. In a late edition of 'Academy Notes' Ruskin described the work as 'so subtle, and so tenderly wrought' ('The Works of John Ruskin', ed. E. T. Cook and A. Wedderburn, 1903-12, 14.30-31), and Ford Madox Brown called it simply 'the best Head in the rooms' ('The Diary of Ford Madox Brown', ed. V. Surtees, 1981, 138). She exhibited a further eight works at the academy, including 'The Departure: an Episode of the Child's Crusade' (priv. coll.) in 1860 and 'The Veneziana' (priv. coll.) and 'Peep-Bo!' (des.) in 1861. On at least two occasions works of hers were rejected by the academy selection committees: in 1856 'Rowena Offering the Wassail Cup to Vortigern' and in 1859 ''No Joy the Blowing Season Brings'' were refused. The latter was subsequently much admired in Ernest Gambart's 1859 winter exhibition at the French Gallery. 
For a while Joanna Boyce resisted Henry Wells's proposals of marriage. In a postscript to a letter to him of June 1855 she announced that the 'intense love of independence, which has often been a bane to me' (Boyce family MSS) was being overcome, but on 10 February 1857 she still feared the loss of liberty that might go with marriage, for 'I have talents or a talent and with it the constant impulse to enjoy it, -- not for notoriety or fame, but for the love of it and the longing to work' (ibid.). Later in 1857 they travelled together in Italy and, according to a plan which had been previously divulged to Joanna's siblings, were married on 7 December in Rome, their wedding being solemnized at the British consulate. After their return to England in March 1858 they set up house in 1859 in Upper Phillimore Gardens, and later had built a country house at Holmbury Hill in Surrey. They had three children -- Sidney and Alice were the inspiration for various of their mother's last paintings. It was following the birth of her third child, Joanna Margaret, and as a result of ensuing gastroenteric fever that Joanna died, on 15 July 1861, at her home, 9 Upper Phillimore Gardens. She was buried in the Boyce family tomb at Kensal Green cemetery, her body subsequently being removed to rest with that of her husband after his death in 1903. 
Friends and fellow painters were invited to see the works that remained in Joanna Wells's studio. D. G. Rossetti, Burne-Jones, F. M. Brown, and Watts were among those who expressed their admiration for her art. 'The Spectator''s obituarist concluded that 'no English-woman has ever set forth such mastery of style and such subtle qualities of painting as are impressed upon her works' ('The Spectator', 20 July 1861, 783), and drew a parallel between her early death and that of Elizabeth Barrett Browning, which had occurred a month or so before. Joanna Wells was represented in the Royal Academy summer exhibition in the year after her death, with a painting entitled 'A Bird of God' (priv. coll.). Five of her paintings were also included in the International Exhibition of 1862. She was represented in the 1901 Royal Academy exhibition 'Works by deceased British artists', and in 1935 an exhibition of thirty-one of her paintings was held at the Tate Gallery. 


@@@@@


doc= 45491


Morgan, (Mary) Evelyn De (1855-1919), painter, was born on 30 August 1855 at 6 Grosvenor Street, London, the first of the four children of Percival Andre Pickering (1811-1877), QC, and his wife, Anna Maria Wilhelmina (1824-1901), daughter of John Spencer-Stanhope and his wife, Elizabeth. Evelyn displayed a talent for drawing at an early age and, despite a certain amount of disapproval from her parents, declared a serious intent to become a professional artist. Her maternal uncle, the painter John Roddam Spencer-Stanhope, encouraged her to develop her artistic skills and introduced her to Italian Renaissance painting which was to be a significant influence on her work. In 1873 she enrolled at the Slade School of Fine Art in London, where she was among the first generation of women artists to attend. She soon became a distinguished scholar, winning several prizes for drawing and painting, and was later awarded the prestigious Slade scholarship. However, Pickering was keen to learn more and between 1875 and 1877 she made several trips to Italy to study Renaissance painting at first hand. As a young woman, she showed remarkable ambition and independence, as well as an extraordinary commitment to her art. On her return to London she was invited to exhibit at the Grosvenor Gallery, where she chose to show her first major painting, 'Ariadne in Naxos' (1877; De Morgan Foundation, London), a simple yet powerful composition depicting a distraught Ariadne abandoned on the beach. On 5 March 1887 she married the potter William Frend De Morgan (1839-1917), who, along with his friend and business associate William Morris, became a prominent figure in the decorative arts movement. The De Morgans settled at The Vale in Chelsea, where they lived until 1910, although they often spent the winter in Florence due to William's bad health. 
While financial gain was considered less important to the De Morgans than artistic pursuits, any income that was generated from the sale of Evelyn's paintings was used to help finance her husband's pottery business. Her exhibitions attracted a great deal of critical appraisal, so much so that the late Victorian painter G. F. Watts reportedly proclaimed her to be 'the first woman artist of the day -- if not of all time' (Stirling, 193). The subjects of her oil paintings draw on a rich variety of sources including mythology, literature, the 'Bible', and war, and represent an attempt by the artist to 'explore both cosmic mysteries and contemporary issues through myth and symbol by developing an aesthetic that was personally authentic' (Gordon, 34). During the 1890s De Morgan painted several canvases featuring solitary full-length female figures in the landscape. The influence of her travels in Italy and her interest in Botticelli is particularly striking in the painting 'Flora' (1894; De Morgan Foundation, London), generally considered to be her masterpiece. Her attention to detail, in particular her observation of nature, creates an exquisite and delicate background to the serene goddess of fruitfulness. Her acquaintance with the later generation of Pre-Raphaelite artists, and the symbolist painter Edward Burne-Jones whose work she admired, helped to raise her profile in the Victorian art world. Indeed, such was Burne-Jones's stylistic influence that De Morgan's 'Aurora triumphans' (1886; Russell-Cotes Art Gallery and Museum, Bournemouth) was for a time wrongly attributed to Burne-Jones due to the forged inscription 'EBJ'. The influence of the Pre-Raphaelites can be seen in later works such as 'Queen Eleanor and Fair Rosamund' (De Morgan Foundation, London) with its vivid colours and medieval theme. The use of narrative details, for example, literary references, emblems, and symbols, which are typical of the Pre-Raphaelite style, creates an image of intense drama. The preparatory drawings for this painting, like so many of her figurative studies, highlight De Morgan's meticulous and highly accomplished technical skills. 
In 1906 De Morgan held a solo exhibition at the Bruton Gallery in London, and a year later showed twenty-five works at Wolverhampton Art Gallery. The horrors of the South African War and the First World War had a profound effect on De Morgan who was a staunch pacifist. She painted over fifteen war paintings including 'The Red Cross' (exh. 1916; De Morgan Foundation, London) which shows the figure of Christ surrounded by angels, floating above a field of white memorial crosses. She died of nephritis at her home, 127 Old Church Street, London, on 2 May 1919 and was buried in Brookwood cemetery on 8 May. 
After her death, De Morgan's sister, Anna Maria Wilhelmina Pickering (1865-1965), later Mrs Stirling, published 'William De Morgan and his Wife' (1922), a lively, if somewhat unreliable, account. The De Morgan Foundation at Old Battersea House, London, was formally established in 1968 and houses Mrs Stirling's extensive collection of De Morgan's painting and drawings, although many works were destroyed in a fire in 1991. In the 1990s several exhibitions of De Morgan's paintings, drawings, and sculpture helped to bring her work to a wider audience. In addition, feminist art historians have reappraised De Morgan's work in the context of her female contemporaries and not simply in relation to the male artists associated with the Pre-Raphaelite movement. Her enduring reputation as an artist of extraordinary imagination and ambition was anticipated in an obituary written in 1920: 'it is safe to prophesy that Evelyn De Morgan's works will be eagerly sought after as some of the Old Masters are today' (McAllister, 29). 


@@@@@


doc= 45492


Rae, Henrietta Emma Ratcliffe (1856-1928), painter, was born at 1 Grove Villas, The Grove, Hammersmith, London, on 30 December 1856, the youngest daughter of Thomas Burbey Rae, clerk of the local board of guardians, and his wife, Anne Eliza Louisa, 'nee' Graves, a gifted amateur musician. Though her mother wished her to make a career in music, she eventually began to train in art at the Female School of Art, Bloomsbury, independently at the British Museum, and in the evenings at Heatherley's School of Art. In 1877 she gained access at her sixth attempt to the Royal Academy Schools, where she studied until 1884. 
Henrietta Rae exhibited widely in London and the provinces from 1879, making her debut at the Royal Academy in 1881 with 'Miss Warman', a portrait. Her 1884 exhibit, 'Lancelot and Elaine', marked her intention to become identified as a painter of the highest genre, which included literary and mythological subjects, and the following year 'Ariadne Deserted by Theseus' and 'A Bacchante' (Christopher Wood Gallery, London) signalled her commitment to the classical revival promoted by the Royal Academy as the path to high art. This became viable for female artists at this time because the artistic training accessible to them began to compare with that available to men. She became the first female artist in Britain since Angelica Kauffmann to establish herself at this level of the hierarchy of genres. In this ambition she was much influenced by her friendship with the leading artist and best-known neo-classicist of the day, Frederic (later Lord) Leighton, whom she freely acknowledged as her mentor, though she was never his student. On 26 May 1884 Rae married in Croydon fellow artist Ernest (1857-1923), son of George Barten Normand. She had met him while a student at the Royal Academy and they went to live near Leighton in the newly fashionable district of Kensington which became something of an artistic colony from the 1880s. They had a son in 1886 and a daughter in 1893. 
Seeking to develop her work, Rae and her husband went to Paris in 1890, studying at the Academie Julian and in Brittany. This experience gave her work a new painterliness, to be seen in 'La cigale' which she showed at the Royal Academy in 1891. In 1894 she exhibited a large multi-figure composition, 'Psyche before the Throne of Venus', which the artist intended as her 'chef-d'oeuvre': though attracting much attention, and finding a purchaser in the important collector of contemporary art George McCulloch, it was deprecated by critics who found it too 'feminine' to be sufficiently grand. This was a major disappointment for her and thenceforward she seems to have accepted that prejudice against women's artistic ambitions would dog her efforts and always limit her successes. She continued, however, in the same vein of subjects and style, with such works as 'Apollo and Daphne' (1895), 'Isabella' (1896) (ex Sothebys), and 'Diana and Callisto' (1899). Interleaving these ambitious canvases with the more commercially reliable genre of portraiture, she continued to appear regularly at the Royal Academy exhibitions until 1919. Despite the advent of modernism she did not abandon her production of classical stories presented in narrative fashion -- for example, 'Hylas and the Nymphs' (1910; priv. coll.) -- and symbolic nude female figures -- as in 'Songs of the Morning' (1904; priv. coll.) -- which still found a ready audience in the gallery-goers and collectors of her own generation. 
Rae gained an honourable mention at the Universal Exhibition in Paris in 1889 and a medal at the world fair in Chicago in 1893. Her painting 'Ophelia' (Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool) was purchased by the Liverpool corporation in 1890 and she was the first woman to serve on the hanging committee of that city's important autumn exhibition at the Walker Art Gallery in 1893. She was one of the artists commissioned to produce frescoes for the Royal Exchange, London, completed in 1900, and was included in the Victorian Exhibition mounted at Earls Court, London, in 1897 to represent the art of the queen's reign, serving as president of the women's art section. She died on 26 March 1928 at her home, St Egberts, 4 Fox Hill Gardens, Upper Norwood, Surrey. 


@@@@@


doc= 45493


Graham, Jocelyn Henry Clive (1874-1936), author, was born on 23 December 1874 in London, the second child of Sir Henry John Lowndes Graham (1842-1930), clerk of the parliaments, and his first wife, Lady Edith Elizabeth Gathorne-Hardy (died 1875), daughter of the first earl of Cranbrook. Graham's mother died when he was two weeks old, but he later felt himself fortunate in having in Sir Henry 'the most perfect of fathers' (family papers). In 1884 Sir Henry married Lady Margaret Georgina Compton, daughter of the fourth marquess of Northampton, and had three further children. Harry Graham was educated at Eton College and at the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, and joined the Coldstream Guards in 1895. Between 1898 and 1904 he was aide-de-camp to the earl of Minto, governor-general of Canada, with a gap in 1901-2, when he served in the South African War. 
Under the pseudonym 'Col. D. Streamer', a pun on his regiment, in 1899 Graham published 'Ruthless Rhymes for Heartless Homes', for which he is best known. Forerunners of the sick joke, unlike 'Struwwelpeter' they contain no moral to mitigate the enjoyable beastliness. Whereas Hoffmann's Pauline goes up in flames because she disobeys her mother, in 'Tender-heartedness' Graham visits the same fate on Billy without any attempt to edify: '
Billy, in one of his nice new sashes, 

Fell in the fire and was burnt to ashes; 

Now, although the room grows chilly, 

I haven't the heart to poke poor Billy. 

' 
'Ruthless Rhymes' reflected an upbringing in which almost nothing was off-limits as a subject for humour. 'My family would think me very ill if I ever said anything in a letter that wasn't absolutely flippant', the nineteen-year-old Graham wrote to a friend (family papers). Sir Henry was a pianist, singer, and songwriter whose 'Six Drawing-Room Ditties' -- 'Oh, what a shape hers! Cutting her capers.' -- were an early influence. Graham impressed Lady Minto by writing, producing, and starring in musical shows. The governor-general was less happy when his aide-de-camp published a comic poem about Theodore Roosevelt that included the lines: '
Though jealous rivals dared to scoff, 

He wore the smile-that-won't-come-off. 

' Lord Minto commented, 'I am furious... it's all wrong for one of my staff to be making fun of the President'. But he later wrote: 'Harry quite awful and makes me hysterical he is so amusing' (Bowles, xi-xiii). 
Graham was private secretary to the former prime minister Lord Rosebery from 1904 to 1906, when he became a full-time writer. He was briefly engaged to the American actress Ethel Barrymore, who found him 'a gay, brilliant creature' but decided not to marry him (Barrymore, 144-6). He tried biography -- 'Splendid Failures' has sympathetic portraits of Wolfe Tone, Toussaint l'Ouverture, and Hartley Coleridge -- but his speciality was the comic poem, without the brutal succinctness of 'Ruthless Rhymes' but dotted with biting observations, as in 'Forms of address', which appeared in 'Deportmental Ditties' (1909): '
Then make it a rule, if you're bent on succeeding, 

To show every sign of good birth and good breeding, 

To do what is thought 'comme-il-faut' and 'de rigueur', 

To browbeat the poor and to bully the nigger. 

' On 8 February 1910 Graham married Dorothy (1879-1942), daughter of Sir Francis Hyde Villiers, British ambassador in Brussels, and widow of Captain Hugh Keith-Fraser. When war was declared in 1914 he was nearly forty, but he rejoined his regiment, dealing with disciplinary lapses such as 'the glorious crime' of 'looking at the sergeant-major in an old-fashioned manner' (Graham papers). From 1917 he served in France, and saw many horrors. But he continued writing and following the progress of musical comedies to which he had contributed lyrics. 'The Maid of the Mountains' (1917) ran for a record 1352 performances at Daly's, in London; its best-known song, 'Love will Find a Way', is characteristic of dozens of lyrics turned out by Graham over the next fifteen years. At one point, in 1924, there were seven productions in which he was involved (Bowles, xvi). Many were set in 'that imaginary country in Central Europe, which has to be imaginary because no actual country ever could be governed on such pleasantly frivolous lines' ('The Times', 11 Feb 1931). 
Graham's facility allowed him to ring innumerable changes on the theme of young love, although he used his comic gift when he could. In the Gilbertian 'I understood' the narrator tells of his failed attempts at love, borrowing, and insurance selling with the refrain: '
He didn't say he wouldn't and he didn't say he would, 

He didn't have to say a single word -- I understood. 

' Graham's most popular song, made famous by Richard Tauber, was 'You are my heart's delight', from 'The Land of Smiles', with music by Franz Lehar. 'White Horse Inn', also translated by Graham from the German, had hits with the title-song and 'Goodbye' ('I'll be sometimes missed by the girls I've kissed'). In his comic prose there is evidence that Graham influenced P. G. Wodehouse, who is on record as an admirer (private information). In 'The Bolster Book' (1910) he invented a club for rich young boneheads, the Celibates, with dialogue that pre-echoed Wodehouse's 'Drones'. 
In 1930, with 'More Ruthless Rhymes', Graham revisited what the poet Gavin Ewart called the 'epigrammatic squib' (Ewart, 91). 'Indifference' finds him as casually mordant as ever: '
When Grandmamma fell off the boat, 

And couldn't swim (and wouldn't float), 

Matilda just stood by and smiled. 

I almost could have slapped the child. 

' Ewart believed Graham 'was not much inferior' to Gilbert as a versifier. When he died a fourth leader in 'The Times' (31 October 1936) described 'Ruthless Rhymes' as 'that enchanted world where there are no values nor standards of conduct or feeling, and where the plainest sense is the plainest nonsense'. 
Despite his sharpness with the pen Graham was widely liked. He lunched at his clubs -- the Beefsteak and the Garrick -- and did his best work in the small hours. 'Tall, lean and soldierly' ('The Times', 2 Nov 1936), he accentuated his military bearing with a Kitchener-style moustache. His only child, Virginia Graham (1910-1993), followed him as a writer, contributing many articles to 'Punch'. Graham died of cancer in London on 30 October 1936. 


@@@@@


doc= 45494


Humphreys, Eliza Margaret Jane (1850-1938), novelist, was born on 14 June 1850 at Gollanfield, Inverness-shire, the daughter of John Gilbert Gollan, who had been in business in India, and his wife, the daughter of the manager of the Bank of Bengal. John Gollan had returned to Scotland on inheriting the family estate, and his daughter often referred to him as 'the Laird'. As a child, Eliza Gollan accompanied her parents and brother to Sydney, Australia, where her father pursued a business venture, but this proved disappointing, and the family returned to England, settling in London, when she was fourteen. Her Australian experience is reflected in the semi-autobiographical novel 'Sheba', published under the pseudonym Rita in 1889. She had no formal education to speak of, but showed very early a flair for writing stories. 
On 23 July 1872 Eliza Gollan married Karl Otto Edmund Booth, a professional musician. His father was German, his mother English, but Eliza's description of her father-in-law as a baron seems unfounded, as was her use of the name von Booth. The marriage lasted long enough to produce three sons, but ended unhappily, later providing material for 'Saba Macdonald' (1906), and also for her Victorian trilogy: 'Grandmother' (1927), 'The Wand'ring Darling' (1928), and 'Jean and Jeanette' (1929). Her second marriage, to an Anglo-Irish professional singer, William Ernest Humphreys (who used the stage name Desmond Humphreys), was a success. A daughter, Dorothy, was born in 1891. After a short stay at Youghal, in Humphreys' native county, Cork, the family lived for several years at Bournemouth, then moved to Bath. 
As a writer, Rita greatly admired Ouida, and came to be seen as a rival to Marie Corelli, having much in common with both writers. She was extremely prolific, with nearly 120 titles to her name, and worked in various genres, producing novels, short stories, plays, and essays. Her first published work, which appeared when the author was still in her twenties, was 'Vivienne' (1877), and others followed rapidly and frequently, with titles such as 'My Lady Coquette' (1881), 'My Lord Conceit' (1884), and 'Good Mrs. Hypocrite' (1897). Her characters were frequently aristocratic, and the books often had fashionable foreign settings (partly owing to the influence of her European honeymoon). She first began to receive widespread recognition as a popular writer with her 'Dame Durden' (1883). 'Peg the Rake' (1894) sold 160,000 copies, a large number for those days, and was her first novel with an Irish setting or Irish characters, thereafter a consistent feature of her work. 
The year 1894 also saw the appearance of 'A Husband of No Importance', the first of the books in which Rita expressed a critical attitude to current patterns in social life. With a nod to Oscar Wilde's 'A Woman of No Importance', which had opened in 1893, it forms an attack upon the then-prevalent 'new woman' novel. Although Eliza Humphreys herself, by this time, was a successful professional woman (and a founder member of the Writers' Club for Women), she disapproved of women 'aping men', and especially disliked what would later be called polemical feminism. In 'Souls' (1903), she scathed pretentious and vicious society women in search of new sensations, following this up with a series of articles ('The sin and scandal of the 'smart' set'), in the periodical 'The Gentlewoman', and with another fictional indictment, 'Queer Lady Judas' (1905). In 1907 she produced 'Personal Opinions Publicly Expressed', in which one essay was entitled 'The increase of vulgarity amongst women'. Rita saw the United States as a source of bad examples, a theme to which she returned after a visit to that country, in 'America through English Eyes' (1910). 
Eliza Humphreys had long been critical of 'Church' Christianity, and considered Mrs Humphry Ward's 'Robert Elsmere' (1888) 'one of the bravest and best books of the past century'. She met Madame Blavatsky and became interested in theosophy, and problems of religious belief and conduct dominate Rita's 'Calvary: a Tragedy of Sects' (1909), a novel which she maintained meant more to her than any other book that she had written. It was made into a film, as also were 'Grim Justice' and 'The Iron Stair', and income from that source helped her through the difficult years of the First World War. In the post-war world, however, with its changed tastes in literature, she found herself in ever greater financial trouble, especially as her husband became an invalid. She was forced to apply to the Royal Literary Fund, and also sought a civil-list pension. These were refused her ('it being obvious that the standard of this lady's work did not qualify her'), but in 1930 she was given an award from the Royal Bounty Fund (her novels had been greatly liked by Queen Mary, who ordered a complete set of them for her private bookcase). 
In her 'Who's Who' entry (found under Rita), Eliza Humphreys said that she was a great lover of the theatre, and she wrote several plays, none of which, however, enjoyed much success. That was true also of her post-war novels, although they continued to receive respectful notices in the 'Times Literary Supplement'. Her last work of fiction was 'The Marriage Comedy' (1934), and her final book her autobiography, 'Recollections of a Literary Life' (1936). In his preface to this, her friend Sir Philip Gibbs wrote: 'Somehow I think of 'Rita''s readers as lying on deck-chairs in pre-war summers, as tourists in Venice and other pleasant places where well-to-do English people used to take their holidays.' 
Rita's writing was always fluent and lively, but occasionally marred by repetitiveness and inconsistencies, and her educational shortcomings sometimes showed. Characters rather than plot were her forte, but, in her prime, she was none the less an extremely popular novelist. Eliza Humphreys died of heart failure at 239 West Brow, Combe Down, Bath, on 1 January 1938; her husband died in the following year. 


@@@@@


doc= 45495


Williams, Dame Juliet Evangeline Rhys (1898-1964), political activist and public servant, was born on 17 December 1898 at Sheering Hall, Sheering, Essex, the younger of the two daughters (there were no sons) of Clayton Louis Glyn (1857-1915), barrister, and his wife, Elinor Glyn, nee Sutherland (1864-1943), novelist. She was educated at The Links, Eastbourne, but left at the age of fifteen to join the Voluntary Aid Detachment. In 1918 she became private secretary to the director of training and staff duties at the Admiralty, and in 1919 assistant secretary of the war cabinet demobilization committee. Later the same year she became private secretary to the parliamentary secretary at the Ministry of Transport, Lieutenant-Colonel Sir Rhys Williams, first baronet (1865-1955), Coalition Liberal MP for Banbury and son of Gwilym Williams, county court judge, of Miskin Manor, Pont-y-clun, Glamorgan. They married on 24 February 1921. There were four children of the marriage: Glyn David Rhys (1921-1943), Susan Eleanor ('b'. 1923), Brandon Meredith Rhys ('b'. 1927), and (Marion) Elspeth ('b'. 1937). Sir Rhys Williams changed his name by deed poll to Sir Rhys Rhys Williams on 26 November 1938; thereafter the family was known by the surname Rhys Williams. 
In the years immediately following the First World War Juliet Williams was primarily occupied with raising her children. Nevertheless, in 1924 she and her husband went to Hollywood to help bring her mother's business affairs into order; while there Juliet Williams wrote the continuity for her mother's second film for MGM, 'His Hour'. In the 1930s she was actively involved in social and medical work, particularly relating to maternity services and child welfare. She was honorary treasurer of Queen Charlotte's Hospital Anaesthetic Fund from 1928 to 1939, honorary secretary of the Joint Council of Midwifery from 1934 to 1939, and a member of the interdepartmental committee on abortion from 1937 to 1938. She was also a founder member of the National Birthday Trust in 1928, and its chair from 1957; as such she was active for many years in organizing medical research relating to maternity services. In 1937 she was made a DBE in recognition of her part in the drafting of the 'Midwives Act', 1936. During the Second World War she served as an assistant commercial relations officer in the ministry of information and then (from 1940) as an assistant section officer in the Women's Auxiliary Air Force. In 1942 she was appointed a dame of grace of the order of St John of Jerusalem. Her elder son, Glyn David Rhys Williams, a captain in the Welsh Guards, was killed in action in Tunisia in April 1943. 
Between the wars Juliet Williams had developed a keen interest in economics and attended study groups such as the Economic Research Council (of which she later became vice-president). She published 'Something to Look Forward to' in 1943, and 'Family Allowances and Social Security' in 1944, both advocating and providing detailed plans for the development of a welfare state. She was also actively involved in Liberal Party politics. She stood unsuccessfully for parliament in the Liberal interest twice (at the Pontypridd by-election in 1938, and at Ilford North during the general election of 1945). She was honorary secretary of the Women's Liberal Federation from 1943, and chair of the publications and publicity committee of the Liberal Party from 1944 to 1946; she resigned after a disagreement on policy matters with her party's leaders. 
After the Second World War, Juliet Rhys Williams's passion was European unity. At the Hague Congress of May 1948, the high point of federal aspiration, she acted as secretary of the economic section, responsible for producing the economic and social resolution ('The Congress... affirms the urgent need for an economic union in Europe'). Back in Britain she had already become a leading light in the various organizations which urged British involvement in the European construction. She was an early member and secretary of the British committee of the European League of Economic Co-operation, founded in 1946. She also joined as secretary (from 1947 to 1958) and later chair (from 1958) the United Europe Movement, and from 1951 to 1954 was editor of 'European Review'. 
From these vantage points Juliet Rhys Williams encouraged the Macmillan-Eccles duo to bring forward in the council of Europe constructive alternatives, which Britain could support, to the Schuman plan for a coal and steel community (1950). In 1953, when Europe was agonizing to no ultimate effect over the institution of a defence community, she urged upon Macmillan, now in the cabinet, that the only method of remaining a world power was to go in with Europe: 'Britain cannot possibly remain a world power upon the present basis. The Commonwealth is non-existent, except as a coronation pageant... To continue upon the present line... is to court utter disaster.' But if Britain opted for Europe, she argued, it would 'have the full approval of America, and will, indeed, be America's saviour inasmuch as she succeeds in holding West Germany to the Western side'. To Macmillan, she 'combined a remarkable knowledge of technical economics with an almost prophetic power of grasping the long term implications of large questions'. The document which she sent him was 'remarkable in its prescience' (Macmillan, 475-7). 
Juliet Rhys Williams was described by her 'Times' obituarist as 'a tremendous dynamo' ('The Times', 19 Sept 1964). She was a prolific writer, if not in her mother's 'nonsensical and ungrammatical' vein. Hers were mainly heavy pieces on traditional Liberal themes, including 'Taxation and Incentive' (1952), advocating the replacement of state benefits by universal subsistence allowances and heavier taxation of earned income. Nevertheless, there were lighter interludes, including 'Aircraftswoman Grey' (1943), 'Stern Daughter' (1944), 'Dr. Carmichael' (1946), and '49 Chances' (1947). She was a governor of the BBC (1952-6), director of the 'Economic Digest' (1954-8), and chair of the Cwmbran Development Corporation (1955-60). She died at the National Hospital for Nervous Diseases, Queen Square, Holborn, London, on 18 September 1964, of craniopharyngioma. She was survived by her younger son (the second baronet) and her two daughters, her husband having predeceased her in 1955. 


@@@@@


doc= 45496


Bullen, Edward (1813-1868), legal writer, was born at Taunton, on 3 April 1813, the son of Robert Uttermare Bullen, an attorney. He was educated at the Benedictine College of Douai, and was admitted to Lincoln's Inn in 1833. (He should not be confused with a Gray's Inn barrister of the same name, called in 1852.) As a Roman Catholic he was unable to subscribe to the oaths required for call to the bar, and therefore followed the course set by others in the same plight -- notably Charles Butler (died 1832), also of Douai and Lincoln's Inn -- by practising 'below the bar'. Such practitioners had no rights of audience in court, but were permitted to engage in chambers practice either as conveyancers or special pleaders. Bullen chose pleading, and became one of the most celebrated pleaders of the century. He is first mentioned in the 'Law List' for 1838, when he was practising at 2 Elm Court. The privilege of reading as a pupil in his chambers was highly prized. 
Bullen wrote 'A Practical Treatise on the Law of Distress for Rent and of Things Damage Feasant' in 1842, a work which achieved a second edition in 1899 but which was destined to be overtaken by more detailed treatises on the same subject. A pamphlet which he published in 1853 on the changing relationship between landlord and tenant indicates his continuing interest in that branch of the law. His lasting renown, however, was due to his classic 'Precedents of Pleadings in Common Law', compiled in collaboration with a former pupil, Stephen Martin Leake, and which first appeared in 1860. The object was to produce a collection of simple modern precedents in conformity with the new pleading system introduced by the 'Common Law Procedure Act' 1852, and the rules made under it, which put an end to the fictions and prolix formalities which had characterized special pleading during the first twenty years of Bullen's professional life. The book was an enormous success and became the 'vade mecum' of every common-law barrister; an extended second edition appeared in 1863, and by the time of the fourth edition (1882) the work's original length had been doubled. Despite the many further reforms introduced throughout the next century, which necessitated heavy revision by successive editors, the work of Bullen and Leake was still in use (as Bullen, Leake, and Jacob) in the thirteenth edition of 1990. 
Bullen died at his London home, 82 Belsize Park Gardens, on 19 July 1868, after reading the proofs of the third edition of 'Precedents of Pleadings'. He was survived by his wife, Louise. Three of his sons were barristers who had served as pupils in his chambers. His eldest son, Edward Uttermare, born about 1838, was admitted to the Middle Temple in 1856, called to the bar in 1860, and joined the western circuit. The second son, Charles Louis, became a member of the same inn in 1857 but does not appear to have been called or to have practised. Another son, Thomas Joseph, born in 1845, joined the Inner Temple in 1864, and practised as a special pleader until 1883, when he was called to the bar. He assisted Leake in the completion of the third edition of 'Precedents of Pleadings', was co-editor of the 1882 edition, and also helped to prepare the 1899 edition of Bullen's 'Distress'. 


@@@@@


doc= 45497


Leake, Stephen Martin (1826-1893), legal writer, was born in London on 19 March 1826, the eldest son of Stephen Ralph Martin Leake (1782-1865), assistant secretary to the Treasury, and his wife, Georgiana, daughter of Captain George Stevens. The family was seated at Thorpe Hall, near Colchester, Essex, and at Marshalls in High Cross, Ware, Hertfordshire. Leake's grandfather John Leake was a bencher of the Middle Temple, and was said at the time of his death in 1862 to be the senior barrister in England by date of call. John was a grandson of Stephen Martin Leake (1702-1773), Garter king of arms. 
Stephen Leake attended King's College School, and went on to Cambridge in 1844 as a pensioner at St John's College. He was placed as twentieth wrangler in the mathematical tripos in 1848, when he took his BA degree. On graduation he was admitted to the Middle Temple, and he was called to the bar five years later in 1853, reading as a pupil in the chambers of the eminent special pleader, Edward Bullen. He became a member of the home circuit, and attended the Hertfordshire and Essex sessions. On 24 September 1859 he married Isabella 
(or Isabel; died 1924)
, daughter of William Plunkett, a conveyancing counsel. 
Leake (or Martin(-)Leake, as he was sometimes called) practised for about ten years from various sets of chambers in the Temple, but his reputation was chiefly built on his legal writing. His first work, for which he is still best remembered, was 'Precedents of Pleadings in Common Law'; it was compiled in collaboration with Bullen and published in 1860. Bullen and Leake, whose work reached a twelfth edition by 1975, were household names for all barristers for well over a century. 
However, Leake's literary career was to be longer and more distinguished than Bullen's. Belying the image of crabbed pedantry which had traditionally attached to experts on pleading, he was a prominent member of the Juridical Society, founded in the 1850s to promote the scientific study of law. In a paper which he delivered to the society in 1857 he explored the possibility of identifying universal fundamental principles of property law, comparing English and Roman law. Three years later he presented a paper to the Social Science Association on 'The formal science of law'. His inclinations were therefore already turning to legal scholarship when in 1863, worried by increasing deafness, he made the decision to leave practice and retire to his father's seat in Hertfordshire. There he became a county magistrate and made use of the comparative leisure of country life to compose lucid and methodical treatises on the law. His 'Principles of the Law of Contracts' (1867) was the first scientific treatise on what was soon to become a core subject in the legal curriculum; it was also the first treatise to identify and analyse some recently developed doctrines, such as vitiation by mistake. The book was to exercise a beneficial effect on the academic legal literature of the next generation; it was the basis of an American textbook by W. A. Keener, published in 1891, and its influence in English universities was acknowledged by Sir William Anson. 
Leake was inspired by the codification movement, and in 1868 he responded to the general invitation from Lord Cranworth's commission of 1866 by producing 'A Scheme of a Digest of Law, with a Specimen Digest of the Law of Bills of Exchange'. The guiding principle of his scheme was that 'the contents might be recognized intuitively as standing in their proper relations, so that the inquirer might be guided to any point by his sense of order only'. He described the construction of a digest as 'a translation of the law from an historical to a systematic or scientific form', though (in contrast with a code) the cases from which it was derived would be cited. The method was essentially that adopted by Pollock and Chalmers in their respective digests of the law of partnership, bills of exchange, and the sale of goods, each of which resulted in codifying legislation. 
Leake spent his remaining years preparing digests of the common law according to his scheme, beginning with the land law. His 'Elementary Digest of the Law of Property in Land' (1874) was followed by 'A Digest of the Law of Uses and Profits of Land' (1888), which (according to the half-title) was conceived as the third part of his 'Digest of the Law of Property'. This last part was not concerned with uses and trusts, but with 'uses of land' in the lay sense; two further parts were planned but did not materialize. His 'Elementary Digest of the Law of Contracts', which appeared in 1878, was a revised edition of 'Principles' and was designed to fit into the same scheme. The uncompleted works on real property, though revised in a posthumous second edition of 1909, made no particular impact; the solution to the problem of the land law was to be fundamental reform rather than codification. On the other hand, the treatise on contracts reached an eighth edition in 1931 and was still sometimes consulted throughout the twentieth century. 
Leake died at Ware, Hertfordshire, on 7 March 1893, and was buried at Thorpe-le-Soken, Essex. He was survived by his wife, six sons, and two daughters. The eldest son, Stephen (1861-1940), was a co-editor of two editions of 'Precedents of Pleadings in the Common Law', and a Hertfordshire magistrate. The fifth son, Lieutenant-Colonel Arthur Martin-Leake (1874-1953), was twice awarded the Victoria Cross. 


@@@@@


doc= 45498


Whitney, Isabella (fl. 1566-1573), poet, is assumed to be the daughter of Geoffrey Whitney of Coole Pilate, Cheshire, and the sister of Geoffrey Whitney (1548?-1600/01), author of a minor emblem book, 'A Choice of Emblemes' (1586), on the basis of correspondences between persons named in the younger Geoffrey's will and in his volume of emblems, with persons named in 'A Sweet Nosgay', Isabella's second volume of verses. It is possible that references in 'Nosgay' to Geoffrey Whitney refer to two other, more distantly connected, contemporary Geoffrey Whitneys; Isabella's own statement was that she was 'bred' in London. If she was the sister of the author Geoffrey Whitney, she was either estranged from Geoffrey, or married (the 'Sister Eldershae' he names), or dead by September 1600, when Geoffrey omitted mention of an Isabella in his will. Her mother's surname may have been Cartwright. Whatever her origins, Isabella Whitney enjoys the distinction of being the first woman under whose name, or initials, a complete, printed volume of original, secular poetry appeared in English. 

'The Copy of a Letter' (1566-7), the first of Whitney's two known miscellanies, survives in only one known exemplar housed at the Bodleian Library. In addition to a prefatory poem by Richard Jones, the printer, the volume contains four jaunty love complaints, two in female and two in male voice. Although some critics have argued that Whitney was author of only two of the poems, 'I.W. To her Unconstant Lover' and 'The Admonition by the Auctor', others -- Marquis and Krontiris, most notably -- claim that the juxtaposed poems privilege a female complaint about the misuse of women over a male complaint about rebellious women. There have been unreliable editions of 'Copy' by J. P. Collier ('Illustrations of Early English Popular Literature', 1863) and E. Arber ('An English Garner', 1896); a portion was reproduced by Travitsky in 1980, and a facsimile of the whole was published (with an introduction by Panofsky) in 1982. 

'A Sweet Nosgay' (1573), Whitney's second, more complex miscellany, is extant in an imperfect exemplar held at the British Library. The title poem reworks some of the adages of Hugh Plat's 'Floures of Philosophie' (1572), particularly those on love and friendship, flavouring some of the verses with added point of a type that might be called proto-feminist. Like 'Copy', 'Nosgay' can be read as focusing on a single motif, in this case the suffering and illness (mitigated somewhat by the love and friendship of family and friends) which eventually caused the author to leave 'good London'. Poetic epistles and other verses to family and friends describe both the addressees and Whitney's situation, thereby relaying to us seemingly autobiographical titbits that state or suggest that she is from a large family; that two of her younger sisters, to whom she proffers advice, are in service; that she is single and therefore free to write verses; that she is of gentle -- though not exalted -- rank; and that although she has been in service to a woman she admires, she is luckless: she has been ill, has lost her position, and is financially hard-pressed. In the final, most original, and most important poem in the volume, the mock 'Wyll and Testament' Whitney addresses to London before her departure (and her anticipated, mock-serious demise), Whitney describes the city in vivid detail reminiscent of the character sketches of 'Cock Lorell's Boat', of the rogue tracts and cony-catching pamphlets, and of the later city comedies. 'Wyll', though similar to earlier mock testaments, is unusual in being fitted into a narrative frame; Gascoigne may have written his 'Last Will and Testament of Dan Bartholomew of Bath' in imitation. In addition to Panofsky's facsimile of the entire 'Nosgay' (1982), parts of the volume were published in the twentieth century. 
Both volumes mark Whitney as a very unconventional woman. Earlier Englishwomen who put works in print were noble or associated with court circles, and their pious productions (usually translated) were both inherently blameless and a plausible excuse for their breach of convention. In contrast, there is no evidence to suggest that Whitney was well connected, and her poems give what Beilin has termed 'public' voice to breezily expressed secular concerns. Her jocose tone, in fact, lends credence to the suggestion that she is writing imaginary, rather than heartfelt, laments (as her publisher suggests in his prefatory poem to 'Copy'). Whitney was certainly 'au courant' with London literary trends; in fact, she can be viewed as a trend-setter for her composition both of rhymed epistles and of a mock testament. The ballad measure which she used frequently was very popular; her use of familiar allusions (including many of her titles) and of exaggerated complaints are consonant with 'the native plain style of poetry' of her time; she is indeed similar -- in all but gender -- to contemporaries like Gascoigne, Googe, and Turberville. As a woman writer of such verses, however, she is absolutely unique in the mid-sixteenth century: the 'Judith Shakespeare' whom Virginia Woolf posited as an impossibility. 
Both of Whitney's complete volumes were printed by Richard Jones, who specialized in popular ephemera. Fehrenbach speculates that 'The Complaint of a Woman Lover', printed by Jones in 'A Handefull of Pleasant Delites' (1566?), may have been Whitney's and that Jones may have printed two other poems by Whitney, 'The Lady Beloved Exclaymeth of the Great Untruth of her Lover' and 'The Lamentacion of a Gentilwoman upon the Death of her Late Deceased Frend William Gruffith Gent.' in 'A Gorgious Gallery, of Gallant Inventions' (1578). Green suggested that Whitney might also have been author of 'Another by I.W.', a prefatory poem in Thomas Morley's 'A Plaine and Easie Introduction to Practicall Musicke' (1597), although this work was not printed by Jones. There is, however, nothing concrete to tie any of these poems to Whitney. 


@@@@@


doc= 45499


Leigh, Dorothy (d. in or before 1616), writer, was the daughter of William Kempe of Finchingfield, Essex, according to a contemporary 'heraldic book' (BL, Harley MS 6071). Further details of her parentage are unknown. She married Ralph Leigh (died 'c'.1616), a gentleman of Cheshire who served under the earl of Essex at Cadiz. They had three sons, George, John, and William; the last became rector at Groton in Suffolk and is mentioned in letters by John Winthrop between 1626 and 1630 (for example, Winthrop, 1.347). An alternative hypothesis (Morant, 2.363) makes her the daughter of Robert Kempe and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Clement Higham of Barrow-Hall in Suffolk, and sister of William Kempe (1555-1628). It is unlikely, however, that the woman who died in 1616, the mother of young children, had a brother aged sixty-one at the time, and Morant makes no mention of her work. 

'The Mothers Blessing' was published in 1616, subtitled, 'The Godly Counsaile of a Gentlewoman, not long since deceased, left behind her for her Children'. Twenty-three editions of this work were published, of which sixteen are extant, the latest dated 1674. Leigh utilizes the 'mother's advice book', a popular genre which could legitimize a woman's writing at a time when it was readily seen as an 'unchaste' act. She justifies her writing through the idea of leaving advice to her young sons, as a mother's love 'is hardly contained within the bounds of reason', and structures the text around this idea, most chapters being entitled 'the [nth] cause of writing is...'. Mother's advice books are typically prefaced with an epistle from the male printer recording the author's death and innocence of publication. Leigh's death is recorded in the book's title, but she markets the book herself in dedicating it to Princess Elizabeth, the queen of Bohemia. Her projected readership, moreover, expands from her sons to a wider, and female, one: once Leigh has defined the third cause of writing as 'to move women to be careful of their children', this larger female audience hovers behind subsequent chapters. 
Leigh claims for herself a strong moral position by writing on religious themes, identifying herself clearly as a protestant who condemns the 'vain prayers' of Catholics, and exhorting women to be chaste: the woman who is 'unclean' is 'worse than a beast'. She also expresses more radical views, however, in particular on women's rights in marriage and on rape and its significance for women. In instructing her sons on their 'choice of wives' she argues for women's emotional rights in marriage and their equality with their husbands. Leigh advocates female learning and validates this not only through its religious focus, but also as a defence against male threat. A woman's reading thus becomes a defence against listening to wicked male persuasion. Engaging with the long-standing debate over rape, she argues, contentiously, that rape does not undermine a woman's chastity. The feelings of shame experienced by women after rape, she contends, signify their innocence, exemplified particularly in those who commit suicide. The great number of editions of Leigh's work testifies to the popularity of her writing. 


@@@@@


doc= 45500


Collins, An (fl. 1653), poet, is known only as the author of 'Divine Songs and Meditacions' (1653), the sole source of information about her. This volume is in part a spiritual autobiography, but specific details about her life are either lacking, only briefly or cryptically disclosed, or woven into a generic pattern that makes it difficult to separate person from persona. 
Collins's poems describe afflictions in conventional though often moving fashion, as Job-like storms of anguish, and winters preceding spring-like recoveries, but there are also more personal references. She alludes to her external unattractiveness, bodily imperfections, and physical incapacity in metaphors that suggest that she may have been disfigured by an illness such as smallpox and immobilized by the loss or paralysis of a limb, perpetually housebound as a result of some early 'weakness'. That she was able to turn retirement into creative uses by practising her intellectual, spiritual, and poetic powers in 'morning exercise' apparently did not erase her lifelong sense of physical vulnerability, disability, and shame, recurrent themes in her lyrics. 
Collins gives no information about her family: she offers her poems to 'some neare Kindred' (Collins, ed. Gottlieb), but her strongest ties are to a community of saints constituted by shared religious beliefs rather than blood relations. She never mentions a husband or intimate companion, roles abrogated by God, the one truly essential 'Sweet presence' in her life, who instigates and supports her 'calling' to poetry and accepts her poems as 'the offspring of my mind'. 
Frequent references throughout Collins's volume to flowers, rocks, and caves, and 'the beauty of the Land' suggest a country rather than city life, but one filled with tension and strife. The typical struggle between the godly and the ungodly appears in her portraits of a community filled with dissension and slander, often aimed at her, and a countryside ravaged by civil war. Presumably with the parliamentarians in mind, Collins identifies those who ruin the land by forced oaths, confiscations, and innovations in religion and government as dangerous enemies of truth and liberty, but she also criticizes the kind of libertinism often associated with the court, comments favourably on the aims of the 'Good Old Cause', and supports what is often thought of as the radical challenge of continuing to reform the Reformation. 
Collins's religious beliefs are difficult to pin down exactly. One of the poems in the volume, 'The Discourse', is a relatively unexceptional primer of traditional protestantism, and Collins's profound sense of sin has led some critics to call her a Calvinist, but her lack of emphasis on election and predestination and bracing descriptions of the human inclination to goodness make this doubtful. And although she is occasionally critical of 'Novelties' in religion, she displays affinities with some of the sects of the time that were attuned to a personal inner light, apocalyptic, aware of being shunned by respectable secular society, and ever ready to combat publicly the enemies of the godly. 
Collins gives voice to the pains of her triple affliction -- as a physically disabled person, one of the godly living 'where profanenesse did abound', and a woman traditionally constrained to silence and a limited range of activities -- but challenges these pains and constraints in metrically inventive songs and meditations that are 'memorandums' of praise to God and powerful assertions of her own role in typological and contemporary history. 


@@@@@


doc= 45502


Dower, William (1837-1919), missionary, was born in Banchory, south-west of Aberdeen, on 5 November 1837, son of John Dower, a builder, and his wife, Jean, 'nee' Forbes. Like his father, he became a staunch Congregationalist and was apprenticed as a builder, but he attended Aberdeen grammar school and won a bursary to Edinburgh University. There he studied theology and he was ordained in Edinburgh on 28 June 1865. The following month he married Jessie Edward ('b'. 1838), a childhood friend who like him had strong religious convictions. He had been accepted as a missionary by the London Missionary Society (LMS), and in August 1865 the Dowers sailed for South Africa. 
After some weeks in Port Elizabeth they went to Hopedale (later Uniondale), from where William Dower was soon asked to visit the Griqua captain, Adam Kok III (1811-1875), who had requested a missionary. Kok's people, the majority of Khoikhoi origin, had trekked from Griqualand West to what was called Nomansland (later Griqualand East in what became the Transkei) in the mid-1860s. After arranging terms with Kok, Dower, who had by this time learned Dutch, arrived with his family at the Griqua settlement in May 1870. He planned a new town that was given the name Kokstad and assisted the Griqua to move their seat of government there. He became one of Kok's leading confidants at a time (1871) when the first Cape colonial official arrived and announced the 'annexation' of the area. 
When, in the mid-1870s, the LMS asked Dower to move elsewhere he refused, and his connection with the society ended. After he returned to Kokstad from a visit to Britain in 1878 his salary was paid by the Griqua church. He tried to smooth relations between the new Cape colonial administration and the Griqua, who after Kok's death had gone into an abortive rebellion in 1878 to recover their lost independence. Dower encouraged them to accept individual titles to their land, which impoverished many Griqua, who remained opposed to the colonial administration. He had no sympathy for those Griquas who, under the leadership of Abraham le Fleur, sought to challenge that administration, but in 1889 he did visit Griqualand West and Cape Town in an attempt to recover moneys for some Griqua, without success. By 1891, when he left Kokstad, his relations with the Griqua had become strained, in part because of the time he spent ministering to the white community and because he was increasingly associated by the Griqua with the forces that had lost them their independence and their earlier prosperity. 
After he left Kokstad Dower's links with the LMS were restored, and he became one of its directors. He ministered to the coloured congregation at the Union Church in Port Elizabeth until 1912, when he retired to a home he called Banchory at nearby Uitenhage, where he died on 21 December 1919. He had three sons and two daughters; his third son, Edward (died 1918), became secretary for native affairs after the creation of the Union of South Africa. 
Dower helped the Griqua establish themselves in Griqualand East, but then saw a proud community crumble in the face of colonial rule. He is perhaps best known today for 'The Early Annals of Kokstad and Griqualand East' (1902). Written in his old age, when he was more critical of the Griqua than he had been in the 1870s, his book does not give them sufficient credit for reconstituting their state in a new environment, nor does it sufficiently recognize the adverse consequences for them of the advent of colonialism in the 1870s. His readable account nevertheless remains a valuable source for the early history of the Griqua settlement east of the Drakensberg mountains. 


@@@@@


doc= 45504


Senior, Jane Elizabeth (1828-1877), workhouse and school inspector and philanthropist, was born on 10 December 1828 at Uffington House, Uffington, Berkshire, the only daughter of eight children of John Hughes (1790-1857), author, and his second wife, Margaret Elizabeth (1797-1887), second daughter of Thomas Wilkinson of Stokesley Hall, Yorkshire. Known as Jeanie, she had long blonde curly hair and blue eyes. On 10 August 1848 she married Nassau John Senior (1822-1891), son of Nassau William Senior (1790-1864), the distinguished economist. Her husband failed to make a success of the bar, and the couple lived with his parents at Hyde Park Gate during the early years of their marriage, when their son Walter Nassau Senior (1850-1933) was born. The marriage was unhappy, and she found other interests, taking singing lessons with Manuel Garcia, which developed her fine mezzo-soprano voice. Through her friend Sara Prinsep she met the artist G. F. Watts, with whom she formed an intense friendship; she also had an intimate correspondence with the French polymath Prosper Merimee. In 1856 she adopted Helen Wilson, the motherless daughter of an Indian army officer. In 1860 she and her husband set up home in Clapham, taking in family members as paying lodgers; she also gave singing lessons to supplement their income, as her husband lacked permanent paid employment and was virtually cut out of his father's will. 
Although Jane Senior was admired by her husband's sister Minnie, who described her as 'the brightest ornament in our house' (Simpson, 94), it is unlikely that she was close to her father-in-law, who held views on the relationship between the state and the poor far removed from hers. Her own brother, Thomas Hughes (1822-1896), author of 'Tom Brown's Schooldays' (1857), was a Christian socialist who promoted working men's associations, and while there is no evidence of Jane Senior's involvement with these activities, her own work does display a belief not only in charitable work but also in a more active role for the state. 
As part of cultured London society Jane Senior was well connected and, like many middle-class women of her time, heavily involved in charitable work; Octavia Hill (1838-1912) and Louisa Twining (1820-1912) were both her friends. Her views accorded well with those of Twining: both were keen to promote women's work, not only in a voluntary capacity but also in state welfare work with the poor. During the Crimean War Senior worked as part of a team sending supplies to soldiers; later, during the 1870-71 Franco-Prussian War, she directed the ladies' committee of the London office of the Red Cross, for which she was awarded a Red Cross medal. She was also an active workhouse visitor with a special interest in the fate of young girls when they left the workhouse; in 1875 she founded the Metropolitan Association for Befriending Young Servants. Her organizational and workhouse experience led to her appointment as the first woman government inspector, and it is for this that she is remembered. 
On 6 January 1873 James Stansfeld (1820-1898), president of the Local Government Board and a renowned radical campaigner, in a move to receive 'a woman's point of view', appointed Jane Senior inspector of workhouses and of workhouse pauper schools with a brief to produce a report on the effect on girls of education in pauper schools. Both her appointment and report were controversial. The appointment of a woman was unpopular with other civil servants who, as Stansfeld later recalled, hated having a woman imposed on them. On 14 February 1874, however, her appointment was made permanent, with the position of senior inspector. 
Since the early nineteenth century there had been campaigns for middle-class women to exercise greater influence over poor-law policy and the running of the workhouses. It was argued that women would bring their 'domestic economy' skills to the work; indeed, the absence of women's influence was seen as a reason for the development of huge poor-law institutions, so beloved of official experts and decried by campaigners. From 1834 pauper children had been contained either in large London district institutions, in ordinary workhouses, or in separate schools. Intense debate peaked in the 1860s over the appropriate institutions for these children; although all were agreed that the type of institutions in which the children were placed was crucial to their future development and 'usefulness' to society, the issue remained unresolved. Non-official attitudes emphasized the importance of a family, or at least a vicarious family, for children, especially girls, who needed training in domestic skills to fit them for future work as domestic servants, their most likely destination on leaving the control of the poor-law authorities. In the 1860s the huge district schools of London were brought into disrepute by scandalous revelations of mismanagement, disease, and overcrowding, and this strengthened the case for the 'family' system. 
Senior's report appeared in September 1874, in spite of attempts by E. C. Tufnell, the inspector of workhouse schools, to make her withdraw it. She recommended dividing large schools into: cottage homes with about thirty children in each; 'scattered homes', where about thirty children would all live under one roof but attend the local schools; and the more piecemeal, but ultimately more widely adopted suggestion, that orphans should be individually boarded out in working-class homes with foster parents who would receive reimbursement from the poor rates. Her report has been hailed as a landmark in the history of official policy, although in fact attitudes among officials towards pauper children had already begun to change. It was not so much the views that were novel as the manner of their presentation -- by a woman in an official capacity. Senior's ill health, which led to her resignation in November 1874, and Stansfeld's short-term tenure of his post meant that while the policy advocated by Senior was acted upon, Stansfeld's example of appointing a woman to a senior post was not emulated for many years to come. 
Jane Senior, who had suffered for many years from a tumour of the uterus, died of haemorrhage and exhaustion on 24 March 1877 at her home, 98 Cheyne Walk, London; she was buried two days later at Brookwood cemetery, Woking. Her appointment as the first woman government inspector did not herald the arrival in Whitehall of women in high-profile and senior positions or break down prejudice against women in senior civil service posts; but her report did contribute to the development of the system of fostering of orphans in England. 


@@@@@


doc= 45505


Streatfeild, Sophia (bap. 1755, d. 1835), beauty, was baptized on 9 May 1755 at St Anne's, Soho, London, the elder daughter of Henry Streatfeild (1706-1762), of Chiddingstone, Kent, and his wife, Anne Sidney (1732-1812), natural daughter of Jocelyne Sidney, seventh earl of Leicester (died 1743). She was tutored in Latin and Greek by Dr Arthur Collier (1707-1777), lawyer and classicist. An earlier student of his was Hester Lynch Salusbury (later Thrale), whose diary, 'Thraliana', gives the fullest account of Sophia Streatfeild. Hester Thrale met her in Brighton in 1777 and described her on 19 May 1778: 'Her Face is eminently pretty, her Carriage elegant, her Heart affectionate, and her Mind cultivated. There is above all this an attractive Sweetness in her Manner, which claims & promises to repay one's Confidence, & which drew from me the secret of my keeping a Thraliana to deposit all kinds of Nonsense in. (Thrale, 323)' Sophia Streatfeild's classical learning aroused Hester Thrale's jealousy, yet little is known of it; the single extant example of her scholarship is a letter to Hester Thrale that bristles with references to, and quotations from, ancient Greek authors. Samuel Johnson acknowledged her knowledge of Greek, though he did not rate her intelligence. At her death her library contained forty-three volumes of Greek literature. 
Hester Thrale had further occasion to be jealous of Sophia Streatfeild, as her husband, Henry Thrale, was much taken with her. As early as December 1778 she wrote in a footnote, 'I see my Husband is in love with her' (Thrale, 348, n. 1). Not long thereafter, under 10 January 1779, she wrote: 'Mr Thrale has fallen in Love 'really & seriously' with Sophy Streatfeild -- but there is no wonder in that: She is very pretty, very gentle, soft & insinuating; hangs about him, dances round him, cries when She parts from him, squeezes his Hand slyly, & with her sweet Eyes full of Tears looks so fondly in his Face -- & all for 'Love of me' as She pretends; that I can hardly sometimes help laughing in her Face. (ibid., 356)' Hester Thrale repeatedly refers to her husband's obsession with Sophia, and also records other amorous conquests of hers. Her favourite in May 1781 was William Vyse, of Lichfield, yet she was rumoured to have considered Lord Loughborough as a suitor. In the previous autumn she had dazzled Beilby Porteus, bishop of Chester and for fifteen years a married man. According to Hester Thrale, 'She shewed me a Letter from him that was as tender, and had all the 'Tokens' upon it as strong as I ever remember to have seen 'em' (ibid., 761). The last of Sophia's conquests to be named was Dr Charles Burney: 'he is 'now' the reigning Favourite, and she spares neither Pains nor Caresses, to turn that poor Man's head, much to the Vexation of his Family' (ibid., 523). In exasperation Hester Thrale summed up Sophia Streatfeild's character thus: 'a Young Coquet whose sole Employment in this World seems to have been winning Men's hearts on purpose to fling them away. How She contrives to keep Bishops, & Brewers, & Doctors, & Directors of the East India Company all in her Chains so -- & almost all at a Time would amaze a wiser Person than me. (ibid., 523)' Sophia Streatfeild died, unmarried, on 30 November 1835 and was buried in her native Chiddingstone, Kent, where there is a memorial tablet to her in the church. Her library was sold by W. H. Robinson Ltd. Edward Burney's drawings of the characters from 'Evelina', by his cousin Fanny Burney, supposedly depict Sophia Streatfeild as Evelina. 


@@@@@


doc= 45508


Abrams, Harriett (c.1758-1821), singer and composer, was, according to her niece's husband, Thomas Adolphus Trollope, the daughter of a man who came to England 'in the suite of some Hanoverian minister, in what capacity I never heard' (Trollope, 151). She was described by William Thomas Parke as a pupil of Thomas Augustine Arne, but this is not apparent from Arne's reference to her in a letter to David Garrick in September 1775. A soprano, she made her debut on 28 October 1775 at Drury Lane Theatre, London, as the Little Gypsy in 'May Day', an afterpiece written for her by Garrick with music by Arne. William Hopkins, the company's prompter, noted in his diary: 'Miss Abrams (a Jew) about 17 Years old. She is very Small a Swarthy Complexion, has a very Sweet Voice & a fine Shake, but not quite power enough yet -- both the Piece & the Young Lady were receiv'd with great Applause. (Stein, 155)' She sang for five seasons at Drury Lane in musical afterpieces and plays, notably as an Italian Girl in Sheridan's 'The Critic' on 30 October 1779, and then became a concert singer. From 1781 until the end of the decade Miss Abrams was a leading London soloist, appearing in the Concerts of Antient Music, the Academy of Ancient Music, and concert series organized by Venanzio Rauzzini and Johann Peter Salomon. She sang at Salisbury, Cambridge, Winchester, Oxford, and Birmingham, at the Three Choirs meetings of 1781 and 1782, and in the Handel commemoration concerts at Westminster Abbey of 1784-7 and 1790. Charles Burney, writing of the 1784 Handel performances, praised the sweetness, taste, and expression of her singing and noted that although her voice was not regarded as theatrical she was audible in every part of the abbey. 
Harriett's sister, Miss G. Abrams, who took child roles at Drury Lane during Harriett's last two seasons there, was probably the Miss Abrams junior who sang with her sister in concerts in 1781-2. Nothing more is known of her. Jane Abrams ('c'.1766-1813/14) made her first appearance when she sang at Harriett's benefit concert in 1782, and a third sister, the contralto Theodosia ['see below'], joined Miss Abrams and Miss Abrams junior in the Concerts of Antient Music in 1783. Jane appears to have withdrawn from public performance, while Harriett and Theodosia continued to appear as soloists and became particularly admired as a duo, the Miss Abrams. They sang together in public concerts and increasingly at private entertainments in the houses of the aristocracy. Harriett also organized concerts, including a series at the home of George Venables-Vernon, second Baron Vernon, in winter 1791-2 when the oboist William Thomas Parke was one of the musicians she engaged. After 1791 the sisters' only advertised appearances were in Harriett's annual benefits, at which Joseph Haydn presided at the pianoforte in 1792, 1794, and 1795. Eliza ('c'.1776-1831), the youngest of the Abrams sisters, played piano concertos in Harriett's 1788 and 1789 benefits and from 1790 also sang in vocal ensembles with her sisters. Two brothers, the violinist William and the cellist Charles, worked as professional musicians and, according to Doane's 'Musical Directory' (1794), shared a house with their sisters. Flora Abrams, who played the violin at minor venues between 1776 and 1782, may have been a relative. 
Harriett Abrams was a successful composer of songs, duets, and trios. She published two sets of Italian and English canzonets, a collection of sixteen Scottish songs harmonized for two and three voices, and, in 1803, a book of twelve songs dedicated 'with Her Majesty's most Gracious Permission' to Queen Charlotte. There are also about a dozen separately published songs, several of which quickly appeared in editions in the USA. Her most frequently republished piece was 'Crazy Jane' (1799), a setting of a poem by Matthew 'Monk' Lewis, whose first biographer wrote: 'the ballad has been wedded to music by several composers; but the original and most popular melody was by the celebrated Miss Abrams, who introduced and sung it herself at fashionable parties' (Baron-Wilson, 189). 
On 2 June 1791 Harriett was baptized at St George's, Hanover Square, together with Jane, Theodosia, Eliza, and their elder sister Charlotte, who married a few days later. In 1799 John Philip Kemble supped with the unmarried Abrams sisters at their London home, met them at the house of the earl and countess of Mount Edgcumbe, and dined with them at Broadstairs, Kent, in August. After Theodosia's marriage in 1804, the sisters retired to Devon to 'enjoy the well earned emoluments of their profession' (Lysons, 215). When Harriett made her will in 1819, she had $5770 in stocks, the lease of a house in Montague Square, St Marylebone, and a small estate at Englefield Green, near Egham, Surrey. She died at Theodosia's home, The Braddons, South-Hill, Torquay, Devon, on 8 March 1821 and was buried at St Saviour, Tormoham, Devon, on 12 March 1821. According to Mount Edgcumbe, Harriett, Theodosia, and Eliza, 'who were unrivalled in their line, and whose united voices formed the very perfection of harmony' (Edgcumbe, 1824, 142), continued to sing together to the delight of their friends until shortly before Harriett's death. 




@@@@@


doc= 45514


Bunbury, Sir Edward Herbert, ninth baronet (1811-1895), classical scholar and author, was born on 8 July 1811 at Brighton, second of the six children (five sons followed by a daughter who died aged one) of Lieutenant-General Sir Henry Edward Bunbury, seventh baronet (1778-1860), of Mildenhall and Barton Hall in Suffolk, and his first wife, Louisa Emilia (1788?-1828), daughter of General Henry Edward Fox (1755-1811). The family was a landed one renowned, as 'The Times' (8 March 1895) said, for its 'brilliant social qualities and influential connexions', as well as for its art collection at Barton. Edward and his elder brother, Charles James Fox Bunbury (1809-1886), were educated at home. The climax of the enlightened curriculum was an extended visit to Europe in 1827-9: 'Sir Edward's youthful memories were a changing kaleidoscope of rounds of Court gaiety, enlivened by an occasional 'emeute', of perils by flood and troubles at custom-houses; of the gems of art and the glimpses of scenery, of vessels stormbound by contrary winds, and of running the gauntlet of Salvator-like gorges, picketed by troops and ambushed by brigands. ('The Times')' Bunbury matriculated at Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1829, and graduated as senior classic and chancellor's medallist in 1833; election to a fellowship followed in 1835. In 1833, however, he was admitted at the Inner Temple, and was called to the bar in 1841. From 1847 to 1852 he sat as Liberal MP for Bury St Edmunds, but both his attempts at re-election (in 1852 and 1868) proved unsuccessful. 
Bunbury's obituary in 'The Times' characterizes him as 'shy, self-contained, and almost painfully embarrassed in manner'. Perhaps the shyness amounted to little more than an aversion to small talk, because the writer goes on to remark that: 'his marvellous memory never failed him. As he got animated and excited he would gasp in his talk, and incident and reminiscence would crowd fast on each other, till he was almost apt to lose himself in a labyrinth of entertaining digressions.' Sir Clements Markham likewise described him as 'exceedingly fond of society, and in his later years he was a constant frequenter of the Athenaeum, where he enjoyed meeting and conversing with his numerous friends' ('GJ', 499). He was noted for his grasp of disciplines as diverse as art, astronomy, and numismatics. He contributed occasionally to the 'Numismatic Chronicle' and the 'Quarterly Review', and produced a revised edition (1846) of Sir William Gell's 'Topography of Rome and its Vicinity'. 
But Bunbury's most important work matched his classical training with his enthusiasm for geography and travel. As early as 9 December 1839 he was made a fellow of the Royal Geographical Society, and served on its council in 1846-7. It must have been from the 1840s that he became one of William Smith's principal collaborators in the preparation of his great classical dictionaries for John Murray -- of geography above all. Bunbury's contributions were praised by E. A. Freeman and others as 'models of accuracy and of exhaustive erudition' ('GJ', 499). This work laid the foundation for his major piece of scholarship and principal claim to fame, 'A History of Ancient Geography among the Greeks and Romans from the Earliest Ages till the Fall of the Roman Empire'. Twelve years in the making, it runs to more than 1400 pages and was published in two volumes by John Murray in 1879, with a second edition following in 1883 and a reprint by Dover in 1959. Bunbury wrote to Murray from 35 St James's Street, his London residence, on 16 September 1878: 'I am fully aware that my work is not likely to be a pecuniary success and shall be quite satisfied for my own part if it proves as you express it a credit both to author and publisher. I need hardly add that I feel much gratified by the favourable opinion expressed by your referee.' Posterity has shared that opinion. As a thorough, balanced exposition of its challenging and fundamental subject, Bunbury's work remains unmatched in any language. It earned him a medal from the Royal Geographical Society in 1880, and continued to be cited as standard for a century. 
Bunbury succeeded his brother as ninth baronet on 18 June 1886. He died unmarried at Apsley House, 148 King's Road, Brighton, from pneumonia on 5 March 1895, and was buried at Great Barton in Suffolk. His library and collection of Greek coins were sold at Sothebys in 1896. 


@@@@@


doc= 45517


Busk, Mary Margaret (1779-1863), writer and translator, was born at Portland Place, London, in 1779, the daughter of Alexander Blair (1737-1815/16), a wealthy nonconformist soap manufacturer and timber trade merchant from Birmingham, and his wife, Mary Johnson (1749-1827). Her father, a proprietor of the Royal Institution, numbered among his friends the distinguished members of the Birmingham Lunar Society, and possessed homes in Staffordshire near his businesses and in Portland Place, where his wife was a society hostess. Mary Margaret married William Busk (1769-1849), a barrister of the Temple (and later a member of parliament), at Beaconsfield on 2 August 1796. They lived in London, though they travelled frequently and at length on the continent, where Mrs Busk became very proficient in German, French, Spanish, and Italian. Their one child, a daughter, died in infancy in 1801. 
By 1819 William Busk's financial position became difficult, due to election expenses and loans to family members, and his wife began to write for publication. Mary Busk's younger brother, Alexander Blair (one of twins), was an intimate college friend of the Scottish writer John Wilson, and it was through this connection that in the mid-1820s she became one of the very few women contributors to the early volumes of 'Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine', beginning with an essay on Schiller in 1825, and running to thirty-two articles by 1838. At her best, as in 'Modern German school of irony' (September 1835), she unfolds for the British public the genealogy of German idealist thought. During these years her reviews of continental works also regularly appeared in the 'Foreign Quarterly Review' and the weekly 'Athenaeum'. While most women reviewers assumed either a genderless or male stance, Busk's reviews create 'complex personae' in which the voices are 'so ironically self-conscious that we sense underlying mockery and deliberate confusion of gender' (Curran, 10) 
Busk's first books, however, were two didactic works of fiction: 'Zeal and Experience: a Tale' (1819) and the better-known 'Tales of Fault and Feeling' (1825). A more congenial venue for her work appeared in the late 1820s, with the founding of the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge. Busk's insatiable reading in history and knowledge of languages allowed her to diffuse 'A history of Spain and Portugal from B.C.' 1000 to A.D. 1814 (1833), anlations of such works as Philip Siebold's 'Manners and Customs of the Japanese' (1841). Her work as a historian culminated in the four extraordinarily detailed volumes of 'Mediaeval popes, emperors, kings, and crusaders, or, Germany, Italy, and Palestine, from A.D.' 1125 to A.D. 1268 (1854-6). 
In 1836 William Busk's business affairs became embarrassed, perhaps due to his gambling, and the couple may have legally separated to protect her income. Mrs Busk cancelled plans to publish a collection of poems and plays with Blackwood and instead successfully brought out the work by subscription. The two volumes of 'Plays and Poems' (1837) have been remembered for 'Sordello', a narrative in tetrameter couplets that caused the young Robert Browning to rewrite his own long poem on the troubadour and delay publication of his 'Sordello' until 1840. Afterwards William lived chiefly on the continent, and Mary Margaret took London lodgings for part of the year when she was not with him. When he died in Hamburg in 1849, she returned to a house in Queen Anne Street, London, though after seeing 'Mediaeval Popes' through the press she published little. A lifelong asthmatic, she died at home on 11 January 1863. Along with London contemporaries such as Sarah Austin, Mary Margaret Busk served as an intermediary between intellectuals on the continent and in Britain, through both review essays and translations, and helped broaden the cultural climate after the end of the Napoleonic wars. 


@@@@@


doc= 45518


Cartwright, William Cornwallis (1825-1915), politician and journalist, was born on 30 November 1825 in Munich, the first of the two children of Sir Thomas Cartwright (1795-1850), a British diplomatist, and his Bavarian wife, Maria Elizabeth Augusta 
(Lili; 1805-1902)
, daughter of Cajetan Peter Max, Graf von und zu Sandizell. He had one brother, Thomas (1830-1921). William was educated chiefly by private tutors, and grew up in the cosmopolitan milieu of diplomatic circles, becoming fluent in four languages. His indifferent health meant that studying at Balliol College, Oxford, was rejected in favour of the warmer climates involved in a grand tour. During the 1840s his visits included trips to Switzerland, Austria, Hungary, Malta, the Balkans, and Turkey, and in Egypt he made a trip down the Nile. But his favourite place was always Italy, to which he returned again and again. These travels provided the background knowledge for much of his later expertise in foreign affairs, shown in both his journalism and his political career. 
In 1847 Cartwright's grandfather died, leaving his father the Aynho estates in Northamptonshire and a large burden of debt. There was insufficient money for William to stand for parliament, as had been planned, so he went back to travelling, and witnessed some of the revolutionary events of 1848 in Europe. This formed his political outlook as a Liberal, and he believed that the extension of the suffrage and education would be a bulwark against the dangers of revolution. He also espoused the cause of Italian unification. In 1850 his life was changed by the early death of his father, then Britain's diplomatic representative in Sweden. William inherited his enormous debts (paid off only in 1881, when he was left money and property by a relative) and, with no profession to follow, he could live as a gentleman only by renting out Aynho and living cheaply abroad. His position in society was weakened further by his marrying his mistress, (Caroline Charlotte) Clementine Gaul (1821-1890), an uneducated Polish-German woman. They had five children, including Fairfax Leighton Cartwright (1857-1928), who was to serve as Britain's ambassador to Vienna in 1908-13. Living mainly in Rome, Cartwright knew most of the city's resident artists and writers; his friends included Frederic Leighton and Robert and Elizabeth Browning. But he was drawn more to Italian politics, especially the 'Roman question' (concerning the status of Rome and the Vatican). He was a close friend of Lord Odo Russell, Britain's political agent in Rome (1858-70). Cartwright's contacts among the Roman clergy and political liberals were a conduit of information for Russell, and he became almost an unpaid diplomatic agent himself. In 1866 he met both Gladstone and Clarendon, and accompanied the former during most of his trip to Italy that winter. The two men, from 1868 British prime minister and foreign secretary, sought Cartwright's opinions on Italian matters in subsequent years. 
Cartwright began writing for reviews and periodicals in 1858. Some of his articles were eventually turned into his three books: 'Papal Conclaves' (1867), 'Gustave Bergenroth' (1870), and 'The Jesuits' (1876). He also wrote for 'The Spectator', the 'Pall Mall Gazette', and 'The Times'. Much of his writing derived from two propositions: that Italian unification was the main issue facing Europe and that the Roman Catholic church contained reformers as well as reactionaries, making reconciliation between Roman Catholicism and liberalism possible. Cartwright's greatest journalistic success was as an occasional correspondent for 'The Times' during the early part of the First Vatican Council (1869-70). In contrast to the regular correspondents, his column provided the only reliable information in the British press on what was happening during the council's private sessions. He also fed information to Lord Acton (in Rome to help the anti-infallibility bishops), who was behind the famous Quirinus articles in the German press. Cartwright returned to England in February 1870 hoping to persuade the British government to intervene diplomatically to dissuade the council from defining papal infallibility. But his influence on Gladstone was thwarted by Lord Odo Russell's plea for non-interference and Lord Acton's view that only the French government could pressurize the Vatican. 
Cartwright had entered parliament as Liberal MP for Oxfordshire in 1868, and his parliamentary life centred on foreign affairs. In 1880 he hoped for a ministerial position, but was overlooked by Gladstone in his need to balance the government between different groupings. Subsequently he parted from Gladstone over Irish policy, quarrelled with his constituency party, and did not stand in 1885. In 1886 he unsuccessfully stood as a Liberal Unionist for Mid-Northamptonshire. He retired to Aynho, but still travelled regularly. He died on 8 November 1915 at Aynho Park, near Brackley, Northamptonshire, and was buried there. 


@@@@@


doc= 45519


Colquhoun, Archibald Ross (1848-1914), explorer, colonial administrator, and author, was born at sea off the Cape of Good Hope in March 1848, the fifth of six children of Dr Archibald Colquhoun ('c'.1804-1890) of Edinburgh, an employee of the East India Company, and his wife, Felicia ('c'.1817-1855), 'nee' Anderson. Educated at Glasgow Academy, Helensburgh School, and the Moravian School at Neuwied in the Rhineland, he joined the Indian Public Works Department in 1871 as an assistant surveyor. In 1879 he was secretary and second in command of a government mission to Siam and the Shan States, and in 1881-2 he travelled from Canton (Guangzhou) to Bhamo to find the best railway route between China and Burma. Widely regarded as an explorer of the first rank, his Indian administrative obligations prevented him from accepting an offer from Henry Morton Stanley to act as second in command of his Congo expedition. In 1883 'The Times' appointed him its correspondent in the Franco-Chinese War and for the Far East, and in 1884 he was awarded the Royal Geographical Society founders' gold medal; his publications on the trade potential of Burma were welcomed by British chambers of commerce. In 1885 he became deputy commissioner in Upper Burma; his career came to an abrupt end, however, when a frank criticism he made of government policy fell accidentally into the hands of his superiors. 
In 1889, through the offices of James Rochfort Maguire and Alfred Beit, Colquhoun accepted an offer from Cecil Rhodes of the post of first administrator of Mashonaland. In 1890 he secured the eastern frontiers of the territory through treaties with local chiefs. Subsequently, however, he complained to Rhodes that proper administrative procedures were not being followed. Leander Starr Jameson regarded Colquhoun as a pedantic bureaucrat, largely because the latter tried to exercise strict controls over land grants to avoid clashes with the African population. Colquhoun retired on grounds of ill health and was succeeded by Jameson. 
In 1894 Colquhoun became the agent in Peking (Beijing) for the Hongkong and Shanghai Bank and in the following year he surveyed Nicaragua and Panama as possible routes for a Central American canal. From 1896 until 1913 he undertook several tours of Siberia, China, Japan, the Philippines, the Dutch East Indies, southern Africa, North and South America, and the Habsburg empire. In 1900 he married Ethel Maude Cookson ['see below'], who shared Colquhoun's conviction that British public opinion should be informed about the perceived threat to British interests in Asia from other great powers, as well as his belief in the need for compulsory military service, naval preparedness, imperial federation, and 'national efficiency', concerns which he stressed at lectures to various learned and military societies. He was an active member of the Royal Colonial Institute and in 1908-9 took a leading role in a campaign to reform its constitution. He edited 'United Empire' from 1910 until his death on 18 December 1914 at 26 Iverna Gardens, London. 
Powerfully built, with a walrus moustache and a fondness for champagne, Colquhoun was a mercurial character whose life embodied several paradoxes. For all his experience of administration and exploration, he seems to have been unable to deal with South African frontiersmen because he lacked the common touch. He advised on economic development, yet his own business deals were a failure. Unfairly accused by Jameson's biographer, Ian Colvin, of being one of Rhodes's mistakes, he was in reality an accomplished writer of more than fourteen scholarly books and numerous articles on colonial administration, comparative ethnography, railway and canal construction, land settlement, trade prospects, and geopolitics and defence in the European colonial empires, Russia, China, east Asia, and the Americas. He was a regular contributor on these subjects to British, North American, and German journals and newspapers. He was one of the most widely respected travel authors of his time and he built up a series of influential friendships, counting sometime American presidents Theodore Roosevelt and William Taft, and the Canadian imperialist Sir George Parkin, among his friends. 
Colquhoun's widow, known after her remarriage as 


@@@@@


doc= 45522


Crawford, Emily (1831?-1915), journalist, was born, possibly on 31 May 1831, at Corboy, co. Longford, Ireland, one of four daughters and seven sons of Andrew Johnstone (1798-1863) and his wife, Grace-Anne Martin (died 1883); the family were Church of Ireland. Educated at home, mainly by her mother who taught her to read, by the age of eight she was reading a 'Dictionary of the Lives of Illustrious Women' and, while still a child, she devoured Sir Walter Scott's poetry and novels, as well as Shakespeare and biographies of European kings. On Andrew Johnstone's death in 1863 his widow and her two daughters moved to Paris. 
Emily remedied her lack of formal education by attending lectures at the Sorbonne and studying painting. Her initiation into journalism was prompted by another Emily, the sister of Dr Elizabeth Blackwell, showing some of her letters to a friend who then recommended her to write a Paris letter for a San Francisco newspaper, and she also sent one to the London 'Morning Star'. Since Emily Johnstone counted four American newspapermen among her relatives and one, Melville E. Stone, who founded the Chicago 'Daily News', later employed her, her choice of profession might not have seemed unusual, except for the fact that she was a woman. 
Writing in 1864, her future sister-in-law, Mary Eleanor Crawford, described Emily as 'a literary lady and wonderfully clever making $400 a year with her pen!! She writes articles in the 'Scotch Quarterly'' (family archive). A friend described Emily around this time as 'a small, exquisitely-poised figure, brilliant complexion, true blue Irish eyes, and brown hair making up a striking personality' ('Young Woman'). 
In 1864 Emily married George Morland Crawford (1812-1885), whose friendship with William Makepeace Thackeray had earned him the post as assistant to the Paris correspondent of the 'Daily News' in 1850. During her childhood Emily had become deeply conscious of her mother's legal inferiority to her father, so in her marriage contract Emily Crawford stipulated that if any serious disagreement should arise, both parties were free to leave and lead separate lives. Yet this never occurred in their twenty-one years of happy marriage, which produced three sons and a daughter. 
When Henry Labouchere arrived in Paris in 1870, as one of the new proprietors of the 'Daily News', the couple were recognized as a journalistic team -- so much so that Labouchere dispatched them, with their family, to the safety of Tours on the outbreak of the Franco-Prussian War. They returned to report on the events of the commune and Emily gained a great scoop by interviewing Communard leaders as they sat in council on 23 March 1871. Regarded by fellow journalists as the equal of Henri de Blowitz as an interviewer, Emily frustrated Blowitz's attempt to usurp George Crawford's prestigious position in the press gallery of the national assembly, where, despite advancing years, George continued to devil for her until his sudden death in 1885. 
Having inherited her husband's position on the 'Daily News', Emily also contributed to the New York 'Tribune' as well as to 'Truth', a weekly started in 1877 by Labouchere, where he told her to 'spread her wings' and where, she thought, her best writings appeared. She was also a correspondent for the 'Weekly Dispatch', the 'Calcutta Englishman', and the Chicago 'Daily News', as well as a contributor to the 'Contemporary Review', 'Macmillan's', and the New York 'Century'. Her contributions reflected her wide reading, on a daily basis, on politics and literature, of more than a score of newspapers. 'Observe, reflect, and be genuine' ('Young Woman', 184) was her journalistic motto. She kept herself informed, developed an expertise on the works of Emile Zola, and maintained close friendships with George Sand, Victor Hugo, and George Meredith (to whom she was also related). But Emily Crawford also reported on, and explained, great political events in France such as the Panama Canal scandal, the Boulanger crisis, and the Dreyfus affair, which she played down in her 'Daily News' articles, despite the efforts of her son Robert to support the Dreyfusards in the same paper. 
Emily's articles were enhanced by the background knowledge the Crawfords had gathered from their friendship with many leading French politicians, such as Adolphe Thiers, Leon Gambetta, Sadi Carnot, and Georges Clemenceau. Gambetta was even godfather to Emily's only daughter, who tragically drowned in her late teens. As president of France, Sadi Carnot, the son of one of her earliest Parisian friends, Hippolyte Carnot, offered the Legion d'honneur to Emily Crawford, which she declined, asking that it be awarded to her son Robert. 
Politicians' views of Emily Crawford varied. Gladstone, after meeting her in Paris during 1883, described her as a somewhat careless and inaccurate journalist (Gladstone, 'Diaries'). To the American-schooled Clemenceau, however, Emily was 'a ripper. Most men [journalists] in tackling questions look merely at their frontage, [but she] gets behind, beneath, inside and through and through. I have never seen anyone like her' (R. Crawford, 61). 
Emily's fellow journalists in England elected her a life fellow of the Institute of Journalists in 1890, and in 1901 she was president of the Society of Women Journalists. One of her last articles, for the 'Fortnightly Review', 'United States of Europe', reveals her longing for 'the emancipation of Europe from the military machine [which] would free her genius and enable it to soar to heights yet undreamt of' ('Fortnightly Review', 74, 1903, 992-1001). 
After retiring from the 'Daily News' in 1907, Emily continued her weekly letters to 'Truth' until her death. Although she was disabled, requiring a wheelchair, her son Robert effected her evacuation to England before the advancing German army in 1915. She died from apoplexy on 30 December 1915 at 5 Vyvyan Terrace, Clifton, Bristol, aged eighty-four. 


@@@@@


doc= 45524


Bevan, Hannah Marishall (1798-1874), philanthropist, was born on 1 February 1798 in London, one of three children and the only daughter of William Bennett (died 1818), tea merchant, and his wife, Hannah Fossick. She was brought up as a member of the Society of Friends. After her mother had suffered a stroke, leaving her partly paralysed, Hannah Bennett was sent to a school in Croydon at the age of twelve. Even as a child her unselfishness, humility, and strong powers of sympathy were very marked. On leaving school she nursed her mother until her death. The death of her father shortly afterwards, in 1818, left her with only her two brothers, William (1804-1843) and Samuel, for companions. Hannah kept house for both of them and, with Samuel, carried on her father's tea business. After his death from consumption she continued to live with William. 
In April 1824 Hannah Bennett joined the British Ladies Society for promoting the reform of female prisoners, founded by Elizabeth Fry in 1821. In May she was appointed to visit the convict ships with Elizabeth Pryor, and she also campaigned for the better treatment of the female convicts during transportation. On 15 August 1827 she married Thomas Bevan (1804-1847), a surgeon in Liverpool Street, London. 
In 1828 -- the same year in which her first child was born -- Hannah Bevan was acknowledged as a minister of the Society of Friends. Her son died at thirteen months old, but she gave birth to five more sons and two daughters between 1829 and 1842. Occupied by her family and entertaining her large circle of friends, Hannah Bevan continued her philanthropic work, establishing, with the assistance of some friends, the Foster Street ragged school. Still a member of the British Ladies Society (although she stopped visiting the ships after her marriage), she sat on the society's subcommittee to discuss the future management of convict ships in 1831. Her resignation is not noted; she seems simply to have stopped attending the meetings. 
In her later years Hannah Bevan took an active interest in the total abstinence cause: the first Band of Hope in London was formed at her house by her friend Thomas B. Smithies and consisted of some of her own children with a few neighbours. During the potato famine of Ireland in 1846 she worked energetically with others for the relief of those who were starving. She also assisted in the establishment of the First Day School in Quaker Street, Spitalfields (later merged with the Bedford Institute), and was a teacher there. With John Pryor and her brother William Bennett she aided the establishment of the Friends' Institute, which had its headquarters at White Hart Court. She was also deeply interested in the care of young men separated from their homes. 
In 1847 Thomas Bevan became ill and died at the age of forty-three; Hannah's two youngest sons also became severely ill and died that year. In 1852 she moved to Darlington, where two of her surviving sons lived. She visited the inmates of the local workhouse and would invite the children to tea as a treat. However, 1859 saw the start of a long illness, and in June 1864 Hannah Bevan suffered a stroke, from which she never fully recovered. She soon afterwards moved back to London, where she lingered on for ten more years. She died on 7 November 1874 at Linden House, Laurel Grove, Penge, near Sydenham, and was buried at Winchmore Hill with her late husband and children. 
Hannah Bevan's philanthropic concern for the disadvantaged of early nineteenth-century society was not unusual among Quaker women, and she was but one of many who gained their first experience of philanthropic work in Elizabeth Fry's British Ladies Society; the range of her subsequent involvements, however, is perhaps more remarkable. 


@@@@@


doc= 45525


Russell, Frances Anna Maria, Countess Russell (1815-1898), political wife, was born on 15 November 1815 at Minto House, Roxburghshire, the second daughter and third child in the family of five sons and four daughters of Gilbert Elliot Murray Kynynmound, second earl of Minto (1782-1859), and his wife, Mary Brydone (1786-1853). Lady Fanny spent her childhood at Minto and was brought up with a strong sense of obligation and responsibility towards her large family. Her father's political career began in earnest in 1832, when he was sent by the whig government to Berlin as minister, taking his family with him. They remained there until 1834, and in 1835 Minto's appointment as lord privy seal took the family to London, just at the time when Lady Fanny was ready to be launched into society. 
It is difficult to assess the impact made by Lady Fanny Elliot on the whig society she joined in London. In her own diary, she repeatedly comments on how 'it is so impossible for anybody ever to admire my looks or think me agreeable' (MacCarthy and Russell, 25), and laments her social awkwardness. Others were less critical, and portraits from the 1840s and 1850s show an attractive woman with abundant glossy brown hair and a trim figure. Lady Fanny was clearly a highly intelligent woman, although she was not troubled with a systematic education. Her interest was early captured by politics -- not, as was more common, by the personalities of the politicians she came to know, but by the great issues of the day, and by the truly whiggish belief in the value and necessity of public service. Her religious convictions were strong: brought up in the Presbyterian Church of Scotland, she disliked ritual and the priestly caste as much as the evangelical conviction of the necessity for personal conversion. In later life she became a Unitarian. These characteristics, along with her protectiveness and sense of obligation towards her family, were to define her public role. 
The leading whig Lord John Russell (1792-1878) was well known to the Elliots. A widower with two daughters, and four children from his wife's previous marriage, he was more than twenty years older than Fanny Elliot. Two years after his first wife's death, he fell in love with his colleague's daughter, and he proposed to her in writing on 3 September 1840. To the relief of her mother, Lady Fanny refused: the age difference was too great (and the burden of the inherited children would be no small consideration). But Lord John literally haunted her dreams, and unavoidably they continued to meet in London. On 8 June 1841 her hesitation was overcome, and they were engaged. Lady Minto had long been won over -- 'it was not an ordinary person that could suit her... it is evident how fully he appreciates the singular beauty of her character' (MacCarthy and Russell, 43) -- and his family accepted the match, with reservations: 'The family are not liked and are considered jobbers, but I hear a good report of her... I expect he ought to be the best judge of his own happiness' (G. Blakiston, 'Lord William Russell and his Wife, 1815-1846', 1972, 449), wrote his brother. Perhaps as importantly, Lady Fanny was approved at Holland House: 'good tempered and sensible' was Lady Holland's verdict. On 20 July 1841 they were married at Minto, and a month later the whigs fell from office. 
Lady John found great happiness in her marriage, which helped to reconcile her to the loss of her beloved Scotland and to the overnight acquisition of six children, a household to manage, and the public gaze which inevitably focused on the wife of so prominent a politician. Unlike many of her contemporaries, such as Emily Palmerston, Mary Anne Disraeli, and Catherine Gladstone, Lady John Russell never came to relish her position at the political centre. Her health was not good during the 1840s -- she had a number of miscarriages, as well as giving birth to four children between 1842 and 1853, including (Francis Albert) Rollo Russell. She was also notoriously anxious about the effects on her husband's health of holding office. Her hostility towards London life, in particular, was undisguised, and although she carried out the social obligations of a political wife, she always viewed it as 'a sacrifice of private happiness to public duty' (MacCarthy and Russell, 73). Fiercely proud of her husband and his reputation, she told him in 1845, 'My ambition is that you should be the head of the most moral and religious government the country has ever had' (ibid., 72); it was ironic, then, that his connection with her family led to accusations of jobbery and of undue influence exercised over him by both his wife and his father-in-law. Lady John was widely blamed by politicians for the failings of her husband, who vacillated over forming or joining ministries, but her real weakness was an inability (and unwillingness) to play by the rules of the political game. 'I shall not behave like an angel any more', she threatened her father in 1851, 'but say what I think everywhere & to every-body & do a great deal of mischief & break up the ministry' (Reynolds, 181). In particular, she has been blamed for the souring of relations between Russell and Gladstone (whom in later life she came to admire greatly for his commitment to Ireland). The relief she felt at her husband's final retirement from active politics in 1868 (he had been created Earl Russell in 1861) was intense. 
Lady John's interest in political issues and her commitment to a radical whig agenda never wavered. Her letters (particularly to her husband, father, and sons) show a clear understanding of the questions of the day, and a passionate conviction that justice should be done. She believed in liberty for Italy, home rule for Ireland, and parliamentary reform for Westminster; she supported religious liberty (although she fervently disliked 'theology' and ritual, and especially Roman Catholicism) and women's rights (although she believed that in some respects 'women's wrongs' had been exaggerated); and, a true whig, she had her reservations about monarchy: 'I consider Princes & Princesses as unmitigated evils -- Sovereigns have their use in the world, but nobody has ever yet told me of any good purpose served by the existence of these offshoots of Sovereignty' (Lady John to Rollo Russell, 13 March 1863, Bodl. Oxf., MS Eng. lett. e. 111, fols. 226-8). 
After Russell's retirement he and his wife continued to live at Pembroke Lodge in Richmond Park, the home provided for them by the queen. There Lady Russell entertained politicians, men of letters and science, and international visitors; unfettered by the demands of active politics, Pembroke Lodge became a place of pleasant resort and Lady Russell an agreeable hostess. The death of their widowed eldest son, Lord Amberley, in 1876, brought their two grandsons Frank and Bertrand Russell to live permanently with the Russells, but Lord Russell himself died in 1878. Lady Russell survived him by twenty years, during which her interests continued unabated. Among her close friends and correspondents at this time were the positivist Frederic Harrison and the Irish home rule MP Justin McCarthy. The latter described her insatiable desire for knowledge: 'she appears to have felt that whenever she came into converse with any fellow being she was in communication with one who could tell her something which she did not already know' (MacCarthy and Russell, 296). Lady Russell died at Pembroke Lodge on 17 January 1898, and was buried with her husband at Chenies in Buckinghamshire four days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 45526


Hart, Henry George (1843-1921), headmaster, was born on 16 April 1843 at Poona, India, of northern Irish descent, the second child and eldest son of William Hart ('c'.1816-1904), East India Company servant -- fifth son of General George Vaughan Hart (1752-1832) of Kilderry, co. Donegal -- and his wife, Frances Anne (died 1898), daughter of Edward Frere of Llanelli, Brecknockshire, and sister of Sir (Edward) Bartle Frere (1815-1884). Hart was educated at a day school in Bath and a boarding-school near Taunton, neither of which he liked, and from February 1858 to summer 1862 at Rugby School under Frederick Temple (headmaster 1857-69), to whom he became devoted. Lastingly influenced by the school's Arnoldian values, he enjoyed and was successful at Rugby. He played football -- even when an adult he displayed his 'Big Side' cap in his study -- and became head of School House. In later years he 'used to speak with less enthusiasm of his university than of his school' (Coulton, 'Victorian Schoolmaster', 55). In October 1862 he went to St John's College, Cambridge (admitted pensioner May 1862, scholar 1864), with a Rugby exhibition. He had $110 a year in scholarships and an allowance from his father. A 'reading man', he worked hard, rowed, played football, edited the college magazine, 'The Eagle', and was 'a man of high moral influence and of bright and attractive personality' (ibid., 53). In 1866 he was seventh classic (BA 1866, MA 1869), and was a fellow from 1867 until his marriage in 1873. 
At Rugby he had wanted to become a cavalry officer, but in 1866, invited by the headmaster of Haileybury College, Arthur Gray Butler, old Rugbeian and Hart's master at Rugby, Hart became a classics master at Haileybury, the public school recently established in the buildings of the former East India College where Hart's father had been educated. His salary was $150 plus accommodation and extras, and he again played football. A keen fisherman, from 1867 to 1914 he holidayed and fished in Norway, and he learned Norwegian. On 9 August 1873 he married Honoria Letitia (1850-1923), orphaned only surviving daughter of Sir Henry Lawrence (1806-1857). From 1873 to 1879 Hart was a classics master at Harrow School, with an income of over $500 a year. Fair-haired, hazel-eyed, short, and of apparently frail build, he greatly impressed contemporaries by his character: his goodness, sincerity, dedication, and earnestness. A devout Anglican -- though as a young man he had serious doubts and was 'a very broad Churchman' (Coulton, 'Fourscore Years', 215) -- he believed Christianity crucial to education. According to his biographer, 'his every action was consciously and deliberately guided by religion' (Coulton, 'Victorian Schoolmaster', 138). Daily with his wife he read a portion of 'The Imitation of Christ'. 
The free grammar school of King Edward VI at Sedbergh, remote in the West Riding of Yorkshire, was founded about 1525 and munificently endowed with land in Yorkshire. After various vicissitudes it reached a nadir in the 1860s under the disastrous headmastership of the Revd Henry George Day (1830-1900, headmaster 1861-74), who by incapacity and neglect reduced the school to thirteen pupils: in 1865 no new pupil joined. Following scathing reports by the Taunton commission and others, there was a proposal to end the school and use its endowments elsewhere, but in 1874 it was reconstituted by the endowed schools commission. Day was pensioned off, and lived as a parasite on the resources of the school he had so nearly destroyed. The new governors appointed as headmaster the Revd Frederick Heppenstall ('c'.1835-1879). He revived Sedbergh, increasing its numbers, but died suddenly of an incurable disease in July 1879: Hart said he 'had restored the School from nothing into a School' (Clarke and Weech, 150). 
From 1880 to 1900 Hart was headmaster of Sedbergh. He was successful, and contemporaries thought him 'a remarkable man' (Coulton, 'Fourscore Years', 213) and 'a great headmaster' (Coulton, 'Victorian Schoolmaster', 183), but essentially he was neither original nor innovative. Rather he transferred Arnoldian traditions and the normal externals of a public school to Sedbergh, ran the school well, inspired confidence in it, increased the numbers of its pupils -- to about 200, he did not want more -- and masters, improved its buildings and facilities, and gained examination successes. He worked hard, teaching and without clerical assistance except from his wife. Self-sacrificing and generous, he subsidized the school. He himself paid for masters and house scholars from 1891 to 1900 $3878. He won the respect and affection of masters and boys. The latter nicknamed him Daddy, soon abbreviated to Da. His achievement was made possible by the support and generosity of the governors, and especially Sir Francis Sharp Powell, first baronet (1827-1911), old Sedberghian, Conservative MP, chairman of the governors from 1884, and a munificent benefactor whose donations included the sanatorium and the gymnasium. Hart introduced rugby football, the wearing of caps and gowns by masters, and in the Arnoldian tradition initiated the building of a chapel where he preached. In 1883 he was licensed as a lay reader. His assistant masters included H. W. Fowler and G. G. Coulton. In 1891 his health broke down and he spent the Lent term of 1892 away recuperating. He resigned in 1900. Under him Sedbergh had become a successful, if lesser, public school. Typically he gave his large testimonial sum to the school, and it was spent on the drawing school. In 1901 he published 'Sedbergh School Sermons'. 
Hart had broken from his family's traditional Conservatism and become a Liberal, supporting Irish home rule and women's suffrage, but he gave up overt political activity lest it harm Sedbergh. He was reportedly a member of both the Peace Society and the National Service League. 
Hart moved in 1901 to Wimbledon, where he named his house Sedbergh. He visited India and Ceylon, was a temporary Board of Education secondary school inspector and an inspector for the Oxford and Cambridge Board, worked on the Wimbledon Guild of Help, was a governor of Wimbledon high school, and from 1904 to 1919 was an 'invaluable member' ('Wimbledon Boro' News', 2) of the Wimbledon education committee. In the First World War he was a volunteer Norwegian translator at the War Office. Paralysed from late 1918, he died on 12 January 1921 at his home, Sedbergh, Hillside, Wimbledon, Surrey. On 17 January a funeral service at St John's, Wimbledon, was followed by cremation at Woking crematorium; the remains were interred at Sedbergh School chapel. 


@@@@@


doc= 45532


Diggle, Joseph Robert (1849-1917), educational administrator, was born at Canal Bank, Pendleton, Lancashire, on 12 May 1849, the youngest son of William Diggle, a warehouseman, and his wife, Nancy Ann, daughter of John Chadderton. His elder brother, John William Diggle (1847-1920), became bishop of Carlisle. He was educated at Manchester grammar school and Wadham College, Oxford, where he gained first-class honours in modern history. Ordained in 1874, he was curate of St Matthew's, Liverpool, before becoming in 1876 curate of St Mary's, Bryanston Square, London, whose rector was William Henry Fremantle (1831-1916). In 1878 he married Jane Wilkinson Macrae, daughter of John Wrigley Macrae of Aigburth, Liverpool; they had a family of two sons and two daughters. 
Resigning his curacy, Diggle was elected in 1879 to the London school board (LSB) as member for the Marylebone division. He dominated the proceedings of the board between 1885 and 1894 when he was its chairman and leader of the Moderate (that is, Conservative) party. His oratorical skills evinced a strong and abrasive manner, while he was adroit in the management of committees. He was opposed by the Progressive Party on the board, and its leader Edward Lyulph Stanley, whom Diggle accused of extravagance in the running of the board's schools. During the period of Diggle's ascendancy, the progressives coined the term 'Diggleism' to denote his alleged parsimonious approach to educational expenditure, a critique set out in a booklet, 'The Case Against Diggleism' (1894). It was claimed that in order to help Anglican schools compete against secular board schools, he had deliberately neglected school accommodation, equipment, and teachers' welfare. Differences between the parties became particularly acrimonious during the early 1890s as a result of allegations about the state of religious education in board schools by the Revd J. J. Coxhead and a young Anglican lawyer, Athelstan Riley. The resulting storm led to the breakdown of the W. H. Smith compromise of 1871 concerning the teaching of scripture in LSB schools and the eventual unseating of Diggle as leader of the Moderates after their defeat in the 1894 school board election. He lost his seat on the board in 1897. 
Diggle attempted to enter national politics, standing as an independent candidate for West Marylebone in November 1885 so as to test the eligibility of clergy to enter parliament; he polled 101 votes. Having relinquished his orders in 1889 under the 'Clerical Disabilities Act', he stood as a Conservative for Camberwell North in October 1900 but was defeated by the Liberal T. J. Macnamara, a former bitter opponent from the LSB. His wider interests in education and social issues connected with it were expressed in ninety-three letters to 'The Times'. From 1906 to 1908 he was chairman of the council of the Ragged School Union and of the Shaftesbury Society. 
Diggle left London to live in Tenterden, Kent, where he was mayor, 1896-8, and chairman of the Kent elementary schools education committee in 1908. An inveterate committee man, he was chairman of the council of the Royal Botanic Society in 1907, an honorary fellow of the British Institution of Public Health, a corresponding member of the Society of Public Medicine of Belgium in 1891, and a section president at the international congresses of hygiene and demography held at London (1892) and Budapest (1894). His last seven years were spent in Oxford where he died at 24 Merton Street on 16 January 1917. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 45534


Duns, John (1820-1909), United Free Church of Scotland minister and university teacher, was born in Duns, Berwickshire, on 11 July 1820, son of William Duns and Sarah Allan. He was educated locally before entering Edinburgh University to study medicine. The events that culminated in the Disruption of the Church of Scotland inspired him to abandon medicine in favour of the ministry. The Free Church of Scotland licensed him to preach in 1843 and in the following year he was ordained minister of the Free Church, Torphichen, West Lothian. Duns married, on 12 June 1844, Margaret Monteith. The proceeds of her successful, if anonymous, activity as a novelist were applied to the reduction of the congregation's debt. 
While he was at Torphichen, Duns encountered Sir James Young Simpson, whose paternal home was in nearby Bathgate, and they developed a friendship based on their shared interest in antiquarian subjects. Duns also developed an interest in geology. In 1854 he published a 'Memoir of the Late Rev Samuel Martin', of Bathgate, and in 1857 he acted as editor of the 'North British Review'. He edited John Fleming's 'The Lithology of Edinburgh' (1859), to which he also contributed a memoir. His most substantial work was the two-volume 'Biblical Natural Science' (1863-6), which was issued in twenty-four parts at 2's'. per part. The work was heavily illustrated with woodcuts and engraved plates. Another work, 'Science and Christian Thought', appeared in 1866. In 1873 he published his 'Memoir of Sir J. Y. Simpson, Bart.'

In May 1864 Duns was appointed to succeed John Fleming (1785-1857) in the chair of natural science at New College, Edinburgh. At first, this was no more than a lectureship, and the long delay in replacing Fleming reflected the division of opinion in the church as to the appropriateness of retaining such a subject in a theological college. However, in December 1869 fresh endowments were forthcoming to restore the full professorship. Despite his long tenure and his undoubted learning Duns was never an especially influential figure in his church. Perhaps this was because, as an obituary observed, 'it was for his College that he principally lived. Assembly and Presbytery saw little of him, nor did he take any part in ecclesiastical debate, unattracted thereby and perhaps overconscious of a certain hesitancy in speech' ('Missionary Record', 106). The sentiment was echoed by Alexander Martin in a tribute delivered to Edinburgh United Free Presbytery: 'The New College never had a greater friend, never a servant who loved her better or gave himself more unweariedly to the promotion of all her varied interests' ('The Scotsman', 3 Feb 1909). 
Duns published a number of scholarly papers arising from his scientific and antiquarian interests, and he contributed greatly to the museums of New College and the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1859 (vice-president, 1899-1903) and fellow of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland in 1875 (vice-president, 1878). Duns was also president of the Royal Physical Society, Edinburgh, in 1868 and Rhind lecturer in archaeology in 1890. Duns's long service at New College ended with his retirement in 1903; thereafter he resided at Hilderley, North Berwick, East Lothian, where he died on 1 February 1909. He was buried in the parish graveyard there on 3 February. 


@@@@@


doc= 45536


Fitzgerald, Charles Cooper Penrose (1841-1921), naval officer, was born at Corkbeg, co. Cork, on 30 April 1841, the second son of Robert Uniacke Penrose-Fitzgerald DL JP (1800-1857), of Corkbeg Island, co. Cork, who in 1834 assumed the name of Fitzgerald after that of Penrose, and his wife, Frances Matilda (died 1892), eldest daughter of the Revd Robert Austin, prebendary of Cloyne Cathedral. Fitzgerald was educated at Dr Burney's academy, Gosport, and joined the Royal Navy in 1854, on HMS 'Victory' in Portsmouth harbour. As a midshipman he served in the Baltic campaign of 1855, went to the Black Sea in 1856, and then joined HMS 'Retribution' on the China station. On commissioning as a lieutenant in May 1860 he was appointed to HMS 'Ariadne', and quickly attracted attention. Throughout his career he was recognized as one of the finest seamen in the service. In July 1871 he was promoted commander, serving in several ships, including the battleships 'Hercules' and 'Agincourt'. He was badly injured in a hunting accident in Ireland in 1879 and was effectively laid up for a year. He was promoted captain on 19 March 1880, and in August he took command of HMS 'Inconstant', flagship of the flying squadron that sailed round the world. On his return, on 29 November 1882 he married Henrietta Elizabeth (died 1941), daughter of the Revd Francis Hewson of Dunganstown, co. Wicklow; they had two sons and two daughters. 
Although an outstanding sailor, who published 'Hints on Boat Sailing' (1883), Fitzgerald believed that masts and sails had no place on a modern warship, and said so at the Royal United Service Institution in 1887. After commanding HMS 'Inconstant' on a 'round the world' cruise he concluded that sails were wasteful and demoralizing to the men. His paper helped to ensure the final abolition of sailing rig in front-line warships. In 1884-5 he was captain of the Royal Naval College, Greenwich. The following year he commanded HMS 'Bellerophon', the flagship on the West Indies station. In 1888-9 he took a prominent part alongside Admiral Sir Geoffrey Hornby and Captain Lord Charles Beresford in the public debate on naval policy that culminated in the 'Naval Defence Act' of 1889. He remained a notable correspondent of 'The Times' for the rest of his life. After his prominent activity ashore, Fitzgerald commanded HMS 'Collingwood' in the Mediterranean Fleet between November 1889 and January 1893. During the last year the fleet was commanded by Admiral Sir George Tryon. Fitzgerald was immediately taken with Tryon's radical tactical ideas, which dispensed with excessive signalling and relied on sound doctrine and initiative among captains. After Tryon's death in June 1893 in the 'Victoria' tragedy, Fitzgerald publicly defended Tryon's methods in the press debate and wrote a pamphlet explaining his tactical system and a biography, 'The Life of Admiral Sir George Tryon' (1897), to remind the nation and the service of Tryon's immense contribution to naval modernization. It was also something of a lament for a lost leader, for Fitzgerald's career did not prosper when the reaction set in against Tryon's system and he was too closely identified with Tryon to be given further employment on the key stations. 
Fitzgerald next wrote a biography of Admiral Rooke for John Laughton's Greenwich Naval College text 'From Howard to Nelson: Twelve Sailors' (1899), and served on the council of the Navy Records Society. In recognition of his abilities he had been appointed a naval aide-de-camp in mid-1892, an honour he held while serving as captain superintendent of Pembroke dockyard, from January 1893 until March 1895. Both offices lapsed on his promotion to rear-admiral on 20 February 1895. In 1897-9 he served as second in command of the China station, just missing the Boxer uprising, but was not otherwise employed after reaching flag rank. He was promoted to vice-admiral on 28 March 1901, although he had no employment, and was advanced to admiral on 20 February 1905. He was placed on the retired list at his own request on 2 March 1905. Fitzgerald continued to take an active interest in naval issues, publishing a stark warning that Germany was mounting a deliberate challenge to the Royal Navy as early as 1905. His other contribution to the naval debates of the period was a sustained critique of the reforms introduced by Lord Fisher, his contemporary in the service. He particularly opposed the Selborne scheme of common entry for all officers. 
Fit and athletic, even in later life, Fitzgerald wrote two volumes of reminiscences, 'Memories of the Sea' (1913) and 'From Sail to Steam' (1916), expressing his enthusiasm for the service, and his opinions on such issues as the abolition of masts. In late August 1914, following the outbreak of the First World War, he organized a band of women in Folkestone to distribute white feathers to 'slackers' and 'loafers', as he termed young men who had not joined the armed services, an initiative that received newspaper publicity and prompted the wider use of this humiliating gesture to encourage enlistment. He died at his home, 2 Trinity Road, Folkestone, Kent, on 11 August 1921. Although a fine seaman and nicknamed Rough, Fitzgerald was a reflective as well as a practical officer. His public advocacy and writings helped to reshape the late Victorian navy into a modern service. 


@@@@@


doc= 45538


Garnett, William (1850-1932), physicist and educational administrator, was born at 183 Queen Street, Portsea, on 30 December 1850, son of William Garnett, auctioneer, and his wife, Selina ('nee' Webb). He was baptized at King Street Chapel in the following March. Four years later, the family moved to Hoxton, London. After attending a dame-school, and elementary schooling where his enthusiasm was aroused by demonstration lectures given by Lewis M. Stewart, science master at Charterhouse School, he attended City of London School. He became head boy in mathematics, his opposite number in classics being H. H. Asquith. Thereafter Garnett gained scholarships at the Royal School of Mines at South Kensington from 1867, and from 1869 at St John's College, Cambridge, where he supported himself while reading mathematics. He rowed, joined the rifle volunteers, and graduated fifth wrangler in 1873. 
The following year Garnett began lecturing at evening classes. He became a fellow of his college and was invited by James Clerk Maxwell to become his demonstrator in the newly opened Cavendish Laboratory. Maxwell, whose biography Garnett later helped to write, became his beau ideal of a physicist and professor. Garnett took the keenest delight in choosing apparatus in conjunction with Maxwell, and in 1876 was appointed lecturer: he was thus Maxwell's right-hand man both in the laboratory and in the lecture theatre, where he made great use of the magic lantern. He published standard textbooks on various branches of physics. As college steward he attempted to reform the kitchens and the purchasing of food: meals at St John's became known as 'Garnett's sixpenny blowouts', but this experiment in scientific domestic administration was not altogether successful. 
On 21 August 1879, at the Missionary College, Richmond, Surrey, Garnett married Rebecca Samways (1853-1945) of Portsea, and therefore relinquished his fellowship. That winter Maxwell died: Garnett, who was grief-stricken, had high hopes of becoming the next Cavendish professor but Lord Rayleigh was appointed, and wanted no lecturer. Garnett needed a job and was appointed professor of physics, mathematics, and mechanics at the new University College established by the town council at Nottingham, in 1882. In 1884 he accepted an invitation to be principal of the Durham College of Science being established in Newcastle upon Tyne. 
Garnett demanded proper buildings: the longer-established College of Medicine made difficulties about moving to the new site chosen by him; but a foundation stone was laid in 1887, and within six years three of the four planned blocks were completed. They form the nucleus of the campus of the University of Newcastle today. Garnett used the enthusiasm for Queen Victoria's golden jubilee to raise funds; his energy was indomitable, and he even assisted with the building works, as well as giving Christmas lectures to children. He secured one of the first government grants for university colleges in 1888. Newcastle's reputation stood high, and Garnett served on a scientific committee in London where he encountered T. H. Huxley, Lord Kelvin, Norman Lockyer, and Henry Roscoe. 
In 1893 Garnett was chosen as secretary to the new technical education board of the London county council, under the chairmanship of Sidney Webb. Garnett became responsible for twelve London polytechnics, and played an important part in reorganizing the University of London. Altogether, 50,000 students, including those at art schools, came within his purview. Secondary education became at this time an area of contention between school boards and county councils, as various education acts (culminating in that of 1902) were debated in parliament. Garnett's influence and experience were very important in the eventual victory of the county councils, but his memorandum of 1903 to MPs was leaked to 'The Times', which weakened his position thereafter. After retiring in 1915 he chaired the Educational Reform Council in 1916-17, and organized wartime courses for Britons interned in Switzerland. In 1919-23 he was secretary of the London District University Committee, which placed over 7000 ex-servicemen on courses. 
Garnett was affable and charming, alert and vigorous, and retained a firm Christian faith. He enjoyed alpine holidays, notably at Riffelalp above Zermatt. Himself the fruit of competitive scholarship examinations, he became a pioneer in scientific and technical education, at the Cavendish Laboratory, at new redbrick universities, and finally in London. Two of his sons were killed in the First World War; the eldest (James Clerk) Maxwell Garnett, his wife, and his two daughters survived him when he died peacefully at his home, Horestone Point, Seagrove Bay, Isle of Wight, on 1 November 1932. He was buried at St Helen's Church on the Isle of Wight. 


@@@@@


doc= 45539


Gerard, (Jane) Emily (1849-1905), novelist, was born on 7 May 1849 at Chesters, Jedburgh, Roxburghshire, Scotland, the eldest daughter of Colonel Archibald Gerard (1812-1880) of Rochsoles, Lanarkshire, and his wife, Euphemia Erskine (1818-1870), eldest daughter of Sir John Robison (1778-1843), the distinguished inventor. She was also directly descended from Gilbert Gerard (1760-1815), Church of Scotland minister and theological writer, Alexander Gerard (1728-1795), philosophical writer, and Archibald Alison (1757-1839), Scottish Episcopalian minister and writer. Her sister Dorothea Mary Stanislaus Gerard (1855-1915), novelist, was born at New Monkland, Lanark, Scotland, on 9 August 1855. They had two other sisters and three brothers, including General Sir Montagu Gilbert Gerard (1842-1905). 
The family lived in Vienna from 1863 to 1866, and moved in aristocratic emigre circles. Emily, who had been educated at home until she was fifteen, took lessons with, and became a lifelong friend of, Margarita of Parma, niece of the Bourbon pretender to the French throne and later wife of Don Carlo VII, pretender to the Spanish throne. Emily finished her education studying European languages for three years in the convent of the Sacre Coeur at Riedenburg, near Bregenz, Austria, and Dorothea spent four years in the convent of the Sacre Coeur in Graz. Although their family background was Scottish Episcopalian, their mother had converted to Catholicism in 1848, and both sisters were raised in that faith. 
On 14 October 1869 Emily married Chevalier Miecislas de Laszowski (died 1904), a member of an old Polish noble family and an officer in the Austrian army, and moved with him to Brzezum, in what later became Poland, where she was joined by her sisters following the death of their mother in 1870. She had two sons. Dorothea married Julius Longard de Longgarde, who eventually became a field marshal lieutenant, also in the Austrian army, in 1886. They lived in Galicia and had one daughter. 
Despite residing in Austria and other central European countries for most of their adult lives, the sisters, who used the name Gerard professionally, became active participants in the later nineteenth-century British literary community, both independently and as collaborators. Emily Gerard wrote a number of stories for 'Blackwood's Magazine' (which were later reprinted in 'Bis', 1890, and 'An Electric Shock and other Stories', 1897), and reviews of contemporary French and German fiction, both for 'Blackwood's' and for 'The Times' (London), whose obituary notice praised her as 'an able critic of German literature'. She began to write fiction in 1879, collaborating with her sister Dorothea on their first major work, 'Reata', about a Mexican girl adapting to European customs, which was published as a serial in 'Blackwood's Magazine' (beginning in April 1879), as were a number of their subsequent novels. 'Beggar My Neighbour' (1882), a story of feuding brothers, 'The Waters of Hercules' (1885), and 'A Sensitive Plant' (1891), dedicated to Margarita of Parma, concerning a timid young girl coming to terms with a ruthless mother and her beautiful unruly daughter, were published under the collective pseudonym E. D. Gerard, or E. and D. Gerard. They stopped writing together after Dorothea's marriage but a number of their individual works cross-refer: a character in Dorothea's 'A Queen of Curds and Cream' (1892) appears in Emily's 'A Foreigner' (1896). 
In her fiction Emily Gerard frequently employed central European characters and settings, and it is likely that 'A Foreigner' (1896), which featured a cross-cultural marriage, was shaped by her own experiences. She also wrote about the Transylvanian culture and landscape, drawing on the knowledge of the area, particularly of Hermannstadt and Kronstadt, gained during the two years (1883-5) that her husband had been posted there. She wrote on the vampire myth in 'Transylvanian superstitions', an article that Bram Stoker used for research when writing 'Dracula' (1897), and where he discovered the term 'nosferatu'. While these articles appeal to a taste for anecdotes about what were, in nineteenth-century Britain, exotic and little-known regions, they also include some consideration of wider political matters. In 'Transylvanian peoples' published in the 'Contemporary Review' (1887), for example, Emily Gerard concludes by suggesting that central European cultures might eventually become important in wider European affairs, giving British audiences reason to learn about them. She collected her observations in 'The Land beyond the Forest: Facts, Figures and Fancies from Transylvania' (1888). 
Even though Emily Gerard wrote six novels of her own in addition to reviews and short stories, it was Dorothea who became the better-known writer. She was more prolific, publishing at least thirty-seven books of her own and some shorter magazine pieces. Her work, also influenced by her European experiences, often touches on potentially controversial or unconventional topics. She opens 'Orthodox' (1888), for example, with a depiction of the reflexive antisemitism of a Polish army officer, and 'The Million' (1901) features a radical, discontented Polish villager as a central character. But on the whole her fiction is more escapist than polemical, and explorations of larger social issues such as antisemitism or, as in 'A Queen of Curds and Cream' (1892), the cultural gaps between English and central European characters, are subordinated to sentimental romance plots. She was praised for this conventionality at the time; 'The Churchman' recommends her novel 'The Rich Miss Riddell' (1894) as 'clean, interesting, and wholesome' entertainment (Gerard). 'One Year' (1899), a novel about love and suicide set in Galicia, is often considered to be her most powerful work, however. 
Both 'The Athenaeum' and 'The Times' comment on Dorothea's wider appeal in their articles on Emily's death, 'The Times' observing that Emily 'had not won equal popularity with that of her sister' (p. 7), despite Emily's being 'a capable novelist, with an excellent gift for telling a story' as 'The Athenaeum' pointed out (p. 86). Yet Dorothea's greater popularity did not mean that she won more critical respect; in its obituary for Dorothea, 'The Times' coolly described her as being 'hardly a novelist of the first order', although it conceded that she 'could write naturally and with spirit... in her own straightforward and fluent style' ('The Times', 18 Nov 1915, 11). 
Emily Gerard died on 11 January 1905 in Vienna, where she was buried two days later; she and her husband had made their home there following his retirement from active service. Dorothea Gerard, who had also settled in Vienna, and had lived the last few years of her life as a recluse, died there on 29 September 1915. 


@@@@@


doc= 45541


Stokes, Doris May Fisher (1920-1987), medium, was born on 6 January 1920 at 9 Wong Row, Grantham, Lincolnshire, the only daughter of Samuel Sutton, engineer's labourer, and his wife, Jane, 'nee' Wesselby. She was educated locally and was, as a girl, a regular customer at the shop run by Margaret Thatcher's father. While she had no formal involvement with spiritualism during early childhood, she was later to assert that her father had always been 'a natural psychic', and that, when still very young, she had received regular visitations from 'spirit children'. She further claimed to have witnessed as a child the spirit of a neighbour killed in a house-fire walking alongside his charred body as it was carried from the scene of the tragedy. Her father died when she was thirteen and, at the instigation of a friend, she attended a seance soon afterwards. The likelihood of her own career as a medium, however, was not hinted at until some years later when, as a member of the WRAF stationed at Port Talbot, in Wales, during the Second World War, she sought entertainment by means of a number of tongue-in-cheek visits to the local spiritualist church. She later related that on many such occasions she had been informed by visiting mediums that one day it would be she who was appearing on the platform. 
During the war (22 January 1944) Doris married John Fisher Stokes, a journeyman shoemaker, then serving in the Parachute regiment. A son, John Michael, was born in August 1944, but died aged just five and a half months. Doris remained inconsolable in her grief even after the adoption of another son, Terry, and, unable to find comfort in the Church of England faith in which she had been raised, she felt herself inexorably drawn to spiritualism. She and John began attending spiritualist services regularly, and Doris gradually found herself passing on messages from the 'spirit world' to fellow churchgoers during post-service gatherings. These meetings became increasingly popular and, gaining confidence in the 'voices' coming from outside her, Doris soon began holding services of her own at local spiritualist churches. In 1949 she was officially recognized as a practising clairaudient medium by the Spiritualist Union. 
During the following years Doris Stokes became increasingly well known in spiritualist circles, devoting much of her time to public demonstrations and private sittings around the UK. In 1962 she suffered a crisis of confidence, abandoned mediumship, and trained as a psychiatric nurse, but, badly injured by a patient five years later, she was forced to give up nursing, and by 1970 was working as a psychic once more. In 1975 she accepted the post of resident medium at the Spiritualist Association of Great Britain's London headquarters, moving to London from Lancaster, where she and her family had lived since 1954. Her first major step towards celebrity came when, in 1978, she was invited to Australia to appear on the Don Lane television show. Such was the show's success that her initially brief visit to the country was extended to six weeks, during which time she played to three capacity audiences at the Sydney Opera House. There followed visits to the USA and Canada, and 1980 saw the publication of her first volume of autobiography, 'Voices in my Ear', which was composed, somewhat appropriately, with the aid of a ghost writer, and greatly heightened her profile in the UK. Six more volumes were to follow, and over 2 million copies of her books were sold during the 1980s. In December 1984 she became the first medium to appear at the London Palladium -- tickets for her demonstration there sold out in under two hours. Innumerable stage and television appearances ensued, as did consultations with celebrities. As her popularity snowballed so, inevitably, did the number of her detractors. Journalists were particularly keen to discredit her self-professed psychic involvement in certain criminal investigations, and it was not uncommon for members of the public to accuse her of blasphemy during public appearances. Doris always defended herself against such attacks with vigour, claiming that she was neither Satanist nor psychic detective, that her work was done for God, and that her sole purpose was to reassure people of the continued existence of the 'dead'. 
Although Doris Stokes was personally wounded by such negative publicity, it did little to damage her popularity. Much of her success lay in her familiar, grandmotherly appeal: a large, amiable woman, she regularly appeared on stage clad in what she termed her 'rent-a-tent' dresses, and usually addressed audience members as 'lovey' or 'dear'. Many of her on-stage exchanges with the other side were of a humorous or domestic nature, and she often disarmed larger audiences by poking fun at popular conceptions of spiritualism. 
Whatever the reality of her 'strange gift', Doris Stokes was an individual of great personal warmth, and she continued to give free sittings to those who sought her help until just a month before her death. Plagued by ill health throughout most of her life, she underwent some thirteen operations for cancer, including a mastectomy. In April 1987 she underwent surgery for a malignant brain tumour in the Wellington Hospital, north-west London, from which she never regained consciousness, and died in Lewisham, London, on 8 May 1987, survived by her husband. 


@@@@@


doc= 45542


Ayres, Ruby Mildred (1881-1955), romantic novelist, was born on 28 January 1881 at Gresham Villa, St John's Road, Watford, the third daughter of Charles Pryor (or Prior) Ayres (1850-1914), architect, and his wife, Alice Whitford (1855-1903), daughter of William Griggs, surgeon, of Ramsgate, Kent. Charles Ayres had been articled to Edward Welby Pugin (1834-1875) and subsequently established a highly successful practice in Watford, designing a number of the public buildings there. Ruby Ayres was one of the most popular and prolific romantic novelists of the twentieth century. She began writing stories as a girl and claimed to have been expelled from school at the age of fifteen for writing 'an advanced love story'. Meanwhile 'she discovered from the appreciation of her schoolmates, that she could satisfy the feminine taste for romance' ('The Times', 15 Nov 1955, 11). She entered a competition run by 'Boy's Own Paper' for a school story, using a brother's name, and won the first prize of a guinea. 
On 23 December 1909 Ayres married Reginald William Pocock (1880-1948), an insurance broker. The couple had no children and she continued to write, she said, to pass the time while her husband was at work. Shortly after her marriage her story 'The Professor and the Blue Stocking' was accepted by a magazine and she was soon commissioned to write serials for the 'Daily Chronicle' and the 'Daily Mirror'. She also contributed to women's magazines. In the 1950s she provided responses to readers' problems for 'Home Companion'. Her first book, 'Castles in Spain', was published by Cassell in 1912. It is a bitter-sweet story, narrated in the form of a journal by an elderly bachelor, of love flowering too late and differs significantly from the rest of her work, published by Hodder and Stoughton, where the third-person narratives focus on young people and end in unions. 
Ayres's relationship with Hodder and Stoughton began in 1916 and ended only at her death. She wrote some 136 novels for them, many of which were regularly reprinted and were issued in both quality and cheap/popular formats. Her immediate and continuing popularity can be gauged from the data available for 'Richard Chatterton', which was issued in 1916 with a print run of 8000 copies: in 1917 a further 25,000 copies were printed, in 1918 another 19,000, and in 1932 another 30,000. Meanwhile subsequent novels were published in initial print runs of 20,000 to 45,000 copies; these included 'The Remembered Kiss' (1918), 'The Romance of a Rogue' (1923), 'Unofficial Wife' (1937), 'The Constant Heart' (1941), and 'Love without Wings' (1953). 
In Ayres's fictional world the country is good, town life, especially that of London, often bad. Households, white middle-class if sometimes impoverished, regularly include a cook and a maid. Plots concentrate on the misunderstandings that keep potential lovers apart and the (strained) coincidences or crises that bring them together. A simple morality approves forgiveness, truth-telling, and kindness to animals. Ayres's heroes are always self-assured, decisive, morally sound, and financially secure, and older than the heroines. She claimed to admire 'the rough, tough, he-man type who can curse and swear a bit' ('Daily Mirror', 15 Nov 1955, 11). Her heroines, who rarely need to seek paid employment, can be sweet, self-effacing, and loyal to a family which exploits them, or spoilt, wilful, and self-seeking, needing the stern attitude (and sometimes harsh words) of a man with a determined mouth and chin to unlock their better natures and to make them realize that the glamorous 'fast set' is not, after all, for them. 'Happiness', Ayres observed, 'lies in the simple things in life' ('Weekend Woman', 1939, 102). 
The attitude to money in Ayres's work is ambivalent: it is wrong to rank it above other values such as love and loyalty but a modicum of wealth is fundamental to the happy ending. However, she asserted that 'romance can be lively even when the strawberry season is over and there is only bread and cheese in the larder' (Vinson, 41). Deaths -- often of rivals or other figures who threaten the perfect bliss of the central characters, or who provide useful legacies -- occur with remarkable convenience, often in car or aeroplane crashes, and without distressing detail or mourning. A play, 'Silver Wedding', was produced in 1932. 
Ayres was a good businesswoman. Her most frequently quoted remark was 'I write for money'. She normally negotiated directly with her publisher, dispensing with an agent except for her overseas interests. She once said: 'First I fix the price, then I fix the title, then I write the book' ('Daily Mail', 15 Nov 1955, 3). She could write as many as 20,000 words a day. There is so little contextual information behind her plots that Ayres's novels do not become markedly dated and with only minor revision a number were issued in new editions many years after her death. Her books continue to be popular among library borrowers into the twenty-first century. 
Ayres was a forthright but kindly person. Her pet dislikes were ballet and affected young men. In the 1920s she was a member of the Lyceum and Writers' clubs and in the 1930s and 1940s she belonged to the Ladies' Carlton Club. She died at Lulworth House, Ellesmere Road, Weybridge, Surrey, on 14 November 1955 of pneumonia and a cerebral thrombosis. She was cremated at Golders Green, Middlesex, on 18 November. 


@@@@@


doc= 45543


Bottome, Phyllis (1882-1963), writer, was born on 31 May 1882 in Rochester, Kent, the third of four children of William MacDonald Bottome (died 1913), an American clergyman, and Margaret Leatham of Yorkshire. She was educated largely at home, except for a brief period from 1890 to 1895 when she attended a Catholic girls' boarding-school in New York, where her family had temporarily relocated. Returning to England in 1896, Bottome studied acting in London, but pneumonia kept her from her stage debut. As a young woman Bottome enjoyed reading nineteenth-century women's fiction. In 1899 she wrote her first novel, 'Life, the Interpreter', published in 1902, a story of independent womanhood and an attack on class. Soon afterwards she learned she was afflicted with tuberculosis, and she began a lifelong pattern of travelling in Germany, Austria, and Switzerland for her health while still writing and publishing fiction in Britain and the United States. From 1904 to 1917 Bottome published a series of 'social romances' that were serialized in American magazines. Just before the First World War she was living in London and was part of the literary circle which included Ezra Pound, H. D., and May Sinclair. Her novel 'The Dark Tower' (1916; published in England as 'Secretly Armed') was a popular American publication. 
In 1917 Bottome married Captain Alban Ernan Forbes-Dennis (died 1972), who was also tubercular (they had met some years previously at St Moritz and had been engaged in 1904 before Bottome broke it off because of her health). While Forbes-Dennis was at the front, Bottome worked as a writer for the Ministry of Information under John Buchan, and as a relief worker for Belgian refugees. Forbes-Dennis's role as a diplomatist after the First World War required that the couple travel widely in Europe where, in Vienna in 1920, Bottome helped the social worker Valerie Adler and her husband the psychiatrist Alfred Adler with relief work. 
Between 1917 and 1924 Bottome published seven more novels building on the themes of social ills and women's struggle with identity and success in a patriarchal society. 'Old Wine', released in 1926, brought Bottome critical acclaim for its description of post-war Austria. Bottome was analysed by Alfred Adler in the 1930s before moving to Munich, where she witnessed the Nazi rise to power. She produced a pamphlet in tribute to Stella Benson in 1934, but her next significant publication was 'Private Worlds' (1934), a novel about mental illness which was made into a film in 1935 starring Claudette Colbert and Charles Boyer. In 1936 Bottome returned to England and wrote articles warning against the Nazi threat. While these generated little response, her novel 'The Mortal Storm' (1937), which explored the same ideas, was an instant best-seller, particularly in America. It was filmed in 1940 with James Stewart and Margaret Sullavan in the leading roles. In 1939 Bottome published a biography of Adler, for which she conducted primary research in Austria, narrowly avoiding Hitler's entry into that country at the start of the Second World War. 'Within the Cup' (1943) was also successful for Bottome, who incorporated Adlerian psychological theories, and presented sensitive portrayals of characters in conflict with themselves and society. 
In 1947 Bottome published the first of her three autobiographies, 'Search for a Soul: Fragment of an Autobiography'. This was followed by 'The Challenge' in 1952 and 'The Goal' in 1962. These three books provide most of what is known about Bottome. She continued to write and publish novels at a rate of one or two a year between 1940 and 1960. 
Bottome died on 22 August 1963 at her home, Little Greenly, 95 South End Road, Hampstead, London. Her friend Daphne Du Maurier edited her collected stories in 1963. In her long career Bottome wrote on a wide range of subjects in several genres, producing popular, feminist novels and, in her non-fiction, raising the public's awareness of political dangers; her recurring theme was personal freedom. Her works were translated into many European languages. 


@@@@@


doc= 45544


Dawson, Margaret Mary Damer (1873-1920), a founder of the Women's Police Service, was born at 1 York Road, Hove, Sussex, on 12 June 1873, the daughter of Richard Dawson ('b'. 1829/30), a surgeon, and his wife, Agnes Baird Hemming (1851/2-1926), who in 1914, following her husband's death, married Thomas de Grey, sixth Baron Walsingham, and was styled Agnes, Lady Walsingham. Her education in the main was probably private; however, she studied music under Benno Schoenberger and Herbert Sharpe, winning the gold medal and diploma of an institution called the London Academy of Music. Her independent income enabled Margaret Dawson to move in well-to-do circles, and it supported her in her campaigns. In her adult years she became involved with various philanthropic activities. Although she later helped found a home for abandoned babies, her most notable activity at this period was campaigning for the humane treatment of animals, particularly but not exclusively on the continent. She organized the International Congress of Animal Protection Societies which met in London in 1906. For her work she received awards from the Danish and Finnish societies for animal welfare, and she actively participated, together with Louise Lind-af-Hageby, in the Animal Defence and Anti-Vivisection Society. 
Dawson was not active in the women's suffrage movement, but she did take an interest in such feminist issues as the campaign against the traffic in women and children, and served on the Criminal Law Amendment Committee in 1914. This led her into the campaign for women police to protect women from sexual exploitation. For some time feminists had become increasingly aware of the shortcomings of the male police in dealing with cases involving women, and especially the sexual abuse of children, and had been considering women's possible role in police work. Nina Boyle of the Women's Freedom League was one of the most prominent in this, but when war came in August 1914 it was Margaret Damer Dawson who took the lead in recruiting women police; she became chief, with Nina Boyle as her deputy. Many of the first recruits, numbering approximately fifty, had experience of being imprisoned as militant suffragists, a point which was stressed by the rival Women's Police Patrols, set up by the National Union of Women Workers (later the National Council of Women). Margaret Damer Dawson's highly respectable non-suffragette background, together with the number of her aristocratic acquaintances, was thus an asset when dealing with figures of authority. Initially the women, all of independent means, called themselves the Women's Police Volunteers, and devised their own version of the police uniform. With the reluctant approval of the metropolitan commissioner they began training with the Metropolitan Police on a purely voluntary basis, in the meantime working with refugees and giving help and advice to women who required it. However, the first call on their services, in November 1914, was from the army at Grantham, to control women 'of bad character', and to enforce the virtual curfew on women in the area. Margaret Damer Dawson agreed to do this, on the grounds that to prove their willingness to accept police discipline 'no order, however distasteful, could be shirked'. As a result of this departure from feminist principles Nina Boyle called for her resignation, but a vote of the members overwhelmingly supported Damer Dawson, and it was Nina Boyle who left, and Mary Allen and Ellen Harburn went to Grantham. At this time Margaret Damer Dawson decided to change her group's name to the Women's Police Service. 
In 1916 Lloyd George, then minister of munitions, called upon the Women's Police Service to supervise 'munitionettes' (women munition workers). Margaret Damer Dawson agreed to supply, train, and uniform 140 women, in the first instance without any financial aid, on the undertaking that if they proved successful they would receive some money. The women were sent to munition factories at Chester and Gretna. Meanwhile training continued in London's West End, and the publicity that this received caused displeasure in Scotland Yard and the Home Office. The great drain on the Women's Police Service's financial resources had been offset by a massive anonymous donation. In 1918 Margaret Damer Dawson was one of those consulted over a move to establish a permanent women's police presence under Home Office control; however, largely because of Metropolitan Police hostility to the supposedly more militant Women's Police Service, in the first instance, it was Mrs Sofia Stanley of the rival Women's Police Patrols who was appointed superintendent (again, the Metropolitan Police commissioner's main aim was that of prostitution control). 
After the armistice Margaret Damer Dawson, who had been created OBE, got chief constables throughout the country to take on forty-seven of the demobilized munitions women police, but London's commissioner, Sir Nevil Macready, remained hostile. Although the committee on the employment of women on police duties (the Baird committee), to which Margaret Damer Dawson gave evidence, cautiously approved the principle of employing women police, the Home Office did not hide its reluctance to make any concessions. Shortly after the Baird committee heard its last witness, Margaret Damer Dawson died of a heart attack on 18 May 1920 at her home, Danehill Lodge, in Lympne, Kent. She was buried at Lympne four days later. 
Margaret Damer Dawson was blonde, blue eyed, and of delicate appearance. Although an obituarist described her as 'singularly unassuming', she was obviously regarded with apprehension by many male officials and magistrates. She inspired great loyalty and affection among the women who served with her. Her successor, Mary Allen, considered that the struggle against the hostility of the male police establishment had contributed to her early death. 


@@@@@


doc= 45545


Leonora David (c.1637-1715?)], who provided his $1000 capital investment. In 1673 the partnership, worth over $15,000, was re-formed between Leonora and David alone; their marriage in the autumn of 1675 brought him into the Huguenot merchant aristocracy of London. 


@@@@@


doc= 45546


Marescoe, Charles (1633?-1670), merchant, was born in Lille (then in the Spanish Netherlands), probably early in 1633, the youngest surviving son of Jacques and Jeanne Marescoe. He was evidently resident in London by 1649 for in 1653 he testified to four years of service as bookkeeper to Jacques Boeve, merchant (Anglicized as James Boevey). By 1654 Marescoe had moved into a partnership with John Buck (1620-1661), which secured a trading agency on behalf of the Baltic dukedom of Courland and also built up trading links with Sweden's major manufacturers of metals, armaments, and naval supplies. 
Marescoe acquired naturalization on 26 June 1657 (confirmed by Charles II on 29 December 1660) and was married at the French church, Threadneedle Street, on 7 July 1658 to Leonora ('c'.1637-1715?) ['see under 'David, Jacob], a younger daughter of Jan Le Thieullier (1591-1679) and sister of Sir John Lethieullier (1632-1719). The latter drew Marescoe into his extensive trading contacts with Spain and the Mediterranean, where they shared in exports of English tin, lead, and textiles. By 1664 Marescoe's ledgers show him to have been worth over $13,000 net, with large stocks of Swedish products such as iron, copper, pitch, and tar. The Second Anglo-Dutch War (1665-7) ensured him substantial profits from these strategically valuable commodities, and by the close of 1669, when he enrolled his brother-in-law, Peter Joye (1636-1721), as a junior partner, his trading capital stood at nearly $38,000. 
Marescoe's marriage had brought him close to the aldermanic aristocracy of London and in November 1662, by lord mayor's prerogative, he was granted the freedom of the City by redemption as liveryman of the Clothworkers' Company. In 1663 he purchased a grant of arms, and by 1665 he was recognized by the privy council as the king of Sweden's official factor. In this role he was engaged in Admiralty court litigation on behalf of much Swedish shipping, seized during the war as Dutch-owned. He also disputed exactions levied on Swedish goods by the Eastland Company and in 1668-9, collaborating with the Swedish resident, Johann Barkman, Lord Leyonbergh FRS (1625-1691), he successfully opposed improper 'water-balliage' levies by the City of London's officials. 
Marescoe's acquisition in 1668 of an exclusive contract with the Swedish monopoly Tar Company consolidated his prosperous links with Sweden's greatest industrialists, such as the De Geers, the Momma-Reenstiernas, and the Kock-Cronstroms, who began to employ him as their commission agent for sales of iron bars and copper wire. It was in their interests to establish a monopoly in the London commodity market and although they never wholly succeeded there is evidence that Marescoe enjoyed a brief and unpopular pre-eminence in these wares. The reference in Samuel Pepys's diary to 'Morisco's Tarr = Business' on 23 July 1665 is only one indication of the importance which the Navy Board attached to his resources. The East India Company was also a client, as were merchants interested in supplying the African slave trade with specially manufactured bars known as 'voyage-iron'. 
Marescoe's activities were diverse: in partnership with John Lethieullier he carried on an active export trade to Spain, Italy, and the Levant. The commodities he dispatched consisted mainly of native English products, such as Colchester bays, Exeter perpetuanas, and Cornish tin, but he also figured largely in England's fast-growing traffic in colonial re-exports, channelling substantial amounts of West Indian sugars and tobacco to the refiners and blenders of Hamburg and Amsterdam. He maintained slender links with Lille, the city of his birth, seized by Louis XIV in 1668, and he also built up a precarious relationship with merchants of Rouen who marketed his sugar. It was on the recommendation of one of these agents that he engaged as a bookkeeper Jacob David of Darnetal near Rouen, who entered the household in 1668 at a salary of $40 per annum. 
At this date Marescoe was still inconvenienced by the 1666 fire of London and the destruction of his rented house in Fenchurch Street. For a while he shared a Lethieullier house but in 1669 he purchased plots between Tower Street and Thames Street and began building a mansion house in Bosse Alley, conveniently sited for access to the London wharves. With twenty-seven hearths it was a capacious home for a growing family. Five daughters had been born -- Leonora in 1659, Jane in 1661, Elizabeth in 1663, Mary in 1665, and Anne in 1666 -- and a short-lived son, Charles, arrived in 1668. On 5 September 1670, when he made his will, Marescoe's hopes for a male succession were pinned on another son, James, born earlier that year, but James did not long survive his father, who died at his home on 9 September 1670. 
Although Marescoe and his kinsmen had strong ties with St Dunstan-in-the-East and the protestant French church, Threadneedle Street (to whose poor he left $150), his costly funeral was transferred to the parish church at Low Leyton, Essex, where he had rented a country residence since the plague year of 1665. A memorial slab to Marescoe and his children was erected there by his widow, but has not survived. His estate, including real property, was finally valued at about $45,000, of which, by 'the custom of London', he assigned one-third to his widow and two-thirds to the children, but the maladministration of this estate by Leonora and her second husband, Jacob David, was to lead to its dissipation. 


@@@@@


doc= 45547


Lethieullier, Sir John (1632/3-1719), merchant and local politician, was the eldest of the three sons of Jane Delafort of London and Jan le Thieullier (1591-1679), a French protestant from Valenciennes who was brought to England in 1605 and established himself first in Ilford, Essex, and later in Lewisham, Kent. John was to become one of the most distinguished and successful members of his large and prosperous family, and he occupies a significant place in that second generation of Huguenot families which, like his friends the Houblons, distinguished themselves in late seventeenth-century London trade and contributed notably to the 'financial revolution' of the 1690s and beyond. Under the auspices of the Barber-Surgeons' Company, of which he became master in 1676, he was apprenticed to alderman Sir John Frederick (1601-1685), an eminent merchant who became lord mayor of London in 1661, and in 1658 he married Anne Hooker (died 1702/3), the eldest daughter of a future lord mayor. Her plump, pretty looks were much admired by Samuel Pepys (a fellow parishioner of St Olave's, Hart Street) who also paid tribute to her husband as 'a pretty, civil, understanding merchant'. Through his powerful connections Lethieullier was well placed to succeed in City government, and he also established himself quickly in London's overseas trade. 
Lethieullier specialized initially in the export of English textiles to southern Europe and the Levant, buying extensively from East Anglian and west of England manufacturers and superintending the dyeing and finishing in partnership with his brother-in-law, Charles Marescoe, but his interests became increasingly diversified. In 1669, for example, he was importing sugar from Portugal and iron from the Netherlands while exporting lead and tin to Venice and Rotterdam. He became a member (and later director) of the Levant Company and by 1673 was also a director of the East India Company. At the same time he was involved with the Hamburg trade in English textiles and German linens carried on by the declining company of Merchant Adventurers, of which he became governor, and with the new Royal African Company of 1671, in which he served as a director after 1681. 
Having served Tower ward as a common councilman from 1672 to 1675 and performed a term as a sheriff in 1674-5, during which he was knighted, Lethieullier was chosen as alderman for Cripplegate ward but quickly secured his discharge without bearing the usual fine. Nevertheless, through his father-in-law and in his own right, he was an influential figure in City affairs, and he was able to intervene successfully to save his sister Leonora's second husband, Jacob David, from the full financial penalties of his frauds. The career of his brother Sir Christopher (1639-1690) closely matched his own, since the latter traded within the Levant Company (of which he became a director), served as a sheriff in 1688-9 (when he was knighted), and held his place as an alderman for Coleman Street ward before and after the revolution of 1688. His other brother, William (1646-1728), also prospered as a merchant and served the City as a common councilman. 
Lethieullier acquired several properties outside London, which proved their value in the years of the plague and fire. He retained his father's ties in Essex with a house at Low Leyton, and he followed him to Greenwich, where about 1680 he built a substantial mansion called Lewisham House. He also purchased Sutton Place at Sutton-at-Hone in Kent, while in London he acquired, among other properties, Buckingham House in College Street, the former mansion of the second duke, George Villiers. 
Lethieullier did not retain close ties with the French protestant community from which he stemmed, but in 1681 he was appointed as trustee for a fund set up to support French refugees in linen manufacture at Ipswich. He also served his Hart Street parish as a trustee of its charities, and when he died, in his eighty-sixth year, at Lewisham House on 4 January 1719, was buried at St Alfege, Greenwich, where his churchyard monument, erected by a grandson, also records his two sons, John and William, and his three daughters, Anne, Letitia, and Leonora. In a very lengthy will of 6 May 1709, with several codicils, he distributed his real property between his sons and gave $10,200 to his unmarried daughters, Letitia and Leonora, as well as $1000 in addition to his marriage settlement for Anne, now Lady Dodwell. He also left sums of $100 for the French church in Threadneedle Street, and for Christ's Hospital and St Thomas's Hospital. 


@@@@@


doc= 45548


Joye, Peter (1636-1721), merchant, was born in August 1636, the son of Peter Joye, senior, a Dutch-born tailor of Blackfriars, London. Apprenticed by the Merchant Taylors' Company in 1653, Joye was brought into trade by the merchant Charles Marescoe in 1669, soon after his marriage on 23 February 1668 to Marescoe's sister, Elizabeth. Joye provided a quarter share in the firm's capital of $28,000 and their business prospered until Marescoe's death in 1670. Joye then took a one-fifth share in a partnership set up by Marescoe's widow, Leonora, but its $10,000 capital proved inadequate to sustain the scale of its predecessor's activities and he withdrew or was ousted from the partnership in 1675. 
By then Joye had acquired useful experience of the Swedish iron, pitch, and tar imports in which Marescoe had specialized and he was able to set up his own flourishing trade with the major suppliers. He dealt particularly in the long iron bars known as 'voyage' iron or 'Guinea' iron, which was in demand for sale in the west African slave trade. Joye invested $400 when the Royal African Company was floated in November 1671 and he was to serve in its court of assistants as a director in 1678-80, 1683, 1683-5, 1688-9, and 1691-5. He soon became one of the company's major contractors, agreeing in 1685 to supply it with 450 tons of bar iron and 40,000 bars of copper. In 1683 he was admitted to the Eastland Company which dealt mainly in Scandinavian and Baltic commodities. He acquired an interest in shipping and in 1676 secured the British government's diplomatic support to recover one of his vessels after its seizure by a Dutch privateer. His specialization in iron, copper, pitch, tar, and hemp made him a valued and increasingly prosperous supplier of naval goods to the Admiralty, and he made substantial loans to the government of William III. 
Although he was baptized into the Dutch church at Austin Friars, Joye was a long-standing parishioner of St Dunstan-in-the-East, where he became churchwarden. Living close to the wharves through which passed London's overseas trade, Joye paid rates as one of the most substantial citizens of the Dice Quay precinct, and he later inhabited a large house in Mincing Lane. In 1682-3 and 1689-93 he was a member of the common council as a representative for Tower ward and he was commissioned in the militia lieutenancy for the City of London in 1690 and 1694. He became treasurer of St Bartholomew's Hospital, to which he bequeathed $1000. Politically his sympathies were evidently tory-Anglican, for although he was listed as 'good' in a government survey of councilmen in 1681 he was among those liverymen purged by James II in 1687 as hostile to his plans for the toleration of Roman Catholics and protestant dissenters. 
With his first wife, who died on 14 April 1680, Joye had three sons, Charles (1670-1737), Peter (1678-1680), and James (1680-1741). On 6 October 1685 he married his second wife, Eleanor (Ellen) Rawlinson, 'nee' Whistler (died 1729), widow of John Rawlinson. They had no children and lived apart for the latter years of his life. In his will of June 1718 he pointedly left Ellen only a small share in his estate. However, although Charles had followed in his father's footsteps and established himself as a successful Eastland merchant, he had also become heavily involved in the South Sea Company, of which he became deputy governor. He thus shared in the catastrophe of the South Sea Bubble of 1720 and was among those held chiefly responsible. Shrewdly anticipating the confiscation of Charles's estate, valued at $40,105 by a punitive parliament, Peter Joye's last act, on 2 January 1721, was to add a codicil to his will, transferring to James its execution and principal benefits. He died at his house in Mincing Lane on 11 January, and his estate, which included lands in Northamptonshire bought for about $36,000 and financial investments exceeding $56,000, thus passed unscathed to its very numerous beneficiaries, who included the poor of Stockholm, Hamburg, and Malaga, as well as the French and Dutch churches of London, Sion College, and the charity school of St Ann Blackfriars. His widow attempted to have its provisions overturned in chancery on the grounds that Joye was mentally infirm, but was unsuccessful. A memorial to Peter Joye and his first wife was placed in St Dunstan-in-the-East, where he was buried. 


@@@@@


doc= 45549


David, Jacob (c.1640-1689), merchant, born in Darnetal near Rouen, France, was the son of David David (died 1677), a clothier. Vouched for as a devout protestant of good character, he was invited to England in 1668 by the London merchant Charles Marescoe (1633?-1670), who conducted a large-scale trade with Sweden. Employed as bookkeeper at $40 per annum, David was left $25 in his master's will and shortly after was taken into a quadripartite partnership by the widow, Leonora Marescoe, 'nee' Lethieullier [
David thus acquired a share of responsibility for the three surviving daughters of Leonora and the management of their inheritance, which entitled them to marriage portions of some $7100 each. The eldest daughter, Leonora II ('b'. 1659), had been recently married in lavish style to Thomas Frederick (1650-1720), son of a former lord mayor of London, but quarrels between mother and daughter soon degenerated into serious allegations of fraud against the Davids. Leonora's gross extravagance, which is amply recorded in her ledgers, and her concealment of some profitable East India Company shares, laid the Davids open to proceedings in the City of London's court of orphans and between 1679 and 1687 a chancery suit on behalf of the daughters was dragged out to a crushing conclusion. Another daughter, Jane ('b'. 1661), was married off in 1679 to John Lewknor (1658-1707), a member of parliament for Sussex, from whom she eloped in 1685 with another member, William Montagu (1652-1691), and in July 1681 an unlicensed marriage of the youngest daughter, Anne ('b'. 1666), to the allegedly penniless Frenchman, David Gansel of Rouen, led to Jacob David's arrest by the City authorities and a $2000 fine. This was paid off by his wife's aldermanic kinsmen, Sir John Lethieullier and Sir William Hooker, but on 9 October 1685, faced with the final judgment of the court of chancery, Jacob and Leonora fled to Amsterdam, where they were eventually joined by their own children, Isabella ('b'. 1676) and a son ('b'. 1678). Early in 1689 both children died of smallpox and in May, after a violent illness, David followed. 
At the height of his prosperity in the 1670s David had been a respected and generous member of the French Protestant church in Threadneedle Street, of which he was a deacon in 1676-8 and an elder in 1684. Acting as banker for some of the church's investments he was also actively involved in the church's efforts to relocate newly arrived Huguenot refugees. He had secured denization for himself on 14 October 1675 and his naturalization by private bill obtained royal assent on 16 April 1677. There is no record of his London citizenship but he was made free of the East India Company by redemption on 5 December 1679 and he was admitted to the Eastland Company in 1681. Nevertheless his controlling grasp on imports of Swedish pitch and tar and his close liaison with Dutch entrepreneurs laid him open to suspicion from a government which felt it could not trust such vital strategic goods in an alien's hands. His arrest by the City and subsequent travails were noted with some satisfaction by an anti-French public. 
Despite her influential connections with rich and powerful merchants and aldermen, such as her brothers Sir John, Christopher, and William Lethieullier, Leonora remained an embittered exile, corresponding infrequently with the incumbent of Low Leyton parish, the distinguished antiquarian John Strype (1643-1737), about erecting a memorial to her first husband, 'dear Mr Marescoe'. With him, in the 1660s, Leonora had run a thrifty household on about $10 per week, but her second marriage had liberated an extravagant nature, which lavished $500 on her eldest daughter's wedding and established $50 per week as her average 'fraits des mesnage'. It was undoubtedly her initiative which devised the concealment of assets in her first husband's inventory and, in collusion with David, schemed to evade the consequences. Although still pursued by lawsuits with her daughters, she remained unrepentant and lived on in Amsterdam, probably until 1715, when responsibility for the suits passed to her executors. 


@@@@@


doc= 45551


Windsor, Gerald of (d. 1116x36), soldier and dynast, was a younger son of a Norman constable of Windsor Castle. The first whose name has survived is Walter son of Other, who held the manor of Eton and was constable of Windsor in 1086. He was dead by 1105. He may have been Gerald's father or his older brother. In the summer of 1093 Dyfed was overrun by Norman forces and Arnulf de Montgomery (died 1118x22) was established at Pembroke. Gerald, seeking new outlets as was the lot of a younger son, served in that campaign and was appointed castellan of Arnulf's castle at Pembroke. 
There Gerald faced a critical test in the Welsh resurgence of 1096 when the castle was besieged. According to family traditions reported by Gerald of Wales, morale was low, and flamboyant gestures sustained the garrison. Fifteen knights were said to have attempted to escape from the castle; their fate is not known, but Gerald vested their squires as knights and gave them their lands. Food was desperately short, but he took the carcasses of four pigs and had them thrown over the stockade to convince the Welsh that he was well supplied. He also sealed a letter to Arnulf, declaring that he would not need any reinforcements in the foreseeable future, and it was deliberately placed where it would be found by Wilfrid, bishop of St David's, and taken to the Welsh leaders. It was said that when they heard of its contents they abandoned the siege. True, false, or embroidered in the telling, these stories were treasured by his family. 
In 1097 Gerald carried the struggle into Welsh territory by raiding the lands of the bishop of St David's in Pebidiog. About 1100, while Deheubarth was still weak after the death of Rhys ap Tewdwr (d. 1093), he married Nest (b. before 1092, d. c.1130), Rhys's daughter, 'with the object of giving himself and his troops a firmer foothold in the country' ('Gir. Camb. opera', 6.90). They had three sons, William, Maurice Fitzgerald (d. 1176), and David (d. 1176), the future bishop of St David's, and a daughter, Angharad, who married William of Barry, lord of Manorbier. 
In 1102 Arnulf de Montgomery joined his brother Robert de Belleme ('fl'. 1057-1130) in revolt against Henry I. Gerald of Windsor was involved; he was sent to Ireland to seek to persuade Arnulf's father-in-law, Muirchertach O Briain (died 1119), of Dublin, to send support. During the crisis Arnulf's lands were promised to Iorwerth ap Bleddyn (died 1111), the brother of the prince of Powys, but when Henry had crushed the revolt Pembroke was handed over to Saer, a knight of whom little is known. What happened to Gerald is not recorded, but the sequel suggests that he remained in west Wales. Saer was deprived of his lands in 1105, which were retained in the king's hands and administered by royal officials. By then Gerald was secure in the king's confidence and became constable of Pembroke for Henry I. He held a castle and lands at Carew, which became the centre of his family's landed interests. He also made gains in the south-west in Emlyn, where 'for the safe-keeping of his wife and sons and all his valuables' ('Brut: Peniarth MS 20', 28) he built a castle at Cenarth Bychan, usually identified as Cilgerran. His successors remained firmly established there. 
At that stronghold, in 1109, he faced humiliation. Owain ap Cadwgan of Powys (died 1116) visited the castle, ostensibly to see his kinswoman, Nest. He returned with a strong force, to take both the castle and the lady, who may have been a willing partner. Under Nest's persuasion Gerald escaped through the garderobe chute. Owain burned and pillaged the castle and carried off Nest and her children to Powys. His father, Cadwgan, fearing Henry I's anger, was anxious to restore her and the children to Gerald, 'but he was not allowed' ('Brut: Peniarth MS 20', 29) for Owain was infatuated. Later, at Nest's persistent request, the children were sent back to their father, but Owain 'kept their mother with himself' ('Brut: Saeson', 107). Seven years afterwards, in 1116, Gerald took his revenge. By then Owain had been reconciled with Henry I, and he and Windsor were both working with the Anglo-Norman forces in south Wales. A troop of Flemings, serving under Gerald's command, turned on Owain, overpowered his companions, and killed him. Whether Nest ever returned to her husband is not known; she was involved in liaisons with Henry I and with Stephen, constable of Cardigan Castle. Gerald of Windsor's death can be dated only within the limits 1116-36. He does not appear in the surviving records after 1116. His heir, William, and his younger son, Maurice, were leading Anglo-Norman forces against the Welsh in 1136. 
The family of Gerald and Nest was remarkable in three respects: it included a large number of males; most of them were involved in the Norman incursions and settlements in Ireland; and the family produced a fluent writer who recorded their deeds. William, the heir, remained in Wales as lord of Carew. So did his heir, Odo of Carew, but two other sons and a son-in-law settled in Ireland. Maurice, with five of his six sons, and a son-in-law, were involved in campaigns in Ireland and settled there. Bishop David's son, Miles, established his descendants at Iverk in Leinster. Two of the sons of Angharad and William of Barry, Robert and Philip, were prominent in Ireland. So was another son of William, Walter of Barry, probably a bastard. 
This large family, the fitz Geralds (eventually, Fitzgeralds), absorbed their relatives of the half-blood. The son of Nest and Henry I, Henry fitz Henry, died in 1157, but his sons, Meiler fitz Henry (died 1220) and Robert, grew to manhood before the invasions of Ireland where they prospered. Nest's association with Stephen, constable of Cardigan Castle, produced Robert fitz Stephen (died before 1192). He and two sons, both apparently illegitimate, died in Ireland. 
At Manorbier one grandson with no pretension to military ambitions was dedicated to the church, the scholar and prolific writer later known as Gerald of Wales ('c'.1146-1220x23). He recorded in his 'Itinerary through Wales' the heroic stories of Gerald of Windsor at Pembroke, and in 'The Conquest of Ireland' he related with lavish praise the deeds and achievements of his kinsmen in warfare and settlement in Ireland. Gerald enhanced their contribution by omitting or minimizing the exploits of other Anglo-Norman leaders. But the family pride and the family history which he built into his 'Conquest of Ireland' ensured the reputation of the dynasty for adventurous leadership and for a determination to find and exploit new lands. 


@@@@@


doc= 45552


Edward Spenser Burns (1861-1885), who died on 1 March 1885 at Leopoldville, Stanley Pool, on the Lower Congo, after opening up a new route towards the Niadi River, and constructing charts. Burns himself died at his home in Foxmore Street, Battersea Park, on 22 August 1909, and was buried at Paddington on 26 August. Two of his many temperance publications deserve special mention: 'The Temperance Bible Commentary' (1868), which he wrote with F. R. Lees, went through six English editions, and his two-volume 'Temperance History' (1889-91) established his reputation as the movement's best historian. 


@@@@@


doc= 45553


Richard Davies (1818-1896), politician, was born at Llangefni, Anglesey, on 29 November 1818, and married Annie Rees (1836-1918), daughter of the nonconformist minister Henry Rees, in 1855. He was possessed of business acumen and public qualities of a high order. A Liberal in politics, he unsuccessfully contested the tory seat of Caernarfon Boroughs in 1852, but in 1868 he was granted a historic victory when he was returned as the first nonconformist member of parliament for his native county of Anglesey, a seat which he held until 1886. Davies was appointed high sheriff of Anglesey in 1858 and its lord lieutenant in 1884, being the first nonconformist to hold those offices in Wales. He died at his residence, Treborth, near Bangor, on 27 October 1896, and was buried at Llandysilio cemetery, Anglesey, on 31 October. 


@@@@@


doc= 45554


Howard, George James, ninth earl of Carlisle (1843-1911), artist and politician, was born at 56 Park Street, London, on 12 August 1843, the only son of the Hon. Charles Wentworth George Howard (1814-1879), and his wife, Mary Priscilla Harriett Parke (1822-1843), second daughter of James Parke, Baron Wensleydale. His father was the fifth son of George Howard, sixth earl of Carlisle (1773-1848), and MP for East Cumberland, and his father's eldest brother was the statesman George William Frederick Howard, seventh earl of Carlisle (1802-1864). He was educated at Eton College, and at Trinity College, Cambridge, where in 1861 he attended a private course of lectures on history by Charles Kingsley; he graduated BA in 1865. On the death of his father in 1879, he was elected Liberal MP for East Cumberland and lost the seat in 1880, but regained it in 1881. In 1885 he opposed Gladstone's 'Home Rule Bill' for Ireland, joining the Liberal Unionists, and when the constituency of East Cumberland was replaced by the single seat of North Cumberland he declined to stand in the election of 1886. He succeeded his uncle, William George Howard (1808-1889), the invalid and bachelor eighth earl of Carlisle, in 1889, at which time he inherited the Howard estates in Cumberland, Northumberland, and north Yorkshire totalling 78,000 acres. 
On 4 October 1864 Howard married Rosalind Frances Stanley (1845-1921) ['see 'Howard, Rosalind Frances], youngest daughter of Edward John Stanley, second Lord Stanley of Alderley, who became a strong advocate for the temperance and women's suffrage movements. They had six sons, three of whom predeceased their father, and five daughters, one of whom died in infancy. As a married couple they moved among artistic circles in London, and made frequent visits to Europe. Already, as a young man, Howard professed his desire to become an artist rather than pursue a political career, as his family wished, and later, after succeeding to the Carlisle title, he increasingly left the management of the family estates to his wife in order to devote himself to painting. In 1865 he had travelled to Italy where he studied painting under Giovanni Costa, and on his return to London he continued his artistic training at the Kensington School of Art and with the painter J. M. Leigh at Heatherley's Art School. His circle of artist friends included Frederic Leighton, Ford Madox Brown, William Holman Hunt, Val Prinsep, Edward Lear, Alphonse Legros, George Frederic Watts, Dante Gabriel Rossetti, and Edward Poynter; he sketched intimate pencil portraits of many of his fellow artists. Howard formed an especially close friendship with Edward Burne-Jones, under whom he studied initially and from whom he later purchased numerous pictures. Burne-Jones's late masterpiece 'Arthur in Avalon', begun in the 1880s, was originally commissioned as a fresco for Naworth Castle in Cumberland, but realizing the artist's devotion to the composition Howard relinquished his claim upon the picture and accepted another in lieu of the money he had already paid. Rosalind Howard and Georgiana Burne-Jones also formed a close attachment. 
In 1867 Howard and his wife commissioned Philip Webb, the leading Queen Anne architect, to build a London home for them at 1 Palace Green, Kensington. Completed two years later, the interiors were decorated by Morris & Co. and included a frieze illustrating the story of Cupid and Psyche designed by Burne-Jones and completed by Walter Crane. Morris and his family, like Burne-Jones's, were close friends of the Howard family. Both men were commissioned repeatedly to supply furnishings, textiles, and paintings for the other Howard homes, Castle Howard in north Yorkshire and Naworth Castle in Cumberland. Howard made several portrait sketches of both men and their families during their visits to Cumberland. Webb was also commissioned by the Howard family to build St Martin's Church (1874-8), Brampton, Cumberland, and the church was furnished with stained glass by Morris and Burne-Jones. Howard befriended and supported many artists throughout his life, including the sculptors Jules Dalou (during his exile in England from 1879 to 1899), George Cowell, and Edgar Boehm, who executed Burne-Jones's designs for a bas-relief of Flodden field for Naworth Castle. 
Repeated visits abroad, to Italy and Egypt especially, but also to India, South Africa, and the West Indies, supplied the impetus for much of Howard's landscape painting, though he never ceased to paint the countryside in Cumberland, Yorkshire, and Northumberland. He exhibited oils and watercolours regularly at the Grosvenor Gallery in London between 1877 and 1887. In 1882, together with W. B. Richmond, M. R. Corbet, and others, he founded the Etruscan school of painting: this group of Italian and English artists, of whom Giovanni Costa was the acknowledged leader, drew inspiration for their lyrical landscapes from Italian scenery and its mythical, historical, and literary associations. From 1881 until his death Howard sat on the board of trustees of the National Gallery, eventually becoming chairman. He was involved in the founding of the Tate Gallery, and was a member of the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings. He also sat on committees for the National Gallery of New South Wales and the South African Fine Art Gallery, and was also involved in establishing funds and memorials following the deaths of Ruskin, Burne-Jones, and Holman Hunt. Noting his philanthropy, Philip Webb described him as 'a constitutional caretaker of precious things' (Castle Howard archives, J22/64). In 1885 Howard advised Gladstone over the offer of a baronetcy to Watts, which the artist declined, and between 1905 and 1911 he sat on the committee which decided on the historical murals for the House of Lords. 
From the late 1880s onwards Lord Carlisle began to sell a number of items from the collections assembled by his ancestors at Castle Howard. These included pictures by Canaletto and his contemporaries, a series of drawings by Francois Clouet, and a collection of gems which was sold to the British Museum. Further sales of individual pictures to dealers such as Martin Colnaghi, George Donaldson, and Joseph Duveen continued until his death. He negotiated with the National Gallery to sell Mabuse's 'Adoration of the Kings' ('c'.1510- 'c'.1512), the single most important picture in the collection, at less than the market price in lieu of death duties. He also left instructions that the trustees of the gallery should have eleven paintings of their choice from Castle Howard. He continued painting until his sudden death from heart failure at his daughter's residence at Bracklands, Hindhead, near Haslemere, Surrey, on 16 April 1911. He was buried on 20 April at Lanercost Priory, near Naworth Castle, Cumberland. His wife survived him. One of his last works was a series of designs to illustrate a children's songbook which he published in 1910; the frontispiece is a self-portrait with him presenting the book to his children. 
Carlisle was succeeded by his son Charles James Stanley Howard, Viscount Morpeth and tenth earl of Carlisle (1867-1912), politician. Born at 122 Park Street, London, on 8 March 1867, he was educated at Rugby School and at Balliol College, Oxford. He became Viscount Morpeth in 1889. On 17 April 1894 he married Rhoda Ankaret ('b'. 1867), daughter of Colonel Paget Walter L'Estrange; the couple had one son and three daughters. He was captain in the 3rd battalion Border regiment of militia, with which he served in South Africa in 1902. An active member of the London school board (1894-1902), he contested without success in the Unionist interest Chester-le-Street, the Hexham division of Northumberland, and Gateshead. He was Unionist MP for South Birmingham from 1904 to 1911, and from 1910 was one of the parliamentary whips for his party. His health was already failing when he succeeded to the earldom in 1911, and he died at 105 Eaton Place, London, on 20 January 1912. He was buried at Lanercost Priory, near Naworth Castle, on 24 January. 


@@@@@


doc= 45555


Jackson, Mason (1819-1903), wood-engraver and journalist, was born at Ovington, Northumberland, the son of John Jackson, a husbandman, and the younger brother of the wood-engraver John Jackson (1801-1848). The elder brother, having learned his craft with Thomas Bewick, went to London and was joined about 1830 by Mason, whom he then trained as a wood-engraver. By 1836 Mason Jackson was engraving after Richard Seymour for the green wrapper of Dickens's 'Pickwick Papers' and for S. C. Hall's 'Book of British Ballads' (1842). He married on 25 September 1849 Catherine Common of Gosforth, Northumberland; their daughter Catherine was born in 1851. From 1846 to 1863 Jackson was entered in directories as a wood-engraver, at 12 Cardington Street, off Hampstead Road, where after his wife's death he lived with his brother and his family. He married secondly Lucy Berriman Tippetts ('b'. 1838) on 16 July 1864, and thereafter worked from his home at 12 Pembroke Gardens, Kensington, where they brought up their three children, Arthur Mason Tippetts Jackson ['see below'], Herbert, and Lucy. 
During the 1850s and 1860s Jackson produced engravings for numerous magazines and books, among them several series published by Charles Knight, the 'Art Union of London' (1850-60), 'Cassell's Illustrated Family Paper' (1857), and the 'Illustrated London Almanack' (1850-51), signing 'M. JACKSON SC'. In 1850 he began engraving for the 'Illustrated London News', reproducing in full and double-page engravings the drawings and paintings of prominent contemporary artists. From 1860 to 1895 he was also the art editor of the 'Illustrated London News', and on retirement in 1896 he was briefly a director. His book 'The Pictorial Press: its Origins and Progress' (1885) traced the rise of illustrated journalism from its hesitant beginnings to his own times. In addition, Jackson exhibited his landscape paintings from 1856 to 1879 at the Royal Academy and other London galleries. He died at his home, 79 Warwick Road, Brompton, on 29 December 1903 and was buried at Brompton cemetery. The 'Times' obituarist commented, 'By his death journalism has lost one of its most respected veterans', and described him as 'a genial and upright man' ('The Times', 2 Jan 1904, 4a). 

Arthur Mason Tippetts Jackson (1866-1909) was born at the family home, 12 Pembroke Gardens, Kensington, on 30 December 1866. He was educated at Westminster School from 1880 to 1884, then went with a scholarship to Brasenose College, Oxford. A gifted oriental linguist, he gained the Boden prize for Sanskrit and graduated BA first class in 1888. He was called to the bar at Middle Temple in November of that year, by which time he had already secured the Indian Civil Service prize for Sanskrit, and was in India by December, where he rapidly increased his knowledge of vernacular languages. 
Based in the Bombay presidency, Jackson held a number of legal and administrative posts, including that of private secretary to Lord Sandhurst, then governor of Bombay, from 1898 to 1900. He was also superintendent in charge of the revision of the 'Imperial Gazetteer'. He was able to study in the library of the Royal Asiatic Society, was briefly its honorary secretary, and published in its journals. On the occasions when he was back in England, Jackson examined for Oxford University. 
By December 1909 Jackson had risen to the rank of senior collector, stationed at Nasik, and was about to transfer to Bombay for a further promotion. On 22 December a farewell entertainment was being held in his honour at the theatre in Nasik; as Jackson and his wife entered, a young Hindu shot at him several times, and he died instantly. The assassination was undoubtedly political and part of a Brahman rebellion against the government; Jackson had earlier tried the killer's cousin for seditious conspiracy, and a higher court had sentenced him to transportation for life. But even in Nasik, a Brahmanical centre, Jackson's personal kindness had made him much loved, and he was admired and respected for his grasp of Indian languages. A large gathering accompanied his body to the local cemetery at Nasik for burial on 23 December. 


@@@@@


doc= 45558


Henry Raikes (1811-1863), barrister, of Llwynegrin Hall, Mold, Flintshire, and his wife, Lucy Charlotte (died 1889), daughter of Archdeacon Francis Wrangham FRS. He had four brothers and five sisters. His father, the son of Henry Raikes (1782-1854), Church of England clergyman, and his wife, Augusta, 'nee' Whittington, was high sheriff of Flintshire and registrar of the Chester diocese as well as being on the north Wales circuit; his two-volume 'Popular sketch of the origin and development of the English constitution, from the earliest period to the present time' was published between 1851 and 1854. He supervised the early education of his eldest son, who later recalled 'a diet of English Constitution' (Raikes, 8), but in 1846 sent him to Shrewsbury School where he thrived, entering the sixth form at the age of thirteen, excelling in classics, and becoming head of school. He went up to Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1856, and was elected a scholar in 1859, but his constant involvement with the university union, of which he became president in 1859, contributed to his taking a second in the classical tripos in 1860, a result he constantly rued. That same year he entered the Middle Temple and while studying for the law there, he married Charlotte Blanche Trevor Roper (died 1922), fourth daughter of Charles Blayney Trevor Roper of Plas Teg, Flintshire, on 26 September 1861. He was called to the bar on 30 April 1863 and after a brief spell as a journalist he joined the north Wales circuit, but his interest in the law was minimal: politics was the abiding passion of his life. 


@@@@@


doc= 45559


Tweedie, Ethel Brilliana (1862-1940), travel writer, was born at 77 Harley Street, London, on 1 June 1862, the daughter of George Harley (1829-1896), physician, and Emma Jessie, daughter of James Muspratt, a wealthy alkaline manufacturer. They had at least three children. Her family background was one of 'luxury and joy' (Tweedie, 1) coloured by her father's national and international scientific contacts and the wealth of her mother's family. She was educated at Queen's College, London, and in Germany, where her father had earlier worked and studied. On 1 January 1887 she married Alexander Leslie (Alec) Tweedie (1849/50-1896), a marine insurance broker at Lloyd's, son of Alexander George Tweedie of the Madras civil service and grandson of Alexander Tweedie, physician, and entered a life of 'still more luxury and gaiety' (Tweedie, 1). This sheltered and happy life came to an end abruptly with a series of tragic events. Her husband lost all his money when his syndicate failed; his losses turned him from a cheerful outgoing man to a cheerless one and, according to his wife, were what killed him when he died shortly thereafter, in the early summer of 1896. She and their sons Leslie and Harley were left with no settlement, and their predicament worsened later in 1896 when her father died, also leaving her without a settlement. 
Determined to bring up her sons well, even before her father's death Mrs Tweedie capitalized on her enjoyment of travel and turned to travel writing to make her living; she found a receptive public which had a taste for travel books but not yet the opportunity for travel itself. 'A Girl's Ride in Iceland' (1889) was, as she explained with a mixture of pride and apology, a ride 'man fashion'. That trip set the pattern of travel followed by book -- in this case perhaps her least affected book, with an appendix on geysers by her father. The visit to Iceland was followed by 'A Winter Jaunt to Norway' (1894) and, perhaps her most memorable journey, 'Through Finland in Carts' (1897). She then went further afield, to Sicily, Mexico, the USA, Russia, and China, and the resultant travel books, unaccountably to the late twentieth-century reader, were often popular enough to go to several cheap editions and to be translated into other languages. She dabbled in biography as well, starting by editing her father's memoirs for publication in 1899. Tragically both her sons were killed in the First World War. This removed one of the main reasons for her writing, but by then she saw herself as a professional writer and continued to turn out volumes. Her books were always rather 'anxious' to inform and 'heavily overweighted' with advice to women and girls (Middleton, 5, 9), and later on 'the melodramatic quality of her travel writing began to smack of bathos and it was only Ethel's unerring sense of admiration for herself that saved her from literary ridicule' (Robinson, 199). There can certainly be no regrets for the passing into obscurity of 'Busy Days: Quotations from the Author's Works for Every Day of the Year' (1913), 'Women the World Over: a Sketch both Light and Gay, perchance both Dull and Stupid' (1914), and 'My Table-Cloths' (1916), or 'Mainly East (in Prose -- perhaps Prosey)' (1922): but much of her relentless jolliness can probably be traced to her need to please. Certainly she could not afford to abandon a proven formula. She also sketched what she saw on her travels and exhibited her watercolours in several public and private galleries, mainly in London but also in Paris. Often known in mid- to later life as Mrs Alec-Tweedie, she served on numerous philanthropic and charitable committees, seeing herself increasingly as an arbiter of taste and conduct. She was a fellow of the Royal Geographical Society. She died on 15 April 1940 at her home at 60 Devonshire House, Mayfair, London. She was one of the first professional travel writers and was remarkably successful, accumulating an estate proved at just under $20,000, and though her writing now seems unattractive she claimed to have been the first woman to accomplish many feats, from riding astride to skiing. 


@@@@@


doc= 45561


Whateley, Dame Leslie Violet Lucy Evelyn (1899-1987), director of the Auxiliary Territorial Service, was born on 28 January 1899 at 63 Porchester Terrace, Paddington, London. Her mother was Ada Lilian Wood, formerly Hutton, and her father was Captain (later Colonel in the City of London regiment) Evelyn Michell Fitzgerald Wood, whose active service began with the Asante expedition of 1895. Leslie Wood was educated at convents of the Society of the Holy Child Jesus in St Leonards, Sussex, and in Cavendish Square, London. After leaving school at the age of sixteen she became secretary to her grandfather Sir (Henry) Evelyn Wood VC, one of the army's legendary nineteenth-century field marshals, at his home near Winchester, where she received a thorough grounding in army administration and methods. She assisted Sir Evelyn during the period when he was writing his book 'Winnowed Memories' (1918). Later she worked as a secretary for several district nursing associations. On 8 July 1922 Leslie Wood married William John Balfour (1893/4-1934), a brewer, at the parish church, Kensington, London. They had one son, who was born in 1923. Balfour, who had been a cavalry officer during the First World War and from whom Leslie obtained a divorce, died in 1934. Her second marriage, to Squadron Leader Harry Raymond Whateley ('b'. 1910/11), took place on 21 September 1939. 
In September 1938 Leslie Balfour drove to the Territorial Drill Hall at Camberley, Surrey, to join the Auxiliary Territorial Service (ATS) in response to a BBC announcement about the formation of the women's army. 'With the Army tradition I had behind me... there was never any doubt as to how I should try to serve my country', she wrote in her book 'As Thoughts Survive' (p. 11). She was commissioned as a 'one-pipper', with the ATS rank title of company assistant, inevitably abbreviated to 'coy ass'; this was equivalent to a second lieutenant. At the outbreak of war a year later she was posted to the War Office where she swiftly won a reputation as an outstanding administrator. She worked closely with Dame Helen Gwynne-Vaughan, the first director of the ATS, whom she described as 'the old battleaxe'. 'We were all terrified of Dame Helen', Leslie Whateley later recalled. 'She didn't think I would be much good when we first met -- I enjoy remembering that' (Terry, 126). At the War Office Dame Leslie worked alongside Lord Cavan's stepdaughter, Daphne Mulholland; Lord Gort's daughter, Jacqueline Vereker, who became Lady de L'Isle and Dudley; and Lady Trenchard's daughter, Belinda Boyle. 'I was the lowest of the low among Dame Helen's assistants. Dame Helen was a snob and she gathered all kinds of titled people around her' (ibid.), Leslie said. Of all Dame Helen's assistants Leslie Whateley was undoubtedly the most capable and the most efficient. When Dame Helen retired in 1941, she was succeeded as director of the ATS by the stunningly attractive Senior Commander (Major) Jean Knox, later to become Lady Swaythling, who at the relatively young age of thirty-three was given the rank of chief controller, equivalent to major-general. Leslie, then forty-two, was appointed Jean Knox's deputy with the rank of senior controller, thus becoming the first ATS officer to attain the equivalent rank of brigadier. Her rise in the ATS had been meteoric. Jean Knox's immediate task was to repair the damage to the ATS, which had suffered severe criticism from the press. Lord Beaverbrook's 'Daily Express' had led the attacks by printing exposures of maladministration and incidents of irregular conduct that had undermined the authority of Dame Helen. While Jean Knox spent most of her time as director 'absent at conferences, on tour and visiting the women's services of the Dominions and Allies', as the official announcement stated, Leslie Whateley effectively ran the ATS. This was one of the most crucial and active periods of the ATS, when membership expanded from a mere 40,000 to 204,000 as a result of conscription of all single women between eighteen and thirty years of age. Reading Leslie Whateley's book 'As Thoughts Survive' one is left with the impression that Jean Knox rarely attended the numerous official functions at which the director's presence would normally be required. As a result Leslie had to stand in for her director, even at the official fifth birthday celebrations of the ATS in September 1943 when the queen took the salute at Westminster Abbey. The next month, on 31 October, Jean Knox resigned on grounds of ill health and Leslie Whateley was appointed her successor. On the eve of the official announcement of her appointment Leslie Whateley went to a party at Claridges with the Mountbattens, who, she said, 'were absolute angels to me' (Terry, 134). There the press laid siege to her, seeking the background to Jean Knox's resignation. Leslie Whateley was whisked away by General Sir Ronald Weekes, vice-chief Imperial General Staff. All her life Dame Leslie maintained a strict silence over the reasons for Jean Knox's premature resignation. 
Leslie Whateley's first task was to address a letter to each of the more than 6,000 officers in the service, an unprecedented step, and her contribution in restoring morale and the image of the ATS was immense. Although she lacked some of the traditional advantages of a military bearing, being of slight build, small in stature and quiet by nature, she ended the war as a capable and efficient head of an army that was larger than many generals have the opportunity to command. As George Ivan Smith wrote in the 'Daily Telegraph' obituary: 'Courage ran in her veins. She was a military person with a heart and great human understanding. She faced life with the discipline of a soldier's daughter. Dame Leslie was a splendid rudder guiding the ATS into the great contribution it made in a war in which the work of women was greatly needed, pre-dating the mode of modern feminism' During her time as director from 1943 to 1946 Leslie Whateley worked closely with the princess royal, who was controller-commandant of the ATS, and in 1945 was 'proud and honoured' when the nineteen-year-old Princess Elizabeth elected to join the ATS and underwent her training at the ATS Mechanical Transport Training Centre at Aldershot. The princess, later to become Elizabeth II, was commissioned as Second Subaltern Windsor on 5 March 1945. The achievement of the three wartime directors of the ATS is summed up by a saying in the ATS: Helen Gwynne-Vaughan dug the foundations, so deep that everyone fell in; Jean Knox put up the curtains, before the windows were in; and Leslie Whateley put on the roof, and finished the job. 
Leslie Whateley was appointed CBE in 1943, and in 1946, when she retired as director, she was made a DBE. The French made her a chevalier of the Legion d'honneur in recognition of her services in equipping and training French 'volontaires feminines' during their stay in Britain. She was also awarded the Croix de Guerre with silver star. The Americans, whom she had advised on the enlargement of their women's services, awarded her the Order of Merit. In 1948 Dame Leslie became one of the first non-royal women to be made an honorary colonel of a regiment when she was appointed colonel of the 668th battalion of the heavy anti-aircraft regiment, Royal Artillery. She received the Territorial Decoration in 1951. Dame Leslie Whateley retired on 3 May 1946, to a farm in Devon where she and her husband set about restoring an almost derelict 500-year-old property. In 1951 she was appointed director of the World Bureau of the World Association of Girl Guides and Girl Scouts. During her thirteen years in this role she travelled the world encouraging the spread of the Girl Guide movement, especially in Asia. Her courage and indomitable spirit became evident in 1960 when attending in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, a United Nations seminar on the place of African women in public life. She was in the chair during one session when gunfire from Ethiopian rebels interrupted the proceedings. Dame Leslie managed to keep the conference going smoothly, despite a bullet passing through her skirt. She was unperturbed by the incident, declaring: 'A miss is as good as a mile' ('Daily Telegraph'). In her mid-seventies Dame Leslie was still administering the voluntary services of Queen Mary's Hospital, Roehampton, but found time in 1974 to publish a second book of reminiscences, 'Yesterday, Today and Tomorrow'. She died aged eighty-eight on 4 July 1987 in Little Somerford, Wiltshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 45563


Llewelyn, John Dillwyn (1810-1882), photographer, was born at The Willows, Swansea, on 12 January 1810, the son of the naturalist Lewis Weston Dillwyn (1778-1855) and his wife, Mary Adams (1776-1865). Mary was the illegitimate daughter of Colonel John Llewelyn (died 1817) of Ynys-gerwn and Penlle'r-gaer, Glamorgan, and she retained her mother's surname. John Dillwyn succeeded to the estates of his maternal grandfather, Colonel Llewelyn, and assumed the additional surname of Llewelyn upon coming of age. He was educated privately by tutors, and at Oriel College, Oxford, from 1827. His eldest sister, Fanny Dillwyn (1808-1894), married Matthew Moggridge; his brother, Lewis Llewelyn Dillwyn (1814-1892), became MP for Swansea and a director of the Great Western Railway. On 18 June 1833 Llewelyn married Emma Thomasina Talbot (1808-1881), cousin of the pioneer photographer William Henry Fox Talbot and one of the sisters of Christopher Rice Mansel Talbot of Penrice and Margam. They had several children, of whom the eldest, Thereza Dillwyn Llewelyn (1834-1926), married the mineralogist Mervyn Herbert Nevil Story-Maskelyne (1823-1911); the eldest son, Sir John Talbot Dillwyn Llewelyn (1836-1927), married Caroline Julia Hicks-Beach. 
Llewelyn's first photographic experiments, which preceded those of his friend and distant relative Calvert Richard Jones, took place at his house, Penlle'r-gaer (Penllergare), near Swansea, in February 1839 and were inspired by news of Fox Talbot's activities. His earliest surviving images are daguerreotypes from 1840 of his family and house. Not surviving, but recorded in letters, are daguerreotypes of orchids grown at Penlle'r-gaer and sent to William Hooker, the director of Kew Gardens, in January 1842, probably the first time that a photographic process was used for the identification of botanical specimens. Later in the 1840s Llewelyn worked with the daguerreotypist Antoine Claudet on some experiments in photography: no details are known, as the only references to the collaboration appear in the diaries of Lewis Weston Dillwyn. However, several daguerreotypes of Llewelyn by Claudet survive. 
In 1852 Llewelyn was elected to the first council of the newly formed Photographic Society of London (now the Royal Photographic Society); he remained on the council until 5 February 1857. At a meeting on 21 December 1854 he was nominated as the first country vice-president. Llewelyn wrote a letter, dated 20 March 1854, for the society's 'Journal' on the calotype process. In 1856 he announced his oxymel process, a mixture of honey and vinegar, whereby the collodion plates of the period could be prepared some time before use and developed when the photographer returned home. He claimed, in a letter to Fox Talbot, to have tried all the then known processes. In 1852 he had built an equatorial observatory at Penlle'r-gaer for his daughter Thereza and in the mid-1850s together they took collodion images of the moon. The July 1856 edition of the 'Illustrated London News' hailed him 'as a gentleman to whom all photographers owe a world of thanks'. 
Llewelyn exhibited regularly and successfully in the exhibitions of the Photographic Society until 1858. At the Paris Universal Exhibition of 1855 he won a silver medal of honour for four 'instantaneous' photographs. His first instantaneous image had been taken in 1853 of the waves in Caswell Bay, south Wales. One of the Paris images, 'Clouds over St Catherines, Tenby', included a cloud taken in the same exposure, probably the first time this had been achieved; the negative, which still exists, dates from mid-1854 or earlier. Other of his photographic images also appeared in 'The Sunbeam', which was edited by his friend and fellow photographer P. H. Delamotte in 1859. The 'Photographic Exchange Albums' was another forum for some of his images; the publisher Joseph Cundall announced 'Pictures of Welsh scenery' by Llewelyn in 1854, in parts, but these scenes never appeared. In the 1870s Llewelyn's name appears as a council member of the Amateur Photographic Association. 
In 1846 the first 'Journal' of the Horticultural Society had, as its first article and illustration, an account of the Orchid House which Llewelyn had built at Penlle'r-gaer: heated by steam, the original building dated back to 1835. Specimens of his orchids were used to illustrate Samuel Curtis's 'Botanical Magazine' over the course of several years. Llewelyn also created two lakes at Penlle'r-gaer, one of almost 20 acres and a man-made waterfall. It was on the lower lake that Llewelyn, in 1848, demonstrated the first boat in Britain to be propelled by an electric motor; it was constructed from a model by his friend Benjamin Hill of Clydach, who had taught electricity to William Grove. 
In 1843, as a magistrate, Llewelyn was involved in the Rebecca riots in south Wales when the local farmers protested against the tolls extracted from them, allegedly for the maintenance of the road but usually ending up in the landlords' pockets. This episode ended with a major trial in Cardiff, at which Llewelyn and his brother were on the bench. A great, though unassuming, benefactor to the people and poor of the Swansea region, Llewelyn gave 42 acres of his land in 1878 to create Parc Llewelyn for the people of Swansea, at a cost of $20,000. He was a member of the Swansea school board for many years, though in 1877 he scandalized his colleagues by writing a public letter to the ratepayers of Swansea, condemning the board's waste of money. 
Llewelyn was the high sheriff of Glamorgan in 1834 and 1835, and deputy lieutenant in 1836. He became a fellow of the Royal Society in 1836, a fellow of the Linnean Society in 1837, and an FRAS in 1852. For much of his life he suffered from asthma, which in later life prevented him from taking part in his public duties. From 1871 he and his wife lived at 39 Cornwall Gardens, London, and from 1879 at Atherton Grange, Somerset Road, Wimbledon, Surrey. He died at Atherton Grange on 24 August 1882 and was buried in Penlle'r-gaer church in Glamorgan. 


@@@@@


doc= 45592


William [ii] Fairbank (c.1730-1801), followed him as both surveyor and schoolmaster. He married Mary, daughter of Josiah Forster, surveyor and schoolmaster, of Tottenham High Cross, Middlesex, at the Tottenham Friends' meeting-house on 11 May 1758. He combined his two professions until demand for his services as a surveyor led him to give up the school in 1774. He did much surveying for the town trustees and for private landowners, as well as laying out and constructing many turnpike roads in and around Sheffield. He also did engineering works on the River Don and other waterways, and laid out and built many public and private buildings. The family surveys of Sheffield were so numerous that he was able to publish a street map of the town in 1771 and revise and extend it in 1801. He died on 9 August 1801 at his home at West Hill, Lee's Croft, Sheffield; he was survived by his wife. 
William [ii] Fairbank had three sons and two daughters, and his eldest son, 


@@@@@


doc= 45747


Philippe Aimer (fl. 1180-1181) in the recoinage of 1180 conformed to this practice, but also marks a significant stage in the evolution of the office of master. Aimer was brought from Tours by Richard of Ilchester, bishop of Winchester (died 1188), and between August 1180 and May 1181 he was paid 16died a day -- double the rate paid to other senior moneyers. His son Aimer was paid 4died a day. Although Philippe Aimer's employment was terminated rather suddenly, on 2 May 1181, his reputation throughout the Angevin empire, his overall direction of the recoinage -- Ralph de Diceto suggests that he bore some general responsibility for the moneyers' shortcomings, and that he was sent home to France unpunished only thanks to the indulgence of the king -- and his exalted salary all mark him out from ordinary moneyers. 
After the recoinage of 1180 for many years the production of coin was left increasingly in the hands of moneyers, with no master formally appointed over them. Their number at London, the largest mint, fluctuated according to the pressure of work, from a dozen or more at a time of recoinage, to less than half that number at other times. Some scores of labourers were in turn employed by the senior moneyers for most of the less technical manual work. And keepers of the dies and assayers were appointed as a check on the moneyers. In fact moneyers, assayers, and die-keepers came from very similar kinds of social background, and sometimes men moved from one grade to another when vacancies arose. Thus 


@@@@@


doc= 45748


Nicholas of St Albans (d. in or before 1253), who acquired a controlling interest in the mints of London and Canterbury from about 1237 until his death, was another goldsmith. Nicholas's father, John, described by Matthew Paris as 'aurifaber incomparabilis', made the exterior of the shrine at St Albans before taking employment under the king of Denmark. Nicholas succeeded him, and ran the Danish mint for many years before returning to England to take up a similar position for Henry III. He seems to have bought out several other moneyers, and been almostly solely responsible for the London and Canterbury mints in the early 1240s when activity continued at a very high level. A will in the name of Nicholas of St Albans, goldsmith, was enrolled on 25 July 1258, and mentioned a wife, Joan, and sons, Richard and Michael, though the moneyer-goldsmith is known to have died by 1253. 



@@@@@


doc= 45751


William of Gloucester (d. 1269), a Londoner who became a king's serjeant, seems also to have achieved a remarkable concentration of power within the mint and exchange. The great seal in use from 1259 until 1272 was his work, and he carried out a number of royal commissions at Westminster Abbey, including a golden shrine for St Edward. He married Joan, daughter of Michael de St Helen, and with her had a daughter, Joan, and two sons -- John, who became a draper, and Henry, who was a goldsmith. William owned a goldsmithery in the parish of St Vedast. In May 1255 he received the London die formerly held by Nicholas of St Albans, and in 1256 was apparently a leading figure in the consortium of moneyers that took on all the London dies. Then in 1257 he also acquired the Canterbury die of the moneyer Robert, launched the gold penny of Henry III (the first English gold coin since before the conquest), and became warden of the exchanges of London and Canterbury, simultaneously with his moneyer role. 
Other members of the London consortium included John Hardel and Henry of Frowick, already mentioned, and Walter of Brussels, who held property in Pentecostlane, in St Nicholas Shambles, and was still living there in 1281. 


@@@@@


doc= 45752


William de Turnemire (fl. 1279-1284). William and his brother Peter (who fled abroad in 1286) were from Marseilles, and formed part of a team of continental mint-masters brought in to supervise Edward I's recoinage of 1279. The senior master was initially Hubert Alion d'Asti, who was paid $200 per annum for his services, twice the sum William and Peter received. However, Hubert soon left England, and by 1283 he was working in the Namur mint for the count of Flanders. On Hubert's departure William took charge in England. As well as the master's indenture, details of work at the mint survive from a 'Treatise on the New Money' written about this time. This treatise was formerly attributed to William but is now known to have been written in 1286 or 1287, after he had resigned on 28 January 1284 to take charge of the Anglo-Gascon mint at Bordeaux. The treatise describes the division of responsibilities between the master and the warden, and the types of quality control in use at the mint. It also contains authoritative information on assaying, and on the calculation of the correct alloy and appropriate mint charges. 
The employment of foreign experts who ran the mints at particularly busy times but soon moved on, either to avoid prosecution or to take up minting opportunities elsewhere, was common. Occasionally, however, men stayed in England for life. One such was 


@@@@@


doc= 45753


Walter Barde (fl. 1360-1390), son of Filippo de Barde. Walter held the mastership at London from the 1360s to the 1390s. He also ran the exchange of the city of London, despite oft repeated injunctions against such dual appointments, and managed the Calais mint by deputy. Since he was also one of the most frequent sellers of bullion to the exchange, he was simultaneously one of the chief customers of the mint, and the controller of both bullion purchase and coin production. Like Lapinus Roger, Walter held office at a time of considerable political unrest, and despite serious parliamentary interest in the workings of the mint, his expertise seems to have made him indispensable. It has been suggested that Walter may have owed his survival to the importance of the society of the Bardi to crown finances, but it has also been argued that he tried to dissociate himself from the family to build a truly English career. The society, for its part, was anxious not to incur any liability for Walter's mint dealings. 
English master moneyers sometimes competed with the Italians for the mints in the fourteenth century, but they became dominant in the fifteenth. The best example is 


@@@@@


doc= 45754


Bartholomew Goldbeter (d. 1430/31), the name Goldbeter deriving from his trade. From his earliest indenture of 1422, until his death in 1430 or 1431, Goldbeter dominated the mints of London and Calais. He also ran a mint at York in 1423-4, but never took up his option to coin in Bristol. He may have found the work involved in the provincial mints unattractive compared with the very large sums he was coining at London and Calais. He certainly seems to have driven a hard bargain, both with the crown about the terms on which he ran the mints and exchanges, and with individual merchants who brought bullion to the mints. A Commons inquiry of 1423 into Goldbeter's handling of the mints reveals the unusually favourable terms on which he worked, but he managed to hold on to office until his death. He was buried in the London church of St John Zachary. Goldbeter was one of a number of London goldsmiths, such as Louis John (1413), William Rus (1431), and John Paddesley (1434), who were appointed to run the mint at this time. But from the middle of the century a new trend developed, as rather more exalted crown servants were entrusted with the mint. The most famous was Sir William (later first Baron) Hastings (d. 1483), an especial confidant of Edward IV. 
In summary a typical medieval moneyer was often a goldsmith with knowledge of precious metals; he was frequently a property owner of some standing; he might be English or continental, but in either case he had to be able to enjoy the confidence of the international bankers and merchants as well as that of the crown and the local community. It was a technically demanding profession, which offered great rewards to the successful. 


@@@@@


doc= 45759


Bradmore, John (d. 1412), surgeon, was resident in London from at least 1377 until his death. He married twice; his first wife, Margaret, with whom he had a daughter, Agnes, died some time after May 1410, and he married again without delay. His son, Nicholas, was born after his death to his second wife, Katherine. 
In 1386 John Bradmore and his brother Nicholas, also a surgeon, were accused of false coining, but were pardoned. John later supported Nicholas in another brush with the law, but appears himself to have led a peaceful and blameless life. 
Some time between 1403 and his death Bradmore compiled a lengthy surgical treatise in Latin, which he entitled 'Philomena'; this survives as BL, Sloane MS 2272. A Middle English translation of part of this work, made after his death, appears in BL, Harley MS 1736, and extracts from the Latin text in Oxford, All Souls College, MS 73. In his treatise Bradmore gives details of several cases of interest, chief among which is his treatment of Henry, prince of Wales, later Henry V, for a facial wound received at the battle of Shrewsbury in 1403. An arrowhead entered the prince's face beside his nose and became lodged in the bone. After various others had failed to remove the arrowhead Bradmore devised and made an instrument to remove it without further damage to the surrounding flesh. His subsequent treatment of the wound is given in detail. Bradmore had been connected with the royal household since at least 1399, in which year he treated the master of the king's pavilions, William Wyncelowe, for an extensive abdominal wound resulting from a failed suicide attempt. Full details of this case are also given in 'Philomena'. Bradmore received payments from the royal household for fees and robes in 1403 and 1406, and appears also to have received an annuity of 10 marks from the prince of Wales. His appointment in 1408 to the office of searcher of the port of London brought a further annual payment of $10. 
An oath taken before the mayor and aldermen in the Guildhall in April 1390 appears to have appointed Bradmore, with three others, to be in some way overseer of surgery within the city of London. In 1390-91 and again in 1402 he treated monks in Westminster Abbey Infirmary. He was clearly prosperous, and from 1391 he began to acquire property within the parish of St Botolph, Aldersgate, city of London, in which he was resident. From 1391 until his death he lived in a tenement situated on the east side of Aldersgate Street, opposite the parish church. In 1399 he purchased the adjoining garden. At the time of his death he owned four tenements, one of which he bequeathed to his daughter, Agnes, and the remaining three to his second wife, Katherine, and her child. Shortly after his death his widow's property was assessed in the lay subsidy roll of 1412 as having an annual rental value of $4 3's'. 6died 
Bradmore and his first wife, Margaret, were among the founder members in 1377 of the fraternity of the Holy Trinity in the parish of St Botolph, Aldersgate. In 1400 he was churchwarden of the parish church, and in 1409-10 he was master of the fraternity of the Trinity. In his will he bequeathed a cloth of silk to this fraternity and money to the lesser fraternity of Sts Fabian and Sebastian in the same church. In addition, the reversion of the property left to his daughter, his wife, and her expected child was bequeathed to the fraternity of the Holy Trinity if the child should die without legitimate heirs (and indeed the property was in the hands of the fraternity by 1447). Bradmore died on 27 January 1412 in his home parish, and was buried in the church of St Botolph, where a monument commemorating him and both his wives existed before the great fire of 1666. 


@@@@@


doc= 45761


Cokkys, John (d. 1475), medical practitioner, is one of the few men whose name can be linked to the teaching and practice of medicine at Oxford in the fifteenth century. It is all the more frustrating that so few facts about his life can be established with any certainty. Emden lists a number of benefices held by a John Cokkys from 1435 onwards, but it seems unlikely that a man who was granted licence to study at an English university for three years on 21 January 1448, and was admitted BCnL at Oxford in June 1449, should already have held three benefices. His most significant qualification was the degree of bachelor of medicine to which he was admitted on 30 June 1450, and which seems to have given him entry to medical practice and teaching in Oxford for the rest of his career. 
Three medical manuscripts in which his name appears testify to his medical learning and teaching, and one of these, Bodl. Oxf., MS e Museo 155, a collection of Roger Bacon's writings, is in the hand of Cokkys. He seems to have had the knack of getting his name attached to other people's writings. Thus he is credited (as Johannes de Gallicantu) with a commentary on the 'Isagoge' of Johannitius, the fundamental introduction to medicine at Oxford, which in fact is the work of a thirteenth-century commentator known as Johannes Anglicus. A sentence in Cambridge, King's College, MS 16, part 2, folio 7, has led to the attribution of another text to him -- first by Simon Forman, the owner of this manuscript from 1574 -- but in fact this text is the commentary of Bernardus Provincialis on the 'Tabula Salerni'. While Cokkys seems to be claiming in this sentence that he is revealing the secrets of his practice to his pupils, his name has been interpolated into a commentary on medicinal simples. What these manuscripts do bear out is that Cokkys did teach medicine in Oxford, using the standard elementary texts and commentaries of the day as lecture materials. The Oxford medical curriculum seems in most respects to have been deeply conservative, though the interest in alchemical matters, and in Roger Bacon's work, taken by Cokkys was one also shared by another prominent Oxford doctor, Gilbert Kymer. 
Cokkys also practised medicine, as is revealed in a chancery writ (TNA: PRO, early chanc. proc., C 1/45/175), dated 1467/73, in which he was summoned to answer for having withheld evidence relating to the death of John Walweyn, who had been his patient. John Clerk, mayor of Oxford, and the surgeon John Barbour were also co-defendants. A number of recipes given to Cokkys are quoted in Bodl. Oxf., MS Ashmole 1432: a drink for the stone 'proved uppon hymselff', another for dropsy, others for palsy, bad sight, 'fleuma', and various aches. These are typical practical remedies of the sort found in commonplace and recipe books of this period. Cokkys appears to have remained in Oxford for the rest of his life. He was a benefactor of Canterbury College, as recognized by letters of confraternity from Christ Church Cathedral priory, Canterbury, on 5 May 1463. Emden, who identifies Cokkys with the rector of Mixbury, Witney, and Hardwick, parishes in Oxfordshire, estimates that he was dead by April 1475. 


@@@@@


doc= 45762


Fayreford, Thomas (fl. 1400-1450), medical practitioner, is responsible for the only extant medieval list of cures performed on patients. Fayreford owned, and partly wrote, BL, Harley MS 2558, which is the only source for his life and work. There was a Thomas Fayreford, a Dominican named in a royal mandate as having rebelled in reaction to a direction given by the prior provincial after a visitation in Oxford in 1370, and it is known that the Thomas Fayreford who wrote the list of cures was in Oxford in the first decade of the fifteenth century. But the time gap is large, and there is no sign of the interests of a past or present Dominican in the manuscript. Harley MS 2558 does, however, provide a series of tantalizing glimpses of the working life of a fifteenth-century medical practitioner. 
The parts of the manuscript written by Fayreford include the list of cures (BL, Harley MS 2558, fol. 9), and two long texts on medicine and surgery compiled by the writer, almost all in Latin. The list of cures, occupying two sides of paper, gives details of patients' names, sometimes their occupations and places of residence, the ailments from which they suffered, and occasionally the prognosis -- 'quod omnes disperaverunt de vita eius' ('that all despaired of his life') -- and treatment. It is titled 'the list of cures performed by Thomas Fayreford in different places', and the list contains 103 entries, though some entries refer to more than one patient. Unfortunately there are no dates for the cures, though many of the places named can be identified. As one of the patients comes from Fairford in Gloucestershire, it seems likely that this was the place of origin of Thomas Fayreford. Since he mentions seeing a cure performed by Nicholas Colnet in Oxford, almost certainly in the first decade of the fifteenth century, Fayreford may have had some training and access to medical books there. Fayreford's own hand suggests a date of writing in the second quarter of the century. 
Bridgwater in Somerset was one centre of Fayreford's medical activity, Tiverton in Devon another, but there is also a group of cases lying in the far north-west of Devon, from Linton to Barnstaple. It is unlikely either that patients from these places travelled long distances to see Fayreford, or that he travelled to them from one home base. It is more likely that he was situated in these areas at different phases of his career, and that the entire list represents his later recollection of all the phases of his medical activity. His patients came from diverse social backgrounds, from Lady Poynings to 'cook Geffrey', and included clergy, a miller, and a cellarer. He treated men, women, and children -- 63 definitely male, and 42 female, and among both sexes, 17 children. The most prominent, and surprising, ailment he treated was suffocation of the womb, diagnosed in many of his female patients from Lady Poynings down. Fayreford's expertise in gynaecological matters belies the idea that male medieval doctors did not meddle in female complaints. Otherwise the complaints range from straightforward surgical problems like burns, thorns, or fractures, to categories of fever that were the domain of the physician rather than the surgeon. 
Fayreford's remedies were drawn from unimpeachable academic sources in some cases; in others they were validated by experience, Fayreford's own or that of others. This is revealed by a study of the medical and surgical texts that he compiled. These are in effect commonplace books, gathering under the headings of particular diseases various remedies, written into the book by Fayreford at different times. Many of these remedies are quoted from academic sources like Bernard de Gordon or Gilbert the Englishman. Lady Poynings gave him a remedy for 'demigreyne', and Fayreford testified to his own success with certain 'experiments'. Like other respectable medical practitioners Fayreford also used charms, making little distinction between a charm for epilepsy and a 'rational' remedy for the same complaint. 
It is not known when Fayreford's active medical practice ended. The writing of his book may have been intended to pass on his secrets to his heir or apprentice. But the book gives a unique insight into the character of late medieval medical practice. 


@@@@@


doc= 45763


Marchall, Roger (c.1417-1477), physician and writer on medicine, embodied three strands of late-medieval English life: Cambridge University and its support through gifts of books; the sphere of London medical practice (including royal service); and the financial world of London merchants which afforded him prosperity. Born at Toddington in Bedfordshire, Marchall was one of at least four siblings in what was probably a landowning family. Still alive in the early 1470s were a brother John, of Toddington, a sister, Alice Awncell, and a brother Nicholas (died 1474), sometime alderman of London and warden of the ironmongers. Whether Thomas Marchall 'clericus' ('fl'. 1438-1439), author of a Latin poem on cock-fighting, was another brother is unclear. Roger Marchall married Johan, probably after 1456. By the time Marchall's will was written (14 February 1477) they had a daughter, Anne, who was a minor, and an unborn child. Proved on 6 May 1477, the will specified burial in St Katharine Cree, London (his wife and John Clerk, royal apothecary, were executors). Marchall left to his children lands and tenements in that parish and in Hackney, along with $200 and considerable plate. The will is noteworthy for its minimal religious bequests when compared with those of his brother Nicholas. 
The first twenty years of Marchall's recorded life were spent at Cambridge. He was admitted as a fellow of Peterhouse in 1437, presumably having determined as MA. This suggests that he was born about 1417. He lectured as regent master, and afterwards held the position of junior proctor of the university (1443-4). He had been awarded the MD degree by 1453. Some of his manuscripts bear his notes and diagrams from this period. He has also been suggested as the author of 'Cum rerum motu', a 1441 text on invalid and valid horoscopes for Henry VI, which survives in a later manuscript. 
London was Marchall's residence from 'c'.1456, and during this time he served as physician to Edward IV. References to this service are found in a writ of 1468, recording the examination of a woman for leprosy, and in Bodleian, MS Ashmole 424, where he identifies himself as 'regum medicus'. Peterhouse, MS 95 contains a recipe, 'preservativa Regis Edwardi iiiite', apparently in his hand. Marchall may also have been responsible for royal horoscopes in his codices. In addition to royal service Marchall attended the first wife of John Howard (later duke of Norfolk) in 1465, and in 1471 is recorded as inspecting treacle for the mayor of London. Records surviving from the period of Marchall's London residence also testify to his financial transactions, particularly with members of the Guild of Ironmongers. In 1464 he conveyed money to Peterhouse as an executor of the will of the London ironmonger Thomas Dorchester, and his own will of 1477 records two debts of $100 each, owed him by the ironmongers William Fuller and William Milne. 
Marchall's manuscripts are the richest source of information about his interests. In a careful hand he copied out and annotated the text of Petrarch's 'De remediis utriusque fortunae', in what is now Oxford, All Souls College, MS 91. He may have compiled a medical florilegium emphasizing English medical writers in Cambridge, Gonville and Caius College, MS 98/50, and he supplied a number of short texts or notes, as well as diagrams and figures of division, to twelve other manuscripts. Leland also cited him as author of a (mathematical?) text titled 'De figuris cata et apodiatis'. Marchall was, however, neither the author nor the scribe of the Middle English surgery treatise in New York, Academy of Medicine, MS 13, which has been attributed to him. 
Roger Marchall also assembled manuscripts from booklets, adding tables of contents (for example, BL, Harley MS 531). He appears to have commissioned at least four codices from one London scribe and was particularly interested in Albertus Magnus on the 'Parva naturalia', owning four codices of that group of texts. He left his mark in numerous manuscripts, most of which he owned, by annotating them and supplying contents tables to them: forty-five survive in fourteen libraries; six others may have been his; twelve mentioned in records have not been traced. The overwhelming majority of the more than 400 texts he listed or annotated in his surviving codices are medical or have to do with astronomy, astrology, or natural philosophy. 
Wealth from London trade enabled Roger Marchall to acquire scientific and medical manuscripts, which he used and then donated, apparently in the early 1470s, to three Cambridge colleges which supported the study of medicine: Peterhouse, King's, and Gonville Hall. His intellectual tastes and his wealth are revealed in two deluxe manuscripts he donated to Peterhouse; these are now Bodleian MS Ashmole 424, containing Witelo's 'De perspectiva', and Cambridge, Magdalene College, Pepys Library, Pepys MS 2329, a mathematical compendium. His benefaction of a considerable number of valuable books to fifteenth-century Cambridge colleges is exceptional for one who was neither a member of the aristocracy nor a cleric. 


@@@@@


doc= 45766


Coward, Thomas Alfred (1867-1933), ornithologist and journalist, was born on 8 January 1867, at Higher Downs Road, Bowdon, Cheshire, the youngest of the four children of Thomas and Sarah Coward. His father, who was engaged in textile bleaching, was also a much respected Congregational minister at Rusholme Road Chapel. He was educated at a school in Sale, Cheshire, before entering the family firm of Melland and Coward, bleachers, where he worked for about nineteen years. When the firm was taken over by a larger enterprise he gave up the career of a businessman and devoted himself to natural history, supplementing his private income by writing articles for a variety of journals and newspapers. His interest in natural history had been encouraged by a neighbour, Joseph Sidebotham, a noted lepidopterist, and by his father, who had been a founder of the Manchester Natural History Society and had helped to establish its collection, later transferred to the Manchester Museum. 
Coward's many writings on natural history appeared in magazines of general interest, such as 'Chambers Journal', 'Nineteenth Century', 'The Field', and 'Country Life'; and in journals devoted to particular interests, such as 'The Zoologist', 'Proceedings of the Zoological Society', 'British Birds', and 'Memoirs and Proceedings of the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society'. He also wrote articles for newspapers, including the 'Manchester Guardian'; later in his life he became a successful broadcaster. Coward's literary style was notably clear and his lectures had the same quality. His first book, 'The Birds of Cheshire', written in collaboration with a former schoolfellow, was published in 1900. 'Vertebrate Fauna of Cheshire' came out in 1910. In 1912 he wrote 'The Migration of Birds' for the 'Cambridge Manuals of Science and Literature' (2nd edn, 1929). Best-known among his many works, however, is his 'Birds of the British Isles and their Eggs', in three volumes, which was first published in 1919. He also published works on local history, including 'Picturesque Cheshire' (1903), and 'Cheshire Traditions and History' (1932). 
In 1904 Coward married his cousin, Mary Constance Milne; the two made frequent long journeys together in their studies of natural history. Coward was closely associated with the Manchester Museum. In 1913 he was on the museum committee, and from March 1916 to January 1919 he was acting keeper. In 1922 he was again acting keeper for a short time. Coward was long a member of the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society, which he joined in 1906 and of which he was president in 1921-3. Coward was a gentle, friendly man, who abhorred cruelty in all its forms. He died following a heart attack on 29 January 1933 at his home, Brentwood, Grange Road, Lower Bowdon, Cheshire: his wife survived him. Two nature reserves, Cotterill Clough and Marbury reed-bed, are dedicated to his memory. 


@@@@@


doc= 45770


Cleghorn, Hugh (1752-1837), colonial administrator, was born on 21 March 1752 at The Society, Edinburgh, the only son of John Cleghorn (died 1774), merchant and brewer, and his wife, Jean (1712-1791), daughter of William Scott, professor of Greek at Edinburgh University, and Jean Fairbairn. The Cleghorns' only other child was a daughter, Magdalene. Hugh Cleghorn's family represented a solid alliance between well-to-do brewers and influential academics, among whom were William Hamilton, principal of Edinburgh University, and William Cleghorn, professor of moral philosophy there. William Cleghorn gave his 'dying voice' for Adam Ferguson, one of the outstanding personalities of the Scottish Enlightenment, to be the next professor of moral philosophy at Edinburgh. Hugh Cleghorn was to be a student of Ferguson's at the university; he went there in 1764, at the age of twelve, because he wanted to study Greek and could not do so at the Edinburgh high school, where he began his education. Cleghorn's mind was thus formed by and imbued with the challenges of the Scottish Enlightenment and of Edinburgh at its most brilliant period in the eighteenth century. His own inclination was at first towards academic life: in 1773 he was appointed professor of civil history at the University of St Andrews. On 2 February 1774, in Old Greyfriars parish, Cleghorn married Rachel McGill (died 1821), daughter of John McGill, and a relative of Adam Smith, who left the young Cleghorns $400 in his will. It was early in their marriage that their two sons and five daughters were born; both the sons eventually followed careers in Madras. 
Sixteen years in St Andrews proved to Cleghorn that it was too narrow a stage for his abundant energy and 'bigness of mind', as his friend William Adam phrased it (Clark, 283). A passionate desire to travel led him to seize the opportunity to see Europe as 'bear leader' to the tenth earl of Home. One of the most important results of this tour (1788-90) was the friendship he formed in Neuchatel with the comte de Meuron, whose mercenary Swiss regiment had been hired by the Dutch East India Company to guard Colombo and other Dutch garrisons in Ceylon. Cleghorn also acquired an appetite for politics, and his fertile mind was busy for schemes with an alliance between Britain and the Swiss cantons, which, if they launched an attack on the eastern frontier of France, might restrain the French from invading the Netherlands. These schemes brought him to the notice of Henry Dundas, the most influential government minister in Scotland, who, as president of the Board of Control, was able to ensure that the East India Company gave jobs to the many young Scots he recommended. Dundas found Cleghorn's intelligence reports valuable, and regarded him as another instrument to be used in furthering British interests in India. 
Cleghorn wanted the government to safeguard Madras by extending British control to Ceylon. When de Meuron confided in Cleghorn how dissatisfied he was with the Dutch as paymasters, and when the French revolutionary armies invaded the Netherlands and William V of Orange fled to England, the opportunity arrived for Britain to get Ceylon into its sights, for William, in his 'Kew letter', ordered all commanders of Dutch forces to hand over forts under their command to the British. Dundas agreed with Cleghorn that, as de Meuron's Swiss regiment in Colombo constituted the only reliable force there, if these troops could be persuaded to change sides, Ceylon could be won without, in Cleghorn's words, 'great effusion of blood'. So he and de Meuron were authorized in 1795 by the British government to go to Madras with all possible speed to bring about the transfer of the allegiance of the Swiss regiment to the British, and to end Dutch rule in Ceylon. Cleghorn hoped the element of surprise would add to Dutch confusion, so he tried to stop the comte boasting too loudly about his new rank of major-general during their journey to India. Once there, Cleghorn did go so far as to write to a friend, 'I am not here merely to eat mangoes' (Clark, 127). In the event, the plan worked: the Swiss obeyed their colonel's instructions, the Dutch governor surrendered after a token resistance, and the British army entered Colombo. 
Cleghorn's return to Britain took him through Europe, and set his ever eager mind to planning how to frustrate Napoleon's drive into Italy. His plan impressed Dundas, who read it over with Pitt at Walmer Castle, although the treaty of Campo Formio made it irrelevant. In 1798 Dundas sent a reluctant Cleghorn back to Colombo as secretary of state under the governorship of Frederick North: Dundas, under pressure to exchange Ceylon for the Cape, wanted to keep both, and needed someone who shared his views on the spot. But the personal antipathy between Cleghorn and North, and the failure of the pearl fishery of which Cleghorn had been put in charge, led to his leaving Ceylon after only two years, with a charge of stealing pearls hanging over him. The charge was unfounded, as the official inquiry established, but it meant the end of Cleghorn's public career. 
Cleghorn retired to Fife and set himself to 'improve' his estates and enjoy his friends and his grandchildren, as far as his financial worries would permit. He had put the $5000 given him by the East India Company for his first enterprise in Ceylon towards buying Stravithie, an estate in Fife just south of St Andrews, and had little spare capital and a somewhat meagre government pension. To add to his difficulties, William Campbell, a writer to the signet and the husband of Cleghorn's second daughter, Jane, attempted to avert his own financial ruin by using Cleghorn's name as security. Cleghorn accepted responsibility for the debt, but was so mortified by his own carelessness over money that he made Stravithie in its entirety over to his surviving son, Peter (1783-1863), registrar-general to the supreme court in Madras. Following the death, in 1824, of Peter's wife their son, Hugh Francis Clarke Cleghorn was brought up by his grandfather. From 1831 Hugh Cleghorn lived on his pension in the family house, Wakefield, Stravithie, Dunino, Fife, where he died on 19 February 1837. He was buried in Dunino churchyard. 
In the second half of the twentieth century Cleghorn's name acquired some notoriety in Sri Lanka (as Ceylon became in 1972). On his first visit in 1795 he had undertaken a tour of the northern coastal region, writing to Dundas, 'At present we are as ignorant of Ceylon as we are of Japan' (Clark, 138). He had had much conversation with Dutch settlers, officials, and lawyers, and after eight months as secretary of state, he set down what he had learned from them of 'the administration of justice and of the revenues under the Dutch government' in a minute to Dundas of 1799. In 1954 the Tamils, looking for ammunition to sustain their claims to a separate homeland in the north and east of the island, seized on some phrases in Cleghorn's minute to justify them. For example, he asserted that 'Two different nations, from a very early period, have divided between them the possession of the island. First the Sinhalese, inhabiting the interior of the country in its southern and western parts.... and secondly the Malabars [Tamils] who possess the northern and eastern districts. These two nations differ entirely in their religion, language and manners' (de Silva, appx B). Throughout his life Cleghorn's enthusiasm for learning, from whatever situation he found himself in, remained undimmed. Whether he was exhorting his St Andrews students to read Adam Smith and John Millar, analysing his observations on Europe at war for Pitt and Dundas, or putting into practice scientific methods of farming on his own estate in Fife, he was always forward-looking and his ideas sparkled with 'bigness of life'. 


@@@@@


doc= 45772


Reynolds, Alfred (1818-1891), wood-engraver and colour printer, was born on 1 April 1818 at Donnington, near Chichester, Sussex, the youngest of seven children of George Reynolds (1766-1851), naval officer, and his wife, Mary Ann (1783-1833), daughter of Richard Prior, yeoman, of Donnington, and his wife, Ann; he was a grandson of Admiral John Reynolds. He was baptized on 8 May 1818 at Providence (Independent Calvinistic) Chapel, Chichester, reflecting the religious persuasions of his mother. His father was an evangelical churchman. Alfred probably followed his brother William ('b'. 1815) in attending a school in Southgate, Chichester, before being apprenticed, on 1 August 1832, to George Baxter, colour printer (grandson of the principal founder of Providence Chapel), to learn wood-engraving, at 29 King's Square, Clerkenwell, London, where Baxter lived, and where William Reynolds was already an indentured pupil. About 1836 Baxter moved, with his apprentices, to 3 Charterhouse Square. It appears that Alfred was an inventive pupil but was not alone in finding Baxter's teaching of wood-engraving insufficiently intensive. (He was among former apprentices who in 1849 opposed in court an extension of Baxter's colour printing patent.) Another apprentice was F. W. M. Collins, later joint patentee with Reynolds of the block process. 
How Reynolds was employed in 1839-43 is unknown. By 1844 he had joined Collins and another former fellow apprentice, Charles Gregory, in London, as wood-engravers and printers, taking charge of their colour printing. Their skill soon rivalled that of Baxter, and was praised by contemporary critics, including Thackeray. Gregory, Collins, and Reynolds soon specialized in illustrating children's books, including a 'Home Treasury' series (1846) by the versatile Henry Cole, who apparently introduced Reynolds to another entrepreneur, Herbert Minton, pottery manufacturer of Stoke-on-Trent. 
On 14 March 1848, Collins, possibly the financier, and Reynolds, usually referred to as the inventor, patented (no. 12079) a process 'for improvements in ornamenting china, earthenware, and glass' by printing several colours exactly on to ceramic or glass surfaces. The result was far superior to the earlier transfer printing. Minton encouraged this project, considering Reynolds as the inventor. Reynolds moved to Stoke-on-Trent in 1848 to manage his process for Minton, who apparently acquired, for fourteen years, a two-thirds share in this patent in May 1849. Reynolds later assumed complete responsibility for Minton's tile department. Some independent evidence shows that at least until the early 1860s Reynolds operated his invention on his own account as well. 
Reynolds's technique was immediately used at Mintons for producing large coloured tiles designed by A. W. N. Pugin to decorate the smoking room of the new House of Commons. In 1855 Reynolds's work won a first-class medal at the Universal Exhibition in Paris. In spite of later competition from two breakaway tile firms, particularly after 1868 from Minton Hollins, block printed tile manufacture increased in later years and by 1880 accounted for more than a fifth of Mintons' sales. In 1873 Reynolds was awarded, at a Universal Exhibition in Vienna, another first-class medal. 'He was well placed', Paul Atterbury states, 'to mastermind the great revival in pictorial and decorative tiles that occurred in the 1870s', concluding that 'his technical developments were crucial to Mintons' foremost position as producers of decorative printed tiles' (Atterbury and Batkin, 40, 394). The block process continued in commercial use until the 1920s. 
At Stoke, Reynolds, who remained a bachelor, lived in lodgings. Alone among his immediate relations he was a convinced Liberal in politics. His influence secured a clerkship in a local bank for his young nephew Alfred S. H. Reynolds (son of his brother William), who consequently lived with him from 1877 to 1883, and in 1885 married into a Stoke family. In 1886 Reynolds retired on account of heart trouble, but he continued to enjoy an active interest in books, flowers, astronomy, and local good works until his sudden death at his home, Bank House, Vine St, Stoke-on-Trent, on 9 January 1891. Appreciated by Mintons' workpeople for his kindly character, he was buried on 16 January amid public mourning by an old friend, Bishop Sir Lovelace Stamer, rector of Stoke 1858-92, at Hartshill cemetery. He left a surprising quantity of small house property. Harrison Weir, a contemporary pupil of Baxter, wrote from Kent, 'his memory has ever been fresh and green in my mind' (H. Weir letter to A. S. H. Reynolds, 1891). Anonymous commemorative verses appeared in 'Poetical Wild Oats' (n.d.), 100-06, published by Digby, Long & Co., London. 


@@@@@


doc= 45775


Norton, John (1606-1663), minister in America, was born on 6 May 1606 in Bishop's Stortford, Hertfordshire, the son of William Norton and his wife, Alice Browest. As a youth he was tutored by Alexander Strange at Bunningford School, and he matriculated as a pensioner at Peterhouse, Cambridge, in 1620 at the age of fourteen, graduating BA in 1624 and proceeding MA in 1627, having earned a reputation as an excellent Latinist. Cotton Mather claimed that family financial difficulties prompted him to leave the university rather than continue as a fellow. Mather also reported that as a youth Norton had been addicted to card-playing, but that once chastised for the practice by one of the family servants he henceforth adopted a strong lifelong opposition to the practice. After returning home he accepted a post as usher at the Stortford grammar school and also served as the local curate. Although he was exposed to puritan ideas at Cambridge, it was his attendance to the preaching of Jeremiah Dyke and other local puritans that effected his conversion. Because he was unwilling to compromise his new convictions he turned down a church benefice to become chaplain to Sir William Masham of High Lever, Essex. He likewise declined Richard Sibbes's efforts to procure him a fellowship at St Catharine's College, Cambridge. 
After their attempt to leave England in 1634 was thwarted by bad storms, the following year Norton migrated to New England in the company of his wife, about whom nothing is known, and of his fellow clergyman Thomas Shepard. They landed at Plymouth, and he initially preached in that colony before moving to Boston in 1636. There he took a lead in opposing Anne Hutchinson, who preached a mystical apprehension of spiritual election and accused most of the region's clergy, including Norton, of preaching an Arminian-style covenant of works. He was a member of the synod of 1637 which defined religious errors said to be maintained by Hutchinson and her followers, and supported her exile. In 1638 Norton accepted the ministerial post of teacher in the church at Ipswich, Massachusetts, where Nathaniel Rogers was pastor. 
In England in 1643 the unity of the puritans in the Westminster assembly splintered when the dissenting brethren issued their 'Apologetical Narration' calling for toleration within a projected presbyterian settlement for independent congregations of orthodox believers. English congregational Independents such as Thomas Goodwin and Philip Nye cited the example of the New England way in defence of congregational polity while the presbyterian majority, led by the assembly's Scottish observers, sought to discredit that position. Among other strategies the presbyterians sought to engage respected continental theologians to write in support of their position. One such important work was produced by William Apollonius, pastor of the church in Middleburg. The congregationalists turned to their New England allies for a response and the colonial clergy selected Norton. His Latin 'Responsio ad totam questionum...' (1648) was an answer to Apollonius that was published in London with a preface by Nye, Thomas Goodwin, and Sidrach Simpson. It spelt out in great detail congregational church polity and sought to demonstrate the affinity of congregational practice with continental reformed belief and polity. Like most New Englanders, Norton strongly supported the dissenting brethren but was concerned about the alliance with the sects into which they were forced in the 1640s. As he wrote to the former New Englander Giles Firmin, he thought 'better of many Presbyterians' than he did of some of the sects, 'for I distinguish between Independents and Congregational men' ('New England Historical and Genealogical Register', 20, 1886, 229). 
With his answer to Apollonius behind him, Norton served in 1648 as a member of the colonial assembly that prepared the Cambridge platform, which expressed the structural character and the faith of the churches of New England. When, prior to the assembly, members of the Boston church questioned whether such an endeavour would interfere with congregational autonomy, Norton preached to that congregation a guest sermon which was credited with gaining their participation. He also wrote to John Durie a letter, signed by forty-three other ministers, which expressed support for that reformer's eirenic efforts to unite Christians. 
In 1645 Norton was invited to deliver the election sermon for the colony and was considered as a possible agent to represent Massachusetts in England until that plan was postponed. He came to the assistance of the magistrates in 1650 when one of their number, Springfield's William Pynchon, published 'The Meritorious Doctrine of our Redemption' (1650), a tract which denied the doctrine that man's sins were imputed to Christ and that the Saviour suffered to redeem them. At the request of the colony's general court Norton wrote and published a refutation of Pynchon's 'A Discussion of that Great Point in Divinity, the Sufferings of Christ' (1653). 
John Cotton was said to have recommended Norton to succeed him as teacher in the First Church of Boston, and following Cotton's death in 1652 the churches of Ipswich and Boston entered into a protracted struggle for his services. After a council of twelve churches intervened the Ipswich congregation relented and Norton was ordained at Boston on 23 July 1656, the New England churches maintaining that ordination was specific to a particular congregation. In 1654 he published 'The Orthodox Evangelist', a critical exposition of puritan faith and theology which strongly asserted the inefficacy of man's work in the process of salvation while maintaining that the pietistic love that results from God's election of the saints was expressed within their lives. He also published 'A Brief and Excellent Treatise Containing the Doctrine of Godliness' (1648), a 'Brief Catechism' (1660), and a biography of his friend and predecessor John Cotton, 'Abel being Dead yet Speaketh' (1658). The last work is credited as being the first biography written in America. In 1659 he wrote 'The Heart of New England Rent', in which he expounded the threat posed by Quaker missionaries to New England and justified the application of the death penalty to Quakers who defied banishment to return to the colony. Appointed an overseer in 1654 he also devoted attention to the affairs of Harvard College, and in addition he tutored children in his home, the most notable of whom was the young Increase Mather. By 1656 his wife had died, and on 23 July that year he married Mary Mason, who outlived him. 
New Englanders had supported the English puritan regimes of the Commonwealth and protectorate and feared the consequences of the restoration of the Stuarts in 1660. Though he continued to urge the prosecution of the puritan errand, Norton's 1661 election sermon, 'Sion the Outcast Healed of her Wounds', called for reconciliation with the crown. Consequently in 1662 Norton and Simon Bradstreet were sent to England by the Massachusetts general court to seek reassurances regarding their charter and to respond to criticism about the colony's harsh treatment of Quakers. While the charter was upheld for the time, the royal government insisted on changes in the Massachusetts franchise, demanded adherence to the 'Navigation Acts', and required toleration of dissenters. Norton and Bradstreet were generally blamed by their fellow colonists for conceding too much and their mission was judged a failure. Shortly after returning from England, on 5 April 1663, Norton appeared to suffer a stroke after preaching at the morning service and died that same day; he was buried in the King's Chapel burial-ground, Boston. His contemporary Nathaniel Morton characterized Norton as 'singularly endowed with the tongue of the learned, enabled to speak a word in due season' and 'not only a wise steward of the things of Christ, but also a wise statesman' (N. Morton, 'New England's Memoriall', 1669). 

John Norton (1651-1716), minister in America, was the son of William Norton of Ipswich, Massachusetts, and his wife, Lucy, daughter of Emmanuel Downing (1585-1660) and Lucy Winthrop. He was thus the nephew not only of John Norton but also of George Downing, and great-nephew of Governor John Winthrop. He was a pupil at Ipswich School and then matriculated at Harvard, where he received his BA in 1671. Ordained at Hingham, Massachusetts, in 1678, he became the colleague and then successor of Peter Hobart; his ministry was undistinguished. He published an election sermon, 'An Essay Tending to Promote Reformation' (1708), and delivered a funeral elegy on Anne Bradstreet. Having proceeded MA from Harvard in 1716, he died in the same year. 


@@@@@


doc= 45776


Wilson, Charlotte Mary (1854-1944), anarchist and feminist, was born on 6 May 1854 in the village of Kemerton, on Bredon Hill, Worcestershire, the only child of Robert Spencer Martin (died 1896), physician, and his wife, Clementina Susannah, 'nee' Davies (died 1903), who was from a distinguished clerical family. She received the best education then available to girls, going to Cheltenham Ladies' College and then to Cambridge University; there, from 1873 to 1876, she attended the new institution at Merton Hall, which later became Newnham College, and took the higher local examination. While at Cambridge she lost her religious faith and moved to the political left. On 21 September 1876 she married her cousin Arthur Wilson (1847-1932), a stockbroker. They lived for a time in Hampstead, where she was active in charitable and educational work, but she became a socialist and then an anarchist (influenced by Peter Kropotkin, who was serving a prison sentence in France), and at the end of 1884 they adopted the simple life and moved to a historic cottage at Wyldes on the edge of Hampstead Heath (about which she wrote 'Wyldes and its Story' in 1904). Meanwhile she became active in several political organizations. 
During 1884 Charlotte Wilson joined the two leading socialist bodies, the Social Democratic Federation and the Fabian Society, and began contributing to their papers; she also formed a group which met in her home to study socialist theory and history. She was the only woman elected to the first executive of the Fabian Society in December 1884, and for two years led the anarchist fraction in the society, giving talks and writing articles explaining anarchism to socialists. Early in 1886 she contributed the anarchist half of a Fabian tract entitled 'What Socialism is', and later in 1886 she spoke on the losing side in a debate at which representatives of the socialist organizations decided to take the parliamentary, rather than the revolutionary, road. She withdrew from the Fabian executive in April 1887 and concentrated on work within the anarchist movement. 
Charlotte Wilson was associated from the start with 'The Anarchist', the first English-language anarchist paper in Britain, founded in March 1885 by Henry Seymour, with whom she formed the English Anarchist Circle. In January 1886 Kropotkin was released from prison and he settled in England, partly as a result of her invitation. At first Kropotkin and Wilson worked with Seymour, but in October 1886 they started another anarchist paper, 'Freedom', modelled on the French-language papers he had edited for several years in Switzerland. She was publisher, editor, and main contributor, with gaps caused by her illness, until she retired in January 1895 because of family illness. She remained associated with the paper until 1901, her last contribution being a 'Short history of 'Freedom'', written in 1896 and published in December 1900. From 1888 she helped to produce a series of 'Freedom Pamphlets', some of which were translated or written by herself, the most important being 'Anarchism and Outrage' (1893), a summary of the anarchist attitude to political violence. For a decade she also spoke to all kinds of audiences throughout the country, and she became a familiar figure as the leading native middle-class proponent of anarchist communism. 
Charlotte Wilson was not directly involved in politics for the decade from 1895, during which both her parents died; her main public activity in these years was the campaign for the preservation of Hampstead Heath. In 1906 the Wilsons left Wyldes, and divided their lives between a London apartment and a house in Peppard Common, Oxfordshire. She then returned to political activity, this time in the women's movement. She joined several feminist organizations -- the Women's Industrial Council, the Women's Local Government Society, the Women's Freedom League -- and in 1908 she founded the Fabian Women's Group. She became its secretary, its meetings were held at her London home, and she led its ambitious programme of research into and publicity about women's social and political interests; she described it in 'Fabian Women's Group: Three Years' Work' (1911). She also returned to the Fabian executive from 1911 to 1914. She withdrew from political activity for the last time at the beginning of the First World War, and turned instead to welfare work for British prisoners of war, for which she was appointed OBE in 1919. The Wilsons had no children, and after her husband's death in 1932 she was looked after by his nephew, Gerald Hankin. They moved to the United States, where she ended her life in a home, suffering from senile dementia. She died at Irvington-on-Hudson, New York, on 28 April 1944, just before her ninetieth birthday. 
Charlotte Wilson played a leading part in two distinct episodes of the British left -- establishing a serious and lasting anarchist paper at a critical time in the growth of the socialist movement, and encouraging serious and influential research into women's issues at a critical time in the growth of the feminist movement. In both areas she was distinguished by intelligence and industry, reticence and reliability, and she won the friendship of all who worked with her and the respect of all who knew her. John Henry Mackay described her in his documentary novel of the 1880s as 'the most faithful, the most diligent, and the most impassioned champion of Communism' ('The Anarchists', 1891, 41), and Edith Morley described her as 'the fount and inspiration' of the Fabian Women's Group ('Women Workers in Seven Professions', 1914, v). 


@@@@@


doc= 45778


Needham, (Amy) Violet (1876-1967), children's writer, was born on 5 June 1876 at 9 John Street, Berkeley Square, London, the younger daughter of Colonel Charles Needham (1844-1934) and his wife, Hendrika Amelie Charlotte Vincentia (Amy) de Tuyll de Serooskerken (1854-1936), a Dutch heiress. Charles Needham was the illegitimate but acknowledged son of Francis Jack, second earl of Kilmorey (1787-1880), and Priscilla Anne, daughter of Captain Sir William Hoste RN (1780-1828). Needham entered the 1st Life Guards, served in the Egyptian campaign (1882), and commanded the regiment (1888-92), but his addiction to gambling brought financial difficulties; the family moved house frequently during Violet's youth as his fortunes changed. 
Violet and her sister, Evelyn Norah (1874-1967), were educated at home and became fluent in French, Italian, and German. They accompanied their parents when their father was military attache in Rome (1895-1901); later the family lived in London and at their country house, Tylehurst, Forest Row, Sussex, where Violet became friendly with the alpinist Douglas Freshfield (1845-1934). Visits were paid to her mother's relatives in France, Austria, and the Netherlands. After her parents' deaths she moved to 1 Spanish Place, Marylebone, London, and in the early 1950s joined her widowed sister at Horton Hall, Gloucestershire. 
Violet Needham was physically plain, but dressed elegantly and had great personal charm. She remained a Victorian lady, but took to motoring (rather dangerously) and was a heavy smoker of Turkish cigarettes, using a special oval shagreen holder. She once gave her hobbies as gardening and wood chopping, but she also painted and did needlework. Although she published nothing until the age of sixty-three, she had always told stories to young relatives, particularly her four nephews. In 1918 they urged her to write down the latest bedtime story; it was sent to various publishers but was rejected as too adult for children. Twenty years later a niece-in-law showed it to William Collins; on his own children's recommendation he published it in 1939 as 'The Black Riders'. Eighteen children's books followed, as well as short stories and articles. Only at the age of eighty, following a car accident, did she cease writing. 
Violet Needham's most popular stories belong to a sequence of eight set in a group of Ruritanian countries clearly modelled on pre-1914 Austria-Hungary. 'The Black Riders' (1939), 'The Emerald Crown' (1940), 'The Stormy Petrel' (1942), 'The House of the Paladin' (1945), and their sequels are a heady mixture of romantic backgrounds, swift action, and spine-chilling suspense, with characters remarkable among the children's books of the period for having real moral dilemmas, and faults as well as virtues. She was particularly good at portraying children in relation to adults and at drawing convincing villains. Again unusually, she did not hesitate to kill off major characters. Her books are marked by the importance of loyalty and a firm sense of 'noblesse oblige' -- all her heroes and heroines are decidedly upper-class -- with an underpinning of strong but unbigoted faith (she was an Anglican), sincere but not sanctimonious. The books were well illustrated by Joyce Bruce, a Gloucestershire neighbour, who worked closely with her to match the drawings to the author's imagination. 
Violet Needham's works also include three contemporary English stories with supernatural elements, 'The Horn of Merlyns' (1943), 'The Bell of the Four Evangelists' (1947), and 'Pandora of Parrham Royal' (1951); two Ruritanian historical stories, 'The Woods of Windri' (1944) and 'The Changeling of Monte Lucio' (1946); and a historical tale, 'The Boy in Red' (1948), dealing with William the Silent and using as a setting Clingendaal near The Hague, a house belonging to Dutch relatives. 
Violet Needham's heyday was the 1940s, when her books reached a wide audience through being broadcast on 'Children's Hour', and her young readers included Auberon Waugh, Antonia Fraser, A. S. Byatt, and Alice Thomas Ellis. She died of heart failure at Horton Hall, Gloucestershire, on 8 June 1967. She was cremated, and her ashes scattered at Little Sodbury Manor, Gloucestershire. After a period of neglect her works began to arouse interest in the 1980s; the Violet Needham Society was formed in 1985. 


@@@@@


doc= 45779


Young, Grace Emily (1868-1944), mathematician, was born in London on 15 March 1868, the youngest of four children of Henry Williams Chisholm (1809-1901) and his wife, Anna Louisa Bell (1824-1900). He was warden of the standards and chief clerk to the exchequer; the measures of length in Trafalgar Square were placed under his direction. Grace's elder brother Hugh Chisholm (1866-1924) gained eminence as editor of the eleventh and twelfth editions of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' and as city editor of 'The Times'. 
The family moved to Haslemere in 1874 upon the father's retirement. After education at home from governesses, Grace won a scholarship to Girton College, Cambridge, in 1889, and four years later passed the mathematical tripos examinations. She performed even better by gaining a first class in the final honours school examination at Oxford University, which she had been allowed to take. Disliking the British system of mathematics education, she enrolled in a newly launched programme of higher education for women conducted at Gottingen under Felix Klein, director of the mathematics faculty. Two years later she was the first to complete the programme, with a dissertation on spherical trigonometry analysed in Klein's way in terms of the group of geometrical transformations under which configurations remain unchanged. Her results have been applied to astronomy. 
Grace returned home to look after her elderly parents, and once more met William Henry (Will) Young (1863-1942), who had briefly coached her at Cambridge. She at first declined his proposal of marriage but they were married on 11 June 1896. Their first child, Frank, nicknamed Bimbo, was born in 1897. Grace drew her husband into research-level mathematics, which they pursued for the rest of their lives in continental Europe. At first they spent a year in Italy, working in geometry, but finding the topic somewhat uncongenial they returned to Gottingen in 1899 to seek Klein's advice on research topics. Klein proposed set theory, which was beginning to receive great attention from mathematicians at that time, and the couple devoted their research career to aspects of this topic. They lived in Gottingen until 1908, when they moved to Switzerland, spending seven years at Geneva, and then living near Lausanne. They existed largely on income from Young's savings as a coach, and from his salary as lecturer or professor in universities in England and India. While at Gottingen and then Geneva, Grace trained to be a medical doctor but did not take the examinations. 
Two sons and three daughters were born to them at Gottingen; the eldest daughter, Rosalind Cecilia Hildegard (1900-1992), better known by her married name, Rosalind Tanner, also achieved a notable career in mathematics and its history. Bimbo's education inspired publications from his parents. They produced 'A First Book of Geometry' in 1905, based on folding paper; it was translated into several languages. Then Grace wrote two little books explaining science for children: 'Bimbo' (1906), and 'Bimbo and the Frogs' (1907). Frank's death in action in February 1917 as an airman in the First World War was a devastating blow. 
The Youngs' research work produced about 200 papers and two books. One joint book, 'The Theory of Sets of Points' (1906), was the first comprehensive introduction to several aspects of set theory in English. Their attention centred on point set topology and its application to integration, and to properties of Fourier series and sets of orthogonal functions. It is clear from the couple's correspondence that, while his research-trained wife drew the coach into creative work, he had the stronger talent of the two. Most papers appeared under his name alone, and he wrote some of them entirely; however, she wrote up the majority and checked the details, and handled the proofs. As he put it in one of his letters: 'I feel partly as if I were teaching you, and setting you problems which I could not quite do myself but could enable you to. [...] The fact is that our papers ought to be published under our joint names, but if this were done neither of us get the benefit of it. No. Mine the laurels now and the knowledge. Yours the knowledge only. Everything under my name now, and later when the loaves and fishes are no more procurable in that way, everything or much under your name. (Grattan-Guinness, 'Mathematical union', 141)' From the mid-1910s Grace produced some research papers of her own, mainly applying set theory to the differential calculus. An essay on 'infinite derivatives' won a Gamble prize at Cambridge University in 1915, stimulating some later research. Later she wrote some speculative papers on aspects of Greek mathematics. 
Partly because of Grace's declining health, the Youngs' research work stopped rather abruptly in the mid-1920s, but during the early 1930s she wrote a long unpublished novel entitled 'The Crown of England', on Elizabethan society. During this period she also helped Young with secretarial duties in his post as president of the International Mathematical Union. 
As Paris was falling in 1940 Grace managed, at great risk, to take back to England two children of her daughter Janet, but Young refused to accompany her, fearing punishment for his many praises of German academic achievements. He died in Switzerland in 1942; she died at Janet's house, 98 Park Road, Croydon, Surrey, on 29 March 1944, aged seventy-six. 


@@@@@


doc= 45781


Blackwood, Beatrice Mary (1889-1975), anthropologist, was born on 3 May 1889 at her parents' home at 3 Marlborough Hill, Marylebone, London, the eldest of the three children of James Blackwood (1822-1911), publisher, and his wife, Mary (1859-1953), a nurse, daughter of John Carter Chamberlayne. She was educated in London at Wycombe House School, and Paddington and Maida Vale high school. In 1908 she won a scholarship to Somerville College, Oxford, where she was awarded a second-class honours degree in English language and literature in 1912. 
In 1918 Blackwood took the Oxford diploma in anthropology with distinction and started work as research assistant to Professor Arthur Thomson in the department of human anatomy, then based in the University Museum, Oxford. After two years she was promoted to departmental demonstrator, and then took a BSc degree with a thesis on embryology in 1923. In 1924, as a Laura Spelman Rockefeller scholar, she embarked on a three-year anthropological investigation into the relationship between intelligence and physical type in North America. On her return to Oxford she became university demonstrator in ethnology, a post that was transferred to the Pitt Rivers Museum in 1935, where she remained until retirement. 
Blackwood began fieldwork in 1929 in Buka and Bougainville, later part of Papua New Guinea, funded by the American National Research Council. The resulting publication, 'Both Sides of Buka Passage' (1935), combined social anthropology, material culture, and technology, reflecting her ability to combine methodological approaches. In 1936, under the aegis of the Pitt Rivers Museum, she worked among the stone tool-using communities in the interior of New Guinea. The hallmark of all Blackwood's fieldwork was her adoption of a cat as companion. In the Upper Watut region, where few locals spoke the lingua franca of pidgin, the cat's antics proved essential in breaking down the barriers of communication between her and the warriors. After nine months her pioneering fieldwork was cut short when the area was declared 'uncontrolled' by the government. Rather than return home she spent the rest of her leave collecting in other, more accessible regions of Papua New Guinea. It is for this fieldwork, published as 'The Technology of a Modern Stone Age People in New Guinea' (1950), that she is most fondly remembered as the diminutive woman who braved 'cannibal country' with only a kitten as companion. 
After returning to the Pitt Rivers Museum in 1938 Blackwood made a collecting trip to New Mexico, returning early owing to the outbreak of war in 1939. In 1943, as an acknowledgement of her professional achievements as an expert fieldworker, she was awarded the Rivers memorial medal of the Royal Anthropological Institute. During the Second World War the museum closed and Blackwood and the curator, T. K. Penniman, devoted their time to creating a regional and typological card index for all the objects in the Pitt Rivers Museum. After requests from visiting researchers, who realized the value of Blackwood's comprehensive classification system, it was published in 1970 for use in other museums. She was made lecturer in ethnology at Oxford University in 1946. After her retirement in 1959, at the age of seventy, she continued to work at the Pitt Rivers Museum daily and was made an honorary curator in 1965. 
Blackwood never married, having reportedly chosen at an early age between marriage and a career. An occasional poet, she wrote humorous verse for family and friends, often making light of arduous conditions in the field. She was made a fellow of the Royal Anthropological Institute in 1921 and a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries in 1943. She died of pneumonia on 29 November 1975 at her home, 11 Wyndham House, Plantation Road, Oxford, within days of her final visit to the museum. She was cremated at Oxford crematorium and her ashes spread in the garden of remembrance there on 4 December. 


@@@@@


doc= 45782


Burstall, Sara Annie (1859-1939), headmistress, was born in Aberdeen on 2 November 1859. She was the eldest child, and only daughter, of Henry Abraham Burstall and his wife, Annie Hepzibah King. Her father was the Aberdeen agent of a London firm, and was in charge of three granite quarries and the transport of the stone by sea to England. The family were members of the Church of England and attended what was called the English Chapel because the episcopal churches in Scotland were not then unified. In 1871 Henry Burstall was made redundant and returned with his family to London, where he tried to set himself up as a house builder; but he gave up the business in the late 1870s when he inherited a family legacy. His wife came from a Devon family, and was described by her daughter as an independent woman who had been involved with the Chartist movement, and had attended lectures on hygiene at one of the first mechanics' institutes to provide classes for women. Sara Burstall's two brothers were apprenticed to a firm of marine engineers in London and attended night school to gain engineering qualifications. 
The family was relatively poor after 1871, and Sara Burstall's educational success was based on winning scholarships. In her early years she had a governess and then attended Dr Lyon's Union Street Scottish Academy in Aberdeen, a mixed school. In London she went to Camden School for Girls, the lower-middle-class school founded by Frances Mary Buss for families unable to pay the fees at the North London Collegiate School. At Camden, where Emma J. Elford was headmistress, she was taught divinity, arithmetic, English, history, geography, and French, and a limited amount of Latin in her final year. At fifteen she took the Cambridge junior local examinations, and did so well that she won a scholarship to the North London Collegiate School, which she entered in 1875; Miss Buss was the headmistress of the school she had founded. Here Sara Burstall specialized in mathematics (well taught by Sophie Bryant), and became the joint head girl with Charlotte Angas Scott. In 1878, she sat the London University's general examination for women, and won a scholarship to Girton College, Cambridge. There were only six students in her year, including Hertha Marks (later Ayrton). They were the generation who started the Girton College fire brigade, which was lampooned by 'Punch' but which was an entirely sensible response to the college's geographical isolation. She read for the mathematical tripos although she wanted to change to history; the college insisted she continue with maths, and presented her for the last winter tripos in 1881-2. She reports that she had lost motivation, was stale, and 'just lost my First'; but she received a letter of commiseration from Emily Davies. 
In 1882 Sara Burstall returned to the North London Collegiate School as an assistant mistress on a salary of $120 per annum, at the same time attending teacher-training classes under the auspices of the College of Preceptors. Miss Buss encouraged her staff to take the opportunity presented by the opening of London degrees to women in 1878, and Sara Burstall graduated BA in 1884 and obtained a London diploma in divinity in 1886. She began her long career as an activist in teachers' organizations in 1884 when she became involved with the Assistant Mistresses' Association and the Teachers' Guild. In 1888 she set up her own independent household, which she maintained until her retirement. She and a friend rented one of her father's properties and let rooms to other ladies active in education (as teachers or students). In 1893 she travelled to the USA, to attend the world fair in Chicago and to study female education, funded by a travel scholarship from the Gilchrist Education Trust. Her research led to her first book, 'The Education of Girls in America', published in 1894. In that same year Miss Buss died and Sophie Bryant became headmistress of North London Collegiate, with Sara Burstall as her deputy. 
In 1898, at the age of thirty-eight, Sara Burstall became headmistress of the Manchester High School for Girls, on the retirement of Elizabeth Day who had held the position since the foundation of the school in 1874. Like others of her generation of headmistresses, Sara Burstall was faced with girls who were not academically brilliant, and not enthusiastic to learn classics and mathematics, alongside those who were the potential university entrants, and for whom the pioneer schools had been founded. Secondary education was becoming normal for upper-middle and middle-class girls, but not all of them were scholars. To meet their needs, she designed courses in domestic subjects (cookery, laundry, needlework) and in secretarial skills (bookkeeping, shorthand, and Spanish) to run parallel to the academic courses for the university aspirants. Her phrase for these two groups was 'express trains and slow trains'. Her introduction of home management and other domestic subjects into the curriculum for middle-class girls was a retreat from the insistence of the pioneer generation of headmistresses on a strictly academic curriculum. She believed this was necessary in order to attract a substantial number of fee-paying pupils aged over fifteen, and was better suited to many girls' abilities. But the policy was controversial in her own time, and remains so a century later. It was either a sensible adjustment to the interests of non-academic girls or a betrayal of everything feminist educators had spent fifty years campaigning to achieve. 
Manchester high school grew and prospered during Sara Burstall's period of office. She was also prominent in other educational activities. In 1903, she became one of three women members of the newly formed education committee of Manchester city council, where she initiated the appointment of a woman inspector of infant schools, and the earmarking for girls of two of the four local-authority university scholarships. In 1907-8, she took sabbatical leave and again visited the USA to do the research for her book 'Impressions of American Education in 1908'. In 1909, she was elected president of the Association of Headmistresses of Public Secondary Schools (AHM), serving until 1911. During this period of intense debate about the curriculum for girls, the AHM gave evidence to the government consultative committee which produced the 'Report on Practical Work in Secondary Schools', and stressed the importance of domestic subjects in the female curriculum. 
Sara Burstall regarded the period from 1908 to 1914 as the peak of her career. Depressed by the miseries of the 1914-18 war, and the educational and social changes of the post-war period, she retired from Manchester high school in the school's jubilee year, 1924. In that year she became a magistrate in Manchester, but resigned in 1927, feeling, she said, that married women were better suited to the work. In 1925 she was the first woman to be appointed to a Colonial Office advisory committee, that on native education in Africa. At this period she moved away from Manchester so that she would not impede her successor as headmistress; she lived in Derby before settling in London in 1931. She published her autobiography in 1933. The last of her seven books was a biography of Miss Buss, published in 1938. Sara Burstall died at her home, 46 Stevenage Road, Fulham, in London, on 26 March 1939. 


@@@@@


doc= 45783


Butler, Agnata Frances (1867-1931), classical scholar, was born on 28 January 1867 at 13 Upper Seymour Street, Marylebone, London, the third and youngest daughter of Sir James Henry Ramsay, tenth baronet (1832-1925), of Bamff, historian, and his first wife, Elizabeth Mary Charlotte (died 1868), daughter of William Scott-Kerr of Sunlaws. She was brought up in Perthshire in a distinguished family of Scottish academics, her uncle George Ramsay holding the chair of humanity at Glasgow in succession to his uncle, William Ramsay. Educated at St Leonards School, St Andrews, in which her father took a particular interest, she went to Girton College, Cambridge, in 1884. 
Agnata Ramsay was remembered for her remarkable tripos result in 1887. Women students were officially allowed to enter the university examinations only in 1881, following the success of another Girtonian, Charlotte Angas Scott (1858-1931), who had been ranked as equal to the eighth wrangler in the mathematical tripos in 1880 (her scripts having been informally marked 'by courtesy'). Agnata Ramsay was therefore among the first generation of women students at Cambridge to take the classical tripos, and her achievement in being placed in division one of the first class in 1887 was unequalled by any man in that year. But for her gender, she would have received the accolade of senior classic. 'Punch' marked her supremacy with a famous cartoon in which Mr Punch ushered a gowned female into a first-class railway compartment labelled Ladies Only with the text 'Honour to Agnata Frances Ramsay' (2 July 1887). She, and those who followed her, such as Phillipa Fawcett of Newnham College, who was placed above the senior wrangler in 1890, and Margaret Alford ('b'. 1868) of Girton, who, also in 1890, was bracketed with the senior classic, demonstrated that women could benefit from Cambridge and were entitled to be admitted to the same courses and examinations as men. 
Agnata Ramsay subsequently disproved the then commonly held contention that women who undertook rigorous academic study would be unattractive to potential husbands. Remaining in Cambridge to work on an edition of Herodotus, she 'captured' the master of Trinity College, Henry Montagu Butler (1833-1918), a widower of fifty-seven whom she had met in November 1887 at a production of Sophocles' 'Oedipus Rex'. They married on 9 August 1888. He claimed 'It is her goodness, not her Greek and Latin, which have stolen my heart', but on their honeymoon they 'read a great deal of Greek together' (Butler, 30, 32). Marrying the master of Trinity at the age of twenty-one, she stepped at once into the demanding role of the leading hostess in Cambridge. For thirty years, in spite of her retiring disposition, she fulfilled the heavy duties expected of her with poise and dignity. She bore three sons, James Ramsay Montagu Butler (later regius professor of modern history at Cambridge) in 1889, Gordon in 1891, and Nevile in 1893. The publication of her edition of the seventh book of Herodotus' 'History' in the same year as the birth of her first son provoked a further 'Punch' cartoon, punning on 'a crib for Herodotus' (7 Dec 1889). After her husband's death in 1918 she remained in Cambridge, where she played an active part in the life of the local Christian Science church, which she had helped to found. Agnata Butler died at Sunny Lodge, Mount Park, Harrow, Middlesex, on 27 May 1931. 


@@@@@


doc= 45784


Cadbury, Dame Elizabeth Mary (1858-1951), welfare worker and philanthropist, was born at 3 Elm Place, Peckham Rye, London, on 24 June 1858; she was born into one Quaker family and married into a second. One of ten children of John Taylor (died 1894), a company director and stockbroker, and his wife, Mary Jane Cash (died 1887), her family background was affluent. Her parents were active temperance crusaders, and enthusiasts for the adult education provided by mechanics' institutes. Elizabeth (or Elsie, as she was known) and her sister Margaret were educated privately in Germany, and Elizabeth then attended North London Collegiate School from 1874 to 1876 where Frances Mary Buss was the headmistress. In 1876 she passed the senior Cambridge examination in ten subjects, but did not enter higher education. As the second eldest of the ten children, in what was described as a 'large and boisterous family', Elizabeth taught her younger brothers and sisters. In her childhood and adolescence she loved music. 
In the years after leaving school Elizabeth Taylor did social work in the London docks and in Paris. These activities, along with regular teaching in a Quaker Sunday school, show her religious and philanthropic energies. Her work in the London docks, where she started a boys' club in 1884 at the age of twenty-six, was a pioneering effort for a woman of her age, marital status, and class. She also used her musical talent to entertain seamen. Her Parisian experience from February to July 1885 was work with a protestant mission for the relief of victims of the Franco-Prussian War. From July 1885 she worked with women in the London slums. 
In 1888 Elizabeth Taylor married George Cadbury (1839-1922), a widower with five children. George and his brother Richard were the founders of the Bournville works, and they rebuilt the Cadbury family fortune. George Cadbury's first marriage was in 1872 to Mary Tylor, who died in 1887, and his second wife became stepmother to the five children -- his biographer wrote that she did this with 'skill and passion'. The Cadburys had a further six children: Laurence John Cadbury, born in 1889; George Norman, born in 1890; Elsie Dorothea (1892); Egbert (1893); Marion Janet (1894); and Ursula (1906). Laurence became, in his turn, chairman of Cadburys. Their family home until 1894 was Woodbrooke in Selly Oak, Birmingham, but in 1894 they moved to the Manor House, Northfield, Birmingham. They lived there together until George's death in 1922, and Elizabeth continued to live there until her own death in 1951. In 1948, at the family gathering to celebrate her ninetieth birthday, there were 150 relatives, and at her death she left thirty-seven grandchildren and forty-nine great-grandchildren. 
Elizabeth Cadbury's central work, apart from the rearing of eleven children, was in three spheres: Bournville Village, education and youth work, and the welfare of women. In all these arenas, her efforts were suffused with her Quaker faith. Although it is extremely hard to recreate the religious belief of past generations, commentators on Elizabeth Cadbury are unanimous in their judgement that her Quaker faith was strong, practical, and 'active': a faith producing practical activity in this world. These activities were grounded in the philanthropic capitalism of the Cadburys in Bournville, working to create a new type of community. The factory was already established at Bournville when George and Elizabeth Cadbury married, but the task of establishing the village was carried through by the couple together. The idea of housing at several price levels mixed together to avoid a one-class community was an original one in the 1890s. Unlike at Port Sunlight, houses at Bournville were not 'tied' accommodation, so people who left their jobs with Cadburys did not lose their homes, and non-employees were able to live in Bournville among the Cadbury workers. The pioneering nature of Bournville was publicly recognized by the British Association, who held their annual conference there in 1914 and 1950, and by a royal visit from George V and Queen Mary in 1919. The 200th house at Bournville was opened by Elizabeth Cadbury herself in 1951, and her last public appearance before her death was at the Bournville Village jubilee. She succeeded her husband in chairing the Bournville Village Trust. Her educational work in Bournville included the opening to women of the adult classes (started by George Cadbury) and the establishment of infant schools in 1910. In 1899 she founded an athletic club for young women in Bournville, which opened with a bicycle gymkhana in which both the Cadburys took part. 
Elizabeth Cadbury was particularly concerned with disabled and sick children, and in 1909 opened the Woodland Hospital, which became the Royal Orthopaedic Hospital. Later she built The Beeches, to give holidays for children from the Birmingham slums. She chaired the Birmingham school medical service committee and worked energetically to provide medical inspection in schools. From 1941 to 1948 she was president of the United Hospital in Birmingham. Throughout her life she campaigned for the education and welfare of women. She was a convinced non-militant suffragist. The founder in 1898 of the Birmingham Union of Girls' Clubs, she was active in the YWCA and in the National Council for Women from 1896 to her death. In 1936, at the age of seventy-eight, she led the UK delegation to the World Congress of the International Council of Women which was held in Calcutta. 
Elizabeth Cadbury was an active pacifist. She was the first chair of the Peace and International Relations Committee of the National Council of Women, established in 1914. In 1916 she was elected to the National Peace Council, becoming its treasurer and then its vice-president. Along with Lady Aberdeen, Millicent Fawcett, and Mrs Corbett Ashby, she pressed for the inclusion of women's issues in the agenda of the Congress of Versailles. She chaired the Peace and Arbitration Committee of the International Council of Women, and was an energetic supporter of the League of Nations Union. In the Second World War, she worked with Belgian refugees, and after that war continued her efforts with the International Council of Women. 
In national politics Elizabeth Cadbury's sympathies were similar to those usually associated with Christian socialism, and she was a pillar of the Liberal Party. She was a Birmingham city councillor, for King's Norton ward, from 1919 to 1924, as a Liberal, losing her seat to a Conservative. Her political platform was a reformist one: municipal action in housing improvement, a school health service, and equality of opportunity. Among her political successes were her co-option to the Birmingham education committee in 1919, and her services as a magistrate from 1926. 
For her public service Elizabeth Cadbury was made an OBE in 1918 and a DBE in 1934. The Belgian government honoured her in 1918 for her work with refugees, making her an officer of the order of the Crown, and she was decorated by Queen Elizabeth of the Belgians. The Red Cross organizations of Serbia, Greece, and Yugoslavia also made awards to her for her war work. The University of Birmingham made her an honorary MA in 1919 for her services to education and to the city. 
Elizabeth Cadbury died at the Manor House, Northfield, Birmingham, on 4 December 1951, and was cremated in Birmingham on the 7th. 


@@@@@


doc= 45785


Martindale, Louisa (1872-1966), gynaecologist and suffragist, the elder daughter of William Martindale (1833/4- 'c'.1874), a City of London businessman, and Louisa Spicer ['see 'Martindale, Louisa (1839-1914)], his second wife, was born at Gainsborough Lodge, Leytonstone, London, on 30 October 1872. Her father was an evangelical Anglican, her mother a Congregationalist. Louisa Spicer came from a large family who combined evangelical Christianity with social reform, Liberal politics, charitable works, homoeopathy, and a love of travel. William Martindale died in his early forties when Louisa was three, leaving four children from his first marriage and Mrs Martindale pregnant with Hilda. Two infant children of the marriage had died in the same week as their father. 
After her father's death Louisa Martindale lived first in Penzance before moving to Thuringia in Germany in 1877, where she and Hilda attended a kindergarten run by Fraulein Trabert, a pupil of Froebel. In 1879 the family moved to Switzerland, to a village near Vevey overlooking Lake Geneva, and in 1880 to Lewes in Sussex. Here Louisa Spicer Martindale revealed her progressive ideas about the upbringing of Louisa and Hilda: she converted stables into a gymnasium, paid a gymnastics teacher, gave them bicycles, and had them taught to ride horses astride rather than side-saddle. 
In 1885 Mrs Martindale moved into Brighton so that Louisa and Hilda could attend the Brighton High School for Girls, a Girls' Public Day School Company school opened in 1876. The girls were escorted to and from school by a governess to ensure that they were both chaperoned and educated on the journey. Mrs Martindale had open house on alternate Saturdays for German governesses working in Brighton, and for shop assistants. The latter group included Margaret Bondfield, later the first woman cabinet minister, then sixteen. 
Louisa Martindale attended Royal Holloway College (1890-92), and then the London School of Medicine for Women. She graduated with her MB (London) and BS (London) in 1899. After a brief spell as locum for Dr Mary Murdoch in Hull, Louisa, Hilda, and their mother spent a year travelling around the world. Louisa visited hospitals in Vienna, India, Australia, and the USA. From 1901 to 1906 she was in partnership with Dr Murdoch in Hull, a period which included three months' further study in Vienna. Louisa Martindale left Hull to do postgraduate work in Berlin and London, took the London MD in 1906, and then set up a private practice in Brighton. Here one vital source of income was retainers as medical officer at local girls' schools, including Roedean and the Brighton High School for Girls. Once qualified Louisa Martindale was active in four ways: as a medical woman who worked to open women's hospitals and to promote the interests of women in the profession at home and overseas, as a pioneer of radium therapy, in the governance of the medical profession, and as a feminist and suffragist. 
While Louisa Martindale was in private practice in Marlborough Place, Brighton, she joined the staff of the Brighton Dispensary for Women and Children founded by her mother and Dr Helen Boyle. Fund-raising to open a general hospital for women staffed by women went on in Brighton from 1893, and the Brighton Dispensary gradually expanded to become the New Sussex Hospital for Women and Children. When the New Sussex Hospital, Windlesham Road, was opened free of debt by Lady Astor in 1921 it became one of five general women's hospitals in Britain. Supporters included Elizabeth Robins and Octavia Wilberforce. Martindale became the senior surgeon in 1911; her professional colleagues were leading women pioneers in medicine including Louisa Aldrich Blake, Helen Scatliff, and Gladys Wauchope. In 1913, when the British Medical Association met for its annual conference in Brighton, she was the honorary secretary of the obstetrics and gynaecology section. During the First World War she remained in Brighton, but spent her holidays with the Scottish Women's Hospital at Abbey de Royaumont in France. 
In 1923 Martindale moved to London and set up a private practice there, although she continued to operate at the New Sussex Hospital, as well as the East Grinstead Hospital. She was active in the work of the British Medical Women's Federation, serving as its president in 1931. She was also instrumental in establishing the Medical Women's International Association after its foundation meeting in 1919 in New York, serving as honorary secretary from 1924 to 1929, and then as honorary treasurer. She was president from 1937 to 1947. In 1921 she gave the inaugural address at the Royal Free School of Medicine for Women, which led to the publication of 'The Woman Doctor and her Future' (1922). Working with Christine Murrell, Martindale also ensured that the British Postgraduate Medical School was open to women from its inception in 1931, and she became its first woman governor. In 1924 Martindale was a guest of honour at the American Medical Association's annual convention in Chicago. In 1933 she was made a fellow of the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists and became the only woman on the council in 1934 when she was co-opted. In her autobiography she claimed to have performed more than 7000 operations. 
Martindale was a pioneer of radium treatment for uterine and ovarian cancer in Britain. She had seen the work of Gauss and Kronig in Freiburg in 1913, and after 1921 she worked with Helen Chambers (a pathologist) and Elizabeth Hurdon (a physicist) implanting small amounts of radium surgically in cancerous organs. The trio were the Medical Women's Federation team in the Medical Research Council trials of radium therapy, their radium funded by the Medical Research Council and the King Edward's Hospital Fund. Operating at four women's hospitals the trio collaborated on 300 implants. Chambers and Martindale were on the committee that raised funds to open the Marie Curie Hospital specializing in women's cancers in 1929. As well as the innovative treatment the medical women conducted long-term follow-ups of patients, eventually producing epidemiological data on 13,800 patients. 
Martindale held to the feminist position common in the nineteenth century that women were morally superior to men, and should exhort men to abstain from sex outside marriage and practise restraint within it. She opposed family planning ('conception control') and campaigned against prostitution. Martindale was involved in suffrage campaigning in Hull and Brighton, and she was briefly on the national executive of the National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies. She was not a militant, but did shelter a fellow campaigner being sought by the police under the ''Cat and Mouse''. Her social circle included the Fawcetts, and it was at Millicent Fawcett's urging that Martindale became embroiled in a public controversy. Martindale published a small volume on the evils of prostitution, 'Under the Surface', written from a feminist perspective. Anti-suffrage peers tried to get the book banned for obscenity in 1908. Martindale had focused on the links between prostitution and venereal diseases with explicit details of the medical symptoms. The book argued that enfranchising women would lead to national moral uplift, because women's greater moral sensibility would generate legislation on purity issues, and that sexual equality including equal pay would cause prostitution to wither away. 
Louisa Martindale's personal life was women centred. Her autobiography reports little contact with her older half-siblings, in contrast to her close relationship with Hilda, her full sister. After the death of her mother in 1914, and of Dr Murdoch in 1916, Louisa's main adult relationship was with the Hon. Ismay Fitzgerald (1872-1946) who lived with her from 1911 until her death. Ismay Fitzgerald was the daughter of John David, Lord Fitzgerald of Kilmarnock, an Irish judge, and Jane Mary Matilda Southwell. One of the baron's thirteen children, she was a devout Roman Catholic and loved horses. The two women entertained and visited Ismay's aristocratic relatives and often travelled in Italy, on one occasion having an audience with the pope. After leaving Brighton, Louisa and Ismay lived at Colin Godman's House in Chelwood Gate, Sussex, at Weymouth Street, London, and later at Little Rystwood, Forest Row, East Grinstead, Sussex, and in Manchester Square, London. Martindale's obituaries describe her as small, always beautifully dressed and shod in the current fashion, and fond of parties and entertaining. A dog lover, her memoir devotes a chapter to her pets. 
Louisa Martindale was one of the first women JPs in Brighton (from 1924) and was later a JP in East Grinstead. Created a CBE in 1931, she retired in 1947, and published her autobiography, 'A Woman Surgeon', in 1951. In her old age she became blind. She died on 5 February 1966 at her home, 14 Avenue Lodge, Avenue Road, St John's Wood, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 45786


Calderon de la Barca, Frances Erskine Inglis (1804-1882), author, was born in Edinburgh on 23 December 1804, the fifth of the ten children of William Inglis, a writer to the signet, of Queen Street and Middleton Hall, and his wife, Jane, the daughter of James Stein of Kilbogie, a distiller. Her father was prominent in Edinburgh society, but his speculations bankrupted him in 1828. He took refuge in Normandy, with his family, and died at Le Havre in 1830. His daughter Frances, whose thorough education had included sojourns abroad, first took to writing in these straitened circumstances, and produced the novels 'Gertrude: a Tale of the Sixteenth Century' (2 vols., 1830) and 'The Affianced One' (3 vols., 1832). After her father's death the family moved to Boston, Massachusetts, and the widow opened a school for young ladies. On 24 September 1838 Fanny, as Frances was known, married Angel Calderon de la Barca (1790-1861), since 1835 Spanish minister to the United States. Though the bearer of a famous name, her husband was not rich, and depended on his career as a diplomat and politician of the 'moderado' liberal tendency. He was born in Buenos Aires. It is possible that the couple met through their friendship with the Boston historian and Hispanist William Hickling Prescott. The marriage was childless but clearly affectionate. 
In 1839 Calderon de la Barca was named first Spanish minister to independent Mexico. Fanny's journal in Mexico, published as a series of letters dated 27 October 1839 to 27 February 1842, appeared at the end of that year as 'Life in Mexico, during a Residence of Two Years in that Country', the work by which she is principally remembered and which remains the best-known foreigner's description of early republican Mexico. Published with the support of Prescott, who enlisted the help of Charles Dickens for the English edition, it was in general well received by Anglo-Saxon readers, though one reviewer doubted that it was genuine. It did not please many Mexicans; they with justice likened the author to Frances Trollope, whose 'Domestic Manners of the Americans' had appeared in 1832. 

'Life in Mexico' is a somewhat relentlessly picturesque account of Mexican scenes, society, and politics, which may explain that one reviewer's reservations about its authenticity; Fanny Calderon's strong visual sense gives a record that is the literary equivalent of that left by the contemporary Romantic artists who visited Mexico, such as Carl Nebel and Johann Moritz Rugendas. None the less it contains penetrating sketches of many of the principal figures of the time, Santa Anna, Bustamante, Victoria, Alaman, and many others, of the society of Mexico City, particularly its religious institutions and observances and the situation of women, and records a number of excursions to the provinces. Both Fanny Calderon and her husband were assiduous providers of documentation and information to Prescott; her descriptions of Mexican scenery served him in writing his 'Conquest of Mexico', which appeared in 1843. 
Prefaced by Prescott, 'Life in Mexico' was given the form of letters, presumably written to him, but, as is established in the 1966 edition by Howard T. Fisher and Marion Hall Fisher, it was in reality based extensively on the author's journal, of which two out of the original three manuscript volumes survive (priv. coll.), containing many expurgated passages. The complete text is not only more critical of many aspects of Mexican life -- filth, insects, corruption, ignorance, bombast, 'horrid Mexican fruit' -- but is also more penetrating, understanding, and affectionate. The restored parts show a capacity for reflection not so apparent in the other editions, which merely reprint the text of 1842. 
From Mexico the Calderons returned to Europe via Cuba and Boston. Calderon, an amiable and effective diplomat, was once again named envoy to Washington in 1844, an appointment both welcomed. In 1853 he became foreign minister in the brief and disastrous administration of the Conde de San Luis, which in July 1854 was overthrown by Espartero and O'Donnell. This brought to an end a decade of 'moderado' rule amid scenes of violence in the capital. Calderon had to leave Spain in disguise, and Fanny followed him to Paris. In 1856 she published both her translation of D. Bartoli's 'History of the Life and Institute of St Ignatius Loyola' -- she had become a Roman Catholic in 1847 -- and also anonymously 'The Attache in Madrid, or, Sketches of the Court of Isabella II', her version of the 'pronunciamiento' of 1854. Though it does not rival her Mexican work, it is lively and level-headed, despite being a courtier's book. 
The Calderons returned to Spain in 1856. On the death of her husband in 1861, Fanny retired to a convent, but was promptly appointed governess to the Infanta Isabella. She was made a 'marquesa' in her own right by the restored Alfonso XII in 1876, and died in the royal palace in Madrid on 6 February 1882. 


@@@@@


doc= 45787


Leigh, (Elizabeth) Medora (1814-1849), alleged daughter of Lord Byron, was born on 15 April 1814 at Six Mile Bottom, near Cambridge, acknowledged as the fourth of the seven children of Colonel George Leigh (1770/71-1850) and his wife, the Hon. Augusta Mary, 'nee' Byron (1784-1851). She was named Medora after the heroine of the romance 'The Corsair', begun by George Gordon, Lord Byron (1788-1824), in December 1813 at the height of his relationship with Augusta Leigh, his half-sister. The allegation that Medora was the child of their incestuous union is not proven, but an 'incestuous' motif marked Medora's life. In 1829 she became pregnant by a cousin, Henry Trevanion (1805?-1855?), the husband of her eldest sister, Georgiana, and the couple eloped to France in 1831 using the alias Aubin. There was one surviving child of the liaison, Marie (1834-1873), later Sister Saint Hilaire. Medora's relationship with Trevanion had broken down by 1838. She was now dependent on sporadic and inadequate financial assistance from her hard-pressed mother. In 1840 she became the resistant object of Lady Byron's controlling financial magnanimity, and the recipient of Lady Byron's account of her incestuous conception. Her memoir of her life, down to 1843, was written at this time to justify her position (it was published by Charles Mackay from the MS in 1869). In 1844 she recovered some freedom of action by a loan of $500 on a deed of appointment for $3000 (on the reversionary interest of Byron's marriage settlement). On 23 August 1848 she married Jean-Louis Taillefer (1810?-1877), a retired French soldier of the hussars with whom she had one son, Elie (1846-1900). She died of smallpox on 28 August 1849 at Lapeyre in Aveyron, southern France, where she is buried. 


@@@@@


doc= 45788


Edward Fisher (1546/7-1601), of Bishops Itchington, who is said to have been aged thirty when his father died. He married Katherine, daughter of Sir Richard Longe, and had two sons and two daughters. He provided the queen with dinner at the Itchington manor house during her 1572 progress, but wasted his inheritance, was accused of fraud in the sale of The Priory estate to Serjeant Puckering in 1582, and was consequently prosecuted for fraud in Star Chamber. His debts accumulated, and he died in 1601 in poverty, possibly in the Fleet prison, thus returning the family to the obscurity from which it had been so recently raised by the opportunism and political skills of his father. 


@@@@@


doc= 45789


Noel, Anne Isabella, 'suo jure' Baroness Wentworth, and Lady Byron (1792-1860), philanthropist and wife of the poet Lord Byron, was born at Elemore Hall, Pittington, Durham, on 17 May 1792, the only child of Sir Ralph Milbanke (afterwards Noel), sixth baronet (1747-1825), and his wife, Judith Noel (1751-1822), eldest daughter of the first Viscount Wentworth. Her father, the eldest son of Sir Ralph Milbanke of Halnaby Hall, Yorkshire, was the whig MP for Co. Durham and was renowned for his work for the poor and his support for the abolition of slavery. Both parents were enlightened, and Annabella and her adopted sister, Sophie Curzon, were among the first to be inoculated. She was brought up to be concerned for the workers and tenants of the estate and helped establish a school in Seaham. An early reader, Annabella Milbanke was especially interested in mathematics and astronomy, which she studied with a Cambridge tutor; new ideas on magnetism and phrenology fascinated her. 
In 1810 Annabella Milbanke attended her first London season: she loved dancing and attracted many eligible suitors. She met George Gordon Noel Byron, sixth Baron Byron (1788-1824), in 1812, the year he became famous, and soon after rejected his first marriage proposal. They communicated during 1813, often discussing literature in their letters, and he visited her at Seaham. She accepted Byron's second proposal in 1814 and they were married on 2 January 1815, spending their honeymoon at Halnaby Hall. On the first day Byron received a love letter from his half-sister Augusta Leigh, which he showed to his wife, saying he had married her out of revenge for her previous refusal. 
Augusta came to stay with them in London. Both women were concerned about Byron's mental condition, and his aunt and a cousin came to protect the pregnant Lady Byron from his threats. The baby, (Augusta) Ada, ['see 'Byron, (Augusta) Ada, countess of Lovelace], was born on 10 December. On 15 January 1816 Lady Byron, at Byron's request, took the baby to her parents' home in Leicestershire, promising to return if his doctor advised it. Byron did not accept her parents' invitation to join his wife and they never met again. 
Eventually Lady Byron's parents discovered the cause of their daughter's distress and consulted an eminent lawyer. Rumours about Byron and his half-sister, prevalent before his marriage, resurfaced and they were ostracized from society. Byron decided to leave the country; he departed on 25 April 1816 and never returned. In 1824 he died helping in the Greek War of Independence. On his deathbed he talked urgently to his faithful servant Fletcher, telling him to go to Lady Byron and say he was 'friends with her'. There was much more but Fletcher could not understand him. Lady Byron was devastated when Fletcher visited her and could impart little of Byron's last words to her. 
Lady Byron supervised the education of her daughter, Ada, who proved to be a very intelligent child. She persuaded the mathematician Augustus de Morgan that her daughter should not give up mathematics on her marriage in 1835 to Lord King (later earl of Lovelace). Letters from her daughter to Lady Byron suggest that their relationship was a close one, until Ada fell into the hands of bookmakers, shortly before her premature death from cancer in November 1852. Lady Byron found it impossible to forgive her son-in-law for failing to prevent Ada's association with gamblers; she was similarly disillusioned with her close friend Anna Jameson, who had secretly lent her daughter money. 
Meanwhile, Lady Byron had returned to her early ambitions to help the poor and ignorant. She tried to investigate and understand problems and offered not only money but practical suggestions. A supporter of the Brighton Co-operative Society, she helped pioneer a branch in Hastings. She also lent the ground floor of her house in Brighton to the mechanics' institute for educational purposes. 
However Lady Byron's main interest was developing education for the underprivileged, and her greatest achievement was to establish Ealing Grove School. She had visited and written about Emanuel de Fellenberg's school at Hofwyl in Switzerland and used his principles in establishing the Ealing School. Its aim was practical as well as idealistic, and lessons included allotment schemes, carpentry, masonry, and the commercial principles of marketing garden produce, and Ada regularly helped by giving lessons. An agricultural school was also set up on the Leicestershire estate. Many notable people visited Ealing Grove, including the writer Joanna Baillie, Seymour Tremenheere of the council of education in London, and her son-in-law, the earl of Lovelace, who started a school with similar aims at Ockham in Surrey. 
In 1840 Lady Byron attended the British and Foreign Anti-Slavery Convention and became involved in improving slum conditions and discussing rights for women. She shared with Mary Carpenter (1807-1877), the pioneer worker in reformatories for girls, the belief that society should undertake the education and care of orphans. In 1852 she bought Red Lodge in Bristol, which Mary Carpenter administered as a reformatory for girls. 
On the death of her mother in 1822 Lady Byron took the name Noel but continued to be known as Lady Byron. By the death of her cousin, Nathaniel Curzon, Baron Scarsdale, in 1856, the abeyance of the barony of Wentworth terminated, and she became Baroness Wentworth. She died on 16 May 1860 at home in 11 St George's Terrace, Regent's Park, London. She was buried in Kensal Green cemetery, London. 
Many people who knew Lady Byron well would have been surprised to read the hostile judgements made about her by notable twentieth-century writers; none more so than Lord Byron, who wrote as early as March 1816: 'I do not believe -- that there ever was a better, or even a brighter, a kinder or a more amiable and agreeable being than Lady B' ('Byron's Letters and Journals', 5.44). He told William Parry eight years later that 'The prospect of retirement in England with my wife and Ada gives me an idea of happiness I have never experienced before' (Parry, 122). Amelia Matilda Murray said that she was 'one of those pure spirits, little valued by the world, though worshipped by those who knew her well' (A. M. Murray, 'Recollections of Amelia Matilda Murray', 1868, 72). 


@@@@@


doc= 45790


Wells, Helena (1761?-1824), novelist and educationist, was born in South Carolina, America, the daughter of Robert Wells (1727/8-1794) and his wife, Mary. She had a sister and an elder brother, the physician William Charles Wells. Her parents were Scottish and had settled in Charlestown, Carolina, where her father, a printer and publisher who wrote verse, gained a certain standing as a man of letters. Loyalists, they returned to England at the outbreak of the War of Independence, and her father became a merchant in Fleet Street. From 1789 she and her sister ran a school in London. In 1799 she published 'Letters on Subjects of Importance to the Happiness of Young Females', indicating a change of career to governess. The 'Letters' were in keeping with the female epistolary tradition, including advice on appropriate reading and behaviour, with the usual declaratory preface that the work was not self-promotional but was intended to promote religion and draw young ladies away from frivolous pursuits. In the preface to the second edition (1807) she wrote that her intentions had broadened, so that she was no longer simply offering herself as an instructor of children, but also as a guide to youth. However, she broke with the tradition of completely discouraging girls from reading novels, believing that there were even some excellent romances, and also advocated the reading of history and epic poetry, both of which she believed strengthened the mind without making it 'masculine'. She accepted that a woman, in contrast to a man, could not make her own way in the world unaided, and that 'woman has too often no protector but virtuous principle, -- no support but what she derives from her industry' ('Letters', 2nd edn, 1807, 128). 
Helena Wells also published novels which were critically well received even by the conservative 'Anti-Jacobin Review'. Thus 'The Step-Mother: a Domestic Tale from Real Life' (2 vols., 1799) was seen as safe, moral reading for the young, a form of conduct book. Her later novel, published in 1800, 'Constantia Neville, or, The West Indian' (3 vols.) was again intended as an edifying alternative to the light reading of the circulating libraries. Indeed, Constantia Neville was to serve as an example of a young lady overcoming misfortunes, with the help of others, maintaining her modesty and respectability, and becoming a useful member of society. As in 'The Step-Mother', it was argued that reading would strengthen rather than weaken the mind. Helena wrote that her style was realist, rather than romantic, and her work of observation rather than imagination. There is humour in the work, but also an underlying motive of focusing attention on the impoverished young lady who has to protect her virtue in the face of considerable adversity during a period of political tumult and war; she had herself to seek financial assistance from the Royal Literary Fund in 1801. She cited the example of Mary Wollstonecraft, regretting rather than totally condemning Wollstonecraft's radical moral and political beliefs. She argued that, had Wollstonecraft practised self-discipline, her literary work might have benefited society. Helena called on women to support each other and help such unfortunates earn a respectable living. She expressed concern that the established church was not alive to the dangers presented by the Roman Catholic church, which had established institutions to protect young ladies fallen on hard times. In addition, her novel, with its subtitle 'The West Indian', may be seen as part of the anti-slavery literature, with Constantia as the white colonial outsider in English society. 
On 31 October 1801, described as resident at Warminster, Wiltshire, Helena Wells married Edward Whitford of Broad Street Buildings, and set up house in Salisbury Square, London. Following the birth of her fourth and last child, in 1806, Helena Whitford spent a long period of illness considering the plight of 'unportioned' young ladies. In what appears to have been her last publication, 'Thoughts and remarks on establishing an institution for the support and education of unportioned respectable females' (1809), she returned to the themes of women supporting each other and of the need for improved education for young ladies. She recalled the criticisms of the fashionable education in the social graces made by Hannah More (1745-1833), and wrote of the precarious social as well as financial position of the governess, who often led a lonely, isolated life in contrast to the male tutor. Describing her own difficulties in hiring suitable staff for the school which she had established before her marriage, she pointed to the irony that the children of the lower orders received a more appropriate education (through charity schools, for example) than the daughters of the middle and upper classes. Thus she advocated the establishment in Yorkshire (with its cheap costs, clean air, and central location) of a type of protestant nunnery (though she had been forced to drop any reference to 'nunnery' from her title because of its links with Roman Catholicism), which she envisaged as a national house of refuge for respectable females who needed help, either to equip them for a teaching career or to shelter them in old age. While dismissing any demands for the rights of women, she was acutely aware of the precarious position of the spinster, perhaps because she married late in life. Helena Whitford died at her home in Mapledon Place, Burton Crescent, London, on 6 July 1824. Her husband survived her. Her eldest son, Robert Wells Whitford (1804-1879), educated at St Edmund Hall, Oxford, which was much favoured by evangelical parents, became a chaplain in India. 


@@@@@


doc= 45791


Crawford, Isabella Valancy (1850-1887), writer, was born on 25 December 1850 in Dublin, the sixth of the twelve children of Stephen Dennis Crawford (1807-1875) and Sydney Scott. Isabella studied English, Latin, and French and began writing from a young age. Her childhood was one of financial insecurity and domestic upheaval, however, largely owing to her father's alcoholism and financial irresponsibility. The Crawford family endured poverty, hardship, and tragedy: only three children survived to adulthood -- Isabella Valancy, Emma Naomi, and Stephen Walter. 
About 1857, in search of better prospects, Stephen Crawford moved his family to Paisley, Ontario, where, despite questionable qualifications, he became the village doctor. Following his conviction for embezzling public funds while township treasurer, in 1862 he moved his family to North Drouro (now Lakefield), Ontario, where Isabella became acquainted with the literary sisters Susannah Moodie and Catherine Parr Traill. The Crawfords moved once more in 1868, to Peterborough, Ontario, where Isabella's father and sister Emma died within six months of each other in 1875. 
Before her father's death Crawford had begun writing commercially to augment the family income, and from 1872 her short stories, fairy tales, and romances were published in a variety of American and then Canadian magazines and newspapers, including 'Fireside Weekly', the 'Toronto Globe', and the 'Toronto Evening Telegram'. Her current literary reputation is based primarily on her poetry, and particularly on the one book she published during her lifetime: 'Old Spookes' Pass, Malcolm's Katie, and other Poems' (1884). This collection of narrative and lyric poems received critical but not commercial success -- published at Crawford's expense, it sold only fifty copies out of the 1000 that James Bain & Son had commissioned. 'Malcolm's Katie' -- arguably her best poem -- illustrates Crawford's fascination with native mythology and her use of anthropomorphic imagery by placing a conventional love story about two young sweethearts in the context of Indian legend. Other poems that demonstrate her empathy with the Canadian landscape and native culture include 'The Camp of Souls' (published 1880), 'The Canoe' (1884), 'The Dark Stag' (1905), and 'Said the West Wind' (1905). 'Old Spookes' Pass', a narrative poem written in cowboy dialect, describes a supernatural encounter that takes place during a midnight cattle stampede. 'Gisli the Chieftain' makes use of myth -- this time Russian and Icelandic -- to tell a tale of love, betrayal, murder, and ultimate forgiveness, and again conveys Crawford's view of the universe as a place of destructive opposites that clash until reconciled by love. Good and evil, shadow and light, winter and summer, life and death: all these feature in her poetry as much as nature imagery and native legend. 
Though Crawford is now recognized as one of Canada's most important nineteenth-century poets, she did not live to enjoy either financial or critical success, dying suddenly of a heart attack at her small flat at 57 John Street, Toronto, on 12 February 1887. An edition of Crawford's collected poems appeared in 1905 by John Garvin, who took liberties with her text; it was reprinted in 1972 with a new introduction by James Reaney. In 1923 Katherine Hale produced a selected anthology which reproduced some of the infelicities of Garvin's edition. 'Hugh and Ion', an unfinished narrative poem, was edited by Glenn Clever in 1977. Crawford's prose largely remains unpublished, with the exception of that reproduced in 'Selected Stories' (1975) and 'Fairy Tales' (1977), both edited by Penny Petrone, and 'The Halton Boys: a Story for Boys' (1979), by Frank M. Tierney. 


@@@@@


doc= 45792


Cusack, Margaret Anne (1829-1899), founder of the Sisters of St Joseph of Peace and writer, was born on 6 May 1829 in York Street, Dublin, the elder of two children of Dr Samuel Cusack, a dispensary doctor, and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Stoney. Both parents came from a long tradition of Irish protestantism, the Cusacks claiming descent from Sir Thomas Cusack, one of Henry VIII's reformers influential in establishing the Church of Ireland. Sarah Stoney was of zealous evangelical settler stock, from Oakley Park, near Birr, King's county. Baptized into the Church of Ireland, Margaret Anne's early years were spent in borrowed splendour in a mansion near Coolock, even as the family fortunes dwindled. She developed a rebellious, imperious temperament in her efforts to compete with her younger brother, Samuel, for her mother's affection, and the isolation of her childhood led her to religious enthusiasm. From the age of nine she began to attend revivalist meetings at the home of her cousin, the Hon. Catherine Massy. When her parents separated, Cusack, aged fourteen, went with her brother to live with her Great-Aunt Baker in Exeter, Devon, and joined the Plymouth Brethren. 
On the death of her fiance, Charles Holmes, Cusack enrolled in the Anglican Sellonite sisterhood of Dr Pusey. Uncomfortable with the volatile Oxford Movement and sceptical of the motives of her religious superior, Priscilla Sellon, Cusack converted to Roman Catholicism and was received into the Catholic church on 2 July 1858 with the minimum of instruction. Aged thirty, she entered a Staffordshire convent of the Sisters of Penance but, dissatisfied, withdrew and returned to Ireland, where she immediately entered the Poor Clare Convent in Newry, co. Down, on 2 July 1859. For some years she enjoyed peace and fame, writing and publishing on a variety of subjects. She published in quick succession lives of St Francis, St Clare, and St Patrick, two volumes of Irish history, local histories of the counties of Cork and Kerry, a study of Daniel O'Connell, and a series of publications on the plight of poor girls. In all, she wrote about fifty books and pamphlets during her life. 
Cusack was among those chosen to make a new foundation of Poor Clare nuns in Kenmare, co. Kerry, in October 1871. In 1879 famine devastated the west of Ireland and Cusack used her pen to raise funds and to expose the landlord system that created the famine, for which she also held the government responsible. Her particular target was the administration of the Lansdowne estate. Cusack's writings on the land question created many enemies, including Archdeacon Higgins, the Roman Catholic parish priest of Kenmare, who succeeded in isolating her from her religious sisters and having her transferred back to Newry in 1881. 
An even stormier phase of Cusack's life now began. Impelled by her concern for the better training of female domestic servants, she launched her campaign to found a convent at Knock, co. Mayo, where she claimed that Archdeacon Cavanagh, the parish priest of Knock, had invited her to make a foundation. The difficulties she encountered in this project included not only canonical obstacles and misunderstanding about her mission, but also her own imperious temperament. She claimed visions and revelations, which seemed to exploit the local Knock apparition, so much so that the Catholic archbishop of Tuam, Dr McEvilly, considered her visions 'all bosh' ['see 'Knock, visionaries of (act. 1879)]. He gave grudging permission for a foundation, but on 19 October 1883 withdrew that consent and ordered her to found a Poor Clare convent instead. Cusack insisted that she was making a new foundation, the Sisters of Peace. Deadlock ensued, and on the advice of her friend Cardinal Manning, after further humiliations she moved to England, where she made her foundation in Nottingham in the diocese of Bishop Bagshawe in 1884. She left behind her in Knock an impressive group of buildings, a convent, and two schools. 
In February 1884 Cusack went to Rome to apply for a dispensation from her vows as a Poor Clare. The investigation of her case carried out by Roman authorities reflected the varied perceptions of those who met her. To some she was an excellent religious; to others her actions were incomprehensible and her fitness to found an order suspect. Two years later she went to the United States, instructed by Bishop Bagshawe to raise funds and open houses of the order of the Sisters of St Joseph of Peace. Only one bishop, Dr Wigger of Newark, New Jersey, welcomed her to his diocese. There she opened a holiday house for working girls, trained them, and placed them in service. In 1889 her first autobiography, 'The Nun of Kenmare', appeared. Convinced that her order would not prosper while she was the object of ecclesiastical disapproval, she left her religious community, resigning as leader in 1888. She also seceded from the Roman Catholic church. She strove to make her living by lecturing on her experiences to mainly protestant audiences. Her final conversion, in 1895, was to Methodism, and her last writings, for instance 'Revolution and War: the Secret Conspiracy of the Jesuits in Britain' (1910), reflected her anti-clerical hostility towards the Church of Rome. She returned to England and died at 21 Lansdowne Crescent, Leamington Spa, Warwickshire, the home of protestant evangelical friends, on 5 June 1899. Eccentric and wilful, she never abandoned her pursuit of justice for the poor. In 1974 she was officially recognized by Rome as the founder of the Sisters of St Joseph of Peace but remains a controversial figure. 


@@@@@


doc= 45793


Khan, Noor-un-Nisa Inayat (1914-1944), special operations officer, was born on 2 January 1914 in Moscow, the eldest of four children of Hazrat Inayat Khan (1882-1927), a Sufi religious teacher and musician, and his wife, Ora Ray Baker (1890-1949). Her father was descended from the last Mughal emperor of southern India, and her mother was American, of British descent. 
In the 1920s and 1930s the family, including Noor's two brothers, Vilayat and Hidayat, and her sister, Khair-un-Nisa, was settled in Suresne, France. By many accounts a very gentle, generous, and somewhat highly strung young woman, Noor spent the 1930s studying a range of subjects in Paris. In 1939 she published 'Twenty Jataka Tales', a collection of children's stories based on a cycle of legends about the Buddha. 
After the family fled to England in 1940, Noor enlisted in the Women's Auxiliary Air Force and trained as a radio operator. In the autumn of 1942, she was discreetly approached by a member of the Special Operations Executive (SOE), a secret body which trained men and women to organize resistance groups and co-ordinate sabotage efforts in axis-occupied territory. Noor's knowledge of France and her fluency in French, along with her radio skills, were seen as highly valuable commodities in this context. 
During her SOE training some instructors questioned Noor Inayat Khan's suitability as an undercover agent, fearing that she was too emotional, impulsive, and nervous. However, she did have the support of key officers of the SOE's French (F) section, including Vera Atkins, who paid special attention to the women agents being sent to France. 
Now codenamed Madeleine, Noor was flown into occupied France in June 1943, before her training as an agent was fully completed, to link up with a vast Paris-based network codenamed Prosper, which had been engaged in numerous activities ostensibly designed to prepare for an allied invasion. Unbeknown to Noor, however, the Prosper network had become badly compromised because of problems in both London and France. A deadly combination of carelessness, contradictory priorities, treachery, and sheer misfortune led to the destruction of the network in the spring of 1943. 
As the radio operator for an agent co-ordinating sabotage in an area south-west of Paris, Noor began making contacts, unaware of how deeply the Germans had penetrated the network. Soon after she arrived, Prosper began to disintegrate around her. Though hundreds of agents and resistance members were arrested throughout that summer, Noor managed to stay just ahead of German security services. In spite of the danger she continued to transmit regularly to SOE headquarters. Now the only radio operator left in Paris, she was especially valued, but her superiors in London were increasingly concerned for her safety and pressed her to return. This she refused to do until a replacement could be sent. 
Noor did make some serious mistakes over security. For example, she inexplicably saved all transmitted and received messages instead of destroying them. However, while this and other errors may have contributed to her fate, the larger disaster unfolding around her made her continued evasion of the Germans extremely unlikely even if she had been an experienced professional. She was arrested at her flat in October 1943. Interrogated at length, she refused to give any details of her work with SOE F section. In November, after two escape attempts from German security headquarters in Paris, she was sent to Pforzheim prison in Germany. In the meantime, the German security services were able to use Noor's captured radio, codes, and messages to deceive SOE headquarters into thinking she was still free. 
On 10 September 1944 Noor was taken from Pforzheim to the prison at Karlsruhe, along with three other women from SOE F section. The following day, the women were put on a train for Dachau. On 12 or 13 September 1944 Noor Inayat Khan and her three colleagues were executed at Dachau. In recognition of her efforts and her sacrifice, Noor was awarded a number of posthumous honours, including the French Croix de Guerre and the MBE and George Cross by the British government. 
Noor's sex and her aristocratic Indian background, in combination with her dangerous work and tragic death during the war, have often led to her being portrayed in a highly romanticized manner, as the exotic, martyred 'Indian princess' secret agent. This simplistic rendering does not do justice either to the individual or to the experiences of the women agents of the SOE. Noor was part of a ground-breaking effort to train women as undercover operatives in a range of capacities in enemy-occupied territory. These women willingly abandoned contemporary perceptions about the proper roles for women and accepted the high risks of capture, torture, and death that all undercover agents faced. Through skill and luck many of them were able to make major contributions to local resistance efforts and many survived the war. Others were not as fortunate. Of the thirty-nine women SOE agents who served in France, Noor was one of thirteen who died in the performance of her duty. In spite of the terrifying circumstances she faced -- for which she was perhaps not best suited or adequately trained -- she acted with great determination and integrity and she courageously protected her colleagues and her organization to the end. Noor Inayat Khan stands as both an impressive example of an unusual and important aspect of women's contribution to the allied war effort, and a necessary reminder of the dark side of the too often glamorized world of espionage and covert action. 


@@@@@


doc= 45794


Cook, Florence Eliza (1856-1904), spiritualist and medium, was born on 3 June 1856 at Cobham, Kent, the eldest of the four children of Henry Cook (died 1879), a compositor, and his wife, Emma Till. The Cook family moved from Kent to London about 1859, and took up residence at 6 Bruce Villas, Eleanor Road, Dalston, in the London suburb of Hackney. It was here that many of Florence Cook's most important seances took place. She began to develop her mediumship at the age of fourteen, and by 1871 her seances were being reported in the spiritualist press. In the spring of 1873 she succeeded in producing Katie King, the first full-form spirit materialization seen in Britain. The medium -- petite, pretty, and dark -- and spirit -- similar in features but auburn-haired -- attracted a devoted and influential following. 
Florence Cook's first patron was a wealthy Manchester spiritualist, Charles Blackburn, and the second was William Crookes, a scientist and future president of the Royal Society. Although controversial, allegations that she and Crookes had an affair during 1873-4 throw serious doubt on Crookes's avowal of the medium's genuineness. Cook was several times accused of fraud, most notably by George Sitwell and Carl von Buch in 1880. 
On 29 April 1874 Florence Cook married Edward Elgie Corner (died 1928), a master mariner from Dalston, and temporarily withdrew from giving seances. Two daughters, Kate and Edith, were born to the marriage, which was said to have been unhappy. Florence Cook later undertook a European tour in 1899 in an unsuccessful attempt to revive her mediumistic career. Her younger sister, Kate Selina, also became a medium, and both she and her mother inherited a substantial amount of money from Charles Blackburn in 1891. Florence, who received nothing, died in reduced circumstances of pneumonia at 20 Battersea Rise, London, on 22 April 1904. 


@@@@@


doc= 45795


Glover, Sarah Anna (1786-1867), music teacher, was born on 13 November 1786 at Norwich, the eldest daughter of the Revd Edward Glover, incumbent of St Lawrence's Church, Norwich. The sculptor John Bell (1811-1895) was a cousin. At the age of six she began receiving music lessons from Dr John Beckwith, the organist of Norwich Cathedral, eventually becoming 'an accomplished pianist'. Studious, resolute, and devout, she never married. In her early twenties she ran a local Sunday school with her younger sister Christiana, and there she began making tentative efforts to produce a simplified system of musical notation. 
Glover's first experiment involved pasting guide-letters on the piano keys to help unmusical teachers pick out unknown tunes. She later used both alphabetical and sol-fa names for the purpose, and from that point can be traced the evolution of her novel notation using the initials of the sol-fa syllables -- D, R, M, F, S, L, T -- to represent the rising major scale. She had Anglicized 'do', 're', 'mi', 'fa', 'sol', 'la', 'si' as Doh, Ra, Me, Fah, Sole, Lah, and Te, renaming the seventh degree to avoid confusion between the identical initials of 'sol' and 'si'. All these ideas sprang jointly from careful study of Burney's 'General History of Music' and her experiences while teaching young children in local charity schools. 
By 1827 Glover had drawn up a complete method in manuscript form and was using it as part of her daily teaching in a girls' school of her own founding in Black Boy Yard, Colegate Street, Norwich. Instead of following tradition by first memorizing orthodox musical symbols, her pupils sang from the outset, learning by means of sol-fa notes pointed out on a chart, her 'Norwich sol-fa ladder'. Soon they were singing short phrases in canon and hymn tunes harmonized in two parts. All these were sung from a sol-fa tune book printed in Glover's 'Norwich sol-fa' notation, comprising sol-fa initials and a few additional symbols to represent accent and duration. 
A choir enrolled from Glover's pupils now sang each Sunday at the services in St Lawrence's Church, and there were many enquiries as to how such young children had learned to sing so skilfully. She was repeatedly pressed by visitors to publish an account of her training methods. But it was not until 1835, when her pupils' singing had made St Lawrence's Church widely celebrated, that she found a publisher in Jarrold & Sons of Norwich and was able to produce a detailed summary of her method in print, under the allusive title 'Scheme for rendering psalmody congregational, comprising a key to the sol-fa notation of music, and directions for instructing a school'. 
In 1841 a copy of Glover's 'Scheme' was lent to John Curwen, a young Congregationalist minister deeply interested in educational practice who was then examining various systems of teaching singing with a view to synthesizing a method suitable for general use. Excited by Glover's account, Curwen impulsively adopted, even modified, several of her devices as the basis of what became known as tonic sol-fa, but without seeking her permission. Despite Curwen's hastily expressed apologies and his repeated public acknowledgement of indebtedness to her, the strained relationship that understandably arose between them was resolved only during Glover's last years. She died of a stroke at Malvern on 20 October 1867 and was buried at Hereford, where she had retired only a few years earlier to live with her sister Christiana. 


@@@@@


doc= 45796


Pomeroy, Florence Wallace, Viscountess Harberton (1843/4-1911), dress reform campaigner, was the daughter of William Wallace Legge (died 1868) of Malone House, Antrim, a wealthy landowner, and his wife, Eleanor Wilkie, daughter of Thomas Forster Adderstone of Northumberland. She married James Spencer Pomeroy (1836-1912) on 2 April 1861. He became sixth Viscount and Baron Harberton of Carbery in 1862, inheriting an estate in co. Kildare worth nearly $4000 per year. She eventually inherited her family's fortune. The couple rented Lyston Court, Ross, Hereford, as well as houses in the Kensington area, and, in later years, around Malvern. They had four children: Aline Florence, Hilda Evelyn, Ernest Arthur George, and Ralph Legge. 
Lady Harberton's dress reform campaign began after Aline's death in 1880. An article in 'The Queen' described her divided skirts, shown to the National Health Society in 1882. She may have helped Mrs E. M. King to form the Rational Dress Society (Association) in 1881, and she became president in 1883. Its 'Requirements of a perfect dress' prefaced its inaugural exhibition catalogue: '1. Freedom of Movement. 2. Absence of pressure over any part of the body. 3. Not more weight than is necessary for warmth, and both weight and warmth evenly distributed. 4. Grace and beauty combined with comfort and convenience. 5. Not departing too conspicuously from the ordinary dress of the time.' These were the basic tenets of many dress reformers, a small but vocal minority, until mainstream clothing became more suitable for modern life.In 1884 the Rational Dress Society, 'under the presidency of Viscountess Harberton', sent outdoor and evening dresses with divided skirts to the International Health Exhibition. Lady Harberton's booklet, 'Reasons for Reform in Dress', accompanied the display. Lady Harberton frequently contributed to the society's 'Gazette', published from April 1888 until at least July 1889. The third issue advertised 'The Harberton' divided petticoats, and noted that 'in answer to numerous enquiries our readers will be glad to learn that Lady Harberton purposes holding a drawing-room meeting shortly'. A rare photograph from this period shows the viscountess in flat shoes, voluminous knickerbockers, a long fashionable jacket, a soft blouse, and an impressive hat. In 1893, according to the 'Manchester Guardian', members of Lady Harberton's 'Short Skirt League' pledged to wear walking dresses at least 5 inches above the ground. 
In 1898 Lady Harberton became honorary treasurer of the newly formed Rational Dress League. Its publication described her 'At home', at 108 Cromwell Road, attended by thirty to forty members in 'rationals', and a dinner in Reading when she forgot to toast the queen before giving the word to 'light up', much to the delight of the press. 
Lady Harberton's greatest moment came in 1899. While out with the Cyclists' Touring Club, in customary dress, she was refused service in the coffee room of the Hautboy Hotel in Ockham, Surrey. The club sued the landlady, one Mrs Sprague, who was found not guilty, since Lady Harberton had declined the offer of a meal in the bar-parlour. The press revelled in Lady Harberton's testimony that she regularly walked up Regent Street in divided skirts, and the episode did much to raise awareness of dress reform. It became a standard case on the rights of travellers, and veteran cycle enthusiasts still meet in her memory at the Hautboy. 
Eccentric, self-confident, dedicated, and rich, Lady Harberton spent years wearing odd clothes and setting up societies doomed to failure. Yet her cause was good and her views, so vigorously expounded at every opportunity, were shared by many forward-thinking people. Her basic belief, that female clothing devalued women, was expounded in the 'Rational Dress Gazette' for June 1898. She concluded, 'No one is free who is unable at least to have the unrestricted use of her own limbs, and woman's present appearance is the perpetual expression of this fact, and of her abject acquiescence in a humiliating position'. 
In her last years Viscountess Harberton was a keen suffragist. She died at the age of sixty-seven, at 21 Onslow Square, London, on 30 April 1911, and was buried at Brookwood cemetery, Woking. At that time votes for women were some years away, but Paul Poiret was already designing clothes which heralded the transformation of women's dress and owed not a little to the long campaigns of the dress reformers. 


@@@@@


doc= 45797


Stack, Mary Meta Bagot (1883-1935), health and fitness expert, was born on 12 June 1883 in Dublin, daughter of Richard Theodore Stack (died 1909), dentist. Both her parents were of the Irish protestant professional class. She was educated at Alexandra School and Alexandra College, Dublin. In 1907 she began a course at Mrs Josef Conn's Institute of Physical Training in London. In 1909 she married Albert Thomas James McCreery, a doctor. It was a short-lived marriage, which ended in divorce and minor scandal. Meanwhile she had begun to train as a teacher at Mrs Conn's institute, where she spent a year as a tutor before moving to Manchester in 1910. There she set up her own centre, treating individual patients and teaching private classes. She also established large classes for factory girls. 
On 10 March 1912 Mollie, as Stack was known, married her third cousin, Edward Hugh Bagot Stack (1884-1914), a lieutenant in the Gurkha Rifles, and returned with him to India. Her first child died at birth in 1913, and in July 1914 a second child, Prunella ['see below'], was born. Her husband was killed in France in the early months of the war, and Mollie returned to England. By 1920, to support herself and her family, she was holding small classes in her home, and in 1926 she set up her own school to train teachers, the Bagot Stack Health School. In 1930 she took a big step, away from the select private classes and away, too, from the special charity classes (though both would remain as peripheral activities throughout her career). She founded the Women's League of Health and Beauty, the first and most significant of the mass keep-fit movements of the inter-war period. League classes taught a combination of dance, callisthenics, and remedial, slimming, and rhythmical exercise to music; its magazine published pacifist and feminist political discussion as well as articles on general self-improvement. In 1931 she published 'Building the Body Beautiful'. 
The league was a self-supporting commercial enterprise, with the motto 'Movement is life'; its stated aim was 'racial health', later changed, in 1936, to the more explicit 'racial health leading to peace'. By the time of Stack's death, it claimed some 60,000 female members with franchise centres all over England. The league's success was based on its judicious appeal to an older, class-bound, service-motivated, maternal femininity, while having a modern, mass-market, commercial style, mixed with Stack's shrewd business sense and flamboyant publicity. Her advertising strategies included mass exercise demonstrations in Hyde Park and at the Albert Hall; a series of weekly exercise columns in the press; the production of gramophone recordings with music and exercise instructions; and the cultivation of a star image and fan following for her daughter, Prunella, 'the most physically perfect girl in the world'. 
Mollie Stack was a woman of great vision, enthusiasm, and vitality, whose physical presence was the best advertisement for her system. She was a fine public speaker, capable of inspiring devotion both to herself and to her cause. Numerous well-posed, attractive photographs of Mollie, Prunella, and other league teachers were published in the league magazine, 'Mother and Daughter'. She died at her home, 11 Holland Park, London, of thyroid cancer, on 26 January 1935. Her body was cremated at Golders Green crematorium on 31 January. 
Mollie Stack's only surviving child, (Ann) Prunella Stack (1914-2010), health and fitness expert, was born in India on 28 July 1914, and brought up by her mother following her father's early death. She was educated at the Abbey School in Malvern Wells, and was already famous by the age of twelve, posing at that age as the discobulus (discus thrower) in the British Museum in a photograph that was reproduced around the world. Taking over the reins of the Women's League for Health and Beauty from her ailing mother in the early 1930s, she was dubbed 'the perfect girl' by the British press. In the period before the war, she led the league through a period of expansion, reaching a peak of 177,000 members in 1937. Though herself strikingly slim and beautiful, she emphasised that the league was for 'all shapes and sizes'. In 1936 she led a display by 5000 members at London's Olympia, and in 1938 she led a league delegation to festivals in Hamburg; the following year she hosted a German contingent led by Frau Gertrud Scholtz-Klink, whom Hitler had described as 'the perfect Nazi woman'. Prunella Stack had by then married, in Glasgow Cathedral on 15 October 1938, in what was described as the society wedding of the year, Lord David Douglas-Hamilton (1912-1944), fourth and youngest son of the thirteenth duke of Hamilton. During the Second World War her husband (like his three brothers) joined the RAF, and distinguished himself commanding 603 City of Edinburgh squadron in the defence of Malta in 1942, but in August 1944 he crashed short of the runway on return to RAF Benson after a reconnaissance flight over northern France and was killed instantly, leaving his widow, Prunella, to bring up their two sons, Diarmid ('b'. 1940) and Iain ('b'. 1942). After the war she painstakingly rebuilt the league, and spread its international work, though it never achieved the levels of popular recognition that it had in the 1930s. In London she met an old friend, Alfred Gustave (Allie) Albers (1914-1951), a South African surgeon who was then at Guy's Hospital. They married in Cape Town on 22 July 1950, but tragically he died less than a year later, in a climbing accident. She remained in South Africa for a few years, and in 1953, against the strongly-expressed wishes of the South African government, led a racially mixed delegation of South African Women's League for Health and Beauty members to London for the queen's coronation. She returned with her sons to London in 1956, and on 15 May 1964 she married the barrister and writer Brian St Quentin Power (1918-2008). She continued to be active in the Women's League (re-named the Fitness League in 1999) into her nineties, and in 2010 she attended the eightieth anniversary celebration of its founding. She was appointed OBE in 1980. She died on 30 December 2010 at her London home, 14 Gertrude Street, Chelsea (she and her third husband, Brian, also owned a holiday home on Raasay, near Skye). She was survived by her two sons (one an astrophysicist, the other an elephant conservationist). 


@@@@@


doc= 45798


Paget, Dorothy Wyndham (1905-1960), racehorse owner and eccentric, was born on 21 February 1905, at 32 Green Street, Mayfair, London, the second daughter and youngest child of Almeric Hugh Paget, first Baron Queenborough (1861-1949), politician and yachtsman, and Pauline Payne (died 1916), daughter of a wealthy American politician, William C. Whitney. She was a spoilt child and her bad behaviour, accentuated perhaps by her mother's death when she was ten or eleven, led to expulsion from six schools, beginning with Heathfield School at Ascot. She finished her formal education in Paris at an establishment run by Princess Meshchersky, a Russian emigree. 
Dorothy Paget's wealth, inherited from her maternal grandfather, allowed her to indulge in expensive leisure pursuits. In 1931 she supported the motor-racing team of the 1929 Le Mans winner Tim Birkin to the tune of $32,000 'see 'Bentley Boys. The involvement led to a lifelong passion for fast driving. She also invested heavily in show-jumping. As a girl she had been an accomplished rider in the show-ring and she returned to this pursuit as an owner in the 1950s with a number of successful horses. 
It was as a racehorse owner that Dorothy Paget gained sporting and public fame. Statistically her career in racing was a successful one, bringing her 1532 winners, securing among them seven Cheltenham Gold Cups (five in succession with Golden Miller), two Champion Hurdles, a Grand National (also with Golden Miller), and a wartime Derby in 1943 with Straight Deal. In 1940/41 and again in 1951/2 she was leading National Hunt owner. Financially her sojourn on the turf was a disaster, costing her over $3 million. This was in addition to her vast gambling losses. She bet huge sums daily. Her largest recorded bet was $160,000 to win $20,000 and although this was successful others were not. 
Dorothy Paget paid little attention to her appearance and on the racecourse invariably clad her 20 stone bulk in a substantial speckled blue tweed coat. Not easily approachable, she was domineering, often abominably rude; she described herself as 'desperately fussy' (Gilbey, 138), but had a sense of humour, often at her own expense. She cared nothing for public esteem, declaring that 'the public don't pay my training bills' (ibid., 44). She knew little about politics but declared herself an ardent Conservative 'because I dislike being ruled by the lower classes' (ibid., 134). Like many gamblers she was superstitious and had a particular aversion to the colour green. Her behaviour in other areas bordered on the obsessive. She referred to her staff by a colour code rather than name and often communicated with them by memoranda. She would hire a railway compartment to ensure her privacy and always took two seats at the theatre or Wimbledon, one for her handbag. 
With a few exceptions in racing circles, Dorothy Paget found male company distasteful and claimed she was sometimes physically sick in the presence of men. When she congratulated Golden Miller it was remarked that this was the first male she had ever kissed, though it was noted that he was a gelding! Not surprisingly she never married, though she lavished affection on Olga (Olili) de Mumm, niece of Princess Meshchersky. Her charity was not for the bookmakers alone. When at schools in Paris, she became a benefactor to a home for elderly Russian refugees in Ste Genevieve-des-Bois and her financial assistance continued until the German invasion of France in 1940. 
At 4.30 a.m. on 9 February 1960, twelve days before her fifty-fifth birthday, Dorothy Paget was poring over her racing calendar at her home, Hermits Wood, Chalfont St Giles, sorting out her entries for racing at Wetherby. An hour later she was found dead from heart failure, no doubt influenced by her weight and the smoking of 100 cigarettes a day. Although she professed no religious beliefs, she was buried on 12 February at St Mary's, Hertingfordbury, Buckinghamshire. An honest but acerbic obituary in the 'Sporting Life' led to a spirited response from Olili. Despite her gambling, Dorothy's estate was valued at $3,803,380 (reduced by duties to $736,000); as she died intestate, the beneficiary was her sister, Lady Baillie, to whom in later years she had rarely spoken. 


@@@@@


doc= 45800


Joseph Haydn Parry (1864-1894) was also a composer. He wrote three operas, 'Cigarette' (Cardiff, 1892), 'Miami' (London, 1893), and 'Marigold Farm' (as yet unperformed). In the 1890s he was a professor at the Guildhall School of Music in London. His works are light in character. Although he possessed much of his father's entrepreneurial ability, he did not have the same musical talent or celebrity. 


@@@@@


doc= 45801


Barron, (Mabel) Phyllis (1890-1964), designer and textile printer, was born on 19 March 1890 in Taplow, Buckinghamshire, the younger of two daughters of Walter Barron and his wife, Alice Maud Marguerite, formerly Clark, of Taplow House, Taplow. She was to describe her family as 'rich' and her father as 'something in the City' (Barron). Barron, as she was called by her friends, studied at the Slade School of Fine Art under Henry Tonks and Philip Wilson Steer before immersing herself in designing and printing textiles. Active between the two world wars, she produced furnishing and dress-stuffs together with her partner, Dorothy Larcher (1882-1952), which were noted for their distinctive designs hand block-printed in subtle colours on quality materials. The major collection of their work is held by the Crafts Study Centre collection and archive at the Surrey Institute of Art and Design, University College, Farnham. 
Barron had first become interested in textile printing having discovered some French printing blocks. Information was difficult to obtain but two dye books by Edward Bancroft and William Crookes respectively proved to be invaluable. In 1915 she cut her first block and experimented avidly -- discharging patterns with nitric acid on indigo-dyed cloth, and printing with iron, rust, or cutch on linen and cotton. 
In the early 1920s Dorothy Larcher joined Barron's workshop which moved shortly afterwards to 2 Parkhill Studios, Parkhill Road, Hampstead. Recalling his first meeting with both women in 1938 the etcher and educationist Robin Tanner referred to their partnership as 'a marriage of true minds' (Roscoe, 1993, 123-4). Describing Barron as 'a tall, large, handsome, commanding figure with fine eyes and brow, cropped silver hair, a beautiful outgoing expression and a warm lovely voice' he also remembered her 'joie de vivre', energy, fresh wit, and creative mind which combined with a high sense of standard made her an exuberant and forceful personality (ibid.). 
Barron and Larcher moved to Hambutts House, Edge Road, Painswick, Gloucestershire, in 1930. It was a beautiful Georgian house with a stable block which they converted into a workshop with a large indigo vat. These were years of expansion and they experimented with overprinting and the use of synthetic dyes, employing women from the village to help with printing and sewing. 
The Little Gallery run by Muriel Rose was Barron's and Larcher's main sales outlet in London following their move to the Cotswolds. They also exhibited regularly with the Red Rose Guild in Manchester and the Gloucestershire Guild of Craftsmen. The duke of Westminster had been an early and most influential patron commissioning all the materials for his yacht 'The Flying Cloud' and introducing their work to a wealthy and discerning clientele. Other commissions included the new library and fellows' senior common room at Girton College, Cambridge, and curtaining for the choir stalls at Winchester Cathedral. 
The outbreak of the Second World War ended production and Barron turned to local government work, parish affairs, and education. Her obituary recorded that: 'She took a leading -- although never obtrusive -- part in the life of Painswick, giving valued help as the chairman of the horticultural section of the Painswick show, as a member of the Painswick Food Production Society, as a member and for a while chairman of the Painswick Parish Council, as a member of the Gyde Home Committee and in other ways, while in a wider sphere she was for 22 years a member of the Stroud rural district council. She served for a considerable time as the chairman of the Council's Building Plans Committee and was the vice chairman of the Area Planning Committee. In addition she represented the Council on the Stroud Museum Committee, the Stroud Educational Foundation and other bodies. ('Gloucestershire Echo', 25 Nov 1964)' Barron's death at Hambutts, Edge Road, Painswick, on 23 November 1964 followed a severe bout of influenza. She was cremated three days later at Cheltenham crematorium and her ashes scattered there in the rock and water garden. Examples of her textiles are in the Whitworth Art Gallery, Manchester; Cheltenham Museums and Art Gallery; and the Victoria and Albert Museum, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 45802


Hart, Edith Tudor (1908-1973), photographer, was born in Vienna on 28 August 1908. Her father was the radical bookseller and publisher Wilhelm Suschitzky (1877-1934), a campaigner for a variety of progressive causes. Her mother, Adele Bauer (1878-1980), worked in the home. The two of them, together with her brother, Wolf, provided Edith with a lively and educated background, rather than with a particularly affluent one. 
Suschitzky imbibed that atmosphere, and was remembered by those who knew her in her youth as immensely vivacious, amusing, curious, and gifted. On visiting Sweden in 1919-20, a trip hosted by the Swedish government for central European children afflicted by the First World War, she found she enjoyed both travel and languages. She also had a natural affection for children and undertook her first training in progressive nursery teaching in Vienna in 1925. Two years later she took a course in London with the pioneer educator Maria Montessori. 
By the end of the 1920s, however, and led by her increasingly left-wing politics, Suschitzky decided that the nascent field of photojournalism was the relevant means for her to document social ills. After a course of study at the Bauhaus from October 1929 to April 1930, Edith was ready to use her camera less for creating artful compositions -- such as her early geometric perspective through the Prater ferris wheel, which was to feature so significantly in the film of Graham Greene's novel 'The Third Man' -- and more for showing people, often children, in pitiful slum housing or living on the streets. Austria was still reeling from the effects of the loss not only of a war but of an empire. Suschitzky's series on street beggars, mostly the war wounded, Gypsies, and blind or deaf people, remains utterly harrowing: all are attempting to earn a living with an instrument or a few stray articles for sale; all are dressed in rags, some lacking even shoes or protection against the cold. Other images illustrate the lives of those without domestic water and power, without a bathroom or furniture. Whole families exist on bomb sites or rubbish tips. By contrast, there are heroic pictures of May day parades (shot from above) and demonstrations by the unemployed with the already sinister figures of the special police forces set against barbed-wire barricades in the background. 
Suschitzky travelled to Paris and London at the end of the 1920s, and in 1932 to Italy, where she took a series of photographs of Gypsies at Montefalcone. In 1925 she met an idealistic young British doctor called Alexander Tudor Hart (died 1992), who had gone to Vienna to study orthopaedics under the famous surgeon Professor Boehler. They married at the British consulate in Vienna in 1933, and determined to return to London. Edith's family were Jewish and her brother, Wolf, left for Amsterdam in 1934. Already a member of such organizations as the Artists' International Association (AIA) and the Workers' Film and Photo League, Tudor Hart became involved in curating and contributing to such exhibitions as the AIA's 'The social scene' (1934) and 'Artists against fascism and against war' (1935). 
Following their wedding and the move, the Tudor Harts did not remain long in London. Sharing Edith's left-wing politics and motivated by humanitarian concerns, Alexander Tudor Hart determined to use his skills among the miners and steelworkers of the Rhondda valley in Wales. Tudor Hart documented a great many of her husband's patients and their children, living conditions, home and working lives. By 1936 their own child, Tommy, was born and Alexander Tudor Hart enlisted as a surgeon on the government (republican) side in the Spanish Civil War. By the time he returned at its end Edith had to accept that their marriage was effectively over. They were finally divorced in 1945. 
Thus from the mid-1930s until her death in 1973, Tudor Hart had to provide not only for herself but also for a son who, it gradually emerged, suffered from autism. A dual dedication to Tommy, for whom she attempted every kind of restitution to health, from psychoanalysis to a residential home, and to her own uncompromising style of photography inevitably put her under severe strain. The outlets for her work, never large nor lucrative, were dwindling, particularly with the post-war demise of 'Lilliput', the 'News Chronicle', and especially 'Picture Post'. Even the non-paying but morally supportive left-wing press took a while to recover its circulation -- paradoxically afflicted by the combination of a Labour Party victory and higher standards of living. She wrote several features on women, health, and work, including 'Working Class Wives', published as an imprint in 1939, and in 1952 produced a book for the Ministry of Education entitled 'Moving and Growing'. 
Tudor Hart's situation was made more difficult by the British security services' belief that she was a Communist Party spy. Tudor Hart believed they pursued her to the point where, by the 1960s, she felt bound to destroy not only a very great number of prints but also her negatives. She attempted a variety of semi-commercial ventures, from the Sun Studio in the West End (where she worked as a photographic assistant) to a small antiques shop in Brighton, without finding one that thrived. After a long illness she died at Copper Cliff, Redhill Drive, Brighton, of stomach cancer on 12 May 1973, leaving virtually no estate but her remaining negatives to her brother. She was cremated in Brighton on 15 May. 
The best testament to Edith Tudor Hart's work is her 'Photography as a profession', written for the magazine 'Housewife': 'In the hands of the person who uses it with feeling and imagination, the camera becomes very much more than the means of earning a living, it becomes a vital factor in recording and influencing the life of the people and in promoting human understanding. (Hart, 4-5)' 



@@@@@


doc= 45803


Larcher, Dorothy Mary (1882-1952), flower painter, designer, and textile printer, was born on 28 September 1882 at 47 Shirlock Road, St Pancras, London, the daughter and (presumed) only child of William Gustavus Francis Larcher, schoolmaster, and his wife, Eliza Pearce, 'nee' Arkell. Active during the 1920s and 1930s, she produced with her partner, the designer and printer (Mabel) Phyllis Barron (1890-1964), innovative hand block-printed materials that had 'a perfect harmony between the fibre, the dye and the block' (Bosence, 42). 'Despite the peculiarly English feel of these textiles, they were in complete contrast to what was generally being produced in Britain in the interwar years for dress and upholstery. They stand apart even when compared to the few other well-established contemporary hand block-printed textiles that were available, such as those of Alec Walker for Crysede or Joyce Clissold at Footprints, where designs were often on a smaller scale and the results frequently busier and more fragmented, often employing more colours. (Roscoe, ed. Coatts, 61)' Larcher studied fine art at Hornsey School of Art, London, where she also later taught. In 1914 she accompanied Lady Christiana Herringham to India to help record the Buddhist frescoes in the Ajanta caves; subsequently she taught and lived with an Indian family in Calcutta, as the outbreak of war prevented her return to England until 1921. No doubt it was in India that she first saw textiles being printed by hand. Back in London 'she visited the Brook Street Gallery and was charmed with Barron's simple hand block-printed textiles. They met, and later... decided to work together' (Bosence, 45). Initially Dorothy Larcher 'joined Barron's workshop in Hampstead High Street. Soon afterwards they moved to 2 Parkhill Studios in Parkhill Road and shared a flat together which was practically next door' (Roscoe, ed. Coatts, 64-5). 
In 1930 Larcher and Barron moved to Hambutts House, Edge Road, Painswick, Gloucestershire. The etcher and educationist Robin Tanner recorded his first visit in 1938. Describing Larcher as 'small' but with a 'strong personality', he wrote: 'She had a rather sad, quiet voice and a serious manner, though her sense of humour was every bit as keen as Barron's. She too was most beautifully dressed. She wore cotton printed in iron rust in her own design called 'Old Flower' the very first she ever cut... [She] was a most distinguished embroideress. (Roscoe, 1993, 123)' Whereas Barron tended towards strong geometrical patterns Larcher more often based designs on plant and flower motifs such as 'Little flower' and 'Basket'. Responsibilities in the workshop tended to be divided: 'Dorothy Larcher was mainly responsible for the block cutting... and Barron was very good at dye mixing... Girls from the village helped with the printing, taught by Dorothy Larcher' (Bosence, 48). 
The Second World War brought an end to production. Hambutts House was sold and Barron and Larcher converted the self-contained workshop into a compact but equally comfortable home called Hambutts. Inspired by special plants from their well-stocked garden 'Larcher returned to her flower studies, each one lovingly painted -- its character, colour and markings captured in a rare, discreet quality of paint [but] she completed only about forty of her favourite plants before she died' (Bosence, 48). Her death certificate records that she died of cerebral thrombosis at New Nursing Home, Cainscross Road, Stroud, on 14 August 1952 and that Barron arranged for her burial. 
The Crafts Study Centre at the Surrey Institute of Art and Design, University College, Farnham, holds the major collection and archive of Barron's and Larcher's work, presented by Robin and Heather Tanner. Their textiles can also be seen at the Whitworth Art Gallery, Manchester; Cheltenham Museums and Art Gallery; and the Victoria and Albert Museum, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 45804


Ann Macbeth (1875-1948), was born at 41 Chorley Old Road, Little Bolton, Lancashire, on 25 September 1875, the eldest of the nine children of Norman Macbeth, a mechanical engineer, and his wife, Annie MacNicol. Her grandfather was the portrait painter Norman Macbeth RA. She attended a dame-school in St Anne's, whither her family had moved, and was influenced by her parents' active support of the local church. (Though Scottish Presbyterians, they attended a Congregational church, there being no Presbyterian church nearby.) Owing to a childhood attack of scarlet fever, Ann had the use of only one eye. In 1902, while still a student, Ann Macbeth joined Jessie Newbery as a teacher in the embroidery department of Glasgow School of Art. That year she won a silver medal at the Turin Esposizione Internazionale d'Arte Decorativa, and a silk cushion she had worked with the floral attributes of the four countries of Britain was presented to Queen Alexandra in commemoration of the coronation. She taught needlework, embroidery, and applique, and from 1909 to 1912 also taught metalwork and bookbinding. About 1911 she succeeded Jessie Newbery as head of the embroidery department at Glasgow School of Art, where she had become a member of the school council in 1908. Like her teacher, she made and embroidered her own dresses and also executed fine works of embroidery such as 'The Sleeping Beauty' (1902; Glasgow Museums and Art Galleries) and a pictorial work, 'Elspeth' (1904; priv. coll.). Her works often incorporate panels of figures worked on satin. Their 'billowing elongated skirts with... decorated borders are romantic but still functional' (Swain, 'Ann Macbeth', 8). She was a fine draughtswoman and an influential teacher at her Saturday classes for teachers run by the school. Macbeth reached a wider public with a series of lectures across Scotland, England, and Wales. Her books included 'Educational Needlework' (1911, with Margaret Swanson), 'Embroidered Lace and Leatherwork' (1924), and 'Countrywoman's Rug Book' (1926; repr. California, 'c'.1990). Over a long period examples of her work were on exhibition at Miss Cranston's tea-rooms in Glasgow. She designed for Liberty's and Knox's Linen Thread Company, and embroidered a frontal for the communion table of Glasgow Cathedral. Fra Newbery praised 'her very practical outlook' and noted of her work 'how stuffs, plain, yet of sound quality and good colour could be beautified by the addition of embroidery and other decoration' (ibid.). She was awarded diplomas in art from institutions in Paris, Tunis, Ghent, Budapest, and Chicago. In 1928 she retired to Patterdale, Westmorland, where she 'was quickly recognized by her long flowing cape, her skirt possibly vivid scarlet and emerald green, wearing long necklaces' (Ives, 6). Ann Macbeth died, unmarried, at 8 Eden Mount, Carlisle, on 23 March 1948. As a foreword to Anne Knox Arthur's 'Embroidery Book' (1920) she wrote: 'One may embroider poems, another may embroider prayer and praises for her church, another may beautify a woman's garments or sing a little song in stitches for a baby's robe' (ibid.). Her embroidery of 'The Nativity' is in Glasgow Museum and Art Gallery; that of 'The Good Shepherd' remains in Patterdale church. 
Following their move to Glasgow in 1890, Margaret Macdonald ['see 'Mackintosh, Margaret Macdonald] and her sister Frances Eliza Macdonald ['see under 'Mackintosh, Margaret Macdonald] attended Glasgow School of Art. Noticing a similarity in style between their work and that of two evening students, Charles Rennie Mackintosh and Herbert McNair, Fra Newbery introduced them, a meeting that led to the development of the Glasgow style and then to the marriages of Frances to McNair and Margaret to Mackintosh in 1899 and 1900 respectively. While they were still students, some of their work appeared in 'The Magazine', a manuscript periodical edited by a fellow student, Lucy Raeburn (1869-1952), which appeared from 1893 to 1894. The work of the Glasgow Four as they came to be known is seen to represent the core of the Glasgow style. Both sisters were members of a group at the school known as the Immortals. 
The bookbinder and illustrator Jessie Marion King also studied at the Glasgow School of Art, where her vivid imagination and fine linear style were encouraged by Fra Newbery. From 1900 to 1908 she taught in the school's department of book decoration, which became the department of bookbinding and design. In 1902 she was awarded a gold medal at the Scottish section of the international decorative arts exhibition at Turin for her binding of 'L'enfance de l'evangile'. She illustrated many books, including 'The High History of the Holy Grail' and 'The Defence of Guinevere', two of her finest works. 



@@@@@


doc= 45805


Jessie Wylie Newbery (1864-1948) was born in Paisley, near Glasgow, on 28 May 1864, one of the four children of William Rowat and his wife, Margaret Downie Hill. William Rowat was a shawl manufacturer and later tea importer who had strong views on the education of women. Like her father, Jessie had an independent nature. At the age of eighteen she visited Italy, where she became interested in mosaics, textiles, pottery, and 'peasant crafts'. Throughout her life she collected textiles from Italy, Russia, and the Balkans. In 1884 she enrolled as a student at the Glasgow School of Art, and ten years later she became head of the school's department of embroidery, which she had established earlier. Her work raised the status of embroidery to that of a creative art form. She evolved 'a characteristic linen applique... worked on linen ground, with applied simple stylized flowers and leaves, cut out of coloured linens and held down by satin stitch in silk... the stems coiled into strong lines, outlining the shape of the article. (Swain, 'Mrs J. R. Newbery', 105)' She 'liked the opposition of straight lines to curved; of horizontal to vertical... I specially aim at beautifully shaped spaces and try to make them as important as the patterns' (ibid.). The Glasgow rose, emblem of the Glasgow style, 'is believed to have evolved from her circles of pink linen, cut out freehand and applied with lines of satin stitch to indicate folded petals' (ibid.). She introduced lettering, mottoes, and verses as part of her designs, and also taught needleweaving and dress design. In an interview with Gleeson White she commented, 'I believe in education consisting of seeing the best that has been done. Then, having this high standard thus set before us, in doing what we like to do: that for our fathers, this for us' (G. White, 48). She was a fine teacher and inspired many of her students. 
At the same time Mrs Newbery managed her mercurial husband and brought up two daughters, Elsie and Mary, for whom she designed artistic yet practical dresses, as she designed and made her own attractive clothes. Her original and individual designs for dresses incorporating embroidery set a style for her students which was emulated by many of the Glasgow Girls, including the Macdonald sisters, Margaret and Frances. Like women in other artistic circles, for example, Jane and May Morris, Jessie Newbery wore dresses of an Italian Renaissance appearance, though she also believed that dress should be practical as well as beautiful. At a school at-home in November 1900 'her black merve ['sic'] gown was slightly trained and had the long sleeves puffed at intervals to correspond with the simply fashioned bodice which was finished with a narrow collar of old lace, and on the shoulders bows of reddish gold velvet. (Burkhauser, 148)' It was later noted that 'she never wore a corset in her life... she deplored the tight lacing imposed by the current fashion' (ibid., 50), a comment that reveals her interest in rational dress (she possessed a 'rational' skating costume with red flannel bloomers). In 1918 she retired with her husband to Eastgate, Corfe Castle, Dorset, where she died on 27 April 1948. 
Jessie Newbery's most talented student, 


@@@@@


doc= 45807


Zinkeisen, Anna Katrina (1901-1976), artist, was born in Kilcreggan, Dunbartonshire, on 28 August 1901, the second daughter of Victor Zinkeisen, a research chemist whose family, settled in Scotland for over a century, was of German origin, and Claire Bolton-Charles. Their youngest child was a son, Jack, and the family moved to Harrow, Middlesex, in 1909. Zinkeisen began her art studies young at a technical school, and in 1917 she entered the Royal Academy Schools. There she studied painting under Sir George Clausen, Glyn Philpot, and Charles Sims, although Sir William Orpen suggested that she should work in the sculpture school. Following this training she received her first commission, from the firm of Wedgwood, for some circular plaques. The two reliefs 'Adam' and 'Earth, Fire and Water' were awarded a silver medal at the Exposition des Arts Decoratifs in Paris in 1925. From about 1922 until her marriage she shared a studio in Yeoman's Row, south-west London, with her sister Doris Clare (who was best known for her portraits and designs for the stage). At eighteen Anna first exhibited in the Royal Academy, and she thereafter showed regularly there and at the Royal Institute of Oil Painters. Her self-portrait 'AKZ' (oil, 1925) won a silver medal at the academy in 1925. In 1927 she exhibited 'The Olympians' and 'The Tilting Yard' at the Society of Women Artists. 
Anna Zinkeisen designed magazine covers and book jackets, including several for Barbara Cartland and Doris Leslie, as well as painting portraits. She illustrated many books with her lively and witty line drawings, including A. P. Herbert's 'She-Shanties' (1926) and 'Plain Jane' (1927) (both published by T. Fisher Unwin, London). She created the well-known image of the elegant male smoker who was represented on De Reszke cigarette advertisements and packets. In 1928 she married Colonel Guy R. N. Heseltine MC (died 1967), and they had one daughter, Julia. They lived for many years in St Andrew's Place, Regent's Park, and later also had a cottage in Suffolk. 
In 1934 Anna Zinkeisen was commissioned to paint a mural, 'The Four Seasons', for the ballroom of the liner 'Queen Mary', which was destroyed after the war; she was commissioned in 1947 to execute a new work for the liner, 'The Chase', for a smaller dance room and restaurant. She executed many other murals during the 1950s and 1960s. During the Second World War, Zinkeisen worked as a volunteer from 1939 in the first aid post at St Mary's Hospital, Paddington, becoming an officer in the St John Ambulance Brigade. In her spare time she painted 'First Aid Post by Candlelight' (oil, n.d.; Imperial War Museum); another oil painting of this period, 'Operation in Progress' (1944), is in the collection of ICI. She also drew severe injuries suffered by victims of the bombing; 'Arm and Hand Shell Wound', 'Shell Fragment Wound', and 'Internal Thigh Wound' are examples of her meticulous draughtsmanship now owned by the Royal College of Surgeons. In 1949 she and her sister Doris executed a ceiling painting in the Russell-Cotes Museum in Bournemouth. An evocation of classical gods and goddesses frolicking in the heavens at dawn, it is a characteristically sprightly pastiche of Regency decoration. Her later portraits include those of the duke of Edinburgh (1956), Sir Robert Mark (1974), and Sister Grace Alexander of the Royal Homoeopathic Hospital (1976), the last portrait she completed. Anna Zinkeisen died in hospital in Holborn, London, after a short illness, on 22 September 1976. The funeral service was held at Burgh parish church, Woodbridge, Suffolk, and following cremation at Ipswich her ashes were interred at Burgh parish church in her husband's grave. A memorial service was held on 2 November in Chelsea Old Church. A member of the Pytchley hunt, Zinkeisen was elegant and beautiful all her life, with fair, reddish-brown hair, and green eyes. 


@@@@@


doc= 45808


Bassett, Mary (d. 1572), translator, was the second of five children of Margaret Roper (1505-1544), favourite daughter of Sir Thomas More, and her husband, William Roper (1495x8-1578). Herself a fine classicist, Margaret Roper was determined that her daughter should be taught Latin and Greek by the most distinguished scholars and approached Roger Ascham. In a letter written to Mary in 1554 Ascham explained his failure to take up the invitation, saying that at the time nothing would induce him to leave Cambridge University. However other tutors were found, including John Morwen of Corpus Christi College, Oxford, who taught her Greek and Latin. Her education was praised by Ascham, and Nicholas Harpsfield in his 'Life... of Sir Thomas More' described her as a person of rare learning and an expert in Greek and Latin. 
There is little evidence regarding the detail of Mary's personal life. She married first Stephen Clarke, but there were no children of the marriage; and second, by June 1556, James Bassett (c.1526-1558), Stephen Gardiner's secretary, who, like Mary, became a part of the royal household. This was a short marriage, since Bassett died on 21 November 1558, but they had two sons, Philip and Charles, the latter still unborn when his father made his will in September 1558. A devout Catholic to the end of her life, Mary Bassett attended Queen Mary's court as a gentlewoman of the privy chamber. Ascham's letter of 1554 in search of friendly contacts at court praised her intellectual capabilities, particularly in view of the innumerable distractions for ladies of the court. In fact Mary made excellent use of her opportunities, gaining a reputation for her skill in translation. She dedicated to the queen a presentation copy in a velvet binding of five books of Eusebius's 'Ecclesiastical History', which she had translated from Greek into English. In her preface Bassett elaborated on her aims in translation, explaining that she tried to reflect as clearly as possible the aims and intentions of the author of the original text. She considered the 'Ecclesiastical History' to be an important work which ought to be read by all Christians, both men and women. Her linguistic skills enabled her to judge the existing Greek edition as being full of mistakes. She expressed conventional authorial reluctance to make the translation available publicly, claiming that she had been pressed by friends to make this fine copy. Mary explained that she could not bear to disappoint them and she feared lest refusal be interpreted as pride or sloth. 
Mary Bassett's second extant translation is the later part of her grandfather's 'History of the Passion', the original of which had been given to the family together with some other manuscripts at the time of More's execution. Her translation from the Latin appeared under her own name in the volume of More's collected works in English published by More's nephew William Rastell in 1557. Rastell himself praised the quality of the work and Harpsfield described Bassett's translation as being of such elegance that the reader might think that it was the original written by Sir Thomas himself in English. Harpsfield refers to other translations by Mary Bassett including the 'History' of Socrates, Theodoretus, Sozomenus, and Evagrius, but he adds that out of modesty she suppressed them. No trace of these has yet been found. 
Mary Bassett's will drawn up in 1566 is a clear indication of the strength of her Catholic faith. She committed her soul to the blessed lady St Mary and any beneficiaries who were heretics were to be excluded. Her bequest to her younger son, Charles, hinted at purchases of land which she negotiated on his behalf partly by using her own resources. The will also contains interesting links with her grandfather Thomas More and she passed on to her elder son, Philip, the gold cross that had belonged to him, as well as a gold ring with a ruby that King Philip had given her. Mary Bassett died in London on 20 March 1572. 


@@@@@


doc= 45809


Biddle, Hester (1629/30-1697), Quaker minister and writer, spent her childhood in Oxford. She twice refers to having been born an Anglican, but nothing else is known of her family origin. She wrote only under her married name, so her marriage to Thomas Biddle (died 1682), a cordwainer, occurred before 1655. Until 1666 they lived in the Old Exchange (Royal Exchange), City of London, but after the great fire they moved south of the river to Bermondsey Street. They had four children, all sons: Quaker records identify Daniel (1660-1685), Benjamin ('b'. 1663), and two sons named Thomas (one dying in 1666, his brother living 1668-70). Hester was widowed in 1682, when Thomas died of unknown causes, and she subsequently lived in relative poverty, receiving 5's'. weekly as a 'poor Friend' from the Peel monthly meeting (Rickman, 39-41). 
Most of what is known about Hester Biddle relates to her religious experiences as a Quaker. She received a traditional religious upbringing from her parents, and disapproved of the abolition of the 'Book of Common Prayer'. She became a Friend in response to the preaching of Edward Burrough and Francis Howgill in 1654, and thereafter she became an active Quaker minister and writer. She is sometimes believed to be the woman known to Quaker leader George Fox for predicting the return of Charles II, but the evidence for this well-known story is an unsubstantiated reference in an eighteenth-century text and so must be treated with caution. 
Hester Biddle travelled extensively, both at home and abroad. Within the 'four kingdoms' of the British Isles her ministry included Oxford (1655), Cornwall (1656), Ireland (1659), and Scotland (1672). Her journeys abroad were also numerous, and accounts exist of ministry and travels in Newfoundland (1656, with Mary Fisher), the Netherlands (1656, 1661), Barbados (1657), Alexandria (now Egypt, 1658; on her way she met Katherine Evans, Sarah Cheevers, and Mary Fisher), and France (1694-5). The last-named journey is the most oft-cited; having visited Mary II, Biddle gained a pass to address Louis XIV, whom she urged to pursue politics of peace. 
Biddle's ministering brought her into conflict with local authorities and the state church, resulting in fourteen cases of detention. During the 1650s, when Quakers were encouraged to preach in public to spread their faith, Biddle criticized the clergy, mayors, and magistrates. She was in Oxford and Cambridge in 1655, producing a broadside that reminded 'corrupt' university-educated churchmen that 'God exalteth the poor in spirit, but the rich he sendeth empty away' ('Wo to the City of Oxford', 1655). This radical rejection of social hierarchy and authority is reflected, too, in her imprisonment at Banbury for 'some zealous reprehension uttered against the Mayor and the Magistrates' (Besse, 1.564). Other arrests included Launceston (1656) and Godalming (1659), where she was 'much beaten and abused' (ibid., 1.689). The report of her trial for preaching in 1662 included a defence of women's speaking in response to the jury's astonished remark that 'they never heard of a woman to speak before', and a refusal to allow alderman Richard Browne to reprimand her for travelling without her husband ('A Brief Relation', 35). Letters referring to her consequent confinement in Bridewell and to later imprisonments, one of them for 'writing a book', are in the Public Record Office and in Friends' Library, London. 
Between 1655 and 1662 Biddle was the author of fiery pamphlets that show an acute awareness of social and economic inequality. Typical of her stance is a challenge issued in 'The Trumpet of the Lord' (1662): 'did not the Lord make all men and women upon the earth of one mould, why then should there be so much honour and respect unto some men and women, and not unto others, but they are almost naked for want of Cloathing, and almost starved for want of Bread? (p. 12)' Biddle died in St Sepulchre's parish, Clerkenwell, London, on 5 February 1697, aged sixty-seven, suffering from a 'stoppage' (Quaker register of burials). The administration of her estate was granted to her son Benjamin on 19 February. She was a radical writer and activist who advocated social equality, arguing from a direct sense of empathy: 'the poor... are ready to famish, for whose estate and condition my heart is pained within me' ('A Warning from the Lord God... unto... London', 1660, 11). 


@@@@@


doc= 45811


Carey, Mary, Lady Carey (b. c.1609, d. in or after 1680), author of verse and autobiographical meditations, was the daughter and heir of Sir John Jackson of Berwick upon Tweed, Northumberland; she wrote of her family that 'I had tenderly loving parents' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. D. 1308, fols. 15-44). In her autobiographical meditations, dated between 11 February 1650 and 12 January 1658, she described her conversion to a life of piety at the age of about eighteen after a near fatal illness. She married first, at Hunsdon, Hertfordshire, on 24 June 1630, Pelham Carey ('c'.1612-1642/3), a younger son of Henry Carey, first earl of Dover ('c'.1580-1666), and his first wife, Judith Pelham ('bap'. 1590, died 1629); her husband was knighted in Scotland on 16 July 1633. He was living in Berwick in September 1642, but died within the next few months, apparently leaving no surviving children. On 8 June 1643, still in Berwick, Mary Carey married George Payler (died in or before 1678), paymaster of the garrison there from 1639 to 1642, but by this time one of the officers of the ordnance and armoury in the Tower of London. Although deeply attached to her second husband Mary kept the surname of her first, presumably because of Sir Pelham's titled status. 
During the civil wars Lady Carey accompanied Payler on military campaigns. Later they divided their time between the north-east and the London area, as Payler retained interests in Berwick. Admitted to Gray's Inn on 23 March 1652 he continued as surveyor of the ordnance and in 1654 was additionally appointed a navy commissioner. He was MP for Berwick in 1659. His wife wrote during that decade, 'I have liv'd in Barwick, London, Kent, Hunsdon, Edenborough, Thistleworth, Hackney, Tottridge, Greenwich, Bednall Green, Clapham, Yorke, [Nun] Monkton, St James's, Newington, Covent Garden, & deare St Katherine's' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. D. 1308, fol. 195). 
Of the couple's seven children the first five died in infancy, including Robert (died 1650) and Peregrine (died 1652); only Bethia (1652/3-1671) and Nathaniel (1654/5-1680?) survived to adulthood. In addition to live births Lady Carey suffered at least one miscarriage, an experience which provided the inspiration for her most famous poem, 'Upon the Sight of my Abortive Birth the 31th of December 1657' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. D. 1308, fols. 215-22). The poem compares the 'little Embrio; voyd of life, and feature' to the 'dead frute', in the form of lifeless religious devotions, which Lady Carey is reproached for offering to God: 'Dead dutys; prayers; praises thou dost bring, affections dead; dead hart in every thinge... Mend now my Child, & lively frute bring me; so thou advantag'd much by this wilt be' (Greer, 159-60). She also composed other pious meditations in verse and prose, including 'A Dialogue betwixt the Soule, and the Body', dedicated to her husband (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. D. 1308, fols. 1-176). 
After the Restoration, Lady Carey and her husband seem to have retired to his property at Nun Monkton in Yorkshire. Bethia married James Darcy of Sedbury in the same county, but died on 19 November 1671 aged only eighteen. Payler died in or before 1678, when his widow received the first of several grants of administration of his estates. Their son also predeceased his mother: Nathaniel was admitted to Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, in 1670, and to Gray's Inn in 1671, and had a son Nathaniel (died 1748), but had died by 3 December 1680, when Lady Carey was granted probate of his will. The date of her death is unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 45812


Cunningham, Lady Margaret (d. 1622?), autobiographer, was one of the six daughters of James Cunningham, sixth earl of Glencairn (died 1631), and his first wife, Mariot or Margaret (died 1610), daughter of Colin Campbell of Glenorchy. Despite her high birth she was distinguished principally by misfortune, and by the fact that she wrote a detailed account of the cruelty she suffered at the hands of her first husband; the account provides evidence of the acute vulnerability of wives and the inability of law, custom, and even powerful kinsmen to guarantee protection from brutal husbands. On 24 January 1598 Margaret married Sir James Hamilton (died in or after 1608), master of Evandale, who was from a wealthy and well-connected family. For the next three years she continued to reside with her parents at Finlaystone in Renfrewshire and it is not clear when the marriage was consummated. When she visited Evandale between February and May 1601 Sir James and his parents did not receive her in the family house at Crawford-John, but directed her to a nearby inn. Her first child, James, was born at her father's house on 4 July 1601. In February 1602 she returned to Evandale and was once more accommodated at the inn; an appeal to her parents-in-law for help in paying the bill yielded only 40 merks and eight sacks of farm meal. 
A pattern set in of alternate neglect and abuse by Sir James and his parents. Repeated attempts by Lady Margaret to take up residence with her husband were rebuffed, and the small amounts of money the Hamiltons reluctantly supplied from time to time proved insufficient to cover the costs of the lodgings to which she was forced to resort. Efforts at mediation, most notably by the Hamiltons' successive clan chiefs John Hamilton, first marquess of Hamilton (1532-1604), and his son James Hamilton, second marquess, who in 1603 married Lady Margaret's sister Lady Anne Cunningham (d. 1647), had little success. At different times Lady Margaret took refuge with her parents and with Lady Anne. Temporary reconciliations between the couple led to the birth of four more children, John (12 October 1603), Jean (March 1605), Christian (November 1606), and Thomas (April 1608), but Sir James oscillated between absence (including periodic visits to France), infidelity, repentance, silence, and violence. When in 1604 he took a dislike to Lady Margaret's gentlewoman, Abigail Hamilton, he and two menservants turned both women out of the house at Evandale at night, threatening them with a sword and not allowing them to put on any clothes whatsoever. Lady Margaret records that the night was 'foul' and that she was both sick and pregnant at the time. Naked, they had to seek shelter in the minister's house and they went on to accept charity for nine weeks from the family of a servant. 
This was only one of several sudden evictions, and Lady Margaret was always short of money. In 1605 she was given the rent from a mill, but from this had to provide for herself, the children, her husband, and all his household. When his father died in March 1606 Sir James increased the number of his retainers, but gave her nothing from the inheritance. That September he attempted to sell the barony of Carstairs, but when Glencairn intervened legally, presumably because this property and title had been settled by nuptial contract on his daughter's children, Sir James cut off Lady Margaret's meagre allowance. Persistent mediation in her favour by Alexander Lindsay of Dunrood made no headway, so in January 1607 she brought a lawsuit for maintenance, assisted by her father, her brother-in-law Hamilton, and the earl of Abercorn (another Hamilton kinsman). She spent $100 in legal expenses, but without conclusion. However, through the influence of Hamilton and the laird of Benhaith, she obtained a small allowance. 
That summer saw final attempts at reconciliation. In May Lady Margaret wrote a long letter to Sir James in France, addressing him as 'dear heart', full of devout exhortation and hopeful wishes for his future salvation. She enclosed a poem of her own composition on the same theme in irregularly rhyming pentameters and a book, 'The Resolved Christian'. When he returned in June Margaret was initially so frightened of him that she refused to share his bed, but his promises of reformation brought from her forgiveness and a diamond ring as a token. Yet soon afterwards his behaviour relapsed into harshness and negligence. Following the death of his mother that September, Sir James sent Margaret and their children to live in Libertoun, with very inadequate provision. Having at first refused to visit her for five weeks after the birth of their fifth child in April 1608, Sir James arrived not with money to meet their debts but with an expectation of resuming connubial relations. Lady Margaret, knowing that he was now excommunicated for manslaughter and was living in adultery with a certain Jennat Campbell, finally and irrevocably refused him. In August he retaliated by again throwing his wife and children out of the house. Once more her kinsmen tried to intervene, but when she wrote her testimony on 29 September Lady Margaret described herself as surviving in Libertoun still destitute. 
At this point, under Scottish law Lady Margaret would have been entitled to divorce with a right of remarriage, and at costs less than elsewhere in Europe. However, within a few years Sir James conveniently died. In her will Lady Margaret stated her hope that he had been redeemed before death: she had long ago fully forgiven him. It was thus as a widow that she married Sir James Maxwell of Calderwood, becoming his third wife. Her later letters reveal a happy marriage, which produced two sons, John and Alexander, and four daughters, Susanna, Anne, Margaret, and Catherine. Her daughter Jean Hamilton married Maxwell's son, another Sir James. Left a widow again in 1622, and with two of her sons dead, Margaret wrote from Malsly to her sister the marchioness of Hamilton imploring her and the marquess to take care of her surviving children, several of whom were still young and needed tuition. She enclosed a will dated 2 October 1622, written as if she were sick and dying, asking for her son Thomas to be taken in as a follower of the Hamiltons' eldest son, the earl of Arran, and reminding her sister of a promise made to Glencairn to help her other children; those from her first marriage were not entitled to her small income after her death, while those from the second were dependent on payment by the heir of Calderwood of 6000 merks to be shared between them all. Lady Margaret died at Malsly, probably soon afterwards. 


@@@@@


doc= 45813


Docwra, Anne (c.1624-1710), religious writer, was the eldest daughter of Sir William Waldegrave of Bures, Suffolk, of a leading gentry family and a justice under Charles I. When she was about fifteen her father stimulated what became her considerable study of the law by directing her to read the statutes of the realm, since women 'must live under [the laws] as well as men' (Mack, 316). Her antecedents were Anglican and her political views remained basically royalist; the date of her Quaker 'convincement' is not known, but she married a member of a well-established landed family, James Docwra (1617-1672), who became a Quaker before 1655, in which year he left lands in trust for the benefit of Friends. Following her husband's death in 1672 she moved into Cambridge, where she made her home available for Friends' meetings and the accommodation of travelling ministers. 
Because, as she claimed, Christ died 'to end shadows and typical forms' (Mack, 317), she regretted the growing formalism of the Friends' post-Restoration administrative and disciplinary structures, and opposed separate women's meetings on the grounds that St Paul had debarred women from having authority over men; women, however, could prophesy and guide men Friends in the administration of charity funds. Her first published work, partly in verse, 'A looking-glass for the recorder and justices of the peace and grand juries for the town and county of Cambridge' (1682) forms an eloquent plea for toleration -- 'Force makes Hypocrites' (Phillipson, 'Quakerism in Cambridge before the Act of Toleration', 23). In the following year she visited George Fox (1626-1691) and other Quaker leaders in London to discuss disagreements over Friends' church government, and, invoking her royalist credentials, wrote a defence of women's ministry, 'An epistle of love and good advice to my old friends and fellow-sufferers in the late times, the old royalists'. In the same year her 'A Brief Discovery of the Work of the Enemy of Sion's Peace' commented on expulsions of dissidents from the society. 'True Intelligence to be Read and Considered in the Light' (1683) opposed administrative 'Formalities and Directories' (ibid., 22). 
Anne Docwra was, apparently, immune from persecution throughout the post-Restoration period, perhaps, as she claimed, as a result of her knowledge of the law and also, probably, because of her rank and background, and maybe in return for the clear royalist standpoint she and some local Friends professed in 1680. In 1687 her 'Spiritual Community Vindicated amongst People of Different Perswasions in some Things' fully supported James II's pursuit of toleration. In 1699, in 'An Apostate Conscience Exposed', she attacked her nephew, the Quaker renegade Francis Bugg (1640-1727): the work also contains a vivid defence of Fox's simplicity of life against Bugg's charges of luxury against the Quaker leader. In the following year, in 'The Second Part of an Apostate Conscience Exposed', Docwra countered Bugg's riposte, 'Jezebel Withstood'. 
Docwra's enduring gift to Cambridge Friends came in a two-part legacy in 1700 and 1710, in which she gave an estate in Jesus Lane to the society with a 1000 year lease; in her will, dated 4 and 6 May 1710, by now living in reduced circumstances, she made further bequests to several Friends, confirmed her husband's earlier gifts of lands, and added a gift of $20 for a graveyard. She died the same year in Cambridge, where she was buried. 
Criticized both by Bugg and by voices of mainstream Quakerism in her day, an individualist difficult to contain within an organization acquiring structural coherence, Anne Docwra was a spirited, intelligent, articulate, educated, and wise lady, one who preferred 'rational argument to visionary insight' (Mack, 316) and who yet held to a deep spiritual sense of the Quaker 'glad tidings of the Light' (ibid., 318). 


@@@@@


doc= 45814


Evans, Katharine (c.1618-1692), Quaker missionary, declared to the Maltese inquisition in 1658 that she was the daughter of Anne and Roger 'Canual' and that she was then aged about forty; this was an Italian rendering of her maiden name, which may have been Canval. At an unknown date she married John Evans (died in or after 1690), a yeoman. Before her conversion to Quakerism, she was a member of the Church of England, then a Baptist, and eventually an Independent. Presumably the Evans family converted to Quakerism in the summer of 1654 together with Thomas Murford, who was arrested in 1655 because he disturbed a minister in Bath Abbey and whose wife, Jane, was probably John Evans's sister. 
Possibly between the end of 1655 and the beginning of 1656 Katharine Evans went to the Isle of Man. She was banished from the island, and probably shortly thereafter went to Ireland. There she was interviewed by Henry Cromwell and was placed under arrest for four days. At the end of May 1657 she was arrested and publicly whipped in the market square of Salisbury. Shortly after this, together with Murford, she returned to the Isle of Wight. Afterwards she preached in Portsmouth, Salisbury, and Warminster and in all these places was received with fiery abuse. In the winter of 1657 Evans felt inspired to go to Alexandria and during 1658 went twice to London to organize her journey. In London she met Sarah Cheevers who, independently, had felt the same inspiration. They set out for the Mediterranean in the autumn of 1658. After a short stay in Leghorn the two women got passage in a Dutch ship that reached Malta on 21 December 1658. A few days after their arrival they were interrogated by the Inquisition and arrested. After three months of detention in the house of the English consul in La Valletta, they were taken to the Inquisition prison in Birgu at the beginning of April 1659. The imprisonment of the two women lasted until the summer of 1662. During their stay in the Inquisition prison, the Quaker Daniel Baker went to Malta. He met the inquisitor and the new consul to intercede for them. Their freedom was requested by English shipmasters who visited the island, and by the consul. However, it was probably only through the intercession of Ludovic Stuart, seigneur d'Aubigny, lord almoner to Queen Henrietta Maria and Jansenist abbot of Haute Fontaine and canon of Notre Dame, who had been contracted by the Quakers Gilbert Latey and George Fox, that the two women were released in the summer of 1662. After staying almost three months in the consul's house, they got passage on the 'Sapphire' and returned to England. Their letters and the accounts of their travels to Malta, arrest, and imprisonment, recounting their sufferings, fasting, and visions, were taken to England by Daniel Baker and published in 1662 (shortly before the announcement of their release). This miscellany of documents was republished in 1663 with the account of the last period of detention and of their release. 
On 6 September 1663 Katharine Evans was arrested at Rochester, Kent, but released a few days later. According to the Quaker annalist John Whiting, she went to Scotland in 1663 together with Sarah Cheevers, and then they went to Ireland. They returned to England in May 1664 (Whiting, 221). On their way back they were arrested at Wiveliscombe, Somerset, and remained in prison for a few months. Shortly after their release Sarah Cheevers died. After the death of her friend, Katharine Evans continued her missionary work. In 1666 she was imprisoned at Welshpool, Montgomeryshire. In 1671 she was back in Ireland where she was arrested at Wicklow. On 29 January 1681 she was arrested at Bristol. She died in June 1692. 


