@@@@@


doc= 45816


Sansom, Martha (1689-1736), poet, was born on 1 May 1689 at Hertingfordbury Park, Hertfordshire, the eldest child of Major Thomas Fowke (died 1708), of a Staffordshire gentry family, and his third wife, Mary Chandler, 'nee' Cullen (died 'c'.1705). She was educated at home by tutors, and subsequently at boarding-school. She was brought up a Roman Catholic, but later became a non-practising Anglican. Her autobiographical 'Clio' (written in 1723 but not published until 1752) records her early passion for French romances and love poetry, and a literary ambition discouraged by her mother but nurtured by her father. On her mother's death and her father's return to the army in 1705 she moved in with friends in London. Her father's murder in 1708 proved a devastating blow. 
Fowke's earliest published verse appeared in 'Delights for the Ingenious' (1711). She first achieved public fame in 1720 with verse published in Anthony Hammond's 'New Miscellany' and with 'Clio and Strephon', an important Platonic poetic correspondence with William Bond prefaced by a critical essay by John Porter, which went through several editions. She enjoyed wide-ranging literary friendships, particularly with the poet and critic Aaron Hill, and the poet John Dyer, whose career she encouraged, as well as earning the enmity of others, notably Eliza Haywood, who attacked her in 'The Injur'd Husband' (1723) and the 'Memoirs... of Utopia' (1725-6). Nine poems by Clio, and verses addressed to her, feature in Richard Savage's 'Miscellaneous Poems' (1726). 
By 1721 Fowke's younger brother Thomas had persuaded her to regularize her relationship with Arnold Sansom, a lawyer some years her senior. The marriage proved miserable. Martha left London for East Anglia in 1730, when her husband took up a political post there. He died of alcoholism four years later. She subsequently joined her brother in Leicestershire, where she died on 17 February 1736 at the early age of forty-six. She was buried at St Martin's Church, Leicester. 
During her lifetime Martha Sansom's poetic reputation was blackened by the moral aspersions cast on her character by Haywood and subsequently echoed by Dr Johnson. Recent scholarship has discovered in her work a strongly individual female voice, passionate in quest of literary renown, personal liberty, and a marriage of true minds. Her poetic self-portrait, 'Clio's Picture', consciously opposes contemporary conventions of femininity with a wry account of her own unconventional dark looks. In her poetry she frequently registers her contempt for the narrow confines of female domesticity: '
I was, oh hated Thought! a Woman made; 

For household Cares, and empty Trifles meant. 
(Savage, 'Miscellaneous Poems', 209-10)' Much of her writing was first circulated in manuscript, and recent evidence has considerably enlarged the known corpus of her poems, including some fine amatory verse first printed in the 'Barbados Gazette', subsequently collected in 'Caribbeana' (London, 1741). 


@@@@@


doc= 45817


Mildmay, Grace, Lady Mildmay (c.1552-1620), memoirist and medical practitioner, was the second daughter of Sir Henry Sharington (died 1581), of Lacock Abbey, Chippenham, Wiltshire, and his wife, Anne (died 1607), daughter of Robert Paget, alderman of London. Her father, who was formerly from East Dereham in Norfolk, inherited Lacock Abbey from his brother William Sharington (died 1553), vice-treasurer of the Bristol mint. Grace was the second of four children. Her younger brother William did not survive infancy and her elder sister Ursula died in 1576, leaving Grace and her younger sister Olive as coheirs. 
Grace was educated at home with her two sisters by a Mistress Hamblyn, a relative of the family brought up by Lady Sharington. The governess took great pains with the character and moral training of her charges, and taught Grace some basic medical skills. Grace married in 1567 Anthony Mildmay (c.1549-1617) ['see under 'Mildmay, Sir Walter], eldest son of Sir Walter Mildmay, chancellor of the exchequer, and founder of Emmanuel College, Cambridge, and his wife, Mary Walsingham. The couple resided at Apethorpe, Northamptonshire, and had one child, Mary (1581/2-1640), who married Francis Fane, later first earl of Westmorland, in February 1599. Sir Anthony and Lady Mildmay endured considerable financial strain in their marriage. Not only was no marriage settlement drawn up, but they also became embroiled in expensive and lengthy litigation to gain control of their respective inheritances. Lady Mildmay and her sister Olive were in dispute from early 1581 until late 1609. Lady Mildmay challenged her father's last will, a nuncupative one, which left to Olive the largest share of the estate. Olive was reluctant to relinquish any land to her sister, but eventually the estate was divided equally between the two sisters. Anthony and his younger brother Humphrey quarrelled because Anthony, wishing to provide for his wife and daughter, wanted to break the entail of their father's will, under which his brother was the heir, since Anthony had no son. Sir Anthony won the case, although his victory cost him his brother's friendship. 
Anthony Mildmay had not been eager to marry, 'being then more willing to travel to get experience of the world than to marry so soon' (Pollock, 32). After the wedding Anthony was active in royal service and often away from home. Lady Mildmay divided her time between reading the 'Bible', praying, playing the lute, drawing, needlework, and medical activities. She was an accomplished musician, able to set songs of five parts. Her proficiency in this regard was recognized in the musical world: a galliard, 'My Lady Mildmay's Delight', attributed to the lutenist Robert Johnson, was named after her (Morrongiello). She was also an acclaimed cook. James VI of Scotland dined at Apethorpe while on his journey to take the throne of England, and enjoyed the dinner, since 'everything that was most delicious for taste proved more delicate by the art that made it seem beauteous to the eye, the lady of the house being one of the most excellent confectioners in England' (Aikin, 1.86). Now James I, he visited again in 1612; in appreciation of the Mildmays' hospitality, he gave the timber for the buildings on the east and south sides. A stone statue of James I on the south side of the courtyard at Apethorpe commemorates his generosity. 
Lady Mildmay's medical activities were as sophisticated as her culinary ones and more extensive. She was not unusual in providing medical care: women were expected to be conversant with basic medical treatments, and capable of ministering to their family. However, Lady Mildmay's surviving medical papers reveal that she was engaged in far more than a family-based activity. The papers are not a jumble of cookery and simple herbal recipes, as would be typical, but contain a sophisticated analysis of the causes and treatment of various diseases, accompanied by instructions for the large-scale manufacture of medicines, many of them based on minerals and chemicals. Her understanding of the causes of illness was Galenic in orientation, based on the theory of humours, and was also derived from Christian teachings. She aimed to 'bring the body and parts thereof into an union in itself, by little and little' (Pollock, 110). 
Lady Mildmay practised medicine on a large, expensive, and systematic scale. Commonly used medications, like aqua vitae or metheglin, were prepared in bulk, 10 gallons at a time. One balm required 159 different seeds, roots, spices, and gums, as well as 13 lbs of sugar and nuts and 81/4 gallons of oil, wine, and vinegar. She also practised chemical medicine of the Paracelsian kind, using metals and minerals, such as gold, pearls, turbith, sulphur, and antimony in her salves, cordials, and potions. She experimented with the manufacture and administration of the medicines until she had discovered the most effective method. Her still room had thirty-one large bottles of cordials and oils, all clearly labelled, shelves of powders and pills, a black chest full of ingredients, and sheaves of medical papers (over two thousand loose papers, as well as books, were bequeathed to her daughter, Mary). It is not known who her patients were, but she was prepared to treat individuals of either sex and any age, and she had remedies for a wide range of ailments, both mental and physical. There is no evidence that she received any payment for her work. Except that she refused to perform surgery, the type of care she offered was similar to that dispensed by licensed physicians and earned the praise of some of them. Richard Banister, in a denunciation of women who were active in the medical sphere, exempted 'the right religious and virtuous lady, the Lady Mildmay, of Apethorpe'. Her 'cures were attended with due care, and ended with true charity', and she possessed 'good judgement in many things' (Banister, no. 279). 
Lady Mildmay grew up as a member of the protestant church. Her mother introduced her to the habit of meditating privately every day in order to commune with God, strengthen her faith, and remind herself of God's favours to her. In later life, convinced of her elect status, Lady Mildmay composed a work of 912 folios of spiritual meditations, which cover many topics, the most frequent themes being Christ as the resurrection and the life, and that God would never abandon the faithful. These meditations are an important source for determining what protestantism was for a lay person in post-Reformation England, and also for examining the role of religion in the life of a woman. They illustrate the doctrinal ambiguity of early protestantism, underline the importance of faith, and reveal the educated laity's understanding of key concepts. 
Lady Mildmay's meditations also contain material not recorded elsewhere: on the midlands rising of 1607 and on the earl of Exeter's scheme for draining the fens in Holland, Exeter. Her husband was also involved in both these events. 
Lady Mildmay's memoirs constitute one of the earliest existing autobiographies written by a woman in her own hand. A contemporary portrait depicts her as stern, with an upright bearing, plainly dressed in black, with her hand resting on her medical and musical papers. Her medical work is an example of the important contribution women made to the case of the sick in sixteenth- and early seventeenth-century England. Following the death of her husband in 1617, Lady Mildmay was joined at Apethorpe by her daughter and family, including her granddaughter Lady Rachael Fane. Lady Mildmay died on 27 July 1620 at Apethorpe and was buried in the church there. 


@@@@@


doc= 45818


Mollineux, Mary (1651?-1696), poet, was born Mary Southworth, probably in 1651 and probably in Lancashire. Her parents' names do not appear on her marriage certificate, but it has been speculated that her mother may have been Alice Southworth of Warrington (Mortimer, 126). Mollineux's cousin Frances Owen ('nee' Ridge) was editor and writer of the introduction to her cousin's selection of devotional verses, 'Fruits of Retirement' (1702). 
Frances Owen observed that Southworth's father 'brought her up to more Learning than is commonly bestowed on our sex' (Mollineux, sig. A4'r'). She learned about the nature of plants and minerals, in addition to Latin, Greek, 'physick and chyrurgery', and arithmetic. Though seemingly her learning was impeded by 'weak Eyes', her first dated poem puts her at eleven (ibid., sig. A4'r'- 'v'). She may have been raised a Quaker; Henry Mollineux notes that 'she was Convinced of the Way of Truth in her Youth' (ibid., sig. B'r'). 
In as far as the poetry can be read as biography, Southworth's early work, prior to 1684, extolling the virtues of retirement and retreat, is a pattern of feminine piety. In 1684, however, Southworth was arrested attending a Quaker meeting at James Wright's house in Warrington. Her first experience of imprisonment is rendered in heroic language: '
Tho' the Righteous be in Bonds confin'd, 

They inwardly sweet Satisfaction find. 
(Mollineux, 124)' Southworth met her future husband, Henry Mollineux ['see below'], while in Lancaster Castle. They were married eleven years -- from 10 April 1685 until Mary's death in 1696. John Tomkins describes her as 'a Loving Wife; an Affectionate Mother to her Children' (Tomkins, 50). They had two children, Othniel and Elleazor, both boys. Mollineux compares friendship with the trials of marriage: '
They that are unengag'd in Wedlock, seem 

T'enjoy a Privledge of Liberty 

To act Spontaneously. 
(Mollineux, 162)' The imprisonment of Henry in February 1691, for not appearing before the consistory court over non-payment of tithes, led Mary Mollineux into public conflict with the authorities, whom she engaged in scriptural debate. Answering Bishop Stratford of Chester in August in a way sufficient to convince him that Quakers should be treated with 'kindness' and given their liberty, and arguing with vigour enough to stop the mouth of the bishop's chaplain, she was, nevertheless, accounted a woman with 'so much Learning it makes her mad'. Even despite these victories, Henry was imprisoned, once more, by February 1692 (ibid., sig. B7'v'-C'r'). 
Mary Mollineux's poetry was published posthumously since, according to Tryall Ryder, 'she [was] not seeking Praise amongst Men, but to communicate the Exercise of peculiar Gifts amongst her near Friends and Acquaintance' (Mollineux, A7'v'). Indeed, such is the paradigmatic nature of her meditations on modesty and chastity, her preferment of 'Divine Contemplation' over 'unprofitable Invention', her creative expression is noticeably circumscribed by constrictive notions of pious femininity (ibid., A6'r'- 'v'). 
On her deathbed, Mary Mollineux was 'seized with violent Pain and Sickness'; this continued for a month until she was very weak and rarely achieved consciousness (Mollineux, B2'r'). She died on 3 January 1696, in Liverpool, 'without any Noise, Sigh, or Groan'; she was forty-four (ibid., B3'v'). 




@@@@@


doc= 45819


Penington, Mary (bap. 1623, d. 1682), Quaker and writer, was born at Goodnestone Court, near Faversham, Kent, and baptized on 13 December 1623 at Canterbury Cathedral. She was the only child and heir of Sir John Proude (died 1628), an army officer, and his wife, Anne Fagge of Ewell, Kent (died 1628). Sir John Proude fought for the United Provinces in the service of the prince of Orange and died in 1628 at the battle of Groll, in Guelderland, when Mary was about five. Her mother having died in the same year, Mary went to live with guardians whose identity remains unknown, but whose lack of religious rigour was distasteful to her. 
From the age of nine until her marriage about the age of eighteen Mary Proude resided in Kent, in the home of Sir Edward Partridge and his extended family, including his recently widowed sister, Lady Katherine Springett, and her three children, the oldest of whom, Sir William Springett (1621/2-1644), parliamentarian colonel, deputy lieutenant for the county of Kent, and devout puritan, became Mary's first husband in 1642. He was sympathetic with her attraction to puritanism, although both later rejected Independency. Married 'without a ring', they refused to have their only son, John (died before 1647), baptized ('Experiences', 78). Removed to London on account of the dangerous uprisings in the Vale of Kent, Mary Springett was heavily pregnant with her daughter, Gulielma Maria (1644-1693), when she undertook a harrowing winter journey to Arundel, Sussex, to visit her husband. Having successfully besieged Arundel Castle, he died from spotted fever in 1644. She refused to have her daughter, born after her husband's death, baptized. 
During her widowhood, Mary Springett's spiritual life faltered. Experimenting with and then abandoning different religious 'notions', she also rejected her accustomed 'religious exercises' ('Experiences', 28). Believing in 'the Lord and his truth', yet convinced 'that it was not made known to any upon earth' (ibid., 30), Mary Springett became part of fashionable and irreligious London society; she took up 'foolish mirth, carding, dancing, singing, and frequenting of music meetings', but with a 'heart... constantly sad, and pained beyond expression' (ibid., 30-31). Visited by vivid and prophetic dreams, she still could not pray nor 'call God father' (ibid., 34). 
On 13 May 1654, 'being [long] wearied in seeking and not finding', Mary Springett married Isaac Penington (1616-1679), Quaker convert and author of many spiritual tracts, who, like her, sought the 'truth' and 'refused to be comforted by any appearance of religion' ('Experiences', 38). The couple lived in or near London, although they also had estates at Causham (Caversham) Lodge, near Reading, and at Datchet, in south Buckinghamshire. John Penington, their eldest son and heir, was born in 1655 and before his death in 1710 he had produced a number of Quaker tracts and preserved the personal papers of his parents, including Mary Penington's spiritual autobiography. 'Convinced' about 1656 through the combined efforts of Thomas Curtis and William Simpson, they were publicly affiliated with the Quakers by 1658. Soon after, Mary and Isaac took up residence at The Grange, near Chalfont St Peter, Buckinghamshire, an estate which Isaac's father, Alderman Isaac Penington (c.1584-1661), had given them at the time of their marriage. Their second son, Isaac, was born about 1656, and their only daughter, Mary, in 1657. The Grange was also the centre of the local Quaker community and a haven for the young Thomas Ellwood, who became the Peningtons' tutor in 1662, and whose father opposed his son's convincement. When The Grange was sequestered around 1665 because of Alderman Penington's involvement in Charles I's execution, Mary and her younger children settled near Isaac, imprisoned at Aylesbury (1665-8), while Gulielma Maria stayed with friends. Some time between 1666 and 1668 Mary and some of her children also boarded at Waltham Abbey School, Essex. About 1658-68 she began her spiritual autobiography, which she completed just before her death; it was published in 1821 as 'Some account of circumstances in the life of Mary Penington. From her manuscript, left for her family'. 
Ostracized on account of their Quakerism, Mary Penington and her husband faced lawsuits in chancery, brought by tenants and relations, all of whom took 'advantage' of their Quaker refusal to swear oaths ('Experiences', 53). Judith Penington, Isaac's sister, used the terms of Mary Penington's marriage settlement in an at least partially successful action ('c'.1664- 'c'.1667) to gain control over her sister-in-law's lands in Kent. Lawsuits led to the loss of at least one of Mary's estates and all of Isaac's. She retained at least one in Sussex (Worminghurst Hall) and several in Kent, including Westbeer, but sold the latter to purchase Woodside, a farm with a dilapidated house near Amersham, in 1669. Having given birth to William in 1665 and Edward in 1667, she renovated Woodside, which was ideally located so the family could remain part of the Chalfont St Peter Quaker community. She completed the work in 1672-3 (Penney, 13). In addition to raising her children during Isaac's imprisonments (1666-71), Mary Penington participated in Quaker controversies; her letters speak favourably of separate women's meetings, and address factionalism and backsliding. Isaac's death in 1679 prompted her publication of a testimony to his character, one of several which preface his collected works (1681). She also helped defend her own reputation as well as that of her husband against William Rogers's attacks in the 'Christian Quaker' (1680). In 'John Penington's Complaint Against William Rogers' (1681) she refutes the charge that she avoided the seizure of her property and thus shunned 'suffering' for truth (M. Penington, 'My mother's account', 11). 
To Mary Penington's biographers she is the exemplary wife, mother, and 'helpmeet' to her famous husbands, although many also praise the literary skill evident in her manuscript biography of William Springett, 'A Letter from me to my Dear Grandchild Springet Pen' (1680). Her works are also important 'social documents', which 'record the liberating effect that Quakerism had on... women' (Blecki, 20), offer an 'affecting evocation of a spiritual life lived in inviolable privacy even in the midst of a loving family' (Burns, 72), and present a record of a woman who embraced 'the Friends' imperative to break down the barriers between private spiritual conscience and public life' (Coleman, 93). Her works were first published in 1821, but fifteen extant manuscript copies (1680- 'c'.1812) testify to the recognition of their spiritual and literary merits in England and America. The Victorian novelist Emma Marshall used a family copy of the manuscripts in her civil war romance 'Memories of Troublous Times' (1880), which includes Mary Penington herself as a character. 
Mary Penington's will, dated 18 July 1680, testifies to her successful stewardship of her estate in the face of the government's religious persecution. After giving enough to each of her younger sons 'to bind him to some trade', as well as an additional $400 when each turned twenty-two, she was able to leave gifts and annuities for friends, relatives, and her younger children totalling about $175. Mary's estates, which she had inherited from her mother and father, went to John (M. Penington, 'Abstract of the will', 109-12). Mary Penington died of an illness, perhaps triggered by a serious fever in June 1680. A letter from Isaac Penington referring to Mary's journey to London to consult a physician suggests, however, that as early as 1667 she was suffering from some kind of painful internal complaint. She died on 18 September 1682 at Worminghurst Hall, Sussex, a property that was probably a gift from Mary to her daughter, Gulielma Maria, upon her marriage to William Penn. She is buried beside her husband, Isaac, in the Quaker burial-ground at Jordans, Buckinghamshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 45820


Polewheele, E. (1651?-1691?), playwright, may have been the Elizabeth Polwhele who was the eldest daughter of Theophilus Polwhele (d. 1689), vicar of Tiverton and later a nonconformist minister -- a somewhat startling identification, though no other has been offered. Her birth date can be approximated from his first marriage in May 1650. This Elizabeth Polwhele married Stephen Lobb (d. 1699), a nonconformist minister who became a prominent ecclesiastical figure in the 1680s. They had a son, the first of five known children, on 17 August 1678, having presumably long since given up playwriting. The funeral sermon for Lobb's wife, preached by Samuel Slater, and published in 1691, unfortunately contains no personal details of her life. The identification thus remains tentative. 
Whoever E. Polewheele may have been, she was among the first women to write for the professional stage in England. (Her contemporaries were the obscure Frances Boothby, author of 'Marcelia', 1669, and Aphra Behn, whose 'Forc'd Marriage' appeared about September 1670.) In her dedication of 'The Frolicks' to Prince Rupert (signed E. Polewheele), the author describes herself as 'an unfortunate young woman... haunted with poetic devils', and says: 'I question not but I shall be taxed for writing a play so comical, but those that have ever seen my 'Faithful Virgins' and my 'Elysium' will justify me a little for writing this. I am young, no scholar, and what I write I write by nature, not by art.' The title of the lost 'Elysium' suggests an allegorical masque. 'The Faithful Virgins' survives as an anonymous manuscript (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. poet. 195). On folio 49'r' appears the notation, 'This Tragedy apoynted to be acted by the dukes Company of Actors only leaving out what was Cross'd by Henry Herbert' (master of the revels), and it was presumably performed at Lincoln's Inn Fields about 1670. An old-fashioned play in clanking rhyme, it is a throwback to popular types of the 1620s and 1630s, filled with 'precieux' sentiment. Brought up to date with witches reminiscent of Davenant's version of 'Macbeth', it ends in a contrived bloodbath. 

'The Frolicks, or, The Lawyer Cheated' (dated 1671 by the author in Cornell MSS Bd. Rare P P77) is a more successful enterprise, juggling four distinct plot lines. Sir William Meanwell lives in terror of being cuckolded by his young country wife. Lady Meanwell's sister, Faith, is seduced by Lord Courtall, a married rake who is assisted by Procreate, a French bawd. The witty Clarabell marries the rakish and bankrupt Rightwit, tricking her lawyer father. Two other suitors marry masked women, thinking that they are marrying Clarabell. The crudely constructed, bawdy play is a cross between 1660s 'gay couple' courtship comedy and 1670s sex comedy. Unpublished until 1977, the play was clearly intended for performance; whether it was ever staged is not known. An ambitious if derivative writer, Polewheele was again aiming to exploit a theatrical trend. Whatever ended her career, she was unquestionably one of the first three women to have an original play professionally staged in London. 


@@@@@


doc= 45821


Ross, Katherine (c.1635-1697), memoirist and schoolmistress, was born in Edinburgh, one of five daughters of Francis Collace ('c'.1595-1647), minister of Gordon, and his wife, Marion Muirhead. She describes herself as having been 'religiously educate' (Ross, 8) and notes her conversion at age fourteen, probably under the ministry of Hew Mackail, minister of Trinity in Edinburgh. 
After her marriage on 31 January 1650 to John Ross (died 1674?) Katherine moved north, initially to Tain in Ross, but then to Moray, eventually settling at Bridge End of Inschol near Auldearn. Little is known about her husband except that her friends unite in calling him 'wicked' ('Diary', ed. Laing, 324; NL Scot., Adv. MS 32.4.4, p. 86). Katherine herself speaks of her marriage as '24 years of affliction' (Ross, 9). In the course of it she gave birth to twelve children, all of whom predeceased her. She developed her spiritual life in depth under the ministry of Thomas Hog. It greatly comforted her over the deaths of her children and no doubt also made her marriage easier to bear. By 1667 her spiritual commitment had developed into religious radicalism. 
Around this point, Katherine embarked upon a career of covenanting civil disobedience: refusing to hear the episcopal clergy preach, attending conventicles, reproving her social superiors such as the lairds of Innes and Brodie for acts of conformity, and even refusing to have her children wet-nursed by anyone who had taken the oath of supremacy. In refusing to hear the episcopal clergy both she and her sister Jean were pioneers in their respective parishes, obtaining indulgence and support from their female social superiors who were soon to join them in their protest. Katherine's memoirs in this period read like a who's who of conventicling in the east of Scotland. Thomas Hog, John Welsh, John Welwood, and Thomas Ross were all among her friends and spiritual counsellors. Several letters of spiritual counsel are still extant from Welwood to Katherine and to her sisters Jean and Elizabeth (NL Scot., Adv. MS 32.4.4). 
After the death of Katherine's husband, probably in 1674, she and Jean moved to Falkland in Fife where they became part of the small circle of covenanting resistance in a mostly conforming area. Here they worked as schoolmistresses teaching sewing to the daughters of gentry, but, given their pride in the number of their scholars religiously converted in their hands, it is probable that they also provided religious instruction. This no doubt contributed to their appearance before a local court where they were only saved from prosecution by the interposition of a local noblewoman (perhaps the countess of Rothes). It would also account for the attempted kidnap of one of their scholars by her episcopal relatives. Katherine was quite capable of teaching more than sewing: listing Samuel Rutherford, David Calderwood, and Thomas Shepherd among her favourite authors, she was not only an avid reader but a fluent writer. Over the course of her career as a strict covenanter she was asked to set down her spiritual experiences for the benefit of others, which she did in the shape of her memoirs which circulated in manuscript before being published in 1735 (after her death) by James Hog, minister of Carnock, Fife. 
After another brief stay in Auldearn, about 1677 Katherine returned to Edinburgh where she apparently refused to join the United Societies out of a dislike of separatism. She died there on 10 July 1697, much admired for her piety and considered by Hog as 'one well fit to teach such a weakling as I' (Ross, 5). She was buried on the following day in Greyfriars kirkyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 45822


Savage, Sarah (1664-1752), diarist, was born on 7 August 1664 at Broad Oak, Flintshire, the eldest daughter and third child of a prominent nonconformist minister and diarist, Philip Henry (1631-1696), and his wife, Katherine Matthews (1629-1707). Precocious, she was taught while very young to read English by the Revd William Turner and Hebrew by her father; at six or seven she could already read and construe a Hebrew psalm. In childhood she also began a practice continued into old age of summarizing the sermons she had heard preached, because she found reading such reminders comforting and instructive. At sixteen she began participating in holy communion, wherein 'through [the Lord's] goodness, I found great sweetness' (Williams, 30). Thereafter, following the teachings of her father, she aimed to show her faith by zeal for good works. On 25 March 1687, with some reluctance, she married a pious widower with one child, her relative John Savage (died 1729), a farmer and land agent living at Wrenbury Wood, near Nantwich in Cheshire. The marriage was ultimately a happy one, and their home became a meeting place for fellow dissenters. Throughout her life she would be fond of reading religious works. She also became known in her community as a generous giver of alms. 
Diary-keeping was an important part of the Henry family's religious observance. Sarah's father began his in 1657 and continued it until his death, and her brother Matthew Henry and her sister Ann Hulton also kept diaries. Sarah's began in August 1686 and, like those of the rest of her family, her diary was concerned with the close scrutiny of the use of her time, and scrupulously analysed her sinful nature. She became the conscientious recorder of her own lapses, albeit concerned also that her husband should not become over-involved in worldly concerns. Sarah had resolved to follow the four rules for a godly woman set down by her father: 'obedience to her husband, chastity in conversation, sobriety in adornment, and a 'meek and quiet spirit'' (Crawford, 'Katharine and Philip Henry', 50). Men and women were to respect the division of labour between the sexes, and a woman's highest achievement was to be 'a fruitful vine and a nursing mother' (ibid.). Although Sarah's diary is primarily a spiritual self-examination, in the first years of her marriage it reveals also her desires for a child, sometimes very directly. Thus, supported by her faith but conflicted by desire and fearing barrenness, in October 1687 she writes: 'If God should see good to delay or totally deny the mercy of children to me still by his grace I will wait on him, and love him not one jot the less, tho' I sometimes can scarce quiet my spirit as I would. (Crawford, 'Attitudes to pregnancy', 44)' In 1688, the year when she came safely through smallpox, she also finally bore a premature but surviving son in December (there had already been one miscarriage earlier), but he died on the 18th. After these early disappointments, however, she proved fruitful; on 13 May 1701 she bore her eighth child, Hannah. She produced in all nine children, four of whom, all girls, would survive her and marry. Other disappointments than the death of her first-born (and of her fourth child, a son, on 29 December 1705) were that Philip, her only son to survive birth, died of smallpox at twenty-two in 1721, and that on 27 September 1729 her husband died after forty-two years of marriage. But she never repines in her diary at God's will, ever grateful instead for divine goodness while assured of her own unworthiness. The diary is not entirely limited to self-examination or even personal matters, though her religious concerns dominate it. She is patriot enough to note, for example, King William's part in the battle of the Boyne in 1690 and his death in 1702. Her dedication to her family is a continual theme; her resolution that children are 'arrows in the hand and need to be rightly guided' (Crawford, 'Katharine and Philip Henry', 45) reflects her wish to bring up her children in godliness. However, her diary reveals a tension between Christian love for her children and 'creature love': in 1702 she writes that her greatest sin is 'too much love, and too many cares for, my children' (ibid., 51). Domestic work is seen as necessary and part of a woman's duty but unavoidably worldly, and in her correspondence Sarah frequently apologizes for her attention to family life for its own sake rather than for its spiritual significance. 
Following her husband's death, and after living for a while with her children and with friends, in 1736 Sarah Savage moved to West Bromwich, Staffordshire, her home until her sudden death on 27 February 1752. She was buried in the churchyard of West Bromwich; her funeral sermon was preached on 15 March 1752 by the Revd Mr Howell, dissenting minister. She left behind her diary, continued until her final year, of which only the first original volume survives, at Chester Record Office, although transcripts exist elsewhere. With the aid of these, the nineteenth-century nonconformist writer John Bickerton Williams, a relative of the Henry family, compiled a memoir of her life and thoughts for publication in 1818 as an example of 'female virtue... for the imitation and guidance of succeeding generations' (Williams, v). Williams selected examples from the diary that would emphasize his subject's piety and showed little interest in, for example, the family's financial matters, but this attempt to present Sarah Savage as an example of the religious life to nineteenth-century women would not have surprised her. She had, indeed, continued her record hoping that posthumously 'it may be useful to some of mine... for their quickening... in the narrow way' (Williams, 236). 


@@@@@


doc= 45823


Sharp, Jane (fl. 1641-1671), midwife, was the author of the best-known seventeenth-century textbook on midwifery in English written by a woman. Nothing is known about her life, except that she describes herself as a 'practitioner in the art of midwifery above thirty years' in the preface to her book, 'The midwives book, or, The whole art of midwifery discovered, directing childbearing women how to behave themselves in their conception, bearing and nursing of children' (1671). It has been widely assumed that Sharp was a London practitioner, but no record of either her life or her practice has been found in London, despite extensive searches. Her use of the west-country phrase 'by odds' and the book's dedication to Lady Elleanour Talbutt, who, as an unmarried sister of the tenth earl of Shrewsbury, was probably living in Shropshire or Gloucestershire, suggest that Sharp may not have been from London at all. It has been speculated that she may have had a daughter, or more probably a daughter-in-law, to whom she passed on her skills, since a midwife named Sarah Sharpe is mentioned in the will of Anne Parrott, midwife in St Clement Danes, London. As other historical evidence is lacking, Sharp's existence has sometimes been denied. Late twentieth-century feminist scholars have sought to correct this view, drawing attention to the difficulties of establishing women's identity in the early modern period. 
Published as a small octavo, 'The Midwives Book' was a lengthy text of 95,000 words. It sold, bound, for 2's'. 6died, and achieved four editions by 1725; the third and fourth editions, published by John Marshall in 1724 and 1725, appeared after Sharp's death with the title 'The Compleat Midwife's Companion'. 
In the introduction to 'The Midwives Book' Sharp addressed herself to her 'sisters, the Midwives of England' and gave her reasons for writing the book. She claimed that her distress at 'the many miseries women endure in the hands of unskilful midwives' who practised only for 'lucre's sake' had prompted her work (Sharp, introduction). However, her educational purpose cannot be taken at face value. Printed textbooks were largely irrelevant to the education of seventeenth-century midwives, who were trained by apprenticeship, and the full title of the book suggests that Sharp had a wider audience in mind. It seems likely that the book, like other midwifery manuals, was intended for both lay and medical readers; indeed in her introduction Sharp anticipated that her readership would include young men and women anxious to learn about sexuality and reproduction. 
Divided into six sections, 'The Midwives Book' explored the full range of topics then thought to be relevant to human reproduction. It discussed conception and the promotion of fertility; the signs of pregnancy and the care of pregnant women; the management of both normal deliveries and malpresentations; the treatment of venereal disease; and the post-natal care of both mother and baby. The book also included information about the anatomy of the male and female sexual organs, and a short section on the diseases of children. Sharp has been criticized for her seeming unawareness of podalic version (turning the foetus so that the feet present), but this shortcoming was common to other contemporary medical writers. 
Sharp claimed that the manual was the product of her own experience and the study of foreign authors, but she was very dependent on the work of Nicholas Culpeper, the seventeenth-century radical. Many of the stories, remedies, and descriptions that Sharp uses in books 1, 5, and 6 are based on Culpeper's translation of Daniel Sennert's 'Practical Physick' (1664). Sharp also borrowed extensively from Culpeper's 'Dictionary' and his 'Bartholinus Anatomy', translated from Bartholinus, and from Helkiah Crooke's 'Microcosmographia', a manual of anatomy first published in 1615. However, 'The Midwives Book' was not merely a patchwork of earlier works. Sharp demonstrated her originality by reworking her sources, adding material of her own, and rewording anatomical definitions from a woman's point of view. On the whole 'The Midwives Book' contained much good sense, though it was not in the same league as some contemporary works by continental midwives. 
Sharp's work is important for its defence of the traditional role played by women as birth attendants. In the seventeenth century male practitioners were beginning to encroach upon the professional territory of the midwife, and Sharp felt the need to emphasize the value of the midwife's expertise. Man-midwifery, she argued, was a frivolous fashion, since country folk who could not afford the fees of a male practitioner fared as well in childbirth as the greatest ladies of the land. Sharp did recognize that unskilled midwifery could cause misery, but unlike male critics of midwifery practice she did not represent this as a result of the limited intellectual capacities of women. In her introduction Sharp explained: 'It is not hard words that perform the work, as if none understood the Art, that cannot understand Greek. Words are but the shell that we offtimes break our Teeth with them to come at the kernel, I mean our brains to know what is the meaning of them; but to have the same in our mother tongue would save us a great deal of labour. (Sharp, 3-4)' Although men alone could study anatomy at the universities, Sharp added, women could learn from each other and from 'long and diligent practice'. Sharp may have been aware of the proposals for a college of midwives, controlled by medical practitioners, repeatedly put forward by the Chamberlen family in the first half of the seventeenth century. Within this context, her acceptance of Culpeper as an authority may be significant. An arch-critic of 'closed shops' and professional monopolies, Culpeper was especially popular among mid-seventeenth-century London midwives, who faced the most serious challenge to their status and professional independence. His anti-establishment stance may have had some appeal for Sharp too, as she sought to defend the midwife's time-honoured claim to the practice of midwifery. 


@@@@@


doc= 45824


Shirley, Elizabeth (1564/5-1641), Augustinian nun and author, was the daughter of Sir John Shirley of Shirley in Leicestershire. Sickly in childhood and adolescence she was raised a protestant until at the age of about twenty she went to live as housekeeper to her unmarried Catholic brother, Sir George Shirley of Staunton-Harrold in Leicestershire. Although initially resistant to his efforts to convert her Elizabeth was eventually persuaded by miraculous stories, Catholic literature, and an apparition of the Holy Ghost. Following the marriage of her brother the pressures of recusancy, her ill health, and a reluctance to marry convinced her to enter a convent. After some doubts regarding her vocation she finally joined the Flemish Augustinian cloister of St Ursula's in Louvain, where she made her religious profession on 10 September 1596. In 1608, when the English nuns there decided to establish a separate house, Elizabeth was appointed procuratrice, responsible for its finances, and temporary prioress of the proposed venture. She remained in charge from the nuns' arrival at the new convent on 10 February 1609 until the election of a permanent superior in November, after which she became the sub-prioress, a position she held until infirmity forced her to resign in 1637. 
As a capable administrator Elizabeth was principally responsible for establishing the English Augustinian cloister of St Monica's in Louvain. Since the 1569 election of an English prioress, Margaret Clement, in the Flemish convent about twenty-eight women had crossed the channel and entered there. Upon Clement's retirement in 1606 the disputed election of a Flemish superior culminated in the move for a separate convent. The English feared that St Ursula's would no longer receive recusant novices in the face of competition from the recently founded Benedictine monastery in Brussels and a proposed Poor Clare house at St Omer. Elizabeth Shirley was eminently qualified to organize and execute the venture. Her experience in supervising a secular household, coupled with the financial generosity of her family, enabled her to solicit funds, negotiate renting a suitable house, secure as many household and religious furnishings as the Flemish sisters would donate, and facilitate the removal of the six founders and their belongings from St Ursula's to St Monica's. The first few months in the new house were marked by strong religious fervour, tempered by severe financial shortfalls. As procuratrice Elizabeth feared that the cloister would fail, but she managed to secure sufficient alms to avoid dissolution, even putting some money aside to purchase a permanent residence. Although her sisters ultimately elected Jane (Sister Mary) Wiseman as the first prioress, Elizabeth's appointment as sub-prioress affirmed their confidence in her continuing capacity to manage their temporal concerns. She is regarded as instrumental in the foundation of St Monica's in all accounts of the cloister's establishment. 
However, Elizabeth Shirley is also known as an author. In 1626 she composed the biography of St Ursula's English prioress whose success in attracting English novices paved the way for St Monica's. Written fourteen years after Margaret Clement's death Elizabeth's hagiographical text offered not only the life of her former prioress and the early history of the English Augustinians in Louvain, but it also aspired to provide spiritual and practical guidance to her sisters and their superiors. Deprecating her skill and worthiness as the recorder of Clement's virtue Elizabeth defended her assumption of the task, declaring: 'I thought it my duty & part to geve her some Littell mytt of my good will... beseeching allmighty god to geve me his grace that I may in som littell thing emmitate her & allso to inspire all those that shall hereafter posses her place & offis of government, that they may sett her as a true pattron & example before them & I assure my self they shall make a happy progres. (Shirley, fols. 62-3)' As a writer, therefore, Elizabeth cemented the economic and administrative foundations she had laid in 1608 by establishing herself as a custodian of the cloister's heritage and adviser to future generations of nuns. 
Elizabeth Shirley died, aged seventy-six, on 1 September 1641 at St Monica's, where she was buried. Upon her death her sisters warmly acknowledged her contributions, noting that deafness in old age had deprived them of her much appreciated counsel. Although Elizabeth Shirley was destined to play second fiddle to other superiors in her long religious career of forty-six years, her achievements show how the cloister provided capable and well-connected women considerable scope for institutional governance in early modern society. 


@@@@@


doc= 45825


Speght, Rachel (b. 1597?, d. in or before 1661?), polemicist and poet, was the daughter of James Speght (died 1637), a Calvinist minister in London who was rector of St Mary Magdalen, Milk Street (1592-1637), and of St Clement Eastcheap (1611-37); nothing is known of her mother. Her father was the author of religious tracts and had some associations with the Goldsmiths' guild and the City establishment. Rachel had three surviving siblings, Sara, Rebecca, and Samuel; two others died in infancy. Thomas Speght, editor of Chaucer (1598 and 1602), may have been a kinsman. One of Rachel's works, 'Mortalities Memorandum', was dedicated to her godmother Mary Moundford 'as a testimonie of my true thankefulnesse for your fruitfull love'; Mary was the wife of Thomas Moundford, a renowned London physician who was six times president of the College of Physicians. 
Speght was the first Englishwoman to identify herself, by name, as a polemicist and critic of contemporary gender ideology. Her tract defending women, 'A Mouzell for Melastomus' (1617), is the first, and maybe the only, female contribution to the vigorous Jacobean pamphlet war over women's place and role. She also published, in 1621, a long poetic meditation on death, 'Mortalities Memorandum', together with an allegorical dream-vision poem, 'The Dreame', that is remarkable for its account of her rapturous encounter with learning and for its impassioned defence of women's humanistic education. Her writings indicate that she had acquired a classical education very rare for seventeenth-century women of any class; she knew Latin and had some training in logic and rhetoric, and had at least encountered a wide range of learned authorities. Her minister father may have conducted or supervised that education -- the fact that he left her in his will a copy of the collected works of the puritan theologian Richard Greenham indicates that he valued her intellectual interests -- or she may have attended one of the few schools for young gentlewomen at that period. In the preface to 'Mortalities Memorandum' and 'The Dreame' she offers her new book in part to reassert her authorial rights against those who (refusing to credit female achievement) attributed her tract to her father. As a member of the London bourgeoisie she seems not to have been much troubled by the anxieties about authorship and publication common among the upper classes in early modern England, and especially among women. She may indeed have hoped to earn money from writing as a quasi-professional author. 
The immediate stimulus to Speght's writing was the publication in 1615 of an anonymous attack on women: the rambling, boisterous, tonally confused but lively 'Araignment of Lewde, Idle, Froward, and Unconstant Women' by Joseph Swetnam. This tract inaugurated the rancorous Jacobean skirmish in the centuries-old 'querelle des femmes', or debate over the nature and worth of womankind. Two years later, in 1617, Speght's answer, 'A Mouzell '[muzzle]' for Melastomus '[black mouth]'', was published by Swetnam's printer, Thomas Archer, who was apparently trying to capitalize on a popular controversy. Of the eight major contributors to the Swetnam and cross-dressing controversies of 1615-20 only Speght (then nineteen) published under her own name and insisted on her authorial identity. Most of the tracts in these controversies recycled hoary arguments pro and con, and the male writers saw themselves as participants in an ongoing game of wit. Speght's tract breaks the mould of such rhetorical gamesmanship and, inserting herself into the male preserve of protestant biblical exegesis, reinterprets biblical texts -- especially the creation-fall story from 'Genesis' -- so as to make them yield a more expansive and equitable concept of gender. 
Speght attacks Swetnam on particular points, as the genre and readership of such polemics required, but her sometimes trenchant invective against his logic and style is restricted to the prefatory matter and a few poems, and to an appended small tract, 'Certaine Quaeres to the Bayter of Women', with separate title-page, epistle, and preface. In the 'Mouzell' proper she looks past Swetnam to engage ministers and other commentators who find in scripture some basis to devalue and wholly subjugate women. Her most radical claims are extrapolations from 'Galatians' 3:28, that under the 'New Testament' 'male and female are all one in Christ Jesus'. On that authority she applies the parable of the talents to women, inferring that 'no power externall or internall ought woman to keep idle, but to imploy it in some service of God', while her own act of writing this tract makes the case that some talents ask employment beyond the domestic sphere. She concludes with a stern warning to men who invite God's certain revenge for reviling his best gift and excellent handywork -- 'women I meane, whom God hath made equall with themselves in dignity, both temporally and eternally'. A copy of the 'Mouzell for Melastomus' at the Beinecke Library, Yale University (1h Sp 617m), contains in the margins some eighty-seven harsh and derogatory manuscript annotations in a contemporary hand. These are probably Swetnam's notes, prepared with a view to answering Speght's tract, although no such answer was published. 
Most of what is known about Speght's early life must be extrapolated from her allegorical dream-vision poem, 'The Dreame', which prefaces her long meditative poem, 'Mortalities Memorandum' (1621). The latter offers itself as an example of a proper Christian meditation on death and indicates that her mother's death in June 1620 prompted it. 'The Dreame' allegorizes in a romance mode the obstacles that Speght encountered and overcame in her pursuit of learning -- her own fears, the dissuasions of others, the distractions of domestic duties -- as well as the encouragement she apparently found from (perhaps) her father and mother, or the Moundfords. It is enlivened by the dialogue of the speaker with allegorical characters: Thought, Age, Experience, Truth, Dissuasion, Industry. Rachel the speaker has to overcome difficulties mounted by Dissuasion: '
As dulnesse, and my memories defect; 

The difficultie of attaining lore, 

My time, and sex, with many others more 
(ll. 106-8)' Once entered into Erudition's garden, however, she delights in the 'taste of science' and desires to 'reape this pleasure more and more'. Truth delivers a paean to knowledge, forcefully countering the conventional arguments in contemporary tracts for limiting woman's education to what is of practical use in her life -- the 'Bible', religious treatises, grammar, handwriting, domestic skills (and, for aristocrats, music, dancing, and modern languages) -- with the progressive argument that the very nature of humankind makes all knowledge useful for all humans. At length some unspecified 'occasion' forced her, regretfully, to end her studies, to return '
to that place... 

From whence I came 

' and to use her time 'other-ways' (ll. 238-40), presumably in domestic offices. Soon afterwards she encountered a 'full fed Beast' [Swetnam] attacking women and was prompted to muzzle him; and some time after that [1621] another devouring beast [Death] that depopulated countries and took her mother. 
In the 'Mouzell' Speght does not attack patriarchy as a social arrangement but she does deny any essential basis for it in nature or in the spiritual order. She also represents the family in terms very different from conventional views of it as an analogue of monarchy in the state. 'The Dreame' offers an uncompromising defence of woman's education on the same basis as man's education. Speght's serious effort to rethink the implications of the dominant biblical discourse in regard to women was provoked by Swetnam but 'The Dreame' suggests that it was also provoked by her own situation as a learned young woman hedged about by restrictions. Both tract and poem strongly, cogently, and subversively argue her own and all good women's worth and substantial equality with men. 
On 6 August 1621, at the age of twenty-four, Speght married William Procter (1593-1661) of Somerset, also a Calvinist cleric (and the author of published sermons) at St Mary Woolchurch, London. In 1624 the Procters were living at Upminster in Essex, just outside London, where William was serving as a curate, and from 1627 in the parish of St Giles Cripplegate, where two children were baptized: Rachel (26 February 1627) and William (15 December 1630). In 1631 William Procter gained the living of Stradishall, a rural community in south-west Suffolk, and in 1634 Rachel gave birth to another child, Joseph. In 1644, after much controversy between puritan and establishment factions in his parish, Procter was ejected as 'scandalous' and as a strong supporter of Laudian liturgies and ceremonies. As a condition of receiving the customary one-fifth income from the rectory as maintenance for herself and her children, Rachel Speght was ordered to move three miles out of town and refrain from 'fomentinge any faction' against the cleric who succeeded her husband -- perhaps indicating that she had been actively involved in the parish controversies. Whether the ruling against Rachel was enforced is not known, but the family continued to live in Stradishall, where Procter owned several houses. William Procter evidently kept a school in his house after sequestration; he was restored to his living in 1661 but died between April and mid-July of that year. Rachel Speght published nothing after her marriage and there is no record of her death, though as William Procter's will makes no mention of her, she evidently predeceased him. 


@@@@@


doc= 45826


Squire, Jane (bap. 1686, d. 1743), scientific writer, was born in York and baptized in the city at St Michael-le-Belfrey on 6 May 1686. She was the second daughter of Robert Squire (1648-1707) of York and his wife, Priscilla, 'nee' Bower (1660-1711), daughter of Edward Bower, a merchant of Bridlington Quay. Her parents had married on 13 December 1684, and also had an older daughter, Priscilla (1685-1731), and a son, Robert, who died in infancy in 1688. Robert Squire was a proctor of the civil law who owned a number of properties, including profitable lead and alum mines in Yorkshire, and sat as MP for Scarborough from 1705. Following the death of their father in 1707 and of their mother four years later, Jane Squire and her sister each received a substantial inheritance, which provided them with an unusual degree of independence. In 1711 Priscilla married Bryan Cooke (died 1734) of Doncaster, who had been elected MP for East Retford in January of that year and who succeeded his father as fourth baronet in 1732. 
By at least 1721 Jane Squire was recorded as living in Westminster, London (TNA: PRO, 'Squire v. Burnaby', C11/2689/17). A year later she brought a lawsuit against twelve individuals, including Edward Harley, second earl of Oxford and Mortimer, and Thomas, Lord Harley. The lawsuit sought greater transparency over an expedition of two ships sent in 1721 to 'fish upon wrecks' (that is, to conduct maritime salvage) in which Squire had invested thousands of pounds with no return. Two others named in the lawsuit -- John Burnaby and Branson Oulson -- had captained the expedition's ships while another defendant, John Hutchinson, had acted as a middleman and had received Squire's investment. It was not unusual for women during this period to participate in lawsuits, but it was rare for a woman to lodge such a detailed and vehement complaint and one against individuals as powerful as the Harleys. Hutchinson's initial response, accusing Squire of chasing 'adventures' or risky investments, was followed in 1725 with a more damaging testimony that Squire no longer had the right to be heard in court since she was a 'Popish recusant convict' (TNA: PRO, 'Squire v. Burnaby', C11/303/19). Though an accusation of Roman Catholic worship had been lodged against Squire in September 1722 -- suspiciously soon after she began her action -- this had been dismissed (Middlesex session rolls, LMA, MJ/SR/2394). With the failure of her lawsuit Squire was committed to the Fleet prison, London, for debt on 15 July 1726. She appears to have owed $3400 to a couple named Bower (or Bowers), who may have been maternal relatives (TNA: PRO, PRIS 1/3 127). Following the passage of an 'Act for the Relief of Insolvent Debtors', she was freed on 23 July 1729. 
On her release Squire dedicated herself to developing an improved method of finding the longitude co-ordinate of a ship at sea. She was motivated by the 'Longitude Act' of 1714, which offered rewards of up to $20,000 for methods that could determine longitude within a certain degree of accuracy and specifically on a trial voyage to the West Indies as well as near the coastlines. 
While basic astronomy was increasingly viewed as an appropriate female pastime, the longitude problem's confluence of navigation, mathematics, and financial interest was not. No other woman is known to have openly pursued the British longitude rewards and funds, though at least one -- Sir Joshua Reynolds's sister, Elizabeth Johnson -- did so anonymously in the 1780s. 
In 1731 Squire had the attorney-general, Sir Philip Yorke, read the 1714 act aloud to her prior to beginning work on her proposal. She discussed her ideas with Hans Sloane, president of the Royal Society and a commissioner of longitude, and with the mathematician Abraham de Moivre. Both directed her to Edmond Halley, who as astronomer royal was perhaps the most influential of the commissioners; however, he did not acknowledge her approaches. In response, Squire sent a printed copy of her proposal to each commissioner and to de Moivre in August 1731. 
Squire's scheme was rooted in her Roman Catholic faith, about which she was unusually open. She proposed a new universal language and system of measurement with which -- by fostering universal communication and understanding -- she sought to move humanity closer to the state before the fall of the Tower of Babel. Squire described her plan as a 'simple easy Method' of navigation suitable for sailors with little mathematical knowledge (Squire, 'Proposal for Discovering Our Longitude', 8). It involved dividing the heavens into more than one million equal segments, each centred on a constellation with a zenith point. This would allow sailors to take a precise reading as they navigated, with an astral clock to help correct the difference between apparent and mean solar time. Once the meridian was reset to Bethlehem, ships that stayed true to their course could be piloted by matching the skies to specialist cards based on the star catalogues of the astronomer John Flamsteed. Squire also proposed the use of a 'Speaking-Trumpet' to announce local time from 'the Top of a Church or some other appointed Place', and the deployment of artificial sea creatures as regularly spaced buoys to aid mapping (ibid., 4). Though such details sound fantastical they reflect Squire's familiarity with contemporary intellectual and utilitarian pursuits: attempts to develop universal languages and systems of measurement were relatively common, as was the proposed use of regularly spaced man-made landmarks to address the longitude and similar problems. 
In subsequent letters, and in conversation with individual commissioners, Squire expressed anger that a sitting board of longitude had not met since 1714 to consider proposed solutions. The officials had instead continued to act as independent experts until specific proposals proved sufficiently promising to deserve communal attention and financial support. Some of the commissioners first met in 1737 to offer funds to the clockmaker John Harrison, a meeting of which Squire and many others were unaware. In response to her ongoing complaints, Sir Thomas Hanmer, one of the few remaining original commissioners of 1714, encouraged Squire to publish her ideas which 'if they carry that Demonstration which you think they do, Mankind will greedily receive' (Squire, 'Proposal for Discovering Our Longitude', 22). Squire believed that the opposition she encountered was in large part due to her gender. In January 1733 she wrote to Hanmer of her lifelong interest in more than the traditional female pastimes: 'I do not remember any Play-thing, that does not appear to me a mathematical Instrument; nor any mathematical Instrument, that does not appear to me a Play-thing: I see not, therefore, why I should confine myself to Needles, Cards, and Dice. (ibid., 20)' In later correspondence Hanmer acknowledged 'that you are to expect to lye under some Prejudice upon account of your Sex' (27 July 1741, in Squire, 'Proposal for Discovering Our Longitude', 54). 
In the wake of the second 'Longitude Act' of 1740 Squire tried once more to interest the commissioners in her scheme, but with little success. On 16 January 1742 she wrote angrily to them concerning rumours that the scientific instrument maker George Graham was to present them with an astral clock patterned after her own design. Later that year she turned to publishing her method. Squire's 'A Proposal for Discovering our Longitude' elaborated on her explanation of 1731 and included a selection of her correspondence with commissioners and others. It was published in English and French in 1742 with a second edition, in English only, in the following year. 
Both editions were printed and bound to an unusually high standard for a longitude proposal and included a large fold-out chart summarizing the scheme. Their leather bindings, featuring star symbols invented by the author, may have been the first in England to be decorated with symbols specific to the text (Miller, 10-11). Squire's 'Proposal' attracted much attention, given her gender and the quality of the volumes. The work prompted praise for its author's learning and dedication, as well as confusion -- as when the poet Elizabeth Carter complained to Catherine Talbot of the book's incomprehensibility: 'I am told the project is thought ingenious, and if you should happen to be of that opinion, 'tis ten to one but I may take up the book again, which I have at present thrown by in a great rage (at my own stupidity) and study myself half mad to find out the meaning of it. (Elizabeth Carter to Catherine Talbot, 13 July 1743, 'Series of Letters', 1.35)' Squire died, unmarried, in London on 4 April 1743 shortly after the publication of the second edition of her 'Proposal'. Despite her wish to be buried at St Pancras, her funeral took place on 7 April at St Marylebone, 'attended only with a Hearse and one Coach; which was the more surprising, as she was nearly related to the Chief Nobility and Gentry of this Kingdom' ('Daily Post', 13 April 1743). An obituary notice in the 'Daily Post' commended her as 'a Lady excellently well vers'd in Astronomy, Philosophy, and most Parts of polite Literature [who] led a most moral Life, and was often more charitable than her Circumstances would permit'. 
A copy of the 'Proposal' was sent to the court of Pope Benedict XIV, either by Squire or by another person shortly after her death. The pope sought the opinion of the Bologna Academy of Sciences whose members, unaware of Squire's death, advised Benedict not to fund the scheme but to inform its author of his support for women's participation in the mathematical sciences. Squire herself remained committed to her proposal. Her will directed that, after payment of her debts, sums of $1000 each were to be left to a maternal relative and to three friends 'out of the premium or reward I look on my Self Intitled to for the Method for discovering the Longitude' (Sheff. Arch., CWM/1400). 


@@@@@


doc= 45827


Stirredge, Elizabeth (1634-1706), Quaker prophet and autobiographer, was born in Thornbury, Gloucestershire, of strict puritan parents, William Tayler or Tayer, and his wife. Spurred on by the preaching of John Audland and John Camm in 1654, and the ministry of William Dewsbury and Miles Halhead, Elizabeth was convinced in 1655, when she was twenty-one. Her marriage to James Stirredge the younger (died 1708), fellow Quaker and native of Somerset, on 6 May 1663, produced 'three daughters and three sons' (Bell, Parfitt, and Shepherd, 183). 
In January 1670, five years after Miles Halhead predicted her call to prophecy, Elizabeth Stirredge delivered a written testimony to Charles II, urging him to halt the persecution of the Friends; according to her later account, when she handed him the testimony the king turned 'pale', and 'with a mournful Voice he said, 'I thank you, Good Woman'' (Stirredge, 39-40). Her involvement with the Wilkinson-Story controversy also began in 1670, as she contested John Story's attempts to persuade the Keynsham Friends to meet privately rather than publicly, in order to avoid fines, imprisonment, and the seizure of their goods. She also contested Story's rejection of the call of Quaker women to prophecy and testimony. While Story reduced to tears 'two good Women' who had 'been upon the Service of Truth, and had good Testimony', he found Stirredge unwilling to heed his injunction that Quaker women should 'go home about their Business, and wash their Dishes, and not go about to preach'. Uttering against Story 'a dreadful Testimony', Stirredge later turned a memorable domestic metaphor against her opponent, crying out at a Bristol meeting, 'Woe to that Spirit that dimned the Glory of the Lord, and woe to that Pot that the Scum remains in it, for in it is the Broath of abominable Things' (Stirredge, 82-3, 91). In her autobiography she exposed the hypocrisy of Story's objection to the yearly, monthly, and women's meetings as an imposition of doctrine upon individual conscience, by recording Story's dismissal of her own conscience as the grounds upon which she could legitimately oppose him. 
Stirredge's public testifying continued at the appraising of her family shop's seized stock in 1674, and at a particularly tense incident in 1683, when she prevented a mob from immolating the Chew Magna Friends in their meeting-house. A written prophecy to the mayor of Bristol in 1680 was followed in 1683 by her imprisonment in Ilchester gaol, Somerset, along with other Friends from Chew Magna, including her husband, James. They survived extreme winter conditions exacerbated, according to Stirredge, by the malice of the keeper Giles Bale and his wife, who refused them straw to lie on, confining the men and women together along with felons awaiting execution. While imprisoned Stirredge wrote 'A Salutation of my Endeared Love in God's Holy Fear... unto You of that City of Bristol' (1683), encouraging persecuted Friends and prophesying apocalyptic judgment on Bristol. Released from Ilchester gaol, she and her family left Chew Magna for Hemel Hempstead, Hertfordshire, in 1688. A year later a second prophetic testimony, 'A Faithful Warning to the Inhabitants of England, and Elsewhere', appeared -- focusing on God's imminent wrath and the necessity for national repentance. In 1692 Stirredge completed her spiritual autobiography, 'Strength in Weakness Manifest... in the Life, Various Trials, and Christian Testimony of... E. S.' (from which much of her biography is derived). It revealed her spiritual trials and triumphs, and her concerns over the future of the Quaker movement; it was not published until 1711. The bodily weakness from which she had always suffered increasingly restricted her travel and testimony, though she continued to attend meetings in Hertfordshire and yearly meetings in London. She died aged seventy-two, on 7 November 1706, in Hemel Hempstead. She rests in the Quaker burial-ground at Wood End, Hertfordshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 45828


Stone, Sarah (fl. 1701-1737), midwife, was daughter of 'the famous Mrs. 'Holmes'', midwife, of Bridgwater (Stone, xxiii). Of Mrs Holmes nothing is known except that she trained her daughter. Sarah then worked for six years as her mother's deputy, and valued her practical training more highly even than having, exceptionally for a female, 'read Anatomy' and attended autopsies on 'several Women' (ibid., xv). By 1701 she was in practice, though some of her clients thought her rather young. About 1703, after her mother's death and perhaps because of her marriage, she moved from Bridgwater to Taunton. A number of people named Stone lived in that town, but Sarah's husband is not identifiable. He too was a medical practitioner, perhaps a surgeon, probably an apothecary. The couple had at least one daughter, who in turn became a qualified midwife in Bristol about 1726. 
In Taunton, Stone's practice comprised 'a town wholly depending on the Woollen Manufactory, the Combing and Weaving Part' and a wide agricultural area (Stone, xiii). Weaving, she reckoned, was a very bad trade for pregnant women. At a time when female control of birth practices was being gradually taken over by the man-midwife or obstetric surgeon, this district lacked any such person. Rural midwives were often ignorant and unskilful: unable, for instance, to recognize labour pains and apt to induce labour prematurely. Stone found herself in a position more usual for male practitioners, and was often called in as a last resort when labour had lasted too long and the prognosis looked grim. Her technique of manually turning or shifting a wrongly presenting baby in the womb was particularly useful in saving difficult situations. Stone travelled long distances on bad roads, and towards the end of her time in Taunton she was delivering about 300 babies annually. She kept notes on her difficult cases. 
After about seventeen years the family moved from Taunton to Bristol. Stone says she decided to move because overwork was damaging her health; but professional ambition may have influenced the choice of expensive, fashionable Bristol. Here, among many competitors of both sexes, Stone judged that men (often barely out of their barber-surgeon apprenticeship) were being called in and forceps used far too often. Forceps injuries of a kind virtually unknown to her or her mother were common in Bristol. Stone aimed to combat this trend through improving the education of women midwives so as to render them superior to men in manual dexterity, through knowledge of the healthy female body, and through experience of normal, unpathological pregnancy and delivery. In 1736 she reworked into book form the manuscript notes which she had already shown to colleagues such as John Allen of Bridgwater. This project was connected with another move: this time to London. By December 1736, with the book in draft, the family was settled in Piccadilly, and Stone's husband wrote to Allen for references to help their professional establishment. 
Sarah Stone's 'Complete practice of midwifery consisting of upwards of forty cases or observations in that valuable art, selected from many others, in the course of a very extensive practice, and interspersed with many necessary cautions and useful instructions, proper to be observed in the most dangerous and critical exigencies, as well when the delivery is difficult in its own nature, as when it becomes so by the rashness or ignorance of unexperienc'd pretenders, recommended to all female practitioners in an art so important to the lives and well-being of the sex' was published in 1737. It consists of a preface and forty-two 'observations' of challenging cases, covering nearly fifty births in all. Four of these cases happened during Stone's early years in Bridgwater, and three more lately in Bristol; the bulk of the book deals with Taunton and its rural hinterland. Just over half the infants (twenty-five) failed to survive; but only three of forty-seven mothers died, either in or just after childbirth. Stone did not hold herself responsible for these deaths, since she was often called in too late. One woman had been in labour for nine days, with her child long since dead and putrefied; even omitting that exceptional case, the average length of labours to which Stone was summoned out of desperation was more than three days and two nights. Most of the women in these cases came close to death; though Stone stressed that trouble-free childbirth was the norm, she did not write about it. Once she hesitated to take on a patient who seemed a hopelessly bad risk, but then agreed to do so out of compassion. 
Stone's book is notable as literature as well as medical history. Her meticulous, detailed empirical observation combines with gripping narrative control and vivid phrasing. She draws on the imagery of heroic romance to present herself as a champion of enlightenment, combating the dragons of ignorance and inertia. At a time when most women writers sound almost contorted in their expressions of humility, Stone thought 'any Person may take an 'honest Pride' in the Approbation of the 'Worthy'' (Stone). Nothing is known about Stone's career in London. 
Stone was a remarkable midwife: she was capable of both empathy and detachment, and was sensitive not only to the mother's pain and fear, but also to her need for some autonomy in the birth process. She liked to let the mother choose her position for giving birth, even when the position chosen was not one she favoured herself. She valued both learning and (literally) hands-on experience, believing that even the most skilled practitioner could always learn something new from a difficult case. She rejected superstition for science, though at excruciating moments (as when she felt her finger being sucked in the womb by a baby who, she knew, was most unlikely to be born alive) she drew strength from referring the outcome to God. She sometimes sought to learn the reason for a stillbirth by carrying out her own dissection, yet she felt passionately against any unnecessary mutilation of even a dead body. The exact date of Stone's death is unknown, though it is clear from her book that she was still alive in December 1736. 


@@@@@


doc= 45830


Trye, Mary (fl. 1675), medical practitioner, daughter of the physician Thomas O'Dowde (d. 1665), took up her pen in 1674 to defend the reputation of her father, and so was one of the few early modern women medical practitioners to publish a book. The dedication of her 'Medicatrix, or, The Woman-Physician' (1675), written to Lady Fisher of Packington Hall in Warwickshire, is dated 1 December 1674, and gives Trye's address as 'the Feathers' in 'Old Pell-Mell' near St James's. In it she says that she had moved to London from Warwick 'October last', where she became aware of the published attacks of Henry Stubbe on her father. Trye, like Stubbe, had practised in and around Warwick before moving to London, and she not only felt compelled to defend her father's reputation but to lambast Stubbe. Her father was not only a medical chemist but a well-born and loyal royalist who had lost his fortune during the troubles in Ireland of the 1640s, and who died during the plague of 1665. Trained by her father in medicine and medical chemistry she had continued to sell his medicines to the poor in Warwick 'more out of Charity then my private Interest'. While she says little about herself, she does claim in the introduction to her book to be 'satisfied there is Ability enough in my Sex, both to discourse [Stubbe's] envy, and equal the Arguments of his Pen in those things that are proper for a woman to engage'. 
Apart from defending her father and attacking Stubbe, Trye mounts a defence of her medical views and remedies. Like most other medical chemists, she attacks the practice of phlebotomy. Like many of them, too, she declares that she esteems 'real Learning, and the Foundation, Promoters, and Doctors thereof', but that academic dress had too often become a shield for laziness and arrogance. Only in conjunction with the humility that comes from both practising among ordinary people and wrestling with nature in the laboratory could medical learning be perfected, she claims. Trye does quote from French sources, but has no citations from Latin or Greek, suggesting that she was no more academically educated than her father. It is clear, however, that Trye's book was in part intended to advance her own interests, for (like so many other medical tracts of the day) it concludes with an eight-page 'Advertisement of Dr. O'Dowdes Medicines, and the Authors'. 


@@@@@


doc= 45831


Veitch, Marion (1639-1722), diarist, was born in Edinburgh and baptized in the abbey kirk of Holyroodhouse in the Canongate in Edinburgh on 20 December 1639, the daughter of James Fairlie ('b'. 1606), an Edinburgh shoemaker, and his wife, Euphan Kincaid. When she was six she went to live with relatives in the parish of Lanark, where she grew up and was probably educated privately. She married the Presbyterian minister William Veitch (1640-1722), in the High Kirk of Lanark on 23 November 1664, after which the couple moved to the nearby village of Dunsyre. The marriage produced five daughters and five sons, among them the future governor of Nova Scotia Samuel Vetch. 
William Veitch was constantly harassed by the authorities, often away from his family for long periods, living under a false name and sometimes even in exile abroad. As a result Marion's life was one of frequent moves, and she was out of Scotland for many years. While in England she lived at Hanham Hall, Northumberland (1672-7), Stanton Hall in the same county (1677-85), and Newcastle (1685-8), sometimes with and sometimes without her husband. With the restoration of presbyterianism in Scotland by the revolution of 1688, the Veitches' lives became easier, and William was called as minister to Peebles and later Dumfries, where the couple lived until their deaths. 
Marion Veitch kept a journal, which covered her life from her marriage to her later years in Dumfries, and which was printed for the Free Church of Scotland in Edinburgh in 1846. It describes the affairs of herself and her family, and provides an interesting insight into the thought of a dedicated covenanting presbyterian at a time when the kirk was suffering its greatest persecution. Marion died at Dumfries on 9 May 1722, one day after her husband, and was buried with him in the same grave in St Michael's Church in Dumfries. 


@@@@@


doc= 45832


White, Dorothy (d. 1686?), religious writer, about whose life and parentage very few details are known, was the second most prolific Quaker woman writer in the seventeenth century; yet there are few Quaker figures as unknown. The standard biographical sources, usually quite comprehensive, merely confirm her obscurity; the major source for White's life is her own work. 
White was probably resident in Weymouth, Dorset, in the 1650s, and in London following the Restoration. Of the texts relating to her Weymouth connection -- 'A Diligent Search' (1659) and 'An Alarm' (1660) -- the first also describes a brief imprisonment that occurred after White interrupted the service of a local priest. Her association with London emerges in her 'sufferings' writing: 'The Voice of the Lord' (1662) and 'To All those that Worship' (1664) both indicate that she was imprisoned there. Moreover, in 'Upon the 22nd Day' (1659), White explains that she was compelled to 'leave my own countrey in obedience to the Lord' (p. 7), confirming that her residence was not ordinarily London. In the cases of persecution both in Weymouth and London, however, White's text is the only surviving record of the assaults on her as there is no corroborative evidence -- unusual given the Quakers' meticulous attitude to recording sufferings. 
This absence may just possibly be accounted for by the highly speculative idea that White was in (self-imposed?) exile from Quakerism between 1664 and 1684. The undated 'Universal Love' describes, in language that is feminized and domestic, a prodigal returning home to the fold. The prodigal is an outcast, and the postscript to another text may indicate that White had been excluded from the movement: 'A Visitation of Love' (1684) contains an endorsement of White's good character, which is arguably unnecessary had there been no dispute over her godliness. Neither of these texts was sanctioned by the Quakers' own publications committee, perhaps further indicating White's marginality. 
Equally speculative is the theory that White married John Fincham (died 1711), a rich Norfolk Quaker who died in Suffolk. Quaker records do no more than identify Fincham's wife as a Dorothy White of Thetford, Norfolk, dating the union to 12 March 1681. Apparently a son, Benjamin (died 1727), became a banker. However if this marriage was Dorothy's, she later wrote under her unmarried name. 
Dorothy White was an authoritative writer, often fashioning a role for herself as a spokesperson for the Quaker cause. When she described the fraught events at the end of the Commonwealth and the beginning of the Restoration as acts of God, her writing aimed to fortify the Quakers' resistance to tyrannical worldly powers. Whereas one would expect less radicalism in the 1680s texts, White's later work shows an interest in prophecy that is consistent with the earlier, more enthusiastic, period of Quakerism. Moreover, her texts seem to evidence considerable erudition: she is exceptionally skilful at writing biblically derivative prose (the 'ranterish' source text, the 'Song of Solomon', being a favourite). White's poetry, though, is less obviously accomplished. Possibly her spirituality was rather mystical; she certainly says little on the more material issues that commonly concerned Quakers, such as tithes. 
Given the difficulty over identification, it is impossible to substantiate the belief that White died of a fever in St Giles Street, Cripplegate, London, on 6 February 1686 ('Dictionary of Quaker biography'). However, no woman under the name either of White or Fincham died in Dorset, Suffolk, or Norfolk at that time. Despite the almost total lack of information relating to White's position within the Quaker movement, and the fact that George Fox makes no reference to her, her own words perhaps best express her sense of community with Friends: 'my soul doth swim within the sea of love' ('An Epistle of Love', 1661, 8-9). 


@@@@@


doc= 45833


Whitrowe, Joan (c.1631-1707), religious writer, was the wife of Robert Whitrowe (died in or before 1688), a tailor, and the mother of 
In the 1670s, Whitrowe and her family were living in Covent Garden, London, and it was there in 1677 that both Jason and Susannah died. Jason, aged about six and a half, had been a student at the Latin school and had announced shortly before his death that he would preach a sermon in a tavern against pride and drunkenness. However, it was the death of Susannah, aged about fifteen, that prompted Whitrowe to write what became her most widely read work, 'The work of God in a dying maid, being a short account of the dealings of the Lord with one Susanna Whitrow' (1677). This biography detailed Susannah's utterances against corruption, her initial but mistaken aversion to the Quakers because they were generally socially despised and allowed women to preach, her praise of her mother's spiritual integrity, and her desire to be buried alongside Quakers rather than near a church. In particular, it provides eyewitness accounts of her final illness as she fought 'the tempter', with her mother and the prominent Quaker minister Rebecca Travers at her bedside; after four days of spiritual struggle, she began a period of ecstasy and continuous prayer in anticipation of her own death, which came several days later (Mack, 394). Her final words were 'I am ready, I am ready' (Mack, 395). 'The Work of God' went through a number of not always wholly accurate editions through to the 1690s. 
Whitrowe blamed her husband's evil life for the deaths of her children -- she had, according to Susannah, repeatedly rebuked Robert for offences against God -- but she interpreted their deaths as both an offering to God and a commission to forsake domestic life for that of a prophet. From 1682 she wore sackcloth until the death of Charles II. Robert Whitrow's will (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/390/413), which was proved on 31 March 1688, made no mention of his wife. In the 1690s Joan Whitrowe was living in Putney, Surrey. Between 1689 and 1697 she wrote a number of prophetic tracts addressed to King William as well as works directed to Queen Mary and to Christians in general. In these publications she recounted her visionary experiences, several of which described a heavenly woman travailing in childbirth, and the transformation of Whitrowe's body and spirit into a state of angelic perfection and mystical union with God. The tracts also contained warnings to king and people to repent in preparation for God's impending judgment. Whitrowe criticized the king's predilection for hunting at a time when the people, corrupted by covetousness, were wallowing in the sins of swearing, drunkenness, and idolatry. She also insisted that her readers repudiate their own personal ambitions and attainments, particularly their obsession with fashion, and renew their dedication to piety, humility, and obedience to God and king. 
Whitrowe's writings -- which she was adamant that she wrote herself and not with the help of 'some Man' as some had suggested ('Widow Whiterows Humble Thanksgiving', 1694) -- are of historical importance as striking examples of the mystical visionary literature that circulated in the period after the Restoration, and may be said to have culminated in the activities of the Philadelphians during the 1690s and the arrival of the French prophets who were active in London in the early eighteenth century. However, Whitrowe's prophetic writings were more politically assertive than those of other late seventeenth-century prophets, and in her criticism of social and economic injustice she resembles the early Quakers more than the mystical Philadelphians. Thus she criticized cultural and class hierarchies that oppressed the truly humble: 'the Superior by his Craft and Subtilty gets the Estate of the Inferior to himself, by his Oppression and Extortion, and so constraineth the poor silly Souls to labour hard, to maintain the Pride and Luxury of the Rich... when, at the same time, the Rich Man's Dogs fares ['sic'] better than the Needy Soul, and all this must be counted Equal, Just, and Right. ('Faithful Warnings', 1697, preface)' Whitrowe's works are also interesting as an example of a woman's perception of sacred literature and its relation to her own experience, both as a mother and as prophet 'giving birth' to divine messages: 'I cannot compare [giving myself up to God] with any thing in this World, but a Woman in the strongest Travail and greatest Pain, that ever was known, to bring forth a Child into the World' ('Faithfull Warnings', 79). 
Whitrowe's last known work was an untitled seven-page condemnation of the Quaker leadership, which was privately printed for the author in May 1701. The text bears the printed signature 'J. Whitrow' and a manuscript ascription 'Joan Whitrow' in what appears to be the hand of the Quaker apostate Francis Bugg. The author attacks those Quakers who live extravagantly at a time when others live in extreme poverty. The work, now in Lambeth Palace library, came from Sion College library and was bound among pamphlets that seem to have once been in Bugg's collection. 
Towards the end of her life Whitrowe moved to Twickenham, Middlesex, where she became acquainted with Matthew (Mathias) Perkins ('c'.1665-1741), dissenter and barber-surgeon, whom she made executor of her will. Joan Whitrowe died aged 'about 76 Years' at Twickenham on 8 September 1707 and her funeral was held at St Mary's Church on 20 September ('The Censor', no. 27, 10 June 1715). She was buried in Perkins's garden, on London Road, Twickenham, and the site was marked by an elaborate monument situated within the garden wall. In a letter to the duchess of Hamilton, in October 1717, Alexander Pope commented on the 'Epitaph on Twitnam High-way', which was later demolished (Pope, 'Correspondence', 1.437-8). 


@@@@@


doc= 45834


Battier, Henrietta (c.1751-1813), poet and satirist, was the daughter of John Fleming of Staholmock, co. Meath, Ireland. She later wrote that 'strangers possess my paternal acres' (Battier, preface). By the age of eleven she was writing poetry; she thought well enough of a poem written that year (for Good Friday) to publish it in her collected volume. Her husband was the son of a Dublin banker of Huguenot extraction; they had at least four children. Although called Battier he was not Major John Gaspard Battier as has previously been thought. 
Battier was probably the 'Polly Pindar, half-sister to Peter Pindar', whose 'The Mousiad: an Heroic-Comic Poem' was published at Dublin in 1787 by P. Byrne. The poem and its typography closely resemble 'The Lousiad: an Heroi-Comic Poem' by John Wolcot ('Peter Pindar'), whose first canto Byrne published in 1785. The pseudonym and general style even more closely resemble those of Battier's later satires. If this work is hers, she was at Ipswich in Suffolk on 21 May 1787: the 'Mousiad's' preface 'To the reviewers' is so dated. 
Meanwhile, on a visit to London with her husband in 1783-4, Battier had put together a volume of manuscript poems which she hoped to get published. She approached Samuel Johnson, who gave her his name to head her subscription list, together with warm encouragement and practical help towards securing more subscribers. Her hopes of publishing were dashed by Johnson's death, and further delayed by serious illness and the death of a child. Not until 1791 did her volume appear: 'The protected fugitives: a collection of miscellaneous poems, the genuine products of a lady, never before published'. The poems (both personal and public, sentimental and sharply topical) show a remarkable talent, but little resemblance to her even more remarkable satire. 
While in London, Battier appeared on stage at Drury Lane theatre, playing Lady Rachel Russell in three performances of Thomas Stratford's tragedy on the death of the protestant hero Lord Russell, a role she mentions in 'The Protected Fugitives' (Battier, 120-33). She developed friendly relations with the clientele at the Shakespeare tavern, for whom she celebrated the duchess of Devonshire's famous electioneering of 1784 (ibid., 158-62). She then, however, fell seriously ill. Her husband was ill too; her son died in September 1789; a daughter was probably already dead. 
The same year as her collection, Battier published in Dublin her first known satire as 'Patt. Pindar': 'The Kirwanade, or, Poetical Epistle. Humbly Addressed to the Modern Apostle', in two separate parts, periodical-style. It opens magnificently: '
Unknowing either, and to both unknown, 

An individual, fearless and alone, 

I lift the Gauntlet, in full Chapter thrown 

By THEE, O! K[irwa]n, with satanic grace... 

' Her target, Walter Blake Kirwan, dean of Killala, a convert to the Church of Ireland from Catholicism, had subscribed to 'The Protected Fugitives'. Battier threw down another gauntlet in 'The Gibbonade, or, Political Reviewer' (three numbers, 1 May 1793-12 September 1794). This attacked Lord Fitzgibbon (later earl of Clare) and praised the United Irishmen and the spirit of Swift ('friend of Ierne'). Battier had to struggle to keep afloat financially; she sold her own works from her poor lodgings at 17 Fade Street, Dublin, where undergraduates from Trinity College regularly dropped in. Thomas Moore the poet later remembered her as 'odd, acute, warm-hearted, and intrepid'. His then boundless admiration for Battier's work cooled with time to the condescension he felt due to an old woman. 
Battier's political lampoons probably sold well. In 1795 she published as 'Pat. T. Pindar', in Dublin and London, an exuberant 'Marriage Ode Royal after the Manner of Dryden', on the marriage of the prince of Wales. 'Royal' in the title appears upside down. In 1797 came 'The Lemon', another trenchant reading of Irish politics, in 1799 'An Address on... the Projected Union'. This work, addressed to 'the Illustrious Stephen III, King of Dalkey, Emperor of the Mugglins, Grand Master of the Noble, Illustrious and Ancient Orders of the Lobster, Crab, Scallop', was written in Battier's capacity as poet laureate to a club of radicals for its annual festal day (a politicized festival of misrule) on the island of Dalkey near Dublin, as recounted in Moore's 'Memoirs'. Battier died at Sandymount, Dublin, between September and November 1813. 


@@@@@


doc= 45835


Boyd, Elizabeth (fl. 1727-1745), poet and novelist, apparently lived in London throughout her productive years. All that is known about her life or family comes from a few statements in her published works. In 'The Snail' (1745), the only issue of her proposed periodical, she speaks of her 'deceased Father having long and zealously serv'd the 'Stuart' family in a creditable Employ' (p. 15); and in an 'Advertisement' added to 'The Happy Unfortunate, or, The Female Page' (1732), she states she is publishing the novel: 'with a view of settling myself in a way of Trade; that may enable me to master those Exigencies of Fortune, which my long Illness hath for some Time past reduc'd me to suffer; That I may be capable of providing for my now ancient, indulgent Mother; whom Age, and the Charge of many Children hath render'd incapable of providing for herself.... I shall directly sell Paper, Pens, Ink... Almanacks, Plays, Pamphlets, and all Manner of Stationary Goods.' The 353 subscriptions, among them a large number from the nobility, presumably enabled her to open the shop, possibly at her address in George Court, Princes Street. 
The novel is set in Cyprus, in the tradition of Arcadian romance, with a convoluted plot that demonstrates the evil effects of arranged or loveless marriages. Amanda, Boyd's learned heroine, articulates the matrimonial ideal when she says: 'A Man must be settled enough to form a certain Judgement, of his own Affections and Inclinations, before in my Opinion he's qualified for either a Husband, a Lover, or a Friend, which three Persons ought to be always blended in one, if Happiness is propos'd in the Connubials. (2.215-16)' The novel was reissued as 'The Female Page' in 1737. 
In 1733 Boyd published 'The Humorous Miscellany, or, Riddles for the Beaux', a small collection of songs, riddles, and occasional verse. Her other poems include 'Variety' (1727); 'Verses most Humbly Inscrib'd to his Majesty King George IId on his Birth-Day' (1730); 'The Happy North-Briton' (1737); and 'Glory to the Highest, a Thanksgiving Poem on the Late Victory at Dettingen' (1743). 'Admiral Haddock, or, The Progress of Spain' (1739 or 1740), is a long patriotic poem in which she reviews the defeat of the armada in 1588 and praises the naval actions of 1739. Her ballad-opera, 'Don Sancho, or, The Students' Whim... with Minerva's Triumph, a Masque' (1739), is a strange mix of comedy, necromancy, and masque, set in the garden of an Oxford college, where Don Sancho conjures up assorted spirits, including the ghosts of Shakespeare and Dryden. The piece was never performed but was given a reading in the green room of Drury Lane Theatre. Although Boyd frequently mentions her ill health, neither the cause nor date of her death is known. 


@@@@@


doc= 45837


Campbell, Dorothea Primrose (1792-1863), poet and novelist, was born on 4 May 1792 in the Shetland Islands (perhaps at Laxfirth), the eldest of the many children of Duncan Campbell, a surgeon, and Elizabeth Campbell. Her grandfather had left the family heavily indebted. At sixteen, after her father's death, she approached the Inverness publisher J. Young, timidly hoping to make money from her poems. Young published her first volume, 'Poems' (1811), by subscription, for her sole benefit. The title page bears her full name and a couplet from James Thomson. The poems are remarkably accomplished for her age, encompassing imaginary and actual material and celebrating local scenery and legends. Francis Jeffrey found much promise and originality in them. Campbell's expressed attitudes to Shetland are ambivalent: there is on the one hand delight and pride, on the other a longing for wider horizons. 
A teacher by 1812, Campbell opened her own school at Lerwick in 1813. In 1816 she published a second edition of 'Poems', dedicated to Sir Walter Scott, with whom she corresponded. This work reflects a new melancholy, dwelling on death, on farewell to childhood scenes, and on insults heaped on poverty. She reprinted most of her earlier poems, identifying 'To the Evening Star' as written in 1803. Her subscription list ranges from London to Lerwick; Scott took four copies. Her introduction mentions her father's misfortunes and early death, but the publisher's bankruptcy dashed any hopes of profit. Campbell kept teaching after her own school foundered as a result of her illness and her mother's opium addiction. 
For Campbell's last known publishing venture she assumed an air of proud indifference. Her novel, 'Harley Radington: a Tale', was published in 1821 by A. K. Newman; her payment consisted of twenty free copies. She drew both on canonical authors such as Chaucer, Shakespeare, and Goldsmith, and on recent, little-known women writers whose experience paralleled her own: the Scotswoman and teacher Anne Bannerman, the Englishwoman and traveller Eliza Fay, and Margaret Chalmers, who preceded Campbell as a distinguished Shetland poet admired by Scott, and who shared many of her subscribers. 
Campbell's novel is a 'national tale' which deserves consideration with those of Scott and others. She supplied it with footnotes and a glossary on the life, customs, and superstitions of Zetland (Shetland), where most of it is set. Her narrator, Harley, grows up in fashionable London, not knowing (though clues are dropped) that his mother is a 'female adventurer' whose humble Shetland origins are her guilty secret. The rest of the plot is upstaged by his exploration of his roots, rendered colourfully and humorously during his period of dumbfounded revulsion, lyrically as he discovers a wider Shetland life of landscape, culture, and economic problems. Campbell's accounts of folk customs and beliefs -- such as women raising a storm to wreck a ship -- are particularly striking. 
Newman thought well enough of 'Harley Radington' to promise Campbell cash for another novel. It seems she never wrote this, though she may have contributed to magazines. She impressed the Methodist preacher and scholar Adam Clarke when he visited Shetland in 1826, and remained his correspondent. 
Campbell's earnings from teaching paid for a younger brother's education and supported her mother's old age, but she could never save a penny. In 1841 she was invited to England by descendants of Clarke, who then went bankrupt and could not employ her according to promise. She applied for jobs first as teacher, then as matron of a public institution, as housekeeper, or 'even' as 'Sister in one of the Hospitals', but English employers looked askance at her age and origins. In 1844 she had not worked for a year and was destitute in London. She applied for help to the Royal Literary Fund: humbly, on grounds of need, though her referees, Jeffrey and the traveller and medical writer James Copland, stressed her literary merit. A grant of $30 enabled her to take up a teaching job at Sevenoaks, Kent. She died on 6 January 1863 at an Aged Governesses' Asylum in Kentish Town, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 45838


Cave, Jane (b. 1754/5, d. in or before 1813), poet, was born in Wales, probably at Talgarth in Brecon, where her father, John Cave ('b'. 1712/13), was an exciseman. He was later converted to Methodism by the religious reformer Howel Harris (1714-1773), an associate of the Wesleys. He worked as an excise officer in Talgarth and as a glover in Brecon. Jane wrote on the deaths of Harris and of George Whitefield, and on the consecration of chapels for the sect known as the Countess of Huntingdon's Connexion; she also attended Anglican services. Her mother, who died on 6 February 1777, must have been a Miss H --, as was an aunt to whom her daughter addressed verse letters. Jane Cave had more than one sister. She addressed to her mother, not her father, a poem of farewell to her own maiden name. 
From her childhood Cave had a taste for books and poetry. She lived in several places before her marriage, probably in employment. In Bath she had friends who were like parents to her, and she wrote a poem for two young women being bound apprentices to a milliner. She moved to Winchester in November 1779. In 1783 she had printed by subscription there, 'for the Author', 'Poems on Various Subjects, Entertaining, Elegiac, and Religious'. It bore her birth-name and a portrait showing her pen in hand. It had a lengthy list of subscribers, arranged by their places of residence. This work became the basis of her publishing career. The next edition, published in Bristol in 1786, added 'Now Mrs. W -- ' to her name. 
Thomas Winscom, whom Cave married on 18 May 1783, was an exciseman like her father. They had two sons, and perhaps other children who did not survive. Her husband's job entailed moving to a new place every four years: they were at Chagford in Devon before moving in 1792 to Bristol, where he was still working in 1797. A family named Cave were bankers in Bristol, but their family tree gives no evidence of connection; nor is there any evidence of relationship with Edward Cave (1691-1754), founder of the 'Gentleman's Magazine', which printed an obituary notice of Jane Cave. She enjoyed a network of links all over the west country, though it was not of her own building, since she says she had not the honour of being known to most of her subscribers. Those to her first volume (whose names fill fifty-two closely printed columns) come from towns like Oxford, Woodstock, Abingdon, Whitchurch, Newbury, Southampton, and Portsmouth, several places in the Isle of Wight, Salisbury, Winchester, and Bath. The next edition expands the list to draw from Windsor and from Sussex. Further editions appeared at Shrewsbury in 1789 and at Bristol again in 1794 (listing the names of newly acquired noble subscribers only). The number of subscribers, and the continual addition of new ones, suggests that Cave was skilled in operating the patronage system. 
The first edition is dedicated in a poem 'To the Subscribers', and mentions the author's humble admiration for the 'Celebrated Poetesses' Anna Seward, Anne Steele, and Hannah More, whom Cave does not presume to emulate. The poems are arranged more or less by genre: occasional poems (many written at some specific request), pieces on love, marriage, and family affection, elegies, epitaphs, and hymns. The second edition breaks up this generic ordering, adds new poems, and drops others which might be considered low, like 'Written by Desire of a Lady, on an Angry, Petulant Kitchen-Maid'. Cave writes advice to unborn children, an address to her baby son, poems on religious topics, and about her own relationship to poetry (notably of being too busy with domestic duties to give proper attention to the muses when they make a social call). She also addresses the perennial topic of a reader who disbelieves that she can, as a woman, really have written her works herself. Poems in her last collection relate how in 1791 she rescued a poor woman from debtors' prison by getting up a subscription, and how she has treated her persistent headaches, for which doctors' prescriptions proved useless, both by sea-bathing and by drinking the waters of Bristol. 
On 25 May 1793, the year before her final volume appeared, Cave published 'The Head-ach, or, An Ode to Health' in a Bristol newspaper, including a request for suggestions from any readers who might know of a remedy. From the 1780s onwards, she says, she was losing twelve days every month to excruciating headaches, which a modern scholar diagnoses as migraines, and felt that her effectiveness as wife and mother was seriously impaired. She was scathing about the best efforts of the medical profession. When she first tried sea-bathing she found it terrifying, but later she came to revel in the experience. It did not cure her headaches, but she may have persisted in the practice none the less, for her 'Gentleman's Magazine' obituary says that two years before she died she had a 'miraculous escape from a watery grave'. This obituary pays tribute to Cave's genius, intellect, writings, and virtues as a wife and mother. She died aged fifty-eight in Newport, Monmouthshire, by January 1813 (the date of the obituary). 


@@@@@


doc= 45839


Chalmers, Margaret (b. 1758), poet, was born at Lerwick in the Shetland Islands, and baptized there on 12 December 1758, the eldest child of William Chalmers, customs officer and landowner's steward, and his wife, Kitty Irvine. Her only brother, William, master of the 'Royal Sovereign', fell at Trafalgar, leaving his sisters and widowed mother in poverty. (The mother became bedridden about 1798, as did one of the sisters three years later.) Lord Collingwood petitioned the government for a pension for them, but without success. In 1813 Margaret (impelled, she said, 'by circumstances of severe domestic affliction'), published her 'Poems' by subscription at Newcastle, through S. Hodgson. The volume was badly printed and publicized, and many subscribers were lost by delay. It did not attain the financial success which, for its literary panache and the interest of its subject matter, it deserved. 
Chalmers calls herself 'the first British Thulian quill', though she shares that honour with Dorothea Primrose Campbell, who, more than a generation younger, was the first of the two to be published. Like Campbell, Chalmers expresses a mixture of pride and apology about her native land, enthusiastically describing its landscapes and customs while doubting that it is really a fitting environment for the poet. About herself as poet, too, she sounds ambivalent. She expresses vaunting literary ambition, but does so with self-deprecating wit; she calls herself 'a hizzie', 'madam Thulia', or 'my Greenland Lady'. Much of her material is local: the place names of the island of Uist, scenes along the River Esk, a famine in the Faeroes relieved with British aid, the loss of a Shetland boat at sea. She provides prose notes in explanation of local matters such as handiwork and superstitions. More general topics include female friendship, British patriotism, the royal family, and local dignitaries. Her literary references are largely Scots: she quotes James Thomson, praises Walter Scott, and imitates Robert Burns. 
Margaret Chalmers corresponded with Scott between 1814 and 1815, and sent him copies of some of her poems. In 1816, three years after her publishing venture, she appealed for financial help to the Royal Literary Fund, sending a poem 'To the Powerful Benevolent'. They responded with a grant of $10 but apparently did not keep the poem. It is not known when Margaret Chalmers died. 


@@@@@


doc= 45840


Charlton, Mary (fl. 1794-1824), writer and translator, is principally remembered as being the author of several successful novels at the close of the eighteenth and beginning of the nineteenth centuries. Little else is known about her life. Her first novel, 'The Parisian, or, Anecdotes of Distinguished Characters', set partly during the French Revolution, was published in 1794 at William Lane's Minerva Press, the most notorious publisher of popular fiction of its day. By the end of 1798 Charlton had produced three more novels for the Minerva -- 'Andronica, or, The Fugitive Bride' (1797), 'Phedora, or, The Forest of Minski', and 'Ammorvin and Zallida' (both 1798) -- and Lane gratefully placed her sixth on his list of 'particular and favourite Authors' in his prospectus. Charlton has much in common with her fellow Minerva best-sellers. All of Lane's top authors worked in the Gothic mode, providing their readers with tales of domestic persecution in quasi-exotic settings, but both contemporary and modern critics have professed to find Charlton's descriptions superior to those of her competitors. 
Charlton was also typical in that, even with Europe at war, her work crossed national borders. Like most of the successful Minerva novelists, Charlton was translated into French, her next two novels, 'Rosella, or, Modern Occurrences' (1799), a satire on novel-reading and her best work, and 'The Pirate of Naples' (1801), being published in Paris in 1801. The following year Charlton published 'The Reprobate', a translation from the German of August Lafontaine. Two of her fellow Minerva best-sellers, Eliza Parsons and Elizabeth Meeke, also translated Lafontaine, but it was Charlton's version which provided the basis for Thomas Dibdin's successful comedy, 'Guilty or Not Guilty', first acted at the Theatre Royal, Haymarket, in May 1804. She went on to publish three further translations, 'The Philosophic Kidnapper' ('altered from the French', 1803), 'The Rake and the Misanthrope' (also from Lafontaine, 1804), and 'The Homicide, a Novel, Taken from the Comedie di Goldoni' (1805, reissued as 'Rosaura di Viralva' in 1813). In 1815 Charlton compiled a volume of 'Pathetic Poetry for Youth' and in 1824 she published her final works, 'Grandeur and Meanness, or, Domestic Persecution' and 'Past Events: an Historical Novel, of the Eighteenth Century'. 


@@@@@


doc= 45841


Clark, Emily Frederick (fl. 1798-1833), novelist, was one of several daughters of a customs official named Clark (died 1824) and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1825), the daughter of Felice Frederick (1725?-1797). Emily Clark described herself on the title-page of her first novel as 'grand-daughter of the late Colonel Frederick, Son of Theodore, King of Corsica' and continued to invoke the name of her grandfather on the title-pages of her other novels and in her advertisements for private language teaching. It is fairly certain, however, that Felice Frederick was not the son of Theodore, although Clark probably believed it to be true, as she continued to assert her lineage in letters to the Royal Literary Fund as late as 1830. Her grandfather was a charming impostor who had fooled persons more august and astute than his granddaughter about his supposed royal parentage. He also wrote several volumes on Corsica, and was responsible for Emily Clark's education. One of her sisters was Eliza Fenwick (not the novelist of that name). 
Emily Clark's life story consists largely of a desperate resistance to the decline, from at least assumed gentility, into penury, through an attempt to support her family: 'It is a cruel world for a female, whose expectations have been superior, to encounter' (19 Feb 1819, Royal Literary Fund archive). Educated to aspire to the higher arts, she exhibited miniatures at the Royal Academy in 1799. Yet her first novel, 'Ianthe, or, The Flower of Caernarvon' (1798), was prefaced by the caveat: 'I declare that I have been impelled to exercise the talents, which nature has given me, to aid me in the support of myself, my sisters, and a mother, to whose cultivation they are so much indebted' (p. vi). The novel was dedicated by permission to the prince of Wales, and demonstrates a considerable familiarity with the Welsh countryside, as do most of her novels. In 'Ianthe' pastoral is used in 'a contrast of peace and happiness in Wales with sorrow and deceit in London' (Todd, 85). Reviews of this first novel tended to focus on the motives for its production rather than its literary merits. This was also true of her second novel, 'Ermina Montrose, or, The Cottage of the Vale' (1800), published by subscription, the list for which included several aristocrats, as well as Maria Edgeworth, who ordered twenty copies. The 'Critical Review', after reminding readers of the recent death of Felice Frederick, carefully stated: 'independently of the good wishes we entertain for her welfare, as the descendant of Baron Neuhoff, we are happy to discover in her novel some traces of abilities, much above mediocrity' ('Critical Review', 1801, 355-6). This novel eulogizes the life of the young heroine, who survives the early adventures of escaping from a convent in France and eluding the evil machinations of villainous monks. She manages to return to Wales unscathed, have her virtue proved, and marry and raise a family in perfect felicity. 
By the time of Emily Clark's third novel, 'The Banks of the Douro, or, The Maid of Portugal' (1805), the reviews had petered out, and the reviewers were becoming impatient, one describing the characters as a 'parcel of puppets' who 'vanish out of sight', and recommending that Clark 'study our best novels with attention, if she means to give the world any more of her writings' ('Literary Journal', 1805, 644). The tone of such reviews and, worse still, the almost complete critical neglect of later works such as her volume of 'Poems' (1810), 'Tales at the Fireside' (1817), or 'The Esquimaux' (1819), meant that the Clark family were continually in dire financial straits. 
In 1811 Emily Clark submitted the first of forty-two applications for monetary assistance to the Royal Literary Fund. The letters are increasingly pathetic and desperate, detailing debts incurred, the illnesses and deaths of her parents, and a horrific accident when a candle set alight her muslin dress, burning her badly, and preventing her from writing. As a result of this last calamity, she wrote to the committee: 'I am obliged to conceal where I reside, fearful of being arrested for my Doctor's bill... in consequence of my fatal accident' (7 Dec 1829, Royal Literary Fund archive). The continual stream of begging letters, heedless of the policy restricting the committee from assisting authors more than once in a year, caused a certain degree of impatience on the part of the board members and their associates, one of them referring to Clark as 'this mendicant annuitant' (Sir Benjamin Hobhouse to Joseph Snow, 7 Dec 1827, Royal Literary Fund archive). She herself felt the shame of her applications, maintaining that only '[t]o shun despair' had she 'humiliated' herself 'to ask pecuniary aid of the amiable and feeling', and was conscious that the quality of her works made her less eligible for assistance than others: 'Far be it from me the presumption that I had any claim on the Committee, from my writings, which are very insignificant and little known... Though I have written nineteen volumes, one volume of real merit is more than worth the whole, and I can only wish as I have been destined to write that I had the genius of a Burney, or Sir Walter Scott (18 Jan 1830, Royal Literary Fund archive)' Twenty-four of her pleas for assistance to the Royal Literary Fund were successful. The last such application occurred in 1833 ('I am very weak and obliged to leave off writing'; 7 March 1833, Royal Literary Fund archive), after which time Emily Clark, who remained unmarried, disappears from the historical record. 


@@@@@


doc= 45843


Craik, Helen (1751-1825), author, was born at Arbigland, Kirkbean, Kirkcudbright, the daughter of William Craik (1703-1798), agriculturist, justice of the peace, and inspector of customs, and Elizabeth (died 1787), only daughter of William Stewart, of Shambellie, in Newabbey parish. She grew up at Arbigland, the manor house that her father had built in 1755. One of six legitimate children, she shared her birthplace with John Paul Jones (1747-1792), the naval officer, son of John Paul, gardener at Arbigland, but rumoured to have been one of her father's illegitimate sons. Craik's powerful father was involved in local and national politics, and greatly increased the value of Arbigland through his agricultural innovation. He may also have been involved in the alleged murder (officially ruled a suicide) in 1792 of a man said to be Helen Craik's fiance, a groom on her father's estate, whom local history sources suggest her family had killed because they disapproved of the relationship. The murder remains unverifiable, but Craik did leave Arbigland in 1792 for self-exile at her family's other estate: Flimby Hall, near Maryport, Cumberland. Though she was William Craik's sole surviving legitimate child, in 1792 he gave all his property to a distant relative, John Hamilton. 
While still at Arbigland, Craik was a friend and correspondent of Robert Burns; he wrote to her in 1790 and 1792 of his admiration for her poem 'Helen' (lost), and she wrote the dedicatory poem on the title-page of his Glenriddell manuscript of poems. Most of her poetry is now lost; a few examples, published by her descendant George Neilson in the 'Glasgow Herald' in 1919 -- such as her two poems to her friend Robert Riddell -- survive. Neilson noted 'the recurrent Werterism of Miss Craik's poems', and that '[w]hether fostered by 'Werter' or not, a kindred tragic sentimentality appears in Miss Craik's preference for suicidal and murderous subjects' (Neilson, 'The Maid of Enterkin: Burnsiana 1'). 
At Flimby between 1796 and 1805 Craik published five anonymous novels, all with William Lane's popular Minerva Press. Her first novel, 'Julia de St. Pierre' (1796), in which she refers enigmatically to the 'peculiarly painful circumstances' in the life of the 'once persecuted Author' (vol. 1, p. 3), offers a sentimental portrait of a French emigrant woman as virtue in distress. This theme of persecuted, exiled women, often with murdered lovers or husbands and concerned with issues of justice, was one of Craik's favourites. Though published anonymously, like all her novels, 'Julia' also included a long poem, 'The Maid of Enterkin'. Craik's descendant George Neilson referred to this poem in his article on her unpublished poetry in the 'Glasgow Herald', which also confirms her authorship of the five novels, previously attributed to her through a Minerva Press catalogue. 

'Adelaide de Narbonne, with Memoirs of Charlotte de Cordet' (1800) is Craik's most innovative novel, one of the earliest historical novels, and possibly the first British fictional account of Charlotte Corday, who assassinated the Jacobin Marat in 1793. Craik allies her fictional heroine, Cordet, with the feminism of Mary Wollstonecraft, Mary Robinson, and Helen Maria Williams, the foremost British chronicler of the French Revolution. Drawing on the Gothic romances of Anne Radcliffe and Horace Walpole, Craik fashioned a unique hybrid of historical Gothic that addressed controversial recent events in France, particularly the destructive consequences of women's lack of political and economic rights. This concern with women's rights is also visible in 'Stella of the North, or, The Foundling of the Ship' (1802) and in 'The Nun and her Daughter, or, Memoirs of the Courville Family' (1805), the former set in Dumfriesshire. 'Henry of Northumberland, or, The Hermit's Tale' (1800), based on the Hermit of Warkworth, is Craik's only known novel that is not set in her own day. 
Craik outlived her relatives in Flimby, inheriting sums from them, and in 1807 gained half the proceeds of the sale of the family's Flimby estate ($16,504). She died at Flimby Hall, unmarried, on 11 June 1825. Her obituaries and her memorial in St Nicholas's Church, Flimby (where she was buried), remember her as a published author of works in English and French (now unknown), and as a dedicated philanthropist to the poor -- a characteristic that she shares with her fictional heroines. 


@@@@@


doc= 45844


Fleury, Maria de (fl. 1773-1791), religious controversialist and hymn writer, was based in Cripplegate, London, but little is known of her family and background, other than that she had a brother who married about 1773. An active member of a circle of moderate Calvinist Baptists and other dissenters, she published several pieces on the theological and political controversies of the day. She was a Baptist but the Independent minister John Towers records that she was also a member of his congregation in Clerkenwell for many years. 
De Fleury was a member of the anti-Catholic Protestant Association and wrote in their praise and defence in her 'Poems, Occasioned by the Confinement and Acquittal of the Right Honourable Lord George Gordon' (1781) and in her versified account of the Gordon riots, 'Unrighteous Abuse Detected and Chastised' (2nd edn, 1781), in which she claimed that the Roman Catholics were to blame for the violence. Her anti-Catholic allegory 'Henry, or, The Triumph of Grace' (1782), dedicated to Lord George Gordon, went into three editions. 
De Fleury was a close friend of the Baptist minister John Ryland (1753-1825) and joined with him in his paper war against the flamboyant and high Calvinist minister William Huntington. Her popular 'Letter to the Rev. Mr. Huntington' (2nd edn, 1787) was the first of several attacks she made on Huntington's religious beliefs and practices. She criticized his alleged antinomianism again in 'Antinomianism Unmasked and Refuted' (1791). In a response of 1792 to de Fleury's criticisms, 'An Answer to Fools', Huntington claimed that Ryland had co-written 'Antinomianism Unmasked'. He also made the scandalous claim that the address given by de Fleury in her prefaces was false and that he had eventually found her home by enquiring at a gin shop, where he maintained she was well known. Huntington's claim seems unlikely; the address, 31 Jewin Street, London, was given in some of her publications as a sale outlet, and other references to her poverty would suggest that her writing was an important source of income. 
De Fleury's writing suggests that she was defensive of her poor education and her independence as a writer; Huntington's allegation that she collaborated with Ryland was clearly not new. Her collection 'Divine Poems and Essays' (1791) has recommendatory prefaces by Ryland and two other evangelical ministers, John Towers and Thomas Wills, in which Towers contends that her theologically assertive style is due to the amount of time she has spent conversing with ministers and is not a sign that her work is by another, more educated person. The ministers all stress her commitment to the protestant church, and although she explained in her 'Letter' of 1787 that she was not then an official member of the ecumenical evangelical association she emphasized that her friendships within that circle had confirmed her belief in the great value of their activities. She justified the publication of her poetry and controversial tracts by the need for protestant and Trinitarian evangelism at a time that she felt was one of crisis because of the spread of arianism and socinianism. Her poetry reflects her evangelical mission, and it is perhaps not surprising that she also published 'Hymns for Believer's Baptism' in 1786. It is not known when or where de Fleury died. 


@@@@@


doc= 45845


Deverell, Mary (d. 1805), moral and religious writer, was born probably at Minchinhampton, Gloucestershire. She described herself as 'a person of obscure and undistinguished rank' (Deverell, 'Sermons', 3rd edn, iv) and may have come from a clothing family. She was possibly related to the family of John Deverell, esquire, of Clifton, who are listed as subscribers to her 'Miscellanies' (1781). She was probably unmarried. 
Deverell's 'Sermons on the Following Subjects' (1774) was published in Bristol by the newspaper owner Sarah Farley. Anticipating criticism of her choice of subject, Deverell explained in her preface (pp. iii-v) that she would have changed the title but for the pleas of her subscribers. The list of these published in the first edition shows that she had strong support among the aristocracy and the Bristol clergy; they include the duke of Dorset and the earl of Coventry, and the rector of Minchinhampton, who subscribed for twenty volumes. The duchess of Queensberry and the marchioness of Rockingham subscribed to the second edition for four and eight copies respectively. The sermons dealt with moral issues in a conventional fashion. 
Between the publication of the first and second editions of her sermons Deverell went to London and was present at Garrick's final performance, on 10 June 1776. She also found that the clergy 'approve of my writings... But the title of 'Sermons' from a woman startles them! and must not be encouraged in our sex' (Deverell, 'Miscellanies', 1.110); however, she received permission to dedicate the third edition (1777) to Charlotte, princess royal. In London she may have met Samuel Johnson, who subscribed to her 'Miscellanies', along with his friend Dr William Adams, master of Pembroke College, Oxford. The 'Miscellanies', which was printed for the author, was a much more polemical work than the 'Sermons' and contained trenchant criticism of the treatment of literary women. Deverell complained that 'the world in general have a very illiberal opinion of the conduct and manners of women who are deemed 'learned'' (ibid., 1.228). She declared herself 'something of a rebel' against the belief that 'the female sphere is domestic, and the practice of our duty in that province should be our highest ambition' (ibid., 1.43) and described a woman trapped in an unhappy marriage as 'the legal slave of a despotic sovereign' (ibid., 2.119-20). She recognized that women were disadvantaged by exclusion from men's 'useful clubs and friendly associations' (ibid., 1.113), though she was able to use the public space of the pump rooms at Bath and the Bristol Hotwells to collect subscriptions. 
Mary Deverell's career parallels that of Hannah More. Both were protegees of the Bristol heiress Ann Lovell Gwatkin and both went to London about the same time (1774) to further their literary careers. The Mrs More in Bristol who is listed as subscriber to Deverell's 'Sermons' may have been Hannah More's mother. However, More herself did not subscribe and referred to Deverell derisively as ''parsoness' and 'poetess'' (Roberts, 1.192). In 1782 she wrote from Bristol to Ann Kennicott, widow of Dr Benjamin Kennicott, following a visit from Deverell: 'I think I never saw her in such a fit of poetical phrenzy before, mad as the Cumoean maid, and bursting with the inspiring God, she repeated without stopping to take breath... 'eighteen hundred lines', being a Poem she has just finished, and to which she has modestly prefixed the title of 'Epic'. (More MSS)' This must be a reference to 'Theodora and Dydimus' (1784), a heroic poem in three cantos in praise of female heroism. It was not well received. Her play, 'Mary Queen of Scots' (1792), was apparently never performed. 
Deverell's career demonstrates that, given the right connections, it was possible for a woman to establish a literary reputation. However, her writings show a strong awareness of the precariousness of the career of a literary woman. With the failure of her later works she lapsed into obscurity, though in 1797 she subscribed 5 guineas for the widows and orphans of the men killed at the naval battle of Camperdown. She died at Nailsworth, Gloucestershire, in September 1805, and was buried at Minchinhampton on 12 September. 


@@@@@


doc= 45846


Fay, Eliza (1755/6-1816), writer and traveller, was one of the three identified daughters of Edward Clement (died 1794), shipwright, of Rotherhithe, Surrey; further details of her birth, upbringing, and education are unknown aside from her statement that her mother died between 1780 and 1783. 
In April 1779, aged twenty-three, Eliza Fay embarked on the first of what she later stated were her five journeys to India. She accompanied her husband, Anthony Fay, a barrister and the only son of Francis Fay, gentleman, of Rotherhithe, who intended to practise at the Calcutta supreme court. The couple had married on 6 February 1772 at St Dunstan-in-the-West, Fleet Street, London. Fay, who was born in Ireland, had been admitted to Gray's Inn on 10 November 1772 and Lincoln's Inn on 4 July 1778; in the same year Edward Clement stood surety for Fay at Clement's Inn. In her account of her travels -- published posthumously in 1817 as 'Original Letters from India' -- Eliza Fay explained that she undertook the journey 'with a view to preserving my husband from destruction', in view of his 'violence of temper', extravagance, and 'dissipated habits' (Fay, 1986, 175). She also provided a number of clues about her earlier life: on her arrival in Calais in 1779, for example, she noted that this was her fourth visit to the town and that she had also visited Paris on a previous occasion. Her studied interest in clothing and fabrics prompted E. M. Forster to wonder whether Fay may have had a commercial education, possibly dressmaking in France. 
The couple followed an arduous overland route to India and arrived in Calicut in November 1779 in the build-up to the Second Anglo-Mysore War. The Fays, with eight other Europeans, were taken captive by a Captain Ayres, acting under Sardar Khan, governor of Calicut. They were imprisoned for three and a half months before their release was secured by a Mr Isaac, a respected Jewish merchant of Cochin. 
On 16 June 1780 Anthony Fay was admitted as an advocate at the supreme court of Calcutta. The couple began to move in elite social circles, with Eliza enjoying the patronage of the judge Sir Robert Chambers and his wife, Frances. But neither Anthony Fay's career nor his marriage prospered. Just over a year later he fathered an illegitimate child, and Eliza Fay demanded a private deed of separation (signed on 11 August 1781). Soon after, at the instigation of Colonel Henry Watson, Anthony Fay returned to Britain to present a petition to parliament against Sir Elijah Impey, chief justice of the Calcutta supreme court. Thereafter nothing more is known of Anthony Fay's life aside from references in two law reports, early in 1794, in which his name (given in one instance as Alexander Fay) was cited in a legal case. 
Lacking any means of support, Eliza Fay left for Britain in 1782. She returned to Calcutta two years later to set up as a milliner, her co-partner being a former travelling companion, Avis Hicks. During this period she turned down two offers to 'engage in a seminary for young ladies', about which she expressed regret (Fay, 1986, 215, 238). In 1786 Hicks -- who had married a Calcutta shopkeeper, John Lacey -- sought to return to England on health grounds after the death of her infant child. She was accompanied by Anthony Fay's son; however, Avis and the child were drowned when their ship was grounded near Calcutta in September 1786. Eliza Fay's millinery business failed in 1788, but the trustees allowed her to continue to trade, and she managed to satisfy her creditors over the next five years. In May 1791 Fay wrote of a young man, Benjamin Lacey, described in the letters as the 'brother of my lamented friend's husband', whom she 'received... into my family' and left to supervise her business interests in Calcutta (ibid., 240). 
In 1794 Fay returned once more to Britain, breaking her voyage at St Helena, where she was summoned by the governor to answer a case brought against her by Kate Johnson, who had formerly been in her service. Johnson stated that she had accompanied Fay on her previous voyage from Calcutta in 1782, only to have been left without her consent at St Helena and subsequently sold into slavery. The reason for her abandonment, Johnson alleged, was that she had known that Fay 'was intimate with the Doctor of the Ship'. Fay maintained that she left Johnson 'on account of her bad behaviour' and 'did not suppose she would have been sold' (BL OIOC, factory records, St Helena, G/32/57, fols. 1'v'-2'r'). Rather than stand trial, Fay paid a $60 fine. To set this incident in context, it should be noted that any report of sexual activity on the part of a separated wife might jeopardize her maintenance allowance. 
Following her father's death in 1794 Fay and her sole surviving sister, Eleanor Preston, wife of Thomas Wilkinson Preston of Rotherhithe, inherited leasehold property at Cheriton and Landimor, Glamorgan, while Eleanor also received freehold rental property at Rotherhithe. In the same year Fay began a new career as a merchant, travelling between Britain, India, and the United States. Her ventures were dogged by disaster: one ship caught fire, another was deemed unseaworthy. Ruined goods, poor markets, and unexpected bills further damaged her business. A series of announcements in the 'London Gazette' reveals that, from 1798, John and Benjamin Lacey also faced bankruptcy proceedings. On 6 May 1800 'Mrs Elizabeth Fay, of Fenchurch-street, London, Widow', together with Benjamin Lacey, 'Merchants, Dealers, Chapmen and Copartners', had a commission of bankruptcy awarded against them. Subsequent entries show how Fay sought to restore some of her household goods, as well as the lease on her house in Fenchurch Street. Only in October 1812 do proceedings appear to have been concluded with the payment of a further dividend. 
In August 1804 Fay left once more for Calcutta, arriving in January of the following year. Later in 1805 she announced her intention to open a school at Blackheath, Surrey, and in December returned to England accompanied by fourteen children. Soon after her arrival she took over Ashburnham House, Blackheath, and there opened a girls' boarding school, charging 40 guineas per annum, for which the terms were published in the 'Prince of Wales Island Gazette' (9 Dec 1809). Fay's school, which she ran in association with Marian Cousins, was still receiving pupils when she signed her will on 30 March 1813. However, in the following year Fay and Cousins announced that the partnership had been dissolved ('London Gazette', 22 July 1814), though the school continued to be run by other proprietors. 
At the end of 1814 Eliza Fay obtained a $200 bond with the East India Company to travel (as a passenger) to Bengal, and she left in the spring of 1815 on the 'Sir Stephen Lushington'. At Calcutta she prepared for publication her 'Original Letters from India'. Lively, shrewd, and opinionated, she recounts her travels, marital trials, and commercial ventures. The book's frontispiece -- taken from an engraving of a portrait by Arthur William Devis -- depicts her in Egyptian dress and presents a striking, orientalized figure, but her attention in the text is focused mainly on the workings of British society in Calcutta. A contemporary reviewer praised her spirited style and acute observation ('Calcutta Gazette', 1818), while later critics concentrated on her status as a female traveller: W. K. Firminger in his 1908 edition of 'Original Letters' suggested that Fay's audacity and unfeminine behaviour might alienate readers' sympathies, E. M. Forster described her as courageous and gallant in his 1925 edition, and Felicity A. Nussbaum, writing in 1995, championed her emergent feminist consciousness. 
Eliza Fay died insolvent in Calcutta on 9 September 1816. The registers of St John's Church, Calcutta, record her burial on 10 September 1816. Her estate was administered by the registrar of the supreme court and her possessions auctioned off to meet her debts. Her will was proved on 12 June 1818, the sole beneficiary being her widowed sister Eleanor, then resident in Blackheath. 


@@@@@


doc= 45847


Fisher, Anne (1719-1778), writer on education, was born in Oldscale, in the parish of Lorton, Cumberland, the daughter of Henry Fisher, yeoman, and was baptized in Lorton on 9 December 1719. She married Thomas Slack (bap. 1723, d. 1784), printer of Newcastle, on 15 December 1751. 
Anne Fisher compiled several schoolbooks; the earliest noted by Alston is the second edition of 'A New Grammar: being the Most Easy Guide to Speaking and Writing the English Language Properly and Correctly', which was printed and published in Newcastle in 1750 by Isaac Thompson, her future husband's employer. Her other works include 'The Pleasing Instructor, or, Entertaining Moralist... to which are Prefixed, New Thoughts on Education' (1756); 'The New English Tutor, or, Modern Preceptor' (1763?); 'A New English Exercise Book, calculated to Render the Construction of the English Tongue Easy and Familiar' (1770); and 'An Accurate New Spelling Dictionary, and Expositor of the English Language' (2nd edn, 1773). These popular books were frequently reprinted and pirated in the later years of the eighteenth and early years of the nineteenth centuries. 
Anne Fisher was no mere compiler; she wrote as an experienced educator. Her comments on the teaching of English grammar in the preface of her 'New Grammar' continue to be pertinent and there is a modern ring, too, to her remark, in the introduction to her 'Pleasing Instructor', that: 'An austere or learned pedant has sometimes 'whipped Latin, Greek', &c. into a lad, whose very disgust to 'it' increased, perhaps, with the Acquisition thereof; but it is a 'manifest' absurdity to maintain or imagine that 'anyone' can be 'awed' into a 'Love' of learning. (A. Fisher, 'The Pleasing Instructor', 3rd edn, 1760, ii)' Furthermore Ian Michael, commenting on this same work, records that 'Such exercises [correcting 'false English'] were first applied to the teaching of English syntax by Ann Fisher of Newcastle' (Michael, 325), on the suggestion of an anonymous correspondent writing from Carlisle. It is likely that she supported her husband in his authorship, under the pseudonym S. Thomas, of several works of commercial instruction. She also complemented his 'Newcastle Memorandum-Book' (published annually from 1756 to 1893) with her 'Ladies' Own Memorandum-Book', which was partly produced in London and which survived until 1805. 
Over many years Anne Fisher gave encouragement and support of all kinds to John Cunningham (1729-1773), poet and strolling player. The Slacks published Cunningham's pastoral poems in their newspaper, the 'Newcastle Chronicle', and in their memorandum-books, and valued his friendship on this account. But it is clear from the published letters of Anne Fisher to Cunningham, who was feckless, that she gave him money and clothes, and tried to guide him in his expenditure of the small income produced from the publication of his collected poems. These letters also show not only that she took an active part in the management of her husband's business, especially when he was absent from Newcastle, but also that she understood the technical requirements of book production. For example, in her letter of 4 September 1771 to Cunningham in Scarborough, in which she writes in some detail about the publication of the second edition of his poems, she says: 'Your book is all off now, but not dry enough to bind; a month or two later of the season is the proper season for publishing you may depend of it' (Hodgson, 'John Cunningham', 93). She had earlier tried to persuade him to dedicate the first edition to his patron Mrs Elizabeth Montagu, the 'Queen of Bluestockings', who had a house near Newcastle but he insisted on dedicating and presenting two specially bound copies of the book to David Garrick, whom, as an actor, he greatly admired, but who received the gift ungraciously, giving him 2 guineas and observing that 'Poets and players are always poor' (ibid., 86-7). 
Anne Fisher and her husband had nine children, all girls, of whom five survived them both. She died on 25 April 1778 in Newcastle and was buried in St John's Church. After the death of Thomas Slack, on 13 January 1784, their fourth surviving daughter, Sarah, inherited the printing and bookselling business, and married Solomon Hodgson on 15 February 1785. 


@@@@@


doc= 45849


Green, Sarah (fl. 1790-1825), novelist, was, according to 'A Biographical Dictionary of the Living Authors of Great Britain and Ireland', 'a native of Ireland'. Latterly her address was 18 Dartmouth Street, Westminster, near St James's Park. 'Charles Henly, or, The Fugitive Restored', published by the Minerva Press in 1790, is sometimes ascribed to her on the evidence of a 'Minerva Library' catalogue of 1814 assigning the novel to 'Mrs Green'. Several of her works were printed by the Minerva Press, including the treatise 'Mental Improvement for a Young Lady' (1793), 'addressed to a favourite niece'; its praise of Fanny Burney perhaps suggests novelistic ambition. In 1795 she defended the sanity of the visionary Richard Brothers (1757-1824) in 'A Letter to the Publisher of Brothers's Prophecies'; the glimpses of somewhat fervent spiritual life afforded there seem at odds with the conservatism of her other work. 
In 1799 Green embarked on a productive career as a novelist, with the first work of fiction that can be attributed to her with any certainty, 'Court Intrigue, or, The Victim of Constancy'. Over the next twenty-six years she produced a further sixteen substantial novels, usually under pseudonyms (a Cockney) or partially concealed authorship (S. G****). Much of her work was professedly satirical in character; in 'Romance Readers and Romance Writers' (1810) and 'Scotch Novel Reading, or, Modern Quackery' (1824) particularly, she addressed the issues of her profession in a highly self-conscious way. She also wrote historical romances, and in 'The Carthusian Friar' (1814) produced a successful imitation of Radcliffean Gothic. There were also a number of tales of marriage in contemporary settings. Her novels were fairly expensive -- 'The Royal Exile' (1811) was priced at $1 -- and most of them were reviewed in the standard journals. Comment was initially rather supercilious. 'The Private History of the Court of England' (1808), a characteristic mix of history and invention, was loftily dismissed by the 'Monthly Review' as a 'clumsy fiction' of scurrilous intent because of its recasting of the prince of Wales's amours into a fifteenth-century setting (58, January-April 1809, 101). 'The Reformist!!!' (1810), a satire on Methodism, was thought to be 'good-humouredly written' but improper in its venturing onto religious controversy ('Monthly Magazine', 30, supplement, 31 January 1811, 676), while the 'Monthly Review' found it too slavish in its adherence to government policy (64, February 1811, 216-17). The latter article also questioned the gender of the writer: 'we cannot be such dupes of the preface as to believe that the experience of a lady could have furnished all the scenes which are here delineated; and much less would we attribute to a female pen the great illiberality which occasionally displays itself.' The view was reiterated in the same journal's review of 'Good Men of Modern Date' (1811), though it was also noted that the work contained 'some grammatical errors that savour not of a classical education' ('Monthly Review', 68, May-August 1812, 109). None the less, guarded praise of the characterization and humour in the novels began to emerge, and the 'British Critic' four times declared Green 'well qualified for much better undertakings' (35, January-June 1810, 299; 36, July-December 1810, 407; 37, January-June 1811, 414; and 39, March 1812, 311). The last dated work ascribed to her is 'Parents and Wives, or, Inconsistency and Mistakes' (1825). 


@@@@@


doc= 45850


Ham, Elizabeth (1783-1859), poet and writer, was born on 30 November 1783 in the village of North Perrott, Somerset, on the border with Dorset, the third of the seven children of Thomas Ham, a yeoman farmer and brewer, and his slightly older wife, Elizabeth, who was also, perhaps, of rather higher social standing. Some eighteen months later, at the time of her mother's next pregnancy, Elizabeth lived with various relatives in the neighbourhood and was taken home from time to time. Her own family came together later at Dorchester, Weymouth, and several villages between the two towns and to the west of them. Elizabeth had spells of schooling near home and, for a short time, at an unsatisfactory boarding-school at Tiverton in Devon. Part of her youth coincided with George III's summer visits to Weymouth during the wars with Napoleon when troops and seamen thronged the towns, and for Elizabeth life became a round of plays, balls, parties, fireworks, regattas, and reviews. 
Elizabeth's father decided to move to Ireland and on 3 November 1804 he and Elizabeth set out for Milford Haven in Wales and from there by boat to Waterford. Their first winter in Ireland was spent in Carlow, and in March 1805 the family began a roundabout journey taking them to Kilkenny, Tipperary, Limerick, Ennis, Galway, Castlebar, and eventually Ballina in co. Mayo. There Thomas Ham hoped to make his fortune from cheap grain, and set up malting businesses to supply a brewery in Guernsey. Elizabeth deliberately recorded her impressions of the state of Irish society at the time, including the conditions of the Irish poor, whom she none the less admired. However, party-going and dancing among the soldiery still formed a main part of her life. At Ballina she fell in love with a junior officer who, it would seem, acted in bad faith. She never married, later remarking that we 'live a large portion of our lives between fifteen and twenty-five' (Ham, 'Elizabeth Ham by Herself', 61). Her recollections of her time in Ireland are characterized by a late eighteenth-century appreciation of the sublime and picturesque. 
Thomas Ham's fortunes did not mend and in 1809 Elizabeth returned to Wessex and to the realization that she no longer had a settled home. She also discovered, to her distress, that her accent had been affected by her years in Ireland. She flitted from relative to relative, serving as housekeeper, maid, or nurse as required, and without payment. She visited Guernsey again (a previous family visit had occurred before she moved to Ireland), by which time she was writing verse. Despite a long romantic interest in Napoleon, she took a leading part in the many peace celebrations in 1814 which were taking place from Blandford in eastern Dorset to Yeovil and East Coker in southern Somerset. Later she taught in a small school in Fordington, near Dorchester. 
It was in Yeovil that Elizabeth turned to Unitarianism. Eventually, about 1820, she became the governess to the household of the poet and patron Charles Elton -- then also a Unitarian -- of Clifton, Bristol, where she was, at last, treated as one of a large family of 'gentlefolks'. 'An Infant's Grammar' (1820?) was published, and Elton helped her with a long narrative poem which appeared anonymously in 1824 as 'Elgiva, or, The Monks', the latter displaying a wide reading on her part. 
After the 1820s details of Elizabeth's life are few. The last of the Elton children was born in 1825 and it is difficult to tell how long she stayed on as governess. She had a piece published anonymously in 'The Remembrance', an annual, in 1831, and allusions to Dickens and Thackeray show that she kept abreast of the times in her reading. In 1837 she was in Bath, and was in Brislington, near Bristol, in 1844. In 1845 she recalled her Irish experiences in the romance 'The Ford Family in Ireland'. She referred to the thunder of Louis Jullien's quadrille band, which she could have heard in Bristol or Bath in 1850, and she was still living in Brislington in 1851 as housekeeper for a lady of property. 
At the age of sixty-six Elizabeth began writing her recollections; she had not kept diaries and some of her dates must therefore be accepted with caution. She was still working at it in 1852, by which time she had covered the years up to about 1825. An abridgement of her recollections was published in 1945 as 'Elizabeth Ham by herself, 1783-1820'. Her imaginative power strongly evokes a sense of her time and yet also describes events and people from a matter-of-fact Victorian perspective. The autobiography combines propriety with engaging frankness. Elizabeth Ham died of heart disease in Brislington, at Wick House, the home of her employer, on 1 March 1859. 


@@@@@


doc= 45851


Hands, Elizabeth (bap. 1746, d. 1815), poet, was baptized in Harbury, Warwickshire, on 5 June 1746, the daughter of Henry and Ann Herbert, who at that time were resident in Harbury. Nothing further is known of the circumstances of her parents. Within a couple of years the family had moved to Rowington, where Elizabeth grew up. A sister, Mary, baptized there on 6 September 1748, was buried on 9 April 1749. A brother, Thomas, was baptized on 17 April 1750. 
From a letter, dated 4 November 1788, from Henry Sacheverell Homer (1719-1791), rector of Birdingbury, to the Revd Richard Bisse Riland of Sutton Coldfield, seeking support for the publication of her poems, Elizabeth is known to have worked as a servant in the household of the Huddesford family of Allesley, near Coventry (Bedford, 113). It was in Allesley that on 6 September 1784 Elizabeth married William Hands (1746/7-1825) of Bourton-on-Dunsmore. William was then the blacksmith in Bourton, a position which had previously been held by other members of the Hands family. William and Elizabeth had two daughters: Elizabeth, baptized on 29 August 1785, and Ann, baptized on 8 August 1787. The birth of the former is referred to in the poem 'On the Author's Lying In'. 
Elizabeth Hands had had no formal education. In the advertisement for the subscription for her poems it was noted that she had acquired her knowledge of poetry from the reading available to her in the households where she served. Even so, there is evidence of the breadth of her reading both in the range and skill of her handling of poetic forms, and more directly in the subject matter of some of the poems, particularly 'On Reading Pope's 'Eloisa to Abelard'' and 'Critical Fragments'. 
Hands's single published work, entitled 'The Death of Amnon: a Poem with an Appendix, Containing Pastorals and Other Poetical Pieces', was published by subscription in 1789. At least four of her poems had previously appeared in the Birmingham and Coventry newspapers under the pseudonym Daphne. Henry Homer's letter asserts that her poems would not have been published but for the interest taken in them by his son Philip Bracebridge Homer (1765-1838), who was an assistant master at Rugby School, and was able to enlist the support of the head of that school, Dr Thomas James, and other masters, who all agreed the poems were worthy of publication. The volume was dedicated to Bertie Greatheed of Guy's Cliff near Warwick, with thanks to him and other friends for their support. Its publication by subscription was advertised in 'Jopson's Coventry Mercury' of 24 November 1788, and, having attracted some 1200 signatures, its publication was announced in the same paper on 21 September 1789. The reviewer George Ogle, writing in the 'Monthly Review', noted 'the uncommonly numerous list of subscribers' as testament to the poetic achievement of the writer (3 Nov 1790, 346). The list included local notables, literary figures such as Anna Seward and the poet laureate, the Revd Thomas Warton, and also members and friends of the Herbert and Hands families. 
Richard Gough, reviewing the poems in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' of June 1790, commended the title poem especially (p. 540). He noted the originality of its subject and urged readers to be tolerant of any 'unequal line' which might be found in the five blank verse cantos. The story on which this poem is based is to be found in '2 Samuel' 13. Amnon, the son of David, falls in love with his sister Tamar, and with the help of a scheming friend, Jonadab, rapes her. The injury is avenged by her brother Absalom, who orders his servants to kill Amnon. While Elizabeth herself anticipated some opposition to a woman tackling the subject of a rape, she retells the story with sensitivity and control, and provides insights into character which are developed beyond the original material, through the use of dialogue and internal monologue. Hands successfully exploits the potential of blank verse to create a lively narrative which, following the model of earlier eighteenth-century writers, appropriately incorporates heroic similes and moralizing comments from the narrator. Thirty-nine miscellaneous poems complete the collection, providing a variety of poetic form: song, pastoral, ode, pastoral dialogue, epistle, elegy, and occasional poems. A number of common themes run through the collection, most prominently love and friendship. The occasional poems range in subject from the rampage of a mad cow through the village, to a visit of the king and queen to Kew. 
Elizabeth Hands's consciousness of the novelty of her situation as a working-class woman poet provides the basis for two comic poems, which anticipate the criticisms her 'superiors' were likely to make: 'On the Supposition of an Advertisement in a Morning Paper on the Publication of a Volume of Poems by a Servant Maid' and 'On the Supposition of the Book having been Published and Read'. 
Elizabeth Hands died in June 1815 aged sixty-nine, and was buried in Bourton-on-Dunsmore on 28 June. Her husband, William, lived another ten years, and was buried beside his wife. Hands's poetry was rediscovered in the late twentieth century through the work of Roger Lonsdale, Donna Landry, and Janet Todd, and was republished with an introduction by Caroline Franklin in 1996. 


@@@@@


doc= 45852


Harvey, Jane (bap. 1771, d. 1848), writer, baptized at Gateshead on 8 July 1771, was probably the daughter of William Harvey, wharfinger ('b'. 'c'.1738), and his second wife, Jane, daughter of James Marshall. According to 'The Feminist Companion to Literature in English' she was the daughter of Lawrance and Elizabeth Harvey of Barnard Castle, but there seems no evidence to connect her with this place. 
Harvey's earliest known work is 'A Sentimental Tour through Newcastle', by 'A Young Lady', published in 1794. This takes the form of a guide to various aspects of the city 'certainly in no way inferior to any provincial town in England' visited by the 'young lady'. As well as more typical sights the tour takes in the infirmary and the prison, with digressions, including political comment, on fishing and the coal trade. Her second book, 'Poems on Various Subjects', appeared in 1797. 
Harvey continued to publish poetry throughout her life, including two collections for children -- 'Sacred Hymns' and 'Poems Original and Moral' -- both in 1818, but she is probably better known for her romantic novels, especially 'The Castle of Tynemouth' (1806). Her books enjoyed wide currency and are represented in surviving catalogues of a number of private and circulating libraries. However, contemporary critical reaction was not always kind. The annual publication 'The Flowers of Literature', for example, says of 'The Governor of Belleville' (4 vols., 1808) that 'there are two volumes too much of it' and describes the author as 'lamentably deficient in the knowledge of character'. 
Little is known of Harvey's life but her obituary published in several Newcastle newspapers states that she ran a circulating library in Tynemouth for some years. At the time of her death, on 4 March 1848 in Saville Row, she was living in Brunswick Place, Newcastle upon Tyne. She was buried in the Newcastle general cemetery, at Jesmond, on 6 March. She was unmarried. 


@@@@@


doc= 45853


Hatton, Ann Julia (1764-1838), writer and actress, was born on 29 April 1764 in Worcester, the daughter of Roger Kemble (1722-1802), owner of a travelling theatre company, and his wife, Sarah Ward (1735-1807). Her siblings included Sarah Siddons (1755-1831), John Philip Kemble (1757-1823), Charles Kemble (1775-1854), and Stephen George Kemble (1758-1822). Congenitally lame and scarred by smallpox, she claimed that she was neglected by both parents, and although nicknamed the Genius by other members of the family, received little schooling. She was apprenticed to a mantua maker before going on the stage. Her marriage to an actor, C. Curtis (died 1817), proved bigamous but it was as Ann Curtis that she published 'Poems on Miscellaneous Subjects' (1783). Accusing her family of failing to help her, a newspaper advertisement of 1783 solicited donations from the public to relieve her financial distress; she lectured at James Graham's notorious 'Temple of Health', and later attempted to poison herself in Westminster Abbey. A press report of 1789 indicates that she was working in a bagnio when she was accidentally shot in the eye. 
On 30 January 1792, Ann Julia married William Hatton (died 1806), and a year later went to America where she addressed an ode to the Democratic Society of New York and wrote the libretto for an opera, 'Tammany, or, The Indian Chief', first performed in 1794. Yellow fever drove the Hattons to Nova Scotia but by 1799 they had returned to Britain and settled in Swansea where William Hatton took out a lease on the bathing house, providing bathing machines, an assembly room, and lodgings for visitors to the 'Brighton of Wales'. After her husband died in 1806 Ann Julia kept a dancing school in Kidwelly; she returned to Swansea in 1809 and made her home there for the rest of her life. For many years she received an allowance from her relatives on condition (so it was said) that she lived at least a hundred miles from London. 
For some years Ann Julia Hatton was connected with the Swansea Theatre. In 1803 J. T. Barber described her as lame and grossly overweight, but in reciting 'Alexander's Feast', 'the lady did not fail to exhibit a vivid tincture of the family genius' (Ross, 83). In 1810 she wrote 'Zaffine' for Edmund Kean and the following year adapted a novel by Madame de Genlis. At Neath in 1815 her performance of Lady Randolph in 'Douglas' was so well received that it was announced in 'The Cambrian' that she intended playing Calista in 'The Fair Penitent', 'expressly after the manner of Mrs Siddons' (Price, 120). According to J. Jones, however, the 'Old rancarous hag' ['sic'] had become 'The scoff of grinning Neath' (Jones, 'To Mrs Hatton'). 
Ann Julia Hatton's first prose work was possibly 'The Unknown, or, The Knight of the Blood-Red Plume' (Haining, 1.200-26), a story which appeared anonymously in 'Welsh Legends' (1802). In 1810 'Cambrian Pictures', the first of her fourteen novels, was published under the pen-name Ann of Swansea. At her best, she was capable of writing fluent narrative and lively dialogue, but the novels are immensely long and for the most part undeniably tedious. As she confesses in the preface to 'Lovers and Friends' (1821), 'an author finds his inventive faculties spun as thin as a cobweb in supplying the requisite number of pages for his story'. The novels, all but one published by the Minerva Press, have some generic interest in reflecting the literary fashions of the time -- 'Sicilian Mysteries' (1812) is a pale imitation of Ann Radcliffe's Gothic tales while both 'Secret Avengers' (1815) and 'Cesario Rosalba' (1819) feature Byronic anti-heroes. 'Cambrian Pictures', 'Secrets in every Mansion' (1818), and 'Gerald Fitzgerald' (1831) utilize motifs familiar in contemporary fictions of Wales, Scotland, and Ireland. 'Gonzalo de Baldivia' (1817), dedicated to William Wilberforce, includes the story of an African family brutally transported to the Peruvian silver mines, annotated with a personal statement by the author deploring slavery. 'Conviction' (1814) is notable for a self-portrait: Mrs Mortimer, author of 'Welsh Likenesses', a 'coarse, large, ill-shaped creature', who squints abominably and is pitted with the smallpox (3.204), vigorously denies that she is about to bring out a novel containing 'scandalous anecdotes of this most immaculate town' (3.238). Ann Julia Hatton herself, however, did not scruple to reveal in 'Chronicles of an Illustrious House' (1816) that 'your little town of Gooselake abounds with all the vices of the metropolis' (2.120). The novel caused a furore in Swansea. 
Ann Julia Hatton was a prolific writer of verse. 'Poetic Trifles' (1811) includes the celebrated 'Swansea Bay'. In 1832 she was seeking subscriptions for 'Fifty-Two Poetic Cumaean Leaves. Predicting the Destiny of Ladies and Gentlemen'. In 1834 she approached the publisher Richard Bentley with 'The Raconteur', and presented a scrapbook of verse to the young Swansea physician, Dr Douglas Cohen, fulfilling a promise that she would write him a poem every day for a year. Although 'A Resident of Swansea' described her at seventy as 'still a splendid woman' (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA', 7.175), her autobiographical verses are a poignant expression of her sense of desolation in old age, as well as conveying her bitterness towards her family. 
Ann Julia Hatton wrote 'Farewell Lines' to Dr Cohen on 28 September 1838 and dictated her last letter to him on 21 December, 'when in 'articula mortis'' (D. Cohen to J. D. Francis). She died on 26 December 1838 at 15 Park Street, and was buried in St John's churchyard on 31 December. Brought up a protestant like her mother, it is said that she died a Catholic like her father. The bulk of her estate was left to Mary Johns, her servant. 


@@@@@


doc= 45854


Kindersley, Jemima (1741-1809), travel writer, was born into the modest Wicksteed family on 2 October 1741 in Great Yarmouth, Norfolk, where on 19 April 1762 she married Lieutenant Nathaniel Kindersley (1732-1769) of the Royal Artillery. They met at a local ball, where he was doubtless struck by her beauty, for she became known as Pulcherrima. Their only son, Nathaniel (1763-1831), was born on 2 February 1763. 
In 1764 Kindersley transferred as captain to the East India Company's Bengal artillery, and sailed for Calcutta with his wife and son. Despite her humble background and initial lack of education, Jemima Kindersley responded to the opportunities of her elevation in society. She acquired a fluent prose style, a knowledge of French, and an acquaintance with the ideas of leading philosophers such as Montesquieu, and historians of South America and Asia, which enabled her to write a confident account of her journey to India and life there, mainly in Calcutta and Allahabad, from 1764 to 1768, 'Letters from the Island of Teneriffe, Brazil, the Cape of Good Hope and the East Indies'. Her work gives an interesting account of the early period of British consolidation in north India. It is also important as one of the first travel books by a woman, a field in which there were soon to be many female contributors. 
The 'Letters', which contain no personal information and omit her shipwreck in Bengal, record her wide-ranging observations of local life, religion, and culture, and consider more generally the prevailing characteristics of Indian society. She approached India within the framework of Enlightenment thought and concerns elaborated particularly by Montesquieu, believing that climate shaped character, and that presumed 'oriental despotism' undermined politics, society, and military achievement, and controlled the lives of Indian women. She was particularly interested in the latter, and sought to investigate suttee. As a woman she was able to visit a zenana in Allahabad, and gives one of the earliest Western accounts of the appearance and life of Muslim women. Her careful description avoids overdramatization, but stresses the restrictions imposed on them. 
Jemima Kindersley returned to England with her son in 1769 because of ill health, and her husband died in Calcutta the same year. The 'Letters' were published in 1777, possibly to earn money, since she was left with only a small pension, from which she helped support her mother. Her work met with a warm response; several periodical journals published excerpts, while the 'Monthly Review', though noting that much of her information was not new, praised the narration of 'a variety of amusing particulars with much ease and simplicity, and with every mark of fidelity' (57, 1777, 243). She thus helped set the pattern for women travel writers, who were welcomed for their style and ability to popularize subject-matter which was often dry or difficult of access. 
Her interest in the status and treatment of Indian women led her to give wider consideration to the role of women. However, she found that her intended work had been pre-empted by the publication in French of a book by Antoine Thomas, which she translated in 1781 as 'Essay on the Character, Manners and Understanding of Women, in Different Ages'. Appended to it were two of her own essays. One incorporated ideas suggested by her experience in India and argued that women were controlled by men in direct relation to the power they possessed over them: thus Indian men, who were highly susceptible to the sexual attractions of women, curtailed their rights and freedom, while Dutchmen, 'unacquainted with that jealousy which torments a Mussulman', granted their women considerable liberty (essay 1, 225). Her second essay called for improved education for women. 
She lived in Southampton and later Bath, mixing in cultivated circles. Her son joined the East India Company as a civilian; he shared his mother's literary tastes and interest in India, publishing 'Specimens of Hindoo Literature' (1794). The care of his growing family while he was in India provided an interest in her later years, though she had a reputation for irritability, the result perhaps of loneliness and the ill health from which she never fully recovered. She died in Beaumont Street, Marylebone, Middlesex, probably in April 1809, and was buried on 25 April at St Marylebone. 


@@@@@


doc= 45855


Lewis, Alethea (1749-1827), novelist, was born on 19 December 1749, at Acton, near Nantwich, Cheshire, the elder surviving child of the Revd Joseph Brereton (1721-1787), Church of England clergyman, and his first wife, whose first name was also Alethea (1727/8-1752). After her mother's death (when she was a little over two years of age) she was sent to live in Suffolk with her maternal grandfather, John Kilderbee, a linen draper at Framlingham. Her father, who was chaplain and librarian to the fourth earl of Dysart, remarried and had another family; at his death in 1787 he left her 5 guineas, but his younger daughters $100 each. 
Alethea attended a day school, and in her teens frequented reading circles and began to write, as a pastime and to earn money. As her works show, she read omnivorously. She introduced her close friend Sarah Elmy to George Crabbe, and the couple married; her own engagement to Crabbe's friend William Springal Levett (1752/3-1774) ended with Levett's death in October 1774. She corresponded with Crabbe for several years under the name of Stella; they resumed writing to each other on Sarah Crabbe's death. 
On 19 June 1788 Alethea Brereton married Augustus Fowle Lewis (died 1819), a surgeon who had served a sentence of transportation. She reputedly met him on a stagecoach, and married him without knowing of his criminal record. He seems, however, to have been a good husband. Two months later they emigrated to Philadelphia; but they stayed in America only about a year. On their return they lived briefly in Lancashire, then settled at Preston Hill, Penkridge, Staffordshire, where Augustus Lewis practised surgery and farmed. In 1794 she published her first novel, 'Vicissitudes in Genteel Life'. She went on to write five more books of which the attribution is unquestionable, while the authorship of five more remains in dispute. 
Two doubtful novels, anonymous like Lewis's first, appeared from the Minerva Press in 1795 and 1797. A later title-page claim links them with other novels which may be hers; but they are not mentioned in her next undoubted work. This was 'The Microcosm' (1801), 'by the author of Vicissitudes in Genteel Life', published by subscription and dedicated to her local member of parliament. Its critical preface claims the novel form as a vehicle for Christian instruction, and situates the author in a tradition of fiction reaching back through Fielding, Richardson, Fenelon, and Cervantes to Virgil. 
In 1803 Alethea Lewis published with Minerva a moral work entitled 'Essays on the Art of being Happy'. This launched the pseudonym by which she is often known: Eugenia de Acton, a humorous use of her birthplace. (She enjoyed playing with names: she gave three characters in 'Vicissitudes' her own baptismal name, maiden name, and surname respectively.) The pseudonym recurs on 'A Tale without a Title: Give it what you Please' (1804), 'The Nuns of the Desert, or, The Woodland Witches' (1805), and 'The Deserted Daughter' (1810). 
The alternative claimant of the remaining doubtful works ('Things by their Right Names', 1812, 'Rhoda', 1816, and 'Isabella', 1823) is Frances Margaretta Jacson, whose authorship was asserted both by her own family and by Maria Edgeworth. (Edgeworth mentions her as author of 'Rhoda'; title-pages link 'Rhoda' to the other novels claimed for both Jacson and Lewis.) Similarities of purpose and technique between the two groups are striking, but cannot be regarded as conclusive. Jane Austen's 'Emma' was compared unfavourably with 'Rhoda' by several readers at the time. 
Whether or not the disputed titles are credited to Alethea Lewis, she is an interesting, even quirky writer. Her central plot lines (suffering virtue eventually rewarded) and her earnest Christian intent are conventional enough; but with these qualities go self-conscious and critical addresses to the reader, displays of erudition, use of incidents from her own life, play with titles and genres, and a vein of the fantastical. Alethea Lewis died in 1827, and was buried on 12 November 1827 in Penkridge, Staffordshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 45856


Lickbarrow, Isabella (1784-1847), poet, was born on 5 November 1784 at Market Place, Kendal, Westmorland, the first of four daughters born to James Lickbarrow (1751-1805), schoolmaster, son of Henry and Isabel Lickbarrow of Cautley, in the parish of Sedbergh, and his wife, Mary (1756-1790), daughter of Samuel and Mary Bristo, of Howburn, in the parish of Caldbeck in Cumberland. Her sisters were Rachel ('b'. 1786), Hannah ('b'. 1787), and Margaret ('b'. 1789). The families were all members of the Society of Friends. 
Lickbarrow was given an excellent Quaker education, probably at the Friends' school in Kendal where her relative (first cousin once removed) John Dalton, the eminent scientist, taught before going to Manchester. Her mother died when she was five years old, and her father when she was twenty. She states that her first volume of poetry entitled 'Poetical Effusions' (1814) was published in order to create a fund 'to assist the humble labours of herself and her orphan sisters which would increase their family comforts and better their condition in life'. The list of subscribers to 'Poetical Effusions' included Wordsworth, Southey, and De Quincey. John Dalton bought four copies. 
From 1811 to 1815 Lickbarrow wrote prolifically for the 'Westmorland Advertiser', a weekly broadsheet published in Kendal first by Isaac Steele, then by M. and R. Branthwaite. The Branthwaites were responsible for arranging the publication of 'Poetical Effusions'. In 1818 Lickbarrow appeared as the author of another volume of poetry called 'Lament upon the Death of Princess Charlotte, and Alfred, a Vision'. She continued to write for the 'Monthly Repository' (1818), the 'Lonsdale Magazine' (1820), the 'Westmorland Advertiser and Kendal Chronicle' (1820-23), and the 'Kendal Mercury and Westmorland Advertiser' (1837-40). Her work shows not only a great appreciation of the beauties of nature in the local countryside, but also contains humanitarian reflections on the Napoleonic war, the slave trade, and contemporary domestic life. The discovery of a letter in her own hand to William Lowther, first earl of Lonsdale, dated 27 November 1818, shows Lickbarrow's integrity and independent spirit. The letter returned a gift of $10 10's'., and made clear that to accept such a sum 'would be acting ingenuously towards your Lordship and fear that I either incur the imputation of ingratitude or inconsistency.' Her motive may have been political: 1818 was the year when Lord Lonsdale's two sons were the tory candidates returned to parliament having defeated the whig Lord Brougham. 
For a time Lickbarrow kept a school in Kendal with her sisters Margaret and Rachel until 1820 when her sisters were admitted to Lancaster Lunatic Asylum, suffering from what was described as hereditary melancholia. Both were discharged as cured in 1822, but Rachel was admitted on a further three occasions over the period 1829-35, having twice attempted suicide. 'Notes and Queries' (17 February 1866) suggested that Lickbarrow herself had been admitted to the same asylum, but it has not proved possible to confirm this. Later in their lives their poverty was alleviated; when he died in 1844 John Dalton left in his will one-eighth of his entire estate in trust to the three sisters, '$900 divided in third equal parts to my relations Isabella, Rachel and Margaret Lickbarrow'. It is possible that he helped them financially throughout his life, since there is evidence that the Kendal Society of Friends was supportive. 
Lickbarrow lived with her sisters in Greenhow Yard, Highgate, in Kendal; J. F. Curwen's 'Kirkbie-Kendal' (1900) lists her address as 95/99 Soutergate, the east side -- which was later known as Highgate. Curwen wrote that Greenhow Yard 'has always been considered one of the nicest in Kendal, the houses not being too rank, and by reason of the tall poplars that used to flourish there' (pp. 105-6). After Isabella's death in 1847, the 1851 census recorded Rachel and Margaret Lickbarrow still living in Highgate, described as annuitants, and in the 'Kendal Directory' (1849) they are found in the list comprising the addresses of 'Clergy, Gentry, Partners in Firms not arranged under the classifications of Trades and Professions', and so were not regarded as being 'working-class' as has been suggested. 
Isabella Lickbarrow died on 10 February 1847 at Underbarrow, Kendal. Her death certificate states that she died of atrophy, which was the contemporary description of an emaciating illness such as tuberculosis. She was buried in Castle Street burial-ground, Kendal, on 15 February 1847. 


@@@@@


doc= 45857


Mosse, Henrietta (d. 1834), novelist, was born in Ireland. Nothing is known of her early life or education. Her first novel, 'Lussington Abbey' was published anonymously by the Minerva Press in 1804. On 4 December 1806 at St Marylebone in London she married Isaac Mosse (1766/7-1828), businessman and author of 'Enclytica, Being the Outlines of a Course of Instruction on the Principles of Universal Grammar' (1814). She continued to write for Minerva after her marriage, publishing under her own name. Several novels appeared in quick succession, including the well-received 'Heirs of Villeroy' (1806); 'A Peep at our Ancestors' (1807), a historical novel set in the twelfth century; and 'The Old Irish Baronet, or, The Manners of my Country' (1808), modelled on Clara Reeve's successful Gothic novel, 'The Old English Baron' (1788). 'A Peep at our Ancestors' was allegedly based on 'records and documents', but despite the author's claim to have written a 'correct' sketch of the times, its 'peep' into history is thinly disguised contemporary romance. This novel is graced by a frontispiece engraved portrait of Mosse by H. R. Cook after Ramsey, a dedication to the duke of Leinster, and subscribers list. In 1812 'Arrivals from India, or, Time's a Great Master' was published, with a dedication to Princess Mary. Henrietta Mosse's reputation was that of the skilled Minerva veteran, writing highly marketable novels of indifferent quality, containing 'nothing to condemn, and certainly nothing very much to commend'. The formulas she deployed differed little from other romance writers, 'with this exception that the fair author keeps in mind the good old moral of virtue rewarded, and vice punished' ('Critical Review'). In 1816 she published 'Craigh-Melrose Priory, or, Memoirs of the Mount Linton Family', translated into French the following year. 'A Bride and No Wife' appeared in 1817, with intermittent translation work from French to English. 
The 1820s began badly, with Isaac Mosse swindled in business and paralysed by a series of strokes from 1822. Nursing her husband single-handedly, Mosse published at least four novels between 1825 and 1829: 'A Father's Love and a Woman's Friendship' (1825), 'Gratitude and other Tales' (1826), 'Woman's Wit and Man's Wisdom, or, Intrigue' (1827), and 'The Blandfords, or, Fate and Fortune' (1829) with assistance from her 'benevolent Patroness', Marchioness Cornwallis. With times bad for all and a deepening sense that 'authorship is become a very doubtful source for existence', Mosse advertised for non-literary work, trying to rally her 'power to exert [herself]' and her innate 'high spirit'. The Royal Literary Fund was relatively generous while Isaac Mosse lived and granted his widow $20 in 1828 after an affecting appeal 'from the side of his coffin'. All previous petitions were based on her husband's single published work, and in 1830 Mosse was obliged to appeal for the first time as author in her own right, staking her claim on past publications and several works in hand: three volumes of 'moral and entertaining tales founded on fact', a work entitled 'The distress of women', and several dramas, 'highly spoken of by the Principals of one or two theatres'. Nevertheless, she despaired of ever seeing them performed, confessing that she felt constrained by lack of 'that energetic principle to urge them forwards' which 'cannot properly belong to the female character' ('Archives of the Royal Literary Fund', reel 16). 
The Royal Literary Fund archive charts a harrowing career up until 1834, when Mosse died 'in a state of great destitution in a miserable attic' at 6 Somers Town Terrace, London. W. Jones of 36 Judd Street, the doctor who tended her in her final illness, appealed to the Royal Literary Fund for aid for a decent burial, but his request was ruled 'inadmissible' ('Archives of the Royal Literary Fund', reel 16). 


@@@@@


doc= 45859


Parker, Mary Ann (1765/6-1848), traveller, was a physician's daughter but her parents' names are unknown. Nothing is known of her early life save that she lived three years in Spain as a very young child. She was evidently a well-educated woman who had travelled widely in Europe and was fluent in Spanish. She was originally reputed to be beautiful in face and figure, but smallpox left its marks on her. Before 1790 she married John Parker (1749?-1794), captain in the Royal Navy, and they had four children. Their two sons died early but their two daughters survived. John Parker was a veteran of the siege of Gibraltar (1779-83) and in 1791 he was sent on the 'Gorgon' to relieve the starving convict colony at Port Jackson, New South Wales. Mary Parker accompanied him on a journey which took them around the world before they returned to London by June 1792. 
On 4 August 1794 John Parker died of yellow fever off Martinique leaving Mary Parker and their children in very difficult circumstances. She began to write an account of her experiences to raise money. An adroit publicity campaign was engineered on her behalf by Joseph Budworth with the help of John Nichols, publisher of the 'Gentleman's Magazine'. Budworth, a Sloane Street neighbour in London, and like John Parker a veteran of the siege of Gibraltar, drew attention to Mary Parker's situation with the publication of his 'Siege of Gibraltar: a Poem' (1795) for her benefit, advertising her forthcoming narrative and filling her subscription list. The list was substantial, and drew on literary, naval, and militia connections, and on loyalist sentiment of a sometimes intensely particularist kind, finding tight pockets of local patriotism in Sloane Street and the Lancashire town of Blackburn. Surviving distinguished veterans of the siege signed up, as did dozens of navy pay-office employees; Budworth's London sociability provided members of the Society of Antiquaries, the Trent Club, and others in the highly charged loyalist atmosphere of the time. 
Parker's 'Voyage Round the World, in the Gorgon Man of War' appeared in 1795. The author presented herself as the conventional private, financially embarrassed, reluctant woman writer, and apologized for the book's 'brevity and other greater demerits', attributing these faults to her predicament as 'nurse, and being obliged to attend so much to her domestic concerns' (Parker, preface). Despite her frank admission that she was publishing for money, Parker was no sensationalist. Constrained by her genteel persona, she did not dwell on the sufferings of her long journey, though she was immediately so violently seasick that she was close to 'desert[ing]... & waver[ed] between Husband & Children', noticed the officer John Gardner; nor did she ever emphasize the 'rare circumstance', as a reviewer put it, of seeing 'a female name in the list of circumnavigators' ('Monthly Review', 20, 1796, 112). Instead, her narrative is brisk, matter of fact, and entertaining, enlivened by the 'little dash of satire' in her personality observed by Gardner. At ports of call -- Tenerife, Cape Town, Port Jackson -- she gives a lively account of her social life, interspersed with descriptions of the personalities of her many hosts and hostesses, and observations on landscape, local customs, and manners. The second half of the book is given over to Port Jackson, where she left the impression of 'a very amiable intelligent Woman' ('Journals and Letters of Elizabeth Macarthur', 34). Sections of her husband's log, minutes, and reports are included, as are his whaling notes; his eyewitness government report on the dreadful condition of Third Fleet transportees; and details of the spectacular electrical storm which greeted the 'Gorgon''s arrival, where Parker memorializes her husband and Gibraltar, likening the latter to 'a besieged garrison' (Parker, chap. 5). She praises Governor Phillip's regime as benign and paternal, devoting a chapter to the natives of New Holland. 

'A Voyage' was well received thanks to Nichols but, despite proceeds from it, her pension, and Budworth's book, within a year Parker, in 'great distress', was receiving money from the Literary Fund. Happily, Nichols, Budworth, and several subscribers were also Literary Fund committee members, and her appeals were repeated through to 1804, when she lost her house and was confined for debt, 'within the Gloomy Walls of a prison' -- the Fleet -- 'this horrid abode' ('Archives of the Royal Literary Fund', Case 39: a, 6, 8). Little is known of her later life. She died aged eighty-two at the house of her son-in-law Robert Vincent, in Connaught Terrace, Edgware Road, London, on 30 August 1848. 


@@@@@


doc= 45860


Peisley, Mary (1718-1757), Quaker minister, was born on 19 January 1718 at Ballymore, co. Kildare, the eldest of the three children of Peter Peisley (1694-1754), a farmer of nearby Baltiboys, co. Wicklow, and his first wife, Rachel Burton, a native of Mannin, co. Tipperary, who died when Mary was a child. The family moved in 1723 to the Queen's county and occupied a 300 acre farm at Paddock, near Mountrath, where Peter married in 1727, as his second wife, Anna Pim (1697-1768) of Lacka, with whom he had six further children. Their modest cottage home remained Mary's base for the rest of her life. 
The Peisley family had strong links with the pioneering days of Quakerism. Mary's great-grandfather Peter Peisley (1624-1689), a native of Ascot under Wychwood in Oxfordshire, was involved in a dispute over tithe payments in 1649, even before Quakerism reached Ascot, and later moved to Ireland; he settled in co. Wicklow, first at Poolanarrick, where a Quaker meeting was established on his farm in 1668, and secondly at Baltiboys, where another early Quaker meeting was established. His descendants had maintained the Quaker testimonies in their original purity, and in Mary's day, when Irish Quakers were becoming more worldly, the Peisleys continued to live plainly and visitors to Paddock were delighted by the family's 'instructive conversation' ('Some Account', 6). 
Mary, who lacked 'the privilege of a liberal education', found employment in various affluent households ('Some Account', 308). Aged twenty-six, and following a near fatal riding accident, she was converted to the religious life, and started to speak in Quaker meetings in 1744. Thereafter she embarked on a programme of self-denial and of purification through suffering, preaching against the dangers of wealth and the decline in Quaker spirituality, and seeing herself as a 'sharp threshing instrument' (ibid., 314), and as a 'pipe' through which God's message might be channelled (ibid.). 
Following a short Irish tour in 1746 with the Limerick Quaker Elizabeth Tomey, Mary paid a long religious visit to England (1748-50), accompanied initially by Elizabeth Hutchinson, and later by Mary Weston and others. Guided and fortified by her faith she braved physical danger and hardship, covering 5000 miles on horseback in 29 months and attending 525 meetings. Her preaching was succinct and powerful, and her prophesyings remarkable when 'ministering to the state' ('Some Account', 261) of individuals, whether in public or at private family opportunities. Mary's impact as a preacher, recorded in a verse 'To M.P. a Native of Ireland' ('GM', 1st ser., 20, 1750, 86), was no doubt enhanced by her physical presence 'being near 6 foot' (ibid.). The rigours of this trip seriously affected her health. Another short Irish tour followed in 1751 and, while visiting Cork, her then companion, Catherine Payton, was instrumental in converting Samuel Neale (1729-1792), a paper manufacturer and Mary's future husband, to the religious life. He eventually became a Quaker minister. 
Mary's final and most important religious journey, to America (1753-6), was again undertaken with Catherine Payton; before leaving England they had both been part of a group of six women who proposed to the London yearly meeting that a separate yearly meeting of women Friends should be established (this was not granted until 1784). Mary and Catherine landed at Charles Town, South Carolina, on 26 December 1753 and, travelling often through thinly inhabited country, braving dangerous creeks, swamps, and wild animals, they covered 8000 miles on horseback before they arrived back in Dublin on 19 July 1756. They laboured in the Carolinas, Virginia, Maryland, New England, and Pennsylvania. Everywhere they found 'the discipline sadly let fall' ('Some Account', 343) and they were among the first to preach reform. Mary opposed Friends' ownership of slaves and pointedly held meetings with black people. She urged all Friends to avoid worldliness, particularly in politics, and complained about some Friends' deistical beliefs. She returned home with a certificate of approbation from American Friends, recording how 'acceptable and serviceable her labours had been amongst them'. 
Aged thirty-nine, Mary married Samuel Neale at Mountrath on 17 March 1757, but she died unexpectedly, of 'cholic', three days later at Paddock; her body was interred locally, at the Quaker burial-ground, Mountrath, on 24 March. 


@@@@@


doc= 45861


Scott, Mary (1751/2-1793), poet, was born in Milborne Port, Somerset, the daughter of a linen merchant. Little is known of her before the publication, in her early twenties, of her poem 'The Female Advocate' (1774). It seems that her life had been dominated by illness: in the poem's dedication she writes of her 'years of ill health', and in the poem itself of her 'languor, and unceasing pains'. 'The Female Advocate' also contains clues to particular friendships. The 'Lady' to whom it is dedicated was evidently Anne Steele, who is also addressed as Theodosia, author of 'Poems on Subjects Chiefly Devotional' (1760). Like Scott, Steele was both earnestly religious and an invalid. It is probably Scott whom Steele addresses as Myra in a poem first published in the posthumous second edition of her 'Poems', that speaks of a friend to whom she is 'In suffering and in sentiment allied'. Steele was the eldest daughter of a lay Baptist preacher and timber merchant, William Steele, who appears in 'The Female Advocate' as Philander, a man who has encouraged her writing. Scott praises in the poem another male mentor and friend to 'the female cause'; according to a manuscript note by Sarah Froud, who in 1774 owned the copy now in the Huntington Library, this was Richard Pulteney. Pulteney (1730-1801) was a physician who, from 1765, lived in Blandford, Dorset, and wrote books on botany. 
The title page of 'The Female Advocate' declared it to be occasioned by reading John Duncombe's 'The Feminiad' (1754), a celebration of female learning and, in particular, of women poets. In rhyming couplets Scott supplemented Duncombe's verse catalogue, commending literary women omitted by him, and adding several more recent writers. Those with strong protestant inclinations were singled out for praise. She wrote that the poem, which appeared in a second edition in 1775, sprang from her 'indignation' at the disdain of many men for 'female education'. 
Although Scott appears to have remained in Milborne Port, living with her parents, until she was in her late thirties, she clearly had contacts with a circle of intellectual protestant dissenters. 'The Female Advocate' was published by Joseph Johnson, who would become well known as a publisher of writing by dissenters. Her brother, Russell Scott, was a Unitarian minister in Portsmouth and, in the early 1770s, she met John Taylor (1753-1817), first a student then a tutor at the Daventry Academy for Unitarians. Marriage to Taylor was opposed by her mother, an invalid for whom Scott cared until her death in 1787. Her father died the next year and shortly afterwards, in May 1788, she and Taylor, who had become minister of a chapel at Ilminster, Somerset, married. 
In the 1770s Scott established an epistolary friendship with Anna Seward, whose published letters, seven of them written to Scott, are the main source of information about her. Seward's father, Thomas, had been praised in 'The Female Advocate' for his poem 'The female right to literature', and this may have led to the correspondence between the two women. They wrote to each other mainly about literary topics and, according to a letter from Seward to William Hayley, met only once. Scott published 'Verses Addressed to Miss Seward, on the Publication of her Monody on Major Andre' in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' in June 1783. Roger Lonsdale speculates about her being the Miss Scott whose two poems 'Dunotter Castle' and 'Verses, on a Day of Prayer, for Success in War', were included in 'Poems by the most Eminent Ladies', probably published in 1780. In the year of her marriage she published 'The Messiah', a blank verse epic with Christ as its hero (reviewed in the 'Monthly Review', 79, 1788, 277). This was her last known publication. 
Scott gave birth to a daughter in 1789 and a son in 1791. The latter, John Edward Taylor (1791-1844), would become founder and editor of the 'Manchester Guardian'. Her husband became a Quaker by 1792, an alteration which, from the evidence of Anna Seward's correspondence, placed some strain upon her as he had earlier influenced her to adopt Unitarian beliefs. She continued to suffer from poor health and, three weeks before her third child was due to be born (according to a brief obituary in the 'Gentleman's Magazine'), she died on 5 June 1793, aged forty-one, in Bristol. She was survived by her husband. 


@@@@@


doc= 45862


Strutt, Elizabeth (bap. 1783, in or after 1863), writer, was born at Hull, Yorkshire, where she was baptized on 20 February 1783, the daughter of Thomas Frost, a solicitor in the town, and his wife, Elizabeth. The antiquary Charles Frost was her brother. She was first married to John Byron (1780-1805), a Hull physician, who died aged twenty-five. Her early works as Mrs Byron include 'Drelincourt and Rodalvi, or, Memoirs of Two Noble Families: a Novel' (1807), a three-volume tale of tragic love set in England and Florence. In the preface Byron states: 'To amuse without injuring, and to instruct without offending, is the highest aim of the following pages... The approbation of the wise and good is... always valuable, and they must be undeserving of it, who are insensible of its worth.' The style is reminiscent of Ann Radcliffe's late eighteenth-century romances, and her protagonists demonstrate sensibility worthy of Radcliffe's heroines. Byron was anxious to instruct as well as delight her readers, and her texts are all concerned with morality and virtue. Her epistolary novel 'Anti-Delphine' (1806), for example, is a response to Germaine de Stael's tragic tale of adulterous love. Predictably, in Byron's version the suffering wife uses patience and virtue to reclaim her husband, who has been seduced. 'The Borderers' (1812), another historical romance in an international setting, takes place in the fourteenth century and includes various transformations: a knight who becomes a hermit, Moorish women who convert to Christianity, and a girl who dresses as a page. She married in London, on 8 November 1813, the artist Jacob George Strutt, with whom she had two sons and two daughters. 
As Mrs Strutt she wrote further novels, such as 'Genevieve, or, The Orphan's Visit' (1818) and the later 'Chances and Changes: a Domestic Story' (1835), which combine the romance plot with overtly moral themes, and conclude with the marriages of the scrupulously virtuous heroines to their worthy suitors. Travels through France, Italy, and Switzerland led to European travel guides: 'A Spinster's Tour in France, the States of Genoa etc. During the Year 1827' (1828), 'Six Weeks on the Loire with a Peep into La Vendee' (1833), and 'Domestic Residence in Switzerland' (1842). Aimed primarily at the unaccompanied female traveller, these include practical advice on choosing hotels. Her travel books are straightforward accounts, providing insight into the character of Strutt herself, who comes across as refined and possessed of a keen eye for the beauties of the landscape. 
Elizabeth Strutt also wrote devotional works. Like some of her moral novels, her religious texts testify to her orthodox Christianity and keen sense of morality. For a period up to 1832 she and her husband lived at Butterwick House, Hammersmith, where she ran a boarding school for girls. The preface of her 'The young Christian's companion, or, Manual of devotion for the use of schools and young persons' (1830) makes clear her pedagogical aims: 'The object in the following selection has been to produce a form of prayer, and of devotional exercises, concise enough to insure the attention of the young, and sufficiently impressive to excite the reverence of their hearts, toward the Divine being, whom they are too commonly accustomed to approach with the mere worship of their lips.' Her 'Book of the Fathers' (1837), which drew on materials which she had consulted in libraries in Geneva and Lausanne, was a collection of exemplary lives from the period of the early church. 'The Hermit of Dumpton Cave' (1823) is a biography of a modern hermit, Joseph Croome Petit, and is subtitled ''devotedness to God, and usefulness to man'', while 'The Feminine Soul' (1857), written when she and her husband were living in Great Ormond Street, London, presents a heartfelt argument for spiritual equality between the sexes. 'The Curate and the Rector' (1859) satirizes the Reverend Mr Plufty. 
In June 1863 Strutt was awarded a civil list pension of $70 'in consideration of her straitened circumstances at a great age, and after 58 years of contributions to literature' ('The Times', 11 June 1863). She was one of the nineteenth century's most prolific women of letters, but it is not known when she died. 


@@@@@


doc= 45863


Tatlock, Eleanor (fl. 1799-1811), poet, was the daughter of Richard Tatlock, a naval surgeon (died before 1797), and his wife, Elizabeth Smith (died 1797). She might have been born in Sandwich, Kent, where she spent her youth and where her mother died; she later lived in two Buckinghamshire villages, Wooburn and Great Marlow, having left Kent at some time before 1811. Tatlock was a deeply religious woman who described herself as a dissenter (although not a 'bigoted' one), but she was baptized in the Church of England, and continued to attend its services, at least on occasion. In one of her poems she praised Church of England worship at Wooburn and she addressed another to the Reverend George Edwards, whose congregation she joined when she lived in Great Marlow. 
Tatlock began to publish her poems in religious periodicals, including 'The Evangelical', during the final years of the eighteenth century; in 1811 she reported that she had been contributing to those magazines for 'more than a dozen years' (Tatlock, 1.iii). Her most important work -- and her only publication except for the poetry which appeared in religious magazines -- was a two-volume collection, called simply 'Poems', which she published under her own name in 1811. The collection is dominated by 'Thoughts in solitude', a meditative and digressive blank verse poem in six books, which she wrote to comfort herself during a 'gloomy winter' after she moved away from her friends in Kent (ibid., 1.iii-iv). 'Thoughts in solitude' gives evidence of the range of her interests, which included theology, history, natural history, and social issues such as the problem of fallen women (notes refer to a female penitentiary). Despite the range of topics touched on in this work, Tatlock claims to have worried about leaving herself open to charges of 'female pedantry' and so avoided full documentation of her reading (ibid., 1.211). Almost everything that is known about her life and opinions comes from information which she included in these volumes, and a number of the shorter pieces, which include hymns and poems based on biblical tales, give further evidence of Tatlock's religious convictions. Like most evangelicals, Tatlock supported abolition; she was also interested in missionary work, which she writes about in poems such as her 'Plea for the Jews'. Part of her interest apparently arose from her admiration for the work being done by the ladies affiliated with the missionary societies, whom she praises in her notes on that poem, suggesting that like some other women dissenters of her generation, she might have been willing to explore, however tentatively, the possibility of public (if necessarily secondary) roles for women in religious movements. Tatlock seems not to have married, and there is no certain information about her life after 1811, although Virginia Blain suggests that she might have been the Ellen Tatlock who died in Battersea in 1818, at the age of fifty-five (Blain, Clements & Grundy, 'Feminist comp.', 1055). 


@@@@@


doc= 45864


Thomas, Elizabeth (1770/71-1855), novelist and poet, was baptized on 7 October 1771 at Hartland in Devon, the daughter of Mary (died 1818) and Edward Wolferstan (died 1788) of Berry House there. Little is known of her early life. She married the Revd Thomas Thomas (died 1838), vicar of Tidenham, Gloucestershire, about 1795. Elizabeth Thomas wrote religious verse which was variously received, praised on one hand for its 'purity, correctness, and piety' ('Theatrical Inquisitor', February 1819), but denigrated on the other for its trite or blasphemous versifications of biblical stories ('Monthly Review', August 1819). Her anonymous collection 'The Confession, or, The Novice of St Clare, and other Poems' (1818) was widely reviewed, particularly for the titillating anti-Catholicism of its title poem. Its long preface defends the author's anonymity, arguing: 'her name is so common nothing can be made of it... her character is of the same stamp... she is, in short, quite a creature of ordinary life', disingenuous disclaimers since the title-page advertises the work as penned by the author of 'Purity of Heart, or, The Ancient Costume' (1816), a virulent, polemical novel addressed to the anonymous author of 'Glenarvon', the 1816 'succes de scandale'. In her preface to 'Purity of Heart', under the pseudonym 'an old wife of twenty years', Elizabeth Thomas confesses she could not resist ridiculing 'Glenarvon' in order to counteract 'its horrible tendency' and 'its dangerous and perverting sophistry'. Estimates of the novel's success in advancing public morals and virtue (the 'ancient costume' of her subtitle) differed, from praise as 'a clever little novel' ('Theatrical Inquisitor', Dec 1816), to criticism of the 'old wife' for missing her target and digressing into a personally hostile attack on 'Glenarvon''s presumed author in its 'strange extravagant portrait' ('European Magazine', 1817) of Lady Calintha Limb (Lady Caroline Lamb). 
Elizabeth Thomas has also been identified as 'Mrs Bridget Bluemantle', author of nine Minerva Press novels from 1806 to 1818. While this author's conservative disavowal of any identification with learned women, or underdressed 'Bluestockings', may well be in character, bibliographical problems remain in securely fixing Elizabeth Thomas's name to these works. Virginia Blain rightly points to a confusion in attribution with the novelist Maria Elizabeth Budden ('M. E. B.'), and perhaps these Minerva novels should remain where Blakey left them in 1939, as by an unidentified, pseudonymous author. Elizabeth Thomas died, aged eighty-four, of bronchitis on 1 June 1855 at her home, Foxdown, Parkham, near Bideford, Devon. 


@@@@@


doc= 45865


Vardill, Anna Jane (1781-1852), poet, was born on 19 November 1781 in London, the only child of the Revd Dr John Vardill (1749-1811) and his wife (died 1826). Her father, who was born in New York state, moved to England in 1774. He was a loyalist spy, a professor, and a clergyman who served as rector of Skirbeck and Fishtoft in Lincolnshire, from 1791 until his death in 1811. He wrote at least one play, 'The Unknown', which was performed at the Surrey Theatre in 1819. 
Vardill grew up in Galloway, London, and Lincolnshire. Her father provided the strongest influence on her education. In the preface to her first published work, 'Poems and translations, from the minor Greek poets and others, written chiefly between the ages of ten and sixteen, by a lady' (1809), she states that '[a] most indulgent father... found amusement in familiarizing his only child with the Poets of Antiquity' (Vardill, iv). This first published volume went to three editions. It contains precocious translations of Anacreon, Sappho, Theocritus, Horace, and others, in addition to original works such as 'The rights of woman, a burlesque essay', in which Vardill cites a wide range of supposed authorities on the subject and satirizes both sexes before concluding that woman's role should be that of prime minister to man's king. 
Vardill published 'The Pleasures of Human Life: a Poem', in 1812. Like much of her work, this poem is an effective imitation of a particular style -- Augustan, in this case -- and a tribute to her father, who had died the previous year. From 1813 to 1822, as 'V', she produced a number of works in the style of various Romantic poets, including Walter Scott, Robert Southey, and Lord Byron, for the 'European Magazine'. Her most famous contribution to the magazine was a continuation of Samuel Taylor Coleridge's 'Christabel', published in April 1815, over a year before Coleridge's original appeared in print. She had heard the poem read aloud in December 1814 by Henry Crabb Robinson, a family friend who later became her mother's executor. 'Christobell' demonstrates Vardill's remarkable ability to imitate contemporary poetic forms, allowing the previously inaccessible Romantic idiom to filter into popular literary culture. 
After her marriage to James Niven (died 1830) in 1822, Vardill moved from London to his estate at Kirkcudbright in Scotland. Their only child, Agnes, was born in 1825. After her husband's death Vardill returned to England, where she divided her time between London and Skipton until her death in Skipton on 4 June 1852. 


@@@@@


doc= 45866


Weeton, Nelly (1776-1849), letter writer and governess, was born on 25 December 1776 in Lancaster, possibly in Church Street, the second of the four children of Thomas Weeton (1744-1782), privateersman and slave-ship captain, and Mary (1746?-1797), daughter of Richard Rawlinson, a Preston butcher. She was baptized on 29 January 1777 at St John's, Lancaster, and was named Nelly after her father's ship. Her editors have called her Ellen, but Nelly was her name at baptism and death. 
Weeton's writings consisted mainly of nine letter-books into which from 1804 she meticulously copied the long letters which she sent to friends and relatives. One of these letter-books contains a short memoir, 'The retrospect', which gives information about her early life. A separate manuscript volume includes 'Occasional reflexions', written in 1818, and 'The history of the life of N. Stock', composed in 1824. Only the second, third, and seventh letter-books (the seventh ending in 1825) are extant. The letter-books remained unpublished during Weeton's lifetime and came to light only accidentally in 1925, when their first editor, Edward Hall, discovered one of them in a Wigan bookshop. 'Miss Weeton: a Journal of a Governess' was published in two volumes in 1936, the first covering the years 1807 to 1811, and the second 1822 to 1825. A reprint, 'Miss Weeton's Journal of a Governess', in two volumes with an introduction by J. J. Bagley, was published in 1969. 
In 1784, after losing her father aboard ship during the American War of Independence, Weeton, her mother, and her only surviving sibling, a younger brother, Thomas (Tom), moved from Lancaster to the small village of Upholland, near Wigan. Weeton's childhood was spent in adoration of Tom, whose educational needs were always taken more seriously than her own: 'I revered and loved my mother, but I loved my brother a great deal better' ('Miss Weeton's Journal', ed. Bagley, 1.19). Weeton gained a modicum of education mainly from her mother, who opened a local school in 1788. From an early age she felt the disadvantages of her inadequate schooling very keenly: 'From the peculiarly recluse manner in which I had been educated, I was averse to society' (ibid., 1.20). Weeton assisted in her mother's school and, after her mother's death in 1797, ran the establishment alone in an effort to pay off her mother's debts and to support her brother through his legal education in Preston. 
Tom Weeton's marriage in 1803 and his unfeeling financial manipulation of his sister obliged Weeton to find other ways of supporting herself. In later years her idealization of Tom was poignantly tempered by a hatred of the many injustices he had perpetrated against her: 'What have I done to you, hard-hearted selfish brother, to merit such strange cruelty of conduct?' ('Miss Weeton's Journal', ed. Bagley, 2.87). As a result of her precarious pecuniary situation, Weeton spent the years 1808-9 lodging in Liverpool. In 1809 she was obliged to take up work as a governess to the Pedder family at Ambleside in the Lake District. Here she witnessed with horror the death of ten-year-old Mary Pedder, who fell into the fire. Between 1811 and 1814 Weeton was governess to the Armitage family at High Royd, Honley, near Huddersfield, where she had the task of bringing to order children whom she found 'as unruly, noisy, insolent, quarrelsome a set, as I ever met' (ibid., 2.59). 
In September 1814, at her brother's instigation, Weeton returned to Wigan to marry a local widower and cotton manufacturer, Aaron Stock ('b'. 1776). The marriage was an unmitigated failure: Weeton suffered the excesses of domestic abuse, 'extreme want and houseless at one time; imprisonments and bruises at another; my life daily in danger' ('Miss Weeton's Journal', ed. Bagley, 2.140). She was herself charged with assault and threatened with detention in a lunatic asylum. Her only daughter, Mary ('b'. 1815), was removed from her care and sent to a local boarding-school. Weeton and Stock were separated by deed of separation in 1822, Weeton being thereby banned from the vicinity of Wigan. 
Weeton returned to Upholland and was later reunited with her daughter. Described by Hall as a 'freethinker' ('Miss Weeton's Journal', ed. Bagley, l.xxix), she attended both established and nonconformist churches regularly. She became a member of Hope Independent Chapel, Wigan, in 1827. Her Wigan home in Standisgate, inherited from her father, was sold in 1844. She later moved to Bedford Street, Liverpool, where she died of typhoid fever on 12 June 1849. She was buried in the Liverpool necropolis on 14 June 1849. She bequeathed her letter-books to William Marshall, minister of Hope Independent Chapel, but her principal legatees were her daughter Mary Newell and her grandchildren. 
Lanky, sickly, and beset by acne, Weeton was, by her own admission, physically unprepossessing: 'I never was a beauty and sure enough I grow uglier every day' ('Miss Weeton's Journal', ed. Bagley, 1.226). But the letters reveal a woman of impressive mental accomplishments whose many sufferings seem only to lend a clarity to her quick humour, quiet dignity, and powers of observation. She could, however, be caustic, arrogant, and ferociously self-centred: 'Any ridicule I may thoughtlessly scatter, is not meant to wound, but only to amuse -- perhaps tinged with a latent desire to excite a little admiration at my talents' (ibid., 1.306). 
The letters and journal entries have enormous interest as social history, providing vivid first-hand accounts of the life of the governess and of the developing industrial landscape of north-west England, with its packet steamers and emergent railways. Weeton travelled alone to places as far afield as Yorkshire, London, the Lake District, and the Isle of Man, an itinerary that makes her a fascinating resource for information on the practice of contemporary travel. Since the mid-1980s Weeton's musings on the legal, educational, literary, and professional difficulties faced by women in the early nineteenth century have also attracted the attention of feminist historians. 


@@@@@


doc= 45867


Wheeler, Agnes (bap. 1734, d. 1804), writer on dialect, was baptized at Cartmel Priory church, Lancashire, on 3 July 1734. She was the daughter of Edward and Eleanor Cowherd (sometimes spelled Coward) of Church Town, Cartmel. Nothing is known of her education, and details of her life are sparse. At some stage she travelled to London to take up a post as housekeeper to a family, and while she was there she married a Captain Wheeler. After her husband's death she returned to the north and made her home with her brother, William Cowherd, who lived at Arnside Tower in the village of Beetham, Westmorland. 
Under the initials A. W., Mrs Wheeler published at Kendal in 1790 'The Westmoreland dialect in three familiar dialogues, in which an attempt is made to illustrate the provincial idiom'. The book not only had a second edition in 1802, with a fourth dialogue added, but was reprinted twice more (in 1821 and 1840), with Ann Wheeler acknowledged as author. Her work also featured in work by the Revd Thomas Clarke and others, 'Specimens of the Westmorland Dialect' (1887). 
Mrs Wheeler died at home in Beetham and was buried there on 4 November 1804. Her life remains something of a mystery, and her reputation rests on a single, pioneering work, of which the first edition is so rare that not even the British Library possesses a copy. 


@@@@@


doc= 45868


Wilkinson, Sarah Scudgell (d. c.1830), writer, was the author of at least seventy separate publications, over fifty of which were chapbook romances. She wrote at least six more extended novels, one of which, 'The Thatched Cottage' (1806), gained two reviews, and earned sufficient money for Wilkinson to open a library. A school textbook and a series of 'Valentine Writers' in verse are also known. Of the romances, about a third are acknowledged condensations of existing romances or plays, including work by Sarah Fielding, Matthew (Monk) Lewis, Sir Walter Scott, and Amelia Opie. Her 'original' Gothic fiction diversified the 'castle spectre' formula with Persian, Polish, and even 'aquatic' settings; she has been called 'one of the most productive and gifted of female fiend-mongers' (Tymn, 171). Her work tends to emphasize the plight of women victimized for sexual failings. Her efficient command of standard Gothic crises led in 'The Spectre of Lanmere Abbey' (1820) to a degree of playful generic mockery reminiscent of Austen's 'Northanger Abbey' (1818). Her most frequently reprinted work was 'The Tragical History of Miss Jane Arnold, Commonly called Crazy Jane'; an ostensibly moral tale of seduction, madness, and suicide, it was originally issued about 1818 and was very popular on the northern provincial circuit. She petitioned the Royal Literary Fund for aid for herself and her 'fatherless child' in 1821, declaring that poor health and 'a painful tumour under my right arm' rendered her incapable of any employment beyond writing and needlework. She was apparently receiving $1 per month for her part in the 'Lady's Monthly Museum' (Royal Literary Fund, case 375, 12 Dec 1821). About the same time she began to add Scudgell to her name on title-pages, for reasons not known. The last work ascribed to her and clearly dated is 'Adeline, or, The Victim of Seduction' (1828). The date of her death is thought to be about 1830. 


@@@@@


doc= 45872


Tomkins, William (c.1732-1792), landscape painter, was first recorded on 7 July 1757 as the father of Charles Tomkins (1757-1823) ['see under 'Tomkins, Peltro William], topographical painter and engraver, and on 15 October 1759, on the baptism of his second son, Peltro William Tomkins (1759-1840), also an engraver and draughtsman. The date of his marriage to their mother, Susanna Callard, is not known. 
Tomkins first exhibited at the Free Society of Artists in 1761 and was awarded the second premium for a landscape by the Society of Arts in 1763. His reputation rests on his paintings in the manner of Claude (a number of whose works he copied) of gentlemen's seats, mainly in the west and north of England. He was promoted and patronized by Edward Walter of Stalbridge, Dorset, and his other patrons included the Parkers of Saltram House, Devon. Seven works by Tomkins remain in the Saltram collection, including five views of the environs of the house. He was paid $10 10's'. for two pictures in 1785 but his work at Saltram began earlier, as accounts also record payments of $20 in 1778 for cleaning pictures and $31 10's'. in June 1779 for 'Tomkins to pay Zucchi' ('The Saltram Collection', 67). James Duff, second Earl Fife, was another important patron, for whom Tomkins painted a group of twelve landscapes. A number of his works were engraved for William Angus's and William Watt's sets of views of seats of the nobility and gentry, published in 1787 and 1779-86 respectively. 
Tomkins exhibited at the Free Society of Artists (1761-4), at the Incorporated Society of Artists (1764-8), and at the Royal Academy (1769-90). He was elected an associate of the Royal Academy in 1771. He died at his house in Queen Anne Street, London, on 1 January 1792. 


@@@@@


doc= 45874


Dodd, Edward (1704/5?-1810), musical instrument maker, was probably born in Northumberland in 1704 or 1705 (although Sheffield has also been suggested) and was probably either the son of John Dodd baptized at Simonburn, Northumberland, on 19 November 1704, or the son of Edward Dodd, baptized at Chollerton, Northumberland, on 19 April 1705. Considering his longevity, there are surprisingly few surviving details of his life. The first record of him in city directories, as a bow maker, is from 1802 to 1807, when he was at 11 Paradise Road, Lambeth, although he was probably resident in London by the early 1780s. From Lambeth he moved to the parish of St Bride, Fleet Street, 'whose archives record his death at the age of 105' (Beare and Kass). He died in London on 1 April 1810 and was apparently buried at St Bride's. Edward has been credited with many of the unmarked 'transitional' bows from the eighteenth century that bridge the gap between the baroque and the modern bow developed in late eighteenth-century France by Francois Xavier Tourte. However, it is possible that he did not make bows before his arrival in London and probable that his output has been vastly overestimated. 
Dodd's son 
Although his craftsmanship was not as consistent as that of Tourte, John Dodd is still considered 'the greatest English bowmaker before Tubbs' (Beare and Kass). His bows 'often have ivory frogs with 'DODD' stamped on the frog or stick' (Harvey, 333), although there are also many unauthentic examples with these characteristics. Dodd's later bows made use of all the continental innovations, and his cello bows in particular were favoured among late twentieth-century players. Bows by Edward and John Dodd are in the Hill collection of musical instruments at the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford, and bows by Edward Dodd in the Smithsonian Institution, Washington, DC. 

Thomas Dodd (d. 1834), an instrument dealer who ran successful businesses in Covent Garden, Charing Cross, and Berners Street, London, and James Dodd ('c'.1761-1833) were also sons of Edward. James worked as a bow maker with his father in Lambeth and had two sons, James Dodd (1792-1865) and Edward (1797-1851), both of whom continued to work in the family business. 


@@@@@


doc= 45875


John Dodd (1752-1839), often referred to as the English Tourte, continued the family tradition and remains historically important for his contributions to the evolution of the bow, which may or may not have occurred independently of French advancements. John was baptized at Simonburn, Northumberland, on 28 December 1752 (which may also have been the day of his birth), and became a gunlock fitter and a money scale maker before turning to bow making with his father, probably from the 1780s. Active in the London area, he apparently lived in Southwark, Lambeth, Kew (during the early nineteenth century), and then Richmond, Surrey. His intemperate tendencies are said to have brought financial difficulties, often forcing him to place productivity over quality and ultimately, despite generous friends, landing him in Richmond workhouse. He died in Richmond on 4 October 1839. 


@@@@@


doc= 45876


Dodd, Thomas (d. 1834), musical instrument maker and music-seller, was the third son of Edward Dodd (1704/5?-1810), bow maker. His family moved from Sheffield to London and he was originally apprenticed to a firm of brewers. From 1786 to 1789 he worked as a bow maker in Blue Bell Alley, Mint Street, Southwark, and from 1794 he appears in city directories as a music-seller. He maintained a shop at 11 New Street, Covent Garden, from 1798 and became a successful dealer in instruments and music. Publications that bear his name as printer and vendor and quote this address include a treatise from around 1800 (which uses material originally by Francesco Geminiani) entitled 'Compleat Instructions for the Violin'. The shop was at 92 St Martin's Lane, Charing Cross, from 1809 to 1826, and another branch producing harps and pianos was located at 3 Berner's Street from around 1819 until 1843. In that year Thomas's son Edward was drowned. Both he and his brother Thomas, who died while his father was residing in St Martin's Lane, were pupils of Bernhard Fendt and were involved with the instrument business, but neither managed to emulate their father's success. 
Dodd's business produced violins, violas, cellos, and basses of excellent quality, using Stradivari, Guarneri, Amati, and Stainer models, but the construction of the instruments appears to have been the work of Fendt and John Frederick Lott. Dodd was responsible for what he described on his label as 'the original Cremona oil varnish', the formula for which was a closely guarded secret. It is therefore often the name of the dealer and not the maker that appears on the instrument labels and bows. Dodd almost certainly sold bows made by his brother John Dodd (1752-1839), and Thomas Tubbs's bows are frequently found with the Dodd brand, as are thousands of inferior German bows from the end of the nineteenth century. 
Dodd died in London on 8 February 1834, and, according to a nephew, was buried at St Giles-in-the-Fields. 


@@@@@


doc= 45877


Dodd, James (1792-1865), bow maker, was born on 7 May 1792 in London, the eldest son of James Dodd ('c'.1761-1833) and grandson of Edward Dodd (1704/5?-1810), both of whom were bow makers. Details about his life are sparse, but he worked for a long period as a bow maker with his brother Edward Dodd (1797-1851), who made only violin strings after 1833. James, however, continued to make bows, mainly for the trade, until the year before his death. Those from the early part of his career, particularly the cello bows, are perhaps the finest examples of his work. John Dodd (1752-1839), his uncle, must have been an early influence, and James used the brand 'J. DODD' for many of his bows. He was probably also associated with early members of the Tubbs family. James won awards for his bows (and Edward for his strings) at the London exhibitions of 1851 and 1862. A photograph of a viola bow with gold and tortoiseshell mounts by Dodd, presented at the 1851 exhibition, is included in W. C. Retford's 'Bows and Bow Makers' (1964, pl. X and XI). 
Dodd died at Image Cottage, Holloway Road, Islington, on 19 December 1865, leaving a son, the Revd James Dodd. 


@@@@@


doc= 45879


Spohr, Louis (1784-1859), composer, violinist, and conductor, was born on 5 April 1784 at what is now Spohrplatz 7, Brunswick, the first of the seven children of Carl Heinrich Spohr (1756-1843), a medical doctor, and his cousin Juliane Ernestine Luise Henke (1763-1840). His baptismal name was Ludewig, but his parents, following the fashion of the day, called him Louis; it was by that name he signed himself in later life and under which his compositions were generally published. Spohr's mature height was about 6 feet 6 inches, and he was powerfully built. His upright character enhanced his reputation in England; the anonymous translator of his 'Autobiography' observed: 'he has left us an example of high morality, great amiability, and bright domestic virtues, too rare, alas! among artists and men of genius' (ii). He was twice married: first, on 2 February 1806, to Dorothea Scheidler (1787-1834), and second, on 3 January 1836, to Marianne Pfeiffer (1807-1892). 
Little of Spohr's music seems to have been known in England before he first visited London in 1820, to participate as both violinist and composer at the Philharmonic Society. The immediate impact of this five-month stay was limited. As a violinist he was considered to 'equal, if not to exceed, any player that has lately been heard in England' ('London Magazine', 1, 1820, 444). At a Philharmonic rehearsal he caused a sensation by conducting with a baton and in public by conducting with his violin bow. Among his many compositions performed during the visit was his second symphony, written early in his stay in London. The general reaction to his music is reflected in the 'Quarterly Musical Magazine''s comment that the new symphony was 'well received but did not excite extraordinary sensation' (2, 1820, 383); yet his distinctive musical style made a far greater impression on musicians, laying the foundations for his future popularity and influence in the country. Spohr's music became steadily more familiar in England during the nineteen years that elapsed before his second visit, but it was more popular with musicians than with the public: the inclusion of three of his works in a Philharmonic concert in 1831 prompted the suggestion that the subscribers were 'not yet sufficiently advanced in taste to comprehend it' ('The Atlas', 6, 1831, 140). However, his oratorio 'Die letzen Dinge' ('The Last Judgement'), hailed as 'one of the greatest musical productions of the age' ('The Harmonicon', 8, 1830, 466), stimulated more widespread enthusiasm after its introduction at the Norwich festival of 1830. Edward Taylor recalled, 'Perhaps there is no instance of a similar work, under like circumstances, having attained such speedy celebrity and such high estimation' (preface to Spohr's 'Calvary', 1836). 
The vicissitudes of Spohr's reputation in the 1830s were neatly summarized by H. F. Chorley's comment: 'By some he has been extolled to the seventh heaven, as surpassing Mozart, Weber, and Beethoven, in right of sweet melodies, rich harmonies, and magnificent conceptions -- by others, degraded to the level of those respectable, but most wearisome persons, who produce a multitude of carefully-executed works, upon the liberal allowance of half an idea. ('The Athenaeum', 13, 1840, 421)' Spohr's visit to Norwich to conduct his oratorio 'Des Heilands letzte Stunden' ('The Crucifixion', later 'Calvary') in 1839, however, was a triumph that did much to reinforce his standing in England as 'the greatest living musician' ('Morning Chronicle', 20 Sept 1839). 'The Times' observed: 'there is no cold musical criticism here; no questioning or calculating, 'ought we to admire this, and is Spohr the great composer we have heard him described to be?' We saw in the countenances of the immense multitude the most unequivocal evidences of the composer's genius. Hundreds were melted to tears, and the deep and breathless silence, which from first to last reigned throughout the vast assembly, betokened the heartfelt sympathy which thus enchained them. (21 Oct 1839)' Spohr's presence dominated the London season of 1843. He played and conducted his own works at two Philharmonic Society concerts (one a special command performance for the queen and prince consort), and directed two performances of 'The Fall of Babylon' (commissioned for the 1842 Norwich festival), the second attended by more than three thousand people. At Spohr's farewell dinner, William Horsley observed that 'His reputation ranks with the greatest genius of the present day and would take its position with that of past ages, with Bach, with Handel, Haydn, Mozart and Beethoven' ('Musical World', 18, 1843, 231). 
Spohr was similarly lionized during his last three sojourns in England, in 1847, 1852 (for which he revised his opera 'Faust' for Covent Garden), and 1853. After Mendelssohn's death he was almost universally acknowledged as the greatest living composer. But much of his later work, including the eighth symphony, written for the Philharmonic Society in 1848, was more coolly received, and increasing criticism was levelled against the 'mannerism' of his works. 
Obituaries, following his death on 22 October 1859 in Kassel (where he was buried on 25 October in the Neue Friedhof), stressed his position as 'the last of the Teutonic family of musical giants' ('Musical World', 24, 1859, 713), yet by the centenary of his death his music occupied a significantly smaller place on concert programmes. Nevertheless, his influence on the generation of English composers coming to maturity between 1820 and 1840 was profound. William Spark observed that in the 1830s Spohr's 'rich, original, luscious harmonies quite fascinated our English musicians, who, in many instances, failed not to avail themselves of Spohr's style, so that the term 'Spohrish' soon became associated with a large number of the compositions which were produced at that and subsequent periods by our native composers. ('Musical Memories', 1888, 55-6)' One of these composers, Sir George Macfarren, recalled, 'Few if any composers have exercised such influence on their contemporaries as Spohr did, and many living writers may be counted among his imitators' ('Imperial Dictionary of Universal Biography'). Among those whose music was seen to exhibit Spohr's influence were George Rodwell, Henry Bishop, John Barnett, Henry Smart, William Sterndale Bennett, Macfarren, Samuel Sebastian Wesley, Edward J. Loder, John Lodge Ellerton, Edwin J. Nielson, and many other minor composers. 


@@@@@


doc= 45880


Viotti, Giovanni Battista (1755-1824), musician, was born in Fontanetto da Po, Piedmont, Italy, on 12 May 1755, possibly the illegitimate son of Antonio Viotti, a blacksmith and amateur horn player, and Maria Magdelena Milano. His early instruction may have come from his father and, when he was eleven, from Giovanni, a lutenist in Fontanetto. Viotti's talents were discovered while he was playing at a church festival at Strambino in 1766. He impressed a bishop who was present and who recommended him as a companion to the young Alfonso dal Pozzo, prince of Cisterna. They travelled to Turin, where Viotti came to the attention of Colgnetti, a musician at the royal court of Sardinia-Piedmont; he persuaded the prince's father, the marchese di Vogliera, to take responsibility for Viotti's welfare and further education. After tuition with Antonio Celoniat, Viotti studied with Gaetano Pugnani, the principal exponent of the school of violin playing begun by Arcangelo Corelli; Pugnani returned from London in 1770 to become first violinist in the king's music at Turin. 
After five years (1775-80) at the back of the first violins in the orchestra of the royal chapel in Turin, Viotti embarked on a concert tour with Pugnani. From early 1780 they travelled to Switzerland, Dresden, and on to Berlin, where his first publication, a concerto in A (now known as no. 3) was published in 1781. From there they visited (via Warsaw) St Petersburg, then returned to Berlin towards the end of 1781. It was now important for Viotti to establish himself in his own right, and he made the journey to Paris alone. 
Viotti's remarkably successful debut at the Concert Spirituel took place on 17 March 1782, following which he remained in great demand and in high critical esteem for the next year and a half. He then turned his back on public performance for a time and was appointed Queen Marie Antoinette's accompanist at Versailles, with a life pension of $150, in January 1784. In the following year, while living with his friend the musician Luigi Cherubini, Viotti held private academies on Sunday mornings for fellow musicians, which often featured his own latest compositions. With the patronage of Louis-Stanislas-Xavier, comte de Provence, brother of Louis XVI, Viotti built in 1788 the Theatre de Monsieur (later the Theatre Feydeau), which he ran to great effect. Following the revolution the Theatre de Monsieur closed, and Viotti moved opera performances to the Theatre de la Foire St Germain, but they proved less successful there. 
Viotti's Parisian period had been immensely productive and influential, but his close association with the court came to threaten not only his livelihood but also his life, and to escape the hostility of the Jacobins he abandoned Paris for London, arriving in July 1792. He established himself as a teacher, but once again made his greatest impact as a performer. His debut at Johann Peter Salomon's Hanover Square concert on 7 February 1793, playing his twenty-first violin concerto, was a huge success, and he became the primary violinist of the series for two seasons. He returned briefly to Paris in July 1793, on the death of his mother, before going back to London (via Switzerland, Germany, and Flanders) in December. He was living at 34 Wells Street, Oxford Street, in 1794. Viotti came into contact with Haydn about this time, playing at his benefit concerts in 1794 and 1795. He also became musical director and a performer at the new opera concerts in 1795 and managed Italian opera at the King's Theatre during the 1794-5 season. The connection with the King's endured (his salary was $300 during 1795-6), and he took Wilhelm Cramer's position as leader and director of the orchestra in 1797. Often to be found performing in the homes of the social elite, he enjoyed an assured position as the foremost violinist in London. 
Viotti's fortunes, however, took a distinct turn for the worse soon afterwards. On 20 February 1798 he was replaced as leader at the King's Theatre by Salomon, and, suspected of Jacobin activity, he was ordered to leave Great Britain the following month. Despite his written protestations to the contrary and the flimsy evidence, amounting to little more than that he still had correspondents in France, the order stood. He stayed in Schenfeldt, near Hamburg, for a year and a half, the guest of the Chinnery family, musical English friends from London. Viotti continued to work during this difficult period, publishing a set of duos, op. 5, dedicated to William Chinnery, and teaching; his pupils included the influential German music teacher Friedrich Wilhelm Pixis. 
In July 1799 he left Germany, and he returned to London at some time before 1801. Viotti had been involved with the wine trade before his exile, and this became his primary focus on his return, although he continued to compose and publish new works and perform privately. The Chinnery family remained close friends, and he was often a guest performer at Gilwell, their country house near Stewardstone in Epping Forest, Essex. There were also visits to Paris in 1802 and 1814, and he was a founder member of the London Philharmonic Society in 1813, although his performances for that body were infrequent. The London-born Nicolas Mori, the first violin professor at the Royal Academy of Music, was a pupil of Viotti about this time. 
Viotti's wine business folded in 1818, and Paris apparently offered more possibilities for continuing his musical career and repaying some of his debts. His former patron, the comte de Provence, was now Louis XVIII. A performance of one of his own concertos at a reception held in his honour was received enthusiastically, and he was appointed director of the Paris Opera on 1 November 1819 with an annual salary of 12,000 francs. Once again his good fortune was curtailed. This time the assassination of the king's nephew Charles-Ferdinand, duc de Berri, at the Opera shortly afterwards (while Viotti was visiting London) created severe difficulties for the company and its director. Viotti finally resigned in November 1821, and, despite his enduring directorship of the Italian theatre in Paris, his financial predicament continued. He made his will in Paris (13 March 1822) and travelled to London in the following year to stay with his old friends the Chinnery family at 17 Montague Street and then at 5 Upper Berkeley Street, Portman Square. He died there on the morning of 3 March 1824, and may have been buried at Stewardstone. He left two violins, a fine 1712 example by Antonio Stradivari, used by Viotti until his death, and a Klotz that once belonged to Mrs Chinnery. 
Viotti's will and other documents reveal that his debts (by his own estimation, 80,000 francs and 800 francs to Mrs Chinnery and his brother Andre respectively) and 'bitter regrets of neglected talent' (White, 'Viotti') played heavily on his mind during the final period of his life. Despite this inner torment, contemporary accounts and visual representations depict him as physically attractive with a strong, endearing, and refined personality. His personal attributes, integrity, and talents allowed him to rise from humble origins to the highest echelons of musical and social circles in Italy, France, and England. His suspected Jacobin sympathies and a few questionable career decisions did not prevent him from becoming a hugely important and influential figure whose legacy endured through pupils, proteges, and their writings. Viotti was an innovator, bridging the gap between the Italian and Franco-Belgian (modern) traditions of violin playing, although this also meant that he was denied the relative security offered to earlier court musicians and to the travelling virtuosos of the following era. His ten 'London' concertos combine elements of Haydn's symphonic writing with the qualities of the violin model of Stradivari and the bow developed by Tourte, paving the way for the violin concertos of Beethoven and Brahms. He was sufficiently accomplished as a musician and a virtuoso to develop violin technique and the genre of the violin concerto in general at a time when expressive ideals were in a crucial state of transition. However, modernism and virtuosity were never to be at the expense of lyricism, refinement, and beauty of tone, and these were priorities appreciated by English critics and connoisseurs in particular. Viotti, and later Louis Spohr, represented these qualities in the eyes of the English well into the nineteenth century. 
Viotti was a prolific composer, mainly for his own instrument. Autographs, sketches, and fragments of his work survive at the Conservatoire National de Musique, Paris, the British Library, and the Conservatorio di Musica Luigi Cherubini, Florence. An increasing number of recordings of his works, in particular the concertos, reflected the ongoing reassessment of their importance and quality at the end of the twentieth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 45881


Dicks, John Thomas (bap. 1818, d. 1881), publisher, was born in London and baptized on 20 September 1818 at the church of St Dunstan, Stepney, the son of John Dicks and his wife, Sibyl. Not much is known of his early life, but he appears to have had at least three sisters, Elizabeth, Sibyl Rebecca, and Jane, as well as one brother, Walter George. John Thomas Dicks himself later married, and he and his wife, Maria Louisa, had ten children, including the two sons named in his will as executors, Henry and John Thomas, and a daughter, Kate Alice Taylor, whose husband William and children he excluded from his will by codicil. 
Dicks began in the printing trade in 1832, being employed in the Stationery Office by the queen's printer, as well as in other offices. In 1841 he became the chief assistant of P. P. Thomas, a scholar of Chinese, who was at that time in the business of publishing, printing, and stereotyping in Warwick Square. Dicks's subsequent career and the expansion of his publishing business were intricately tied up with the fortunes of G. W. M. Reynolds, a radical, and purveyor of popular and often sensational fiction; he was the 'most popular writer in England' in the nineteenth century according to 'The Bookseller' (July 1868, 447). Early in his career Reynolds had several bankruptcies, but his association with Dicks turned him into a wealthy man. In turn, Reynolds's popular novels and periodicals, which provided a good portion of Dicks's list throughout most of the mid-nineteenth century, made a fortune for Dicks. 
Their connection began in 1848 when Dicks, still employed by Thomas, took over as publisher of 'Reynolds's Miscellany', establishing an office at Wellington Street North, Strand, London. For a decade after 1848 Dicks published Reynolds's novels and periodicals including a very successful Sunday paper, 'Reynolds's Weekly Newspaper', which started in 1850. He was also the publisher of Reynolds's massive multi-novel series, 'Mysteries of the Court of London' (1849-56). In 1852 Dicks, 'the managing and confidential clerk' of Reynolds's publications, had 'all the details of the business placed under his supervision' ('Reynolds's Weekly', 18 July 1852, 3). In 1863 the two men formed a partnership, and eventually (probably at Reynolds's death in 1879) Dicks purchased for a large sum the name and copyrights of G. W. M. Reynolds. 
In the 1860s Dicks's publishing house had begun to expand dramatically by reprinting novels, plays, 'classics', and miscellaneous material rather than originating new works. According to Montague Summers, during the latter half of the century the firm was 'one of the largest and busiest printing and publishing offices in England' (Summers, 552). In 1866 Dicks began his first and one of his most popular series of cheap reprints, 'Dicks's Shakespeare' (individual plays for a penny, thirty-seven plays in one volume for a shilling); in 1868 Reynolds announced at the annual dinner of the firm that 150,000 copies of the penny Shakespeare had been sold ('Reynolds's Weekly', 12 July 1868, 1). In 1864 Dicks began to issue 'Dicks's Standard Plays', at 1died each. For over twenty years he published a play a week and from 1882 two a week. Over 1000 were published altogether, and include such titles as Dion Boucicault's 'The Shaughraun: an Original Drama in Three Acts, Illustrative of Irish Life and Character', numbered 390 in the 'Standard Plays' series; Henry Hersee's 'All's Fair in Love: an Original Charade Written Expressly for Drawing-Room Acting', billed as number 490 of 'Dicks's Standard Charades and Comedies'; and F. F. Cooper's 'The Spare Bed, or, The Shower Bath: a Farce in Two Acts', number 786 in the 'Standard Plays'. Dicks's dramatic series also included adaptations of popular novels, with dramatizations of Charles Dickens's proving especially popular. At least one catalogue of Dicks's publications was printed, as the 'List of Dicks' Standard Plays and Free Acting Drama' (1884). Many of the popular melodramas, farces, and comedies of the nineteenth century exist only in a Dicks imprint. 
In 1869 Dicks merged 'Reynolds's Miscellany' with 'Bow Bells', the latter being a popular family magazine that he had begun in 1864, designed 'to cultivate a taste for beauty and goodness in humanity'. One historian has suggested that as Dicks prospered, his increasing respectability contrasted sharply with the nature of the earlier publications on which he had collaborated with Reynolds, and that the title change of 'Bow Bells' was perhaps a tactic used 'to conceal the way by which he had come to his wealth' (James, 47). Also in 1869 he began the series 'Dicks's English Novels' (6died a volume), which eventually included 243 titles, by authors such as Dickens and Thackeray, but also by lesser-known novelists of the period. The wide variety of other publications that were issued at one time or another under the Dicks imprint included various albums of songs (such as 'Gems from the Great Composers'); illustrations and prints (Hogarth's various works and Francis Wheatley's 'London Cries'); and chromolithographs (at 6died) 'for framing', including works by Landseer and portraits of various politicians. In 1884, three years after his death, the firm began a new series in his name, 'Dicks's English Library of Standard Works'. 
Dicks retired from the firm in the late 1870s. His two sons, Henry and John Thomas, continued to manage the firm for him, and he moved to the villa St Valentine in Menton, France. Apparently he maintained some connection with the business: writing long after the fact, George Augustus Sala gives the only known personal account of Dicks, recalling that: 'at a pretty little villa at Menton there resided a very old business friend of mine, the Late Mr. John Dicks... [whose] appetite for novelettes was insatiable, and whenever I wanted cash I had only to scribble for a few hours, take the copy over to Menton and receive from the hands of my friendly publisher a crisp ten-pound note and two louis and a half in gold. ('Life and Adventures', 2.367)' Dicks died at Menton on 4 February 1881. After this the firm bearing his name published from several different London locations, including Effingham House, Arundel Street, Strand (beginning 1905), and finally in 1909 as John Dicks Press Ltd, at 8 Temple Avenue. In 1929 'Reynolds's Newspaper' (which continued until 1963) ceased to be published by John Dicks Press Ltd. No further publication was issued under this imprint. 
The survival in libraries of books that bear the Dicks imprint is haphazard and his several series of cheap reprints of English classics are almost everywhere incomplete. Because of his policy of issuing and reissuing publications and series almost constantly, the initial publication dates of many of his series are uncertain. But his achievement is clear: he was one of the most important forces in the increase of cheap reading material for the masses. As his obituary indicated, his publishing concern was 'a marvel in cheap and good literature' ('Bow Bells', 2 March 1881). 


@@@@@


doc= 45883


Bagwell, Richard (1840-1918), historian, was born on 9 December 1840 in Marlfield House, Clonmel, co. Tipperary. He was the eldest son of John Bagwell, MP for Clonmel (1857-74), and his wife, Frances Eliza, 'nee' Prittie. He had one brother and four sisters. He was educated at Harrow School and Christ Church, Oxford, and was called to the bar at the Inner Temple in 1866. On 9 January 1873 he married Harriette Philippa Newton; they had one son and three daughters. He never practised as a lawyer but returned to live in Ireland, where he succeeded his father as owner of Marlfield House in 1883. 
Bagwell believed in the positive contribution which resident Irish landlords made to Irish society and participated fully in local government in co. Tipperary. He was elected high sheriff of the county in 1869 and subsequently served as justice of the peace, magistrate, and foreman of the grand jury for co. Tipperary. In 1898 he was appointed a member of the Local Government Board, whose task was to supervise the implementation of the 'Local Government Act' of that year. He was also a founding member of the Irish Loyal and Patriotic Union (ILPU), an organization of southern unionists formed in 1885 to resist home rule for Ireland and he remained a prominent member of the ILPU and the later Irish Unionist Alliance until his death in 1918. In the 1880s and 1890s he attended many public meetings in England, speaking in favour of the union, and he wrote pamphlets for the Irish Unionist Alliance, although most of these were published anonymously and none can now be attributed to him. 
It was during the years before he took over the running of the Marlfield estate in 1883 that Bagwell did much of the research for 'Ireland under the Tudors' (3 vols., 1885-90). He made use of the printed calendars of state papers in the first volume but the second volume required a considerable amount of research in the Public Record Office in London. Unionist business must have absorbed a great deal of his time in the 1880s and 1890s but he still continued his historical research. Research for the third volume was completed in between attending public meetings in England. His involvement in public affairs also helps to explain why 'Ireland under the Stuarts' (3 vols., 1909-16) was not as satisfactory in terms of research as the Tudor volumes. Apart from his six volumes on Tudor and Stuart Ireland, his only other major historical work was to contribute entries on seventeenth-century Irish subjects to the 'Dictionary of National Biography'. 
From the first appearance of 'Ireland under the Tudors' in 1885, Bagwell earned a reputation for objectivity and impartiality as a historian, a judgement which seems curiously at odds with his political commitment to unionism and landlord power in Ireland. A close analysis of his historical writings reveals, however, that he shared with W. E. H. Lecky a concern to refute James Anthony Froude's interpretation of Irish history. Froude's polemical views on Irish history, which he expressed first in his 'History of England from the Fall of Wolsey to the Defeat of the Spanish Armada' (1856-70) and later in 'The English in Ireland in the Eighteenth Century' (1881), had shocked many people in Ireland, particularly the intellectual elite within the Anglo-Irish community. Froude had made clear his contempt for the historical legacy of the Anglo-Irish, holding them and their ancestors responsible for what he perceived to be the chaotic state of nineteenth-century Ireland. W. E. H. Lecky, Bagwell, and G. H. Orpen all wrote their histories partly in response to Froude and all three endeavoured to restore the reputation of the Anglo-Irish as fair and responsible rulers whose presence assisted rather than hindered the development of law and order in Ireland. 
Bagwell's support for the union as the most equitable system of government for Ireland never wavered. In 1917 he was prominent among those who opposed the compromise agreement of the southern unionist representatives at the Irish convention which allowed for a scheme for the government of Ireland. He died at Marlfield House on 4 December 1918 at the age of seventy-seven. In 1923 Marlfield House was burnt by republican forces in the Irish civil war. The fire destroyed both his library and his historical papers. 


@@@@@


doc= 45885


Cameron, Sir Charles Alexander (1830-1921), public health officer, was born on 16 July 1830 at Dublin, one of three children of Ewen Cameron (1787-1846), soldier, and Belinda, daughter of John Smith of co. Cavan. He was educated privately in Dublin and Guernsey, where his family lived in 1844-5. He studied medicine in Dublin and chemistry in Germany under Baron Liebig and was appointed professor to the Dublin Chemical Society at the age of twenty-three. As he noted himself, in one of his very few self-deprecatory observations, this was a pretentious title to give to the teacher of an unchartered private society. Cameron also lectured on chemistry and physics in three of Dublin's flourishing mid-nineteenth-century medical schools: Peter Street, Dr Steevens's, and the Ledwich. On 16 October 1862, at St Mary's Church, Donnybrook, Dublin, Cameron married Lucie Frances (died 1883), only daughter of John Macnamara, solicitor, of Dublin. They had six sons and two daughters. 
Cameron obtained his first medical qualification, the licence of the King and Queen's College of Physicians in Ireland (subsequently the Royal College of Physicians of Ireland), in 1868, and he later became a member and honorary fellow of that body. He was awarded the fellowship of the Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland in 1874 and obtained a diploma in public health from Cambridge University three years later. Cameron was elected to the chair of hygiene in the Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland in 1868 and to the professorship of chemistry in 1875, and held both appointments until his ninetieth year. 
Cameron's most important work was in the area of public health. In 1862, he began his long connection with the municipal administration of Dublin when he was appointed public analyst. A few years later, he became medical officer of health and held this office until his death more than fifty years later. During this half-century of revolutionary change, Cameron played a key role in improving the living conditions of the Dublin poor. He was knighted in 1885 in recognition of his services to public health and was elevated to the companionship of the Bath in January 1899. He was awarded an honorary MD degree by the Royal University of Ireland in October 1896 and in September 1910 his work was publicly acknowledged by Dublin corporation when he was made an honorary freeman of the city, the capital's highest civic honour. 
Cameron was closely associated with the Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland for many years and was elected president in 1885-6. He published a monumental history of the college in 1886 and a revised, extended edition thirty years later. Cameron could rightly claim that this work was 'practically a history of Irish medicine and institutions from the earliest ages' but, as one critic noted, his literary abilities did not match his industry. The same can be said of his tedious, octogenarian reminiscences and his factually inconsistent autobiography, which were published in 1913 and 1920 respectively. Cameron was on much firmer ground with the professional publications of a career spanning almost seventy years. Several monographs and scores of articles in the leading British and Irish medical, sanitary, and scientific journals are testimony to his intellectual curiosity, prolificacy, and versatility. In addition he produced a booklet on Irish freemasonry, a guide to the Dublin Zoological Gardens, and a volume of German poetry in translation. His unpublished writings include his diaries for the years 1880-1916, which are in the archives of the Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland. 
Cameron was a Renaissance figure, interested alike in the scientific and the literary. He was, variously, theatre critic for the 'Irish Times', and joint owner, editor, and contributor to the 'Agricultural Review'. A great socializer, he was at home in the clubs, drawing rooms, and salons of Dublin and London. He was a striking figure, full-bearded, and of imposing stature, a feature which may have owed something to his interest in gastronomy and fine wines. Witty, urbane, and gregarious, he was acquainted with singers and theatre folk, aristocrats, and members of the royal family. Cameron's politics were unionist and he subscribed to the tenets of the Church of Ireland. He was initiated into freemasonry on 22 December 1858 and was elected deputy grand master of the grand lodge of Ireland in 1911. He was also deputy grand master of the great priory of Ireland and sovereign grand commander of the supreme council 33rd degree, ancient and accepted rite for Ireland. 
Cameron's last official assignment, at the age of eighty-six, was to inspect and report on the camp and buildings at Fron-goch, north Wales, where hundreds of participants in the 1916 rising were interned. He appeared 'immensely old' to the youthful prisoners but, one of them recorded, 'his sharp intelligent face and keen piercing eyes gave indications of a mental alertness and acumen far beyond the ordinary' (Widdess, ix). Although the next five years took their inevitable physical toll, Cameron retained his full mental faculties to the very end. He died at his home, 27 Raglan Road, Dublin, on 27 February 1921 and was buried alongside his wife at Mount Jerome cemetery, Dublin, on 2 March. His gross assets at the time of his death were $11,126 12's.' 2died 


@@@@@


doc= 45886


Cockburn, John, of Ormiston (1679-1758), politician and agricultural improver, was born in Scotland, the second son of Adam Cockburn (c.1656-1735) of Ormiston, lord justice clerk and lord of session with the judicial title Lord Ormiston, and his first wife, Lady Susanna Hamilton, daughter of the fourth earl of Haddington. He was educated at the University of Glasgow between 1691 and 1695. In 1700 he married Lady Beatrice Carmichael (died 1702), daughter of the first earl of Hyndford; they had no children. His second wife was Arabella, third daughter of Anthony Rowe of Muswell Hill; they had one son, George, of the Navy Office. 
Cockburn represented Haddingtonshire in the Scottish parliament from 1703. He was a junior member of the squadrone, and represented the party on the commission to negotiate the treaty of union with England in 1706. He duly voted for the parliamentary union of Scotland and England in 1707. He was a member of the parliament of Great Britain until 1741 and held minor office as a lord of trade, from 1714 to 1717, and then as a lord of the Admiralty until 1732. He gained a reputation for competence in office but was passed over for the position of first lord, after which he gave his political support to the opposition. Although Cockburn did not stand for re-election in 1741 he was reappointed to the Board of Admiralty from 1742 to 1744. 
It is doubtful whether it was his failure to retain office that caused Cockburn to turn away from political life, because his main interests were already directed to agricultural improvement, particularly of his own estate of Ormiston in Haddingtonshire. His father had initiated improvements and these were greatly extended when John succeeded him, his elder brother having died young. Through much of the period when he was devoting his energies to improvement Cockburn was away in London, but he always directed and followed every aspect of his estate by correspondence. His improvements were those that others were to follow later in the century -- enclosure, the planting of new crops such as barley and turnips, the use of artificial grasses and rotations, the planting of trees -- but in Cockburn's case they formed part of two distinctive features of his work. 
The first was his deliberate policy of granting long leases, usually of nineteen but sometimes even of thirty-eight years, to ensure that the tenants were encouraged to adopt the long-term outlook on improvements that Cockburn deemed essential. In this scheme he was fortunate in having among his tenantry succeeding generations of the Wight family, who made their own independent contribution to agricultural improvement and with whom he corresponded regularly when away. Cockburn's attitude to his tenantry, as well as his political philosophy, was expressed well in a letter he wrote to one of them: 'I hate tyranny in every shape, and shall always have greater pleasure in seeing my tenants making something under me, which they can call their own, than in getting a little more myself, by squeezing a hundred poor families, till their necessities make them my slaves. ('Farmer's Magazine', 136)' Second, Cockburn extended his improvements to the entire reorganization of his estate. The village of Ormiston was rebuilt and used as the centre for a range of industrial activities, notably the manufacture and bleaching of linen. It became a place where others gained insights into the new ways and where Cockburn promoted them by launching a discussion group in 1736. 
Posterity has accorded Cockburn his due recognition as an agriculturist but he himself did not reap a financial reward. Unable to finance the costly wait that (as he constantly reminded his tenants) had to be endured to gain the long-term benefits of improvement, he was forced to sell Ormiston to the earl of Hopetoun in 1747. As the family historian wryly commented, 'for the interests of his family, it would have been well had he been satisfied with a political life; but unfortunately he was an enthusiastic agriculturist' (Cockburn-Hood, 157). Cockburn died at his son's home in London on 12 November 1758. 


@@@@@


doc= 45887


Compton, Edward (1854-1918), actor and theatre manager, was born on 14 January 1854 at 16 Charing Cross Road, London, the fifth of the nine children of Charles Mackenzie, known as Henry Compton (1805-1877), an actor, and Emmeline Montague Compton (1823-1911). He was educated at the academy run by the Revd J. Gaitskell, formerly the class-master of the Kensington proprietary grammar school. His first stage appearance was at the Bristol New Theatre, on 22 September 1873, in the small role of Long Ned in F. Boyle's 'Old London'. In April 1874 he joined the Francis Fairlie Touring Company, playing parts in Alfred Kempe's 'East Lynne', C. R. Munro's 'Progress', and Sheridan's 'The School for Scandal'. Then followed stock seasons in Bristol, Glasgow, Kilmarnock, Liverpool, and Birmingham. He made his first appearance in London at his father's benefit at Drury Lane on 1 March 1877, playing Alfred Evelyn in the first act of Bulwer-Lytton's 'Money'. He also appeared in his father's second benefit in Manchester, on 27 March 1877. 
Compton appeared briefly with companies organized by H. J. Byron and by Mrs Hermann Vezin. For two years from 22 October 1877 he toured with a company organized by Ellen Wallis, appearing as Cassio, Malcolm, Romeo, Florizal, and Benedick, as Charles Surface in 'The School for Scandal', and as Claude Melnotte in Bulwer-Lytton's 'The Lady of Lyons'. On 23 April 1879 he played Claudio in 'Much Ado about Nothing' at the dedication of the Shakespearian Memorial Theatre at Stratford upon Avon. During the same year, through Tinsley Brothers, London, he and his brother Charles published their 'Memoir of Henry Compton'. 
Edward Compton next joined the Adelphi Theatre, London, and accepted the invitation of its star, Adelaide Neilson, to accompany her on her next American tour. The company sailed on 27 September 1879. They played in New York, Boston, and New Orleans before concluding performances in San Francisco on 17 July 1880. The tour was a critical and financial success, netting in excess of $15,000. However, it was also physically exhausting for the star and for her company. 
On 28 July 1880 the Neilson company sailed from New York, bound for London. Miss Neilson then continued on to Paris to rest and to prepare her trousseau for her planned marriage that September to Edward Compton. While driving in the Bois de Boulogne on the morning of Sunday 15 August 1880 she was suddenly stricken with a ruptured aneurysm, and she died several hours later. The service and burial took place at Brompton cemetery on 20 August 1880. 
By the terms of her existing will, Miss Neilson made several specific bequests, among them a gift of $2000 to Compton. Although he briefly returned to the Adelphi company following his fiancee's death, the gift allowed him to create and equip his own touring repertory troupe, the Compton Comedy Company, which, for the next thirty-five years, presented Shakespearian plays and old English comedies throughout the United Kingdom. The company made its first appearance at Southport on 7 February 1881. 
As his leading lady Compton selected Virginia Frances Bateman (1853-1940) ['see under 'Bateman, Hezekiah Linthicum], who had recently finished an engagement at her mother's New Sadler's Wells Theatre, playing Miss Hardcastle in Oliver Goldsmith's 'She Stoops to Conquer', Lydia Languish in Sheridan's 'The Rivals', and Lady Teazle in 'The School for Scandal'. 
On 12 June 1882 Compton and Virginia Bateman were married at St Peter's parish church, Brighton. They had five children: the novelist Sir Edward Montague Compton Mackenzie (1883-1972) and the actors Frank Compton (1885-1964), Viola Compton (1886-1971), Ellen Compton (1891-1970), and Fay Compton (1894-1978). 
By 1891 the Compton Comedy Company had toured for ten years, having given approximately 3000 performances in the British provinces -- most notably 'The School for Scandal' a total of 398 times, Thomas Holcroft's 'The Road to Ruin' 367 times, T. W. Robertson's 'David Garrick' 391 times, 'The Rivals' 287 times, and 'She Stoops to Conquer' 234 times. Believing the time was right for the company to move to London, and realizing that a vehicle by a celebrity author would make an impression, Compton, at the urging of his wife, wrote to Henry James to request that he turn his popular novel 'The American' into an actable drama. James agreed, but recorded in his notebooks that 'The field is common, but it is wide and free... And if there is money in it that will greatly help' ('Complete Notebooks', 53). 

'The American' was first presented by the Compton Comedy Company on 3 January 1891 in Southport, with Edward Compton playing Christopher Newman, the American. The premiere succeeded beyond the author's reserved expectations, as he gleefully described to his sister the 'big universal outbreak at the end for 'author, 'author', AUTHOR!'' ('Henry James: Letters', 3.320). 
Compton secured the Opera Comique for the first London presentation of 'The American' on 26 September 1891. Again he played Christopher Newman, but now cast his sister-in-law Mrs Crowe (Kate Bateman) as the Marquise de Bellegarde, and a young American, Elizabeth Robins, as the heroine, Claire de Cintre. Although the celebrity-studded first-night audience may have anticipated a new dawn of English drama from the facile pen of so eminent a novelist as James, they were to be disappointed by heavy-handed melodrama, convoluted twists of plot, uneven pacing, and painfully poor performances by several members of the cast. As one critic described the scene: 'The audience was much amused and rather interested by the first act, less amused and more interested by the second, still less amused and rather less interested by the third, and not at all amused and barely interested by the fourth. Then the curtain came down, the people kindly clapped their hands as a means of stretching themselves, the actors appeared and bowed,... and those in front of the curtain went away rather bored and much disappointed, while those behind departed full of false hope. ('Pall Mall Gazette', 28 Sept 1891, 2)' Despite a well-publicized visit by the prince of Wales and some tinkering with the production, 'The American' closed on 4 December 1891, after only sixty-nine performances, handing its manager a great disappointment and a heavy financial loss. Edward's son Sir Compton Mackenzie described his father's reaction: 'He realised that it was not his destiny to be a leading London actor-manager and went back to the provinces where he was so much loved, and where in a white wig instead of a toupee and with patches instead of a false moustache he would be making much more money and doing far more for British drama than by trying to establish himself in London. (Mackenzie, 'My Life and Times', octave 2, 22)' While the Compton Comedy Company continued to tour the British provinces, Compton, in association with Milton Bode, acquired proprietary interest in several provincial and suburban theatres. In August 1915, as plans were under way for a return of the company to London at the Shaftesbury Theatre, he became ill and plans were suspended. He died at his home, 54 Avonmore Road, London, of throat cancer, on 16 July 1918. 
Two months later, as Mrs Virginia Compton prepared to relaunch the company on an autumn tour, one theatre critic commented: 'it would be impossible, without much delving into the past, to give the list of the famous actors and actresses who learnt their early stagecraft under Mr. Edward Compton's banner. His work rivals that of Sir Frank Benson, and he was a man just as much loved... we shall miss him. ('Bristol Times and Mirror', 28 Sept 1918)' The Compton Comedy Company continued to tour the provinces until 26 July 1923, when financial losses could no longer be borne, and it was disbanded. 


@@@@@


doc= 45888


Corkine, William (fl. 1610-1617), composer, brought out two volumes of accompanied solo songs, both with other music for instruments. His first, 'Ayres, to sing and play to the lute and basse violl, with pavins, galliards, almains and corantoes for the lyra violl', appeared in 1610. The newly fashionable lyra viol was played from tablature like a lute, but chords were restricted to adjacent strings because of the use of a bow. Corkine's 'The second booke of ayres, some to sing and play to the base-violl alone, others to be sung to the lute and base violl, with new corantoes, pavins, almaines: as also divers new descants upon old grounds, set to the lyra-viol' (1612) begins with songs for voice and bass viol alone, in which both parts have an equal importance, rather than being a melody and its harmonic bass. The setting of John Donne's 'Break of Day' is particularly successful. Corkine combined the new chordal lyra viol techniques with traditional 'divisions', in which a relatively slow-moving melodic line was divided into running passage work, and here he used the entire compass of the instrument. This is evident in the 'new descants upon old grounds' in his setting of the melody for 'Come live with me and be my love'. 
Describing himself as 'a poor man indebted to many', Corkine dedicated parts of his books to different people, seven in all, rather than inscribing each volume to a single patron. One of his dedicatees was Edward Herbert, later Lord Herbert of Cherbury, whose own manuscript lute book indicates that he was himself no mean player. A song, 'What booteth Love', for voice and three instruments (probably viols), was included in a 1956 recording, but the original was lost sight of until it was rediscovered in 1983 by David Greer, who also found a second song, 'Sad is the time', in the same source. This is a combined volume of John Dowland's first three printed books of ayres, into which the manuscript songs were introduced (Greer). In 1617 a passport was issued by the privy council to a certain George Vincent 'to goe over to the Prince of Poland, and to carry over with him to the sayd Prince his master these musicians', including one 'Wm Corkin', perhaps indicating the pronunciation of his name (Limon, 101). 


@@@@@


doc= 45889


Cowley, Richard (bap. 1568?, d. 1619), actor, may be the Richard, son of Robert Coolie, who was baptized on 9 October 1568 at St Albans, Hertfordshire, married Elizabeth Davies on 28 January 1592 in Bromyard, Herefordshire, and had a kinsman named Cuthbert ('b'. 1570). The actor had a wife named Elizabeth and children named Robert, Cuthbert, Richard, and Elizabeth, and his name was spelled Coolye in 1598. However, a marriage in Herefordshire in 1592 is uncomfortably close to the start of the actor's London theatrical career, and the identification must remain speculative. 
In any case, Richard Cowley first surfaces as an actor in the early 1590s as a member of Strange's Men. In July 1593 he delivered letters from London to Strange's Men in Bristol, where they were on tour; in a letter of 1 August Edward Alleyn tells his wife: 'I reseved your Letter att bristo by richard couley' (Rutter, 75). Presumably he followed others of Strange's Men into the Lord Chamberlain's Men when that company was formed in 1594. He appears in the 'plot' (a theatre document whose precise function is uncertain) of the play 'Seven Deadly Sins' as 'R Cowly', playing several minor male parts: the Lieutenant of the Tower in the Induction, a soldier and a lord in Envy, Giraldus and a musician in Sloth, and a lord in Lechery. This 'plot', traditionally thought to belong to Strange's Men 'c'.1590, probably belonged instead to the Lord Chamberlain's Men in 1597-8. The use of 'Cowley' in the speech prefixes of both the Quarto (1600) and Folio (1623) versions of Shakespeare's 'Much Ado about Nothing' reveals that he played Verges alongside Will Kempe's Dogberry around 1598. 
Meanwhile, Cowley and his wife, Elizabeth, had settled in Holywell Street, in the parish of St Leonard, Shoreditch, London. Four of their children were baptized there: Robert (8 March 1596; buried 20 March 1597), Cuthbert (8 May 1597), Richard (29 April 1598; buried 26 February 1603), and Elizabeth (2 February 1602). In 1598 Richard Coolye of Holywell Street was assessed on $3 of goods, a respectable sum (Eccles, 45). In 1597 his wife consulted with Simon Forman, the famous astrologer, and apparently had an affair with him. On 20 August 1597 Forman recorded in his diary that he could not decide whether or not to visit her, and when he finally did the assignation was foiled when her husband arrived home. Forman wrote: 'If I had gone presently, I had found her alone' (Cerasano, 157). 
In 1601 Cowley appears for the only time as payee for the court performances of the Chamberlain's Men, along with John Heminges. In 1603 he appears last in a list of nine players in the licence which created the King's Men, and in 1604 he occupies the same position in a list of nine King's Men who received red cloth for King James's procession through London. His position in these lists, and the fact that he appears in none of the cast lists of King's Men in either the Ben Jonson or the Beaumont and Fletcher folios, suggests that he was not a leading member of the company. In 1605 he was a legatee in the will of King's Man Augustine Phillips, who left 20's'. in gold 'To my Fellowe Richard Coweley' (Honigmann and Brock, 73). 
Cowley's wife was buried on 28 September 1616 at St Leonard's, and he himself was buried there on 12 March 1619. Six weeks earlier, on 28 January, his daughter Elizabeth, not quite seventeen years old, had married George Birch of the King's Men. Cowley's nuncupative will, dated 13 January 1618, appoints his daughter executor; it was witnessed by three of the King's Men -- John Heminges, Cuthbert Burbage, and John Shank -- and Thomas Ravenscroft, possibly the madrigalist. 


@@@@@


doc= 45891


Crawshay, Richard (1739-1810), ironmaster and merchant, was born in Normanton, Yorkshire, the first child of William Crawshay (1713-1766), a farmer, and his wife, Elizabeth (1714-1774), 'nee' Nicholson. He had three sisters. According to family tradition a bitter quarrel with his father led to the sixteen-year-old Crawshay setting out for London. Once in the capital he apprenticed himself to a Thames Street ironware merchant named Bicklewith, selling, so legend has it, the pony which had carried him from Yorkshire to furnish a premium. Whatever the truth of this, Crawshay's career was certainly an exercise in self-improvement in the classic Smilesian mould. Indeed, he was the subject of an encomium in Samuel Smiles's 'Lives of the Engineers' (1861-2). The young man's resourcefulness and application were soon evident, for by 1763 Crawshay was in sole possession of Bicklewith's business, and as if to mark his independence, he married Mary Bourne (1745-1811), the daughter of a London stonegrate maker, on 13 June 1763. They had a son, William Crawshay (1764-1834), and three daughters, Anne, Elizabeth, and Charlotte. 
During the 1760s and 1770s Crawshay traded as an iron merchant and a dealer in cast-iron wares from a variety of wharfs and warehouses, before settling at George Yard, Upper Thames Street, which was to be the London base of the Crawshay family firm until 1864. By the 1780s Crawshay was probably London's leading iron merchant. However, his pre-eminence in the capital was not enough. Although he had made much of his fortune by importing iron from the Baltic, he was irresistibly attracted by the idea of becoming an ironmaster in his own right, in Britain. His opportunity came in 1786 with the death of Anthony Bacon, master of the Cyfarthfa ironworks at Merthyr Tudful, with whom Crawshay had been in partnership as a supplier of guns to the Board of Ordnance during the American War of Independence. The guns had been cast at Cyfarthfa and Crawshay must have been well aware of the potential of the iron industry in mineral-rich south Wales. Accordingly, he leased Cyfarthfa from Bacon's estate and devoted an increasing amount of his time to the development of the works. He had, he told a visitor there, 'bent his whole mind upon being a perfect iron-master' (Manners, 69). 
By 1793 Crawshay claimed to have laid out $50,000 on new plant at Cyfarthfa. He did so with effect. A survey of pig iron production in 1796 identified Cyfarthfa as by far the largest ironworks in Britain, casting 7204 tons when average output per works was a mere 1562 tons. The expansion of smelting was more than matched by a massive growth in forge capacity at Cyfarthfa. Indeed, it was in the field of iron refining that Crawshay made his most signal contribution to the British iron trade. He was the sponsor of the 'iron puddling' technique of Henry Cort, which was pioneered as a commercially viable process at his works in the late 1780s and which revolutionized the production of malleable bar iron in Britain. It was small wonder that Cyfarthfa attracted industrialists and technologists from across Europe, anxious to view what was referred to locally as the domain of 'Moloch the Iron King'. For his part, Crawshay relished the attention. His ambition was overweening: 'I must do more than any other Man or my Emulation is not gratify'd' (Gwent RO, D2.162, fol. 233, R. Crawshay to T. Erskine, 3 Nov 1797). 
Crawshay's imperiousness did little to endear him to his fellow ironmasters at Merthyr. Their relations were famously sour. He was, an admirer conceded, 'overbearing in his manners & more unfortunately at variance... with several others who are embarked in the same class of trade' (TNA: PRO, HO 42/61, fol. 529, G. Hardinge to the duke of Portland, 11 April 1801). The 'Tyrant', as Crawshay was dubbed by one of his neighbours, could brook no local opposition (NL Wales, Maybery 2466, R. Hill to J. Powell, 5 Aug 1793). Yet Crawshay was also alert to the sense of corporate fraternity that was so prominent a feature of the eighteenth-century iron trade. His commissioning of a set of portraits of the chief iron founders in the kingdom in 1796 was one expression of this amity. He was indefatigable in protecting the interests of the iron trade, putting to good use the many political contacts he had acquired during his years among the mercantile elite of the City of London, and he played a notable part in the campaign to avert the threatened taxation of iron in 1797. 
Crawshay's interests were not exclusively in iron. He was a tireless advocate of agricultural improvement and canvassed schemes of general enclosure during the 1790s. He took a leading role in the development of canal and road communications in south Wales. He was also a devout churchman. His circle included high-churchmen such as William Stevens, an erstwhile partner at Cyfarthfa, as well as evangelicals from the Clapham Sect. His was a highly conservative Anglicanism, which had him at odds with the 'fanatick Sectarys' of Merthyr with their radical sympathies. 
Crawshay died on 27 June 1810. He was buried at Llandaff Cathedral, attended by vast crowds from Merthyr. His estate was valued at $1.5 million. His ironworks were divided between his son, William, his son-in-law Benjamin Hall (1778-1817), and his nephew Joseph Bailey (1783-1858). To the end, Crawshay was without social pretension. Unlike some of his ironmaster neighbours, he did not aspire to social grandeur. He adopted a simple family motto: 'Perseverance'. 


@@@@@


doc= 45894


Crichton, Sir Archibald William (1791-1865), physician in Russia, the eldest son of 
Archibald William Crichton was educated at Edinburgh high school and Edinburgh University where, in 1810, he contributed a paper on alkaline salts to the Royal Medical Society. He graduated MD with 'De melancholia', a thesis dedicated to his father and his uncle Alexander Crichton (1763-1856), Tsar Alexander's physician and director-general of the Russian civil medical branch, whom he joined at St Petersburg soon afterwards. Through his uncle Crichton obtained in May 1811 the post of medical supervisor, responsible for developing a mineral spa resort in the Caucasus mountain area, and his success in controlling a plague outbreak earned him the knight cross of the order of St Vladimir (fourth class). Following Napoleon's abortive invasion of Russia, he volunteered for army service and in 1813 became physician to a hospital for French prisoners at Riga. Transferred at his own request to his uncle's headquarters by his compatriot James Wylie, the tsar's physician and inspector-general of the military medical department, Crichton took part, as a member of the tsar's suite, in two battles for the French capital. On Napoleon's withdrawal from Paris, the British hosted a dinner in April 1814 for their Russian allies. It was attended by Wylie, Crichton (now promoted to physician-in-chief of the Russian hospitals in the city), Count Platov, generals Chernikov and Barclay de Tolly, and many other senior officers. In 1814 Crichton was awarded the campaign medal and the knight cross of the order of St Anne (second class), as well as the Legion d'honneur by Louis XVIII. After a short period as regimental surgeon to the renowned Preobrazhensky guards, in 1816 he was appointed physician-in-ordinary to Grand Duke Nicholas, who became tsar in 1825. 
In addition to his medical duties, Crichton often performed the role of a courtier. He escorted Grand Duke Nicholas on his four months' tour of Britain between 1816 and 1817. They stayed, 'inter alia', at Chatsworth House (6-9 December 1816) as guests of the sixth duke of Devonshire, and reached Glasgow at Christmas. It was Crichton and not, as recorded, his uncle who accompanied the grand duke and interpreted when Robert Owen, the social reformer, invited them to spend a night at his New Lanark community home late that December. Owen declined Nicholas's offer to help resettle two million surplus British workers in Russia with a view to expanding the country's manufacturing industry (Owen, 115-20). In 1817 Crichton received honorary doctorates in medicine and law from Glasgow and Oxford universities respectively, and he was knighted by the prince regent in the same year. He corresponded from Russia in 1818 with the London ambassador Prince Lieven and the duke of Devonshire about the birth of the tsarevich Alexander, whom he safely vaccinated, and about the grand duchess's health. On 20 May 1820 he married, at St Petersburg, Sophia Louisa Kimmel (1798-1869), a widow, daughter of Nicholas Suthoff (died 1836), court physician and obstetrician. In 1825 Crichton treated Maria Federovna, the dowager empress. 
Crichton, known as Vasily Petrovich Kreyton in Russia, played a significant part in monitoring the serious cholera epidemic in Russia during 1830-31. His knowledge and medical advice on the subject were sought by colleagues such as Joseph von Hamel, the distinguished Russian academician and scientific writer, and Nicholas Arendt, one of the most important surgeons before Pirogov. Co-ordinating information sent from all over Russia, Crichton made a report on the epidemic to the Russian medical council towards the end of 1831, and this in turn formed the basis of two reports compiled by the Royal College of Physicians of London for the privy council. These and accounts by other British doctors of the Russian 'cholera morbus' were relayed to the central board of health in London. Crichton's letter to Sir Alexander Crichton in England, describing the treatment of cholera by German doctors at six St Petersburg hospitals, was published in 1832. He was decorated with the order of St Stanislas (first class) on the birth of Grand Duke Michael in 1832, and was accorded a special badge for '20 years' impeccable service' two years later. 
Compelled by ill health to relinquish his post of physician to Tsar Nicholas and his wife Charlotte, Crichton retired in 1837 with the rank of councillor of state, equivalent to a major-general, and, presumably, with a pension. He was presented with a snuffbox on the tsar's twenty-fifth wedding anniversary in 1847, and was an elected honorary member of the Physico-Medical Society of Moscow University from 1838 to 1848. A portrait represents Crichton as a pleasant man of shrewd intelligence, wearing several insignia on a smart green coat and around his neck. In addition to the honours mentioned he was awarded the higher Russian orders of St Vladimir (second class) in 1834 and St Anne (first class) in 1837, and, successively in 1829, in 1834, and about 1837, two classes and a star of the grand cross of the order of the Red Eagle of Prussia. According to the 'Scottish Antiquary', which published excerpts from his father's family history, he intended to 'make out his title to the Frendraught peerage' (pp. 12-16), but evidently he decided against pursuing this claim to an Aberdeenshire viscountcy conferred upon James Crichton in 1642. Four of his six children died young, but his son Nicholas (1825-1885) became a councillor of state and married Helena Johanna Augusta Nieroth, a wealthy countess of German origin. Their son Nicholas (1869-1916) served as gentleman of the bedchamber to the imperial court in 1911. Crichton died at St Petersburg on 27 February 1865, and was buried at the Smolensk evangelical cemetery on 2 March. 


@@@@@


doc= 45895


Crouch, Frederick Nicholls (1808-1896), cellist and composer, was born on 31 July 1808 at Warren Street, Fitzroy Square, London, the son of Frederick William Crouch ('c'.1783-1844), cellist and author of 'A Complete Treatise on the Violoncello' (1826), and his wife, Anna Maria, daughter of John Nicholls, barrister. His paternal grandfather, the composer William Crouch, was organist of St Luke's, Old Street. He played at the Royal Coburg Theatre from the age of nine, and later at the King's Theatre, Drury Lane, and elsewhere, as a member of Queen Adelaide's private band among others. He travelled in Yorkshire and Scotland, and for two years was obliged to work on coastal smacks plying between London and Leith. After tuition from William Hawes he sang in the choirs of Westminster Abbey and St Paul's Cathedral. From about 1822 he studied at the Royal Academy of Music with Crotch, Attwood, Crivelli, and Linley, among others, and played in London orchestras including the Philharmonic and those of the Antient Concerts and Royal Italian Opera. Some time after 1832 he moved to Plymouth, where he worked as a singer and as a travelling salesman for a firm of metal brokers, and invented the engraving process known as zincography. He was also musical supervisor to the London publishers D'Almaine & Co. From about 1838 he gave lecture recitals on the songs and legends of Ireland, at the same time publishing 'The Songs and Legends of Ireland', which included his most successful song, 'Kathleen Mavourneen'. 
By 1849 Crouch was in America, where he played in the Astor Place Opera House, and where his (mostly unsuccessful) musical enterprises included conducting, singing, and teaching in Boston, Portland, Philadelphia (conducting Mrs Rush's Saturday Concerts), Washington, and Richmond. He joined the Confederate army in the Civil War as a trumpeter, then taught singing in Baltimore, and, from 1883, worked as a varnisher in a factory. He also wrote two operas, 'Sir Roger de Coverley' and 'The Fifth of November, 1670', an 'Othello Travestie', a monody, song collections including 'Songs of Erin', 'Echoes of the Past', 'Bardic Reminiscences', 'Songs of the Olden Time', 'Songs of a Rambler', and 'Wayside Melodies', and many other songs popular in their day. A testimonial concert was given for him in Baltimore in 1883. An autobiographical memoir was published in the Boston 'Folio' in January 1887. Crouch married Lydia Pearson, whom he deserted in 1845; he fathered sixteen children, including Emma Elizabeth (1835?-1886), the Parisian Second Empire courtesan known as Cora Pearl. He died in Portland, Maine, on 18 August 1896. 


@@@@@


doc= 45897


Cummings, William Hayman (1831-1915), singer and musical antiquary, was born on 22 August 1831 at Sidbury, Devon, the son of Edward Manly Cummings and his wife, Julia. The family moved to London and he became a chorister at St Paul's Cathedral. Because William Hawes conducted practices with the help of a riding crop, Cummings's father was compelled to petition the court of chancery in 1842 for the boy's release from such harsh discipline. Cummings then joined the Temple Church choir and secured from E. J. Hopkins, the organist and choirmaster, an excellent musical grounding, including organ lessons. Hopkins later encouraged him to apply, successfully, for the position of organist of Waltham Abbey. Here it was that in 1855 Cummings made his most enduring mark. His generation venerated Mendelssohn; certainly Cummings's own choral compositions owe him much. In any event, he was sufficiently familiar with Mendelssohn's 'Festgesang', an occasional cantata in celebration of the 1840 Gutenberg festival, to unite the music of its second number with Charles Wesley's hymn 'Hark! the herald angels sing'. Cummings left Waltham Abbey to take up a long and distinguished career as a lyric tenor 'of singular sweetness and purity', particularly in the field of oratorio. His only instructor was J. W. Hobbs, a lay clerk at Westminster Abbey, whose daughter Clara he later married. For his 'wonted skill and good taste' and reliable musicianship he was much sought after for London concerts and provincial festivals. At Norwich in 1866, for example, he had to sing everything, some pieces at a moment's notice, when Sims Reeves, the other principal tenor, fell ill. From November 1871, Cummings made the first of two tours of the United States with a small vocal ensemble supporting the baritone Charles Santley. 
In London, Cummings taught singing at the Royal Normal School and the School for the Blind. He was appointed a professor at the Royal Academy of Music in 1879, but resigned in 1896 to become principal of a sister institution, the Guildhall School of Music. In the fourteen years before his retirement, he modernized the curriculum. Cummings enjoyed scholarly pursuits. From the age of nineteen he visited auction rooms and successfully bid for important manuscripts and rarities as diverse as autograph scores of Purcell and Beethoven and one of Handel's lace ruffles. His superb library of some 4500 pieces, the last of the great Victorian collections, was undoubtedly the catalyst for Cummings's editions for the Purcell Society (1878, 1889, and 1891) and his monographs on the national anthem (1902), John Blow (1909), and Thomas Arne (1912), which remained useful sources for more than a century. Upon his death the library was sold at auction and, unfortunately, dispersed as far afield as America and Japan. Thus was sadly fulfilled the prophecy that Cummings himself had made in a paper about national collections (1871) to the (Royal) Musical Association, a body of which he was a founding member. Although contemporaries noted in him a certain inflexibility towards others' opinions, his integrity of purpose and devotion to English music was never in question. For such efforts he was made a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries (1884), Doctor of Music (h.c.) of Trinity College, Dublin (1900), and honorary treasurer of the Royal Society of Musicians. Cummings died at his home, Sydcote, Rosendale Road, Dulwich, London, on 6 June 1915; the funeral service took place on 10 June in the church of St John the Evangelist, Dulwich, and he was interred at Norwood cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 45905


Ward, Mary Josephine (1889-1975), writer and publisher, was born on 4 January 1889 at Snowdon House, Shanklin, Isle of Wight, the first of the five children of Wilfrid Philip Ward (1856-1916), biographer and editor of the 'Dublin Review', and his wife, Josephine Mary Hope-Scott (1864-1932), Catholic novelist and daughter of James Robert Hope-Scott and Victoria Howard. Her parents were both English. On her maternal side she was related to the duke of Norfolk, the highest ranking Catholic peer, and on her paternal side to William George Ward, Oxford don, colleague of John Henry Newman, and the first of the Oxford Movement to 'go over to Rome'. All four of her grandparents were converts to Roman Catholicism. 
Maisie, as she was always known, lived initially on the Isle of Wight, where the Ward family had considerable influence, and later in Eastbourne and then Dorking. After her father's death she lived with her mother in London. One brother died in youth, another lived on the Isle of Wight, and the youngest became a priest and died young. Her only sister married and became a writer, but like the youngest brother she was psychologically fragile. Maisie was educated at home, at a convent school in Dorking, and at St Mary's Convent School, a boarding-school in Cambridge (1905-6), where she displayed a good command of Latin. She was influenced there by the preaching of Robert Hugh Benson and the inspiration of the seventeenth-century Mary Ward, whose nuns ran the school. 
The atmosphere of the Ward home was Catholic and intellectual. Both parents were prolific writers who included among their friends Catholic intellectuals of the day -- G. K. Chesterton, Hilaire Belloc, Friedrich and Anatole von Hugel, and William Basil Maturin. Her father's difficult confrontation with the modernist movement left its mark on Maisie. After finishing her schooling she worked as his secretary and during the First World War volunteered for the Red Cross. Although her younger brothers attended Oxford, she did not, even though she was encouraged to do so by her teachers. By her own account, for almost fifteen years she dithered away her life. 
In 1919 Maisie Ward's life changed when she became a founding member of the Catholic Evidence Guild (CEG); she remained active in this movement for almost fifty years. Through it she met her future husband, an Australian law student, Francis Joseph Sheed (1897-1981), whom she married on 27 April 1926. The CEG played a major role in their professional and personal lives. They devoted many hours each week to training and speaking. In the year of their marriage they co-founded the publishing firm of Sheed and Ward with money given by Josephine Ward. Many CEG friends joined them in working at Sheed and Ward, which Tom Burns in 'The Use of Memory: Publishing and Further Pursuits' (1993) called a cross between 'a sweat-shop and a university'. Seven years later an American office of Sheed and Ward was opened in New York. It was only in 1973 that the Sheeds sold the American company. 
Through her twenty-seven books and her work in the firm Ward influenced several generations of educated Anglo-American Catholics. Beginning in the late 1920s Sheed and Ward took the continental Catholic intellectual revival first to England and then to the United States. Sheed and Ward authors included the French authors Leon Bloy, Francois Mauriac, and Paul Claudel, and the English Christopher Dawson, E. I. Watkin, C. C. Martindale, Martin D'Arcy, and Ronald Knox, as well as Frank Sheed. Maisie first translated and edited volumes for Sheed and Ward. An early contribution was 'The English Way' (1933), edited essays about English spiritual writers from Bede to Newman. Her first major publication was 'The Wilfrid Wards and the Transition' (1934, 1937), a two-volume study of the Ward family which established her as heir of William George Ward and hence the 'granddaughter of the Oxford Movement'. 
In 1927 Maisie gave birth to Rosemary; three years later Wilfrid was born. The latter became a noted American writer and essayist. The Sheeds' domestic life was managed by Frank's Australian mother, who lived with the family. For many years the Sheeds lived at Horley in Surrey, where they opened a chapel which served the rural Catholic community. Frank and Maisie educated the community in the faith, in music, and in liturgical practice. 
During the Second World War Maisie and their children moved to Torresdale, near Philadelphia, while Frank continued to travel back and forth to London to maintain the publishing business. During these war years Maisie wrote 'This Burning Heat: Gilbert Keith Chesterton' (1943), her most popular book, and 'The Splendor of the Rosary' (1945). She returned to England after the war and published her favourite book, 'Young Mr. Newman' (1948), and 'Return to Chesterton' (1952). Her interest in the priest-worker movement led to 'France Pagan?' (1949), and efforts to bolster family life produced 'Be not Solicitous' (1953). In the 1950s she turned to religious topics and wrote 'They Saw His Glory: an Introduction to the Gospels and Acts' (1956) and 'Saints who Made History' (1959). She commemorated the life of her friend Caryll Houselander in 'The Divine Eccentric' (1962) and 'The Letters of Caryll Houselander' (1965). Her final major work was a two-volume study, 'Robert Browning and his World' (1967-9), which celebrated her favourite poet. She wrote two autobiographies: 'Unfinished Business' (1964) and 'To and fro on the Earth' (1973). Almost all of her books were published by Sheed and Ward. Although her prose was never brilliant, her research was extensive, and she wrote with an obvious and contagious sympathy and enthusiasm. 
After 1940 Ward travelled extensively between England, the continent, and America, and later to Australia and Asia. The purpose of this travel was often research and lecturing. This did not deter her writing, which she did in hotels, on planes and trains, and in waiting-rooms. 
Ward's prodigious writing life was paralleled by a commitment to social concerns. She was a great friend of Dorothy Day, the American who founded the Catholic Worker Movement, although they differed on the issue of pacifism. She also worked with the Russian Baroness Catherine de Hueck, founder of Friendship House. During her early married life she was influenced by distributism and operated several unsuccessful farms. Her love of community led her to support the Marycrest community in New York, the Taena community in England, the Canadian maritime co-operatives, priest-worker groups in France, and the land reform movement in India. She was co-founder of the Catholic Housing Aid Society in England, which worked to ameliorate the housing crisis created by the war. 
Ward's literary, religious, and social interests became the subjects of the lecturing on street corners, at Catholic colleges and universities, and at church gatherings, particularly in the United States. She was usually the only woman on the speakers' platform, appearing with prelates, priests, and laymen. Although not considered a handsome woman, she was charming and attentive and won others over through her evident dedication and erudition. In America her success as a speaker was in part attributable to her English breeding and manner of speech. In private she was reserved and retiring except when engaged with ideas. She was immensely forthright and, by her own definition, not a feminine woman; she was too steely, demanding, and unwilling to ingratiate. She was blindly loyal to family and friends and she and her husband always presented a unified stance in public. 
Maisie Ward's life was framed by her Catholicism and her Ward family history. Through these family connections and her writing and work she reflected in microcosm the history of the Roman Catholic church in the Anglo-American world for a century and a half. Her visibility and influence were greater in the United States than in England. With her husband she helped to prepare Catholic laity for the changes of the Second Vatican Council. Sheed and Ward published work by many of the leading theologians of the council, including Hans Kung, F. X. Durrwell, Hans Urs von Balthasar, Karl Rahner, and Edward Schillebeeckx. Ironically, Maisie, and Frank even more so, interpreted the realization of some of the council's changes as injurious to the church. While her second autobiography, written two years before her death, described the confusion she saw in the church after the Vatican Council, it continued to affirm the need to heal suffering in the world. 
The contribution of Maisie Ward is not based on any one of her multiple activities -- her writing, social commitments, publishing, lecturing, or street preaching -- but rather on the totality of these efforts which refer back to an inner dynamism and dedication to the principles of her Catholic faith. In the global reach of these activities and in her ability to sustain them into the last years of her life she was remarkable. In the world of publishing and Catholic intellectual life she was as a woman 'sui generis'. For the last decade of her life she lived permanently in the United States in New Jersey. She died in City Hospital, New York, on 28 January 1975 after a short illness and was buried on 30 January in Jersey City, New Jersey. She predeceased Frank Sheed, who was eight years her junior. 


@@@@@


doc= 45906


Bax, Ernest Belfort (1854-1926), Marxist theoretician and activist, was born at his parents' home, 27 Clarendon Square, Leamington Spa, Warwickshire, on 23 July 1854, the last of four children of Daniel Bax (died 1882), a manufacturer, and his wife, Eleanor, daughter of John Carter of Greenwich. His parents were strict nonconformists who followed evangelical and sabbatarian principles. The family moved to Brighton shortly after his birth, and remained there until 1864, when they moved to Hampstead. Educated mainly by private tutors, Bax began to rebel against his comfortable and pious bourgeois background early. At the age of sixteen he identified himself with the 'Communards' in Paris as they struggled to erect a new social order amid the military collapse of France. This sympathy drew him to the London positivists, one of the few groups in England to favour the revolutionaries in Paris. Although he did not join the positivists, their vision of a new religion centring on the ideal of humanity, derived from Auguste Comte, strongly influenced Bax. 
In 1875 Bax travelled to Germany to study musical composition at the Stuttgart conservatory. After a year he abandoned the plan, although he remained sufficiently conversant with musical forms to serve as a music critic for the London 'Star' in the 1880s, a position he passed on to his close friend George Bernard Shaw. The hope of becoming a composer would be realized by his nephew Arnold Bax. During the 1880s and early 1890s he earned his living by journalism, supplemented after 1882 by his father's inheritance. But in 1894 he was called to the bar by the Middle Temple and commenced practice as a barrister. He did not abandon journalism, editing the socialist journals 'Time' and 'Today' and continuing to write copiously on philosophy and socialism. 
In 1879, while he was working as a correspondent for the 'London Standard' in Berlin, Bax's acquaintance with the German philosopher Edward von Hartmann had led to a lifelong interest in philosophical questions. A decisive turn to his thought came when he read Marx's 'Kapital'. His short piece on Marxist theory, published in 1881, won Bax the praise and gratitude of Marx. Bax did not, however, adopt the orthodox Marxist standpoint, fixed in the years just ahead by the strictly materialistic and deterministic version of Engels. Marxism, according to Bax, still required philosophy, which he defined as 'the final pronouncements of thought on the great problems of life' (E. B. Bax, 'Outlooks from the New Standpoint', 1891, 196). Over the next two decades he attempted to develop the ethical, religious, and metaphysical meaning of socialism by drawing on the German philosophical tradition. From Kant he drew insight into man's ethical life, while Hegel provided a dialectical logic which swept away 'all accepted habits of thought' and disclosed the dynamic nature of reality. But Bax rejected Hegel's rationalism in favour of a notion found in Schopenhauer and von Hartmann, of a non-rational impulse beneath consciousness. Bax called this impulse the 'alogical'. It remained fundamental to his thought. 
Bax accepted Marx's analysis of capitalism. But he was occupied mainly with changes in human consciousness and denied that moral and aesthetic principles evolved in subordination to economic causes. By means of his metaphysical augmentation of Marxist materialism Bax developed a view of history according to which humankind was moving from the unconscious social solidarity of primitive societies, through a period of private property, individualism, and the class struggle, toward the future solidarity consciousness of communism. Scattered through his writings were speculations that humanity was developing a 'super organic' consciousness in which the tension-ridden personality characteristic of history would be overcome. Although Bax never produced a general interpretation of history, he wrote three books dealing with the French Revolution and published three studies of the Reformation era in Germany. 
Bax attempted to instruct his socialist colleagues in the larger meaning of their cause. In 1882 he joined the Democratic Federation (later Social Democratic Federation), founded a year earlier by Henry Mayers Hyndman, and moving toward a Marxist political programme. Two years later Bax joined William Morris in breaking with Hyndman to form the Socialist League. Both men rejected Hyndman's utilitarian-oriented Marxism in favour of a conception of socialism which emphasized ethical and aesthetic values. Bax and Morris worked closely together, editing the league's journal, 'The Commonweal', and collaborating on a book, 'Socialism and the Ground up', which combined a straightforward account of Marxist economic theory with the utopian vision of the authors. The daughter of Morris described their relationship: 'A strange pair they made, Bax with his fine, regular features and bushy moustache... tall and thin, in his black coat... smoking with perhaps a glass at his elbow; my father... sitting at the writing table... with perhaps a dry grin on his face at a vagary of Bax's. (M. Morris, 'William Morris', 2, 1936, 173)' In 1889 Bax left the Socialist League, now the scene of a bitter conflict between those, including Bax, who favoured political action, and a quasi-anarchist wing. He returned to Hyndman's Social Democratic Federation, convinced that it offered the best hope of holding the practical and ideal sides of the movement together. In the years ahead Bax served on the federation's executive, edited its journal, 'Justice', for a short time, and remained one of Hyndman's closest associates. He devoted himself to what he saw as the higher meaning of Marxism, firmly committed to its international mission, and battling against those social democrats who played down the revolutionary goal in order to enhance their appeal to the workers. Toward those socialists who developed, in the Independent Labour Party, a popular ethically inspired form of socialism, Bax had only contempt. Their sentimental socialism was a 'bastard enthusiasm... born of the morbid self consciousness of our Christian and middle class civilization run to seed' ('The Religion of Socialism', 1885, 100). He strongly opposed the tendency among some socialists to assert the compatibility of Christianity and socialism. Although he became less active in the movement after the turn of the century, Bax continued to be seen by Hyndman as the 'only original thinker now in any country' (H. M. Hyndman to George Bernard Shaw, 2 Jan 1914, BL, Shaw MSS) capable of formulating a new philosophical synthesis. 
Bax's role in the early British socialist movement was, however, idiosyncratic. This was most evident in the social criticism to which he devoted much of his journalistic activity. He attacked many features of British life -- imperialism, the legal system, and particularly the middle-class family, 'the most perfect specimen of the complete sham that history has presented' ('The Religion of Socialism', 1885, 141). In contrast to nearly all of his socialist colleagues, Bax was convinced that prevailing moral and legal conventions permitted the female to dominate the male. He fiercely opposed the contemporary feminist movement. Although Bax looked to the working class as the bearer of the 'religion of socialism', his manner -- abstract and impractical -- foreclosed any popular appeal. A young Glasgow socialist, Edwin Muir, recalled hearing him 'mumble his way through a long and intricate paper on some aspect of historical determinism, never raising his eyes from the bundle of papers he held before him' (E. Muir, 'Autobiography', 1954, 112). 
Even so, Bax was an interesting figure in the development of modern socialism. His attempt to do justice to the complexities of human consciousness anticipated later Marxists who broke with the rigid materialism and determinism of orthodoxy. He remained, however, a late Victorian; his socialist faith was a solution to the crisis of religious belief which occupied so many of his contemporaries. 
Bax was married twice. His first wife, Emily Gordon Wright, whom he married in 1877, died at the age of thirty-six after bearing seven children. In 1897 he married a German woman, Maria Johanna Cecelia Henneberg. He died within hours of his second wife at 204 Bedford Hill, Balham, London, on 26 November 1926. 


@@@@@


doc= 45907


Champion, Henry Hyde (1859-1928), socialist and journalist, was born on 22 January 1859 in Poona, India, the son of Major-General James Hyde Champion and his wife, Henrietta Susan, 'nee' Urquhart. He was sent to England to be educated at Marlborough College before entering the Royal Military Academy at Woolwich. He was commissioned as a lieutenant in the Royal Artillery in 1878 and served in the Second Anglo-Afghan War before resigning his commission in September 1882 as a protest against the Egyptian campaign. On 9 August 1883 he married Juliet Bennett (died 17 March 1886). After reading the work of Henry George, Karl Marx, and others, Champion embraced the socialist cause, to which he devoted his fortune and his many talents. 
In 1883 Champion aligned himself with Henry Mayers Hyndman and the Democratic Federation (later the Social Democratic Federation or SDF). He served as the SDF's first secretary and invested $2000 in the Modern Press, which published 'Justice', the federation's mouthpiece. Having edited the 'Christian Socialist' (1882-4) and 'To-Day' (1884), Champion was ideally suited to edit 'Justice', which soon became a respected and influential socialist weekly. A major figure in the early history of the federation, Champion also played an important role in establishing and maintaining the dynamism of the Clerkenwell branch of the SDF. His reputation, however, was jeopardized in the 'tory gold scandal' of 1885, when he helped secure Conservative Party financial support for SDF candidates in the general election. On 8 February 1886, along with other SDF leaders, he participated in the demonstration of the unemployed in Trafalgar Square (for which he was arrested on charges of sedition and later acquitted) and managed in part to redeem his reputation. 
By 1887 Champion had become disillusioned by Hyndman and the SDF, suggesting that the organization's abstract theory had converted few workers to the cause. In May he established a new monthly, 'Common Sense', in which he attacked Hyndman and suggested the need for a party that would appeal directly to workers' interests. He was expelled from the SDF in November 1888 and turned to the Labour Electoral Association in order to promote independent labour politics. Writing for a working-class readership in the 'Labour Elector', which he edited between 1888 and 1891, Champion argued in favour of immediate, practical reforms, particularly the eight-hour day. During the London Dock strike of 1889 he advised strikers on tactics and did much to secure sympathetic press coverage of the dispute. 
Champion devoted his energy in the early 1890s to the cause of independent labour representation, and stood unsuccessfully for Aberdeen South in the general election of 1892. Although ill health prevented him from attending the conference that gave birth to the Independent Labour Party in 1893, Champion worked behind the scenes in shaping the new party. Nevertheless, many Independent Labour Party members remained suspicious of his background and tory financial connections, especially after he offered to fund the electoral campaigns of Labour candidates. By 1894 Champion's reputation was tarnished, and by choosing to emigrate to Australia, leaving behind few admirers, he ensured that the role he played in the formative days of the Independent Labour Party would soon be forgotten. 
Champion settled in Melbourne, where he continued to promote socialist causes. Influenced by his second wife, Elsie Belle Goldstein (died 1953), whom he married on 8 December 1898 and who was the younger sister of the noted Australian suffragist Vida Goldstein, he campaigned on behalf of women's suffrage. He also established the Australasian Authors' Agency in 1906 and published the work of aspiring Australian novelists. He suffered a stroke in 1901, was declared bankrupt in 1922, and died in South Yarra, Victoria, on 30 April 1928. 
Although largely forgotten, Champion played a major role in the development of socialist thought and institutions in Britain. His many pamphlets, along with the articles he wrote between 1888 and 1892 for the 'Nineteenth Century' (which he briefly edited), are evidence of his intellectual rigour, while his organizational and speaking skills were noted by many of his contemporaries. Nevertheless, his aristocratic demeanour and impetuous behaviour (he had an acerbic wit and temperamental personality), along with his dubious financial connections and his distrust of working-class ties to the Liberal Party, alienated many of his potential followers. 


@@@@@


doc= 45908


Curran, Peter Francis (1860-1910), trade unionist and politician, was born in Glasgow on 28 March 1860, the son of George Curran, a causey layer, and his wife, Bridget, 'nee' McGinty. He was named Patrick by his parents who were Irish Catholics, but became known as Pete. After a national school education, he began work in the blacksmith's shop of a steelworks. He assisted the hammer-driver, later rising to that job himself. He was initially active in the Irish Land League, but, influenced by the ideas of Henry George, joined the Scottish Land Restoration League. Not long after he again shifted his allegiances, becoming a member of the Social Democratic Federation. In 1881 he married Mary, daughter of Peter McIntyre, an egg dealer. 
In the late 1880s Curran left Glasgow for London where he found work at the Royal Arsenal, Woolwich. He soon began to appear on socialist platforms and took a full part in the upsurge of the 'new unionism' of 1889, so much so that, having worked with Will Thorne and others to establish the National Union of Gasworkers and General Labourers, by September 1889 he had become a full-time official, the secretary of the union's west of England district. There he gained some notoriety when with two other union leaders he was convicted of intimidation at Plymouth and ordered to pay a fine. The case, 'Curran v. Treleaven', became a landmark when in 1891 it reached the Court of Appeal and the earlier verdict was overturned. In 1891 Curran returned to London as the national organizer of the gasworkers. At about this time, he joined the Fabian Society in which he took an active part until 1900 when he resigned because of the society's failure to denounce the South African War. At meetings of the Trades Union Congress he was associated with the younger socialist delegates who called for a collectivist programme and greater political action. In 1893 he supported James Macdonald in a successful amendment requiring the parliamentary committee of the TUC to give financial aid to candidates accepting the principle of collective ownership; and at the 1894 TUC he was among the delegates who secured the replacement of Charles Fenwick (described by Curran as a round peg in a square hole) as secretary of the parliamentary committee. 
By the early 1890s Curran was politically close to those socialists involved in the creation of the Independent Labour Party (ILP). In 1893 he attended the founding conference of the ILP and sat on its national administrative council until 1898. At the general election of 1895 he was the ILP candidate at Barrow, where he was a poor third in the poll. In the autumn of 1897 he again represented the ILP, at a by-election in the Barnsley constituency notable for the way in which the leaders of the Yorkshire Miners' Association, particularly Ben Pickard, supported the Liberal candidate and denounced the socialists. Curran was again at the bottom of the poll, his campaign not helped by rumours that he had deserted his wife. Whatever the truth of these, in 1897 or 1898 he married his second wife, Marian Barry. He took a leading role in the General Federation of Trade Unions, which formally came into being in 1899, and became its chairman, a post he held until his death. 
Curran worked with Keir Hardie and Ramsay MacDonald in preparing the ground for what was to be the inaugural conference of the Labour Representation Committee (LRC) in February 1900. At the conference he spoke in favour of an independent party of labour and was elected to the executive committee of the LRC. Three years later he moved the resolution requiring officials and organizations affiliated to the LRC strictly to abstain from identifying themselves with or promoting the interests of any section of the Liberal or Conservative parties. For three or four years before the general election of 1906 he nursed the Jarrow constituency, but he was defeated in a straight fight with the Liberal candidate, Sir Charles Palmer. The death of Palmer caused a by-election in July 1907 when Curran again contested the seat, along with Liberal, Conservative, and Irish nationalist candidates. Though accused of playing down his socialism, Curran was able to gain Jarrow for Labour. He had taken an active part in the 'right to work' agitation of the National Unemployed Committee, which was formed in 1903, and made the question of unemployment one in which he specialized in the House of Commons. As well as a 'right to work' bill and the eight-hour day, he advocated a system of state insurance. 
All who knew Curran acknowledged the genial and convivial side of his personality. In February 1909 he suffered the embarrassment of an appearance in court, where he was fined 10's'. for being drunk and incapable in the street. By the general election of January 1910 his health was ruined, a factor which probably contributed to his narrow defeat, by sixty-seven votes, at Jarrow. On 14 February 1910 he died at his home, 1 Pretoria Avenue, Walthamstow; the principal cause of death was certified as cirrhosis of the liver. He was survived by his wife, Marian Curran, also a trade unionist, and by his two sons and two daughters. 
Pete Curran's funeral took place on the afternoon of Saturday 19 February 1910 and was made the occasion of a great demonstration of mourning. According to 'The Times' report (21 February 1910), thousands followed the hearse to Leytonstone Roman Catholic cemetery, a journey of 2 miles through 'thick lines of sympathising spectators'. The procession was led by the Stepney gasworkers' brass band and as well as his widow and four children the mourners included several Labour MPs and trade union officials. One of those present, Ben Tillett, writing in 'Justice' (26 February 1910) described Curran as a man of 'courage, mingled with ambition, and some egotism; virile and eager with an Irishman's rollicking humour and optimism and notable for the sturdy frame, the square determined jaw, the small alert eyes of the man of action'. 


@@@@@


doc= 45909


Hobson, Samuel George (1870-1940), political activist and journalist, was born on 4 February 1870 in Bessbrook, near Newry, Northern Ireland, one of nine children of William Hobson, a Quaker minister, and his wife, Elizabeth, a teacher. Hobson's parents were both strict observers of their religion and they moved to England when Samuel was a child partly to ensure that their children could be educated at a Quaker school in Saffron Walden, which Samuel attended from 1880 to 1883. After the completion of his secondary education at the Friends' school, Sidcot, Somerset (1883-8), and having failed to win a university scholarship, Hobson moved to Cardiff and became involved in socialist circles. He joined the Fabian Society in 1891 and the Independent Labour Party in 1893. He engaged in propaganda work and travelled widely. His early political career was not always successful. He missed the first Independent Labour Party conference in Bradford after a traffic accident, an event which, at least to Hobson himself, symbolized his status as something of an outsider. None the less, throughout the 1890s Hobson was a regular contributor to the 'Labour Leader' and stood for parliament as an Independent Labour Party candidate for East Bristol in 1895. He was elected to the Fabian Society's executive in 1900. 
Hobson's major impact on British politics came when he resigned from the Fabian Society in 1910. Increasingly irritated at the timidity of parliamentary Labour politics, he drifted away from mainstream socialism. In 1912 he became a columnist for A. R. Orage's weekly 'New Age', and in 1914 Hobson's series of articles on industrial policy emerged as a book, 'National Guilds: an Inquiry into the Wage System and a Way Out', published under Orage's editorship. Here, Hobson espoused an ideal of an industrial system composed of self-governing guilds, where neither the state nor capitalists would control industry but where the pay and conditions of work would be decided democratically by workers themselves. His theory became, for a while, the most influential statement of what became known as guild socialism. 
Hobson's prominence did not last long. The arrival of the precocious Oxford academic George Douglas Howard Cole in guild socialist circles during the First World War threatened Hobson's supremacy. Their theoretical disagreements became a staple point of debate in the intellectual world of early twentieth-century socialism. The central contention often appeared to concern the role of the state in a prospective guild utopia, but in reality that issue was only testament to a far wider set of disagreements as to the nature of the underlying ideology, especially concerning the rights of the individual in relation to the authority of the guilds (see G. D. H. Cole, 'The guilds, the state, the consumer, Mr. S. G. Hobson and others', 'New Age', 6 Dec 1917). In 1915 Hobson joined with Cole as a founder member of the National Guilds League, but Cole's domination of the organization unsettled the less educated man, and Hobson never played a particularly large role in the movement, the focus of his attentions remaining with the 'New Age'. 
Even that was not to last. After Orage committed the 'New Age' to support of the proposals of the maverick economist C. H. Douglas in 1919, Hobson became disillusioned with the journal. In its place, he moved to practical action and attempted to create a co-operative guild in the building trade in the early 1920s. Economic downturn, however, ensured that these were unsuitable years for industrial innovation and the guild soon collapsed. In its wake, he continued to work in the labour movement but never again achieved his earlier level of recognition. 
Away from politics, Hobson appears to have lived a full life. He was never as emotionally committed to political activism as his more successful contemporaries and, as a result, he was able to pursue a series of other careers. These included the management of a banana plantation in British Honduras and the editorship of an investment journal, 'The Mint'. Many of his experiences are retold in his engaging autobiography, 'Pilgrim to the Left: Memoirs of a Modern Revolutionist', which was published to some acclaim in 1938. He died at his home, 6 Albion Street, in Dunstable, Bedfordshire, on 4 January 1940. 


@@@@@


doc= 45910


Jowett, Frederick William (1864-1944), socialist and politician, was born on 31 January 1864 at 108 Clayton Street, Bradford, one of eight children (three of whom died in infancy) of Nathan Jowett, cotton warp dresser, and his wife, Emma Gerry. Born into a working-class household, his education was limited, and at the age of eight he started work in the Bradford textile trade as a half-timer, before transferring to full-time employment at the age of thirteen. His education was continued through a mixture of self-directed reading and attendance at classes at the mechanics' institute and the technical college. He made rapid progress in the textile trade and became a power-loom overlooker at the age of nineteen. On 19 July 1884 he married Emily Foster, the daughter of a Bradford wool waste dealer, and through his marriage he became a partner in a small textile firm. However, by this point his interests were already more clearly related to trade unionism and the infant labour movement, which were to dominate the remainder of his life. 
In 1886 Jowett joined William Morris's Socialist League, and on the closure of the Bradford branch in 1889 he was a founder member and secretary of the Labour Electoral Association, an organization committed to the selection and election of working men as parliamentary candidates. His acceptance of socialism grew out of reading Carlyle, Ruskin, and Morris (influences which he later acknowledged in the 'Review of Reviews', June 1906, 575), combined with observing working-class life: his direct experience of the social, economic, and political situation in late Victorian Bradford dominated his political career. In that period the textile industry was undergoing increasing difficulties, which led to worsening labour relations and culminated in the Manningham mills strike (December 1890-April 1891). Out of that strike emerged a growing demand for independent working-class political activity, which, faced by locally a conservative Liberalism and a weak trade unionism, led to the formation in the spring of 1891 of the Bradford Labour Union, subsequently the Bradford Independent Labour Party. Jowett, who was a founder and first president of the Bradford labour church, was a key figure in this burgeoning movement; in November 1892 he was the party's first candidate for Bradford town council to win a contested election. For the next fifteen years his major sphere of activity was Bradford town council, and from 1897 the city council. As chairman of the sanitary committee and later the health committee, he was a driving force behind municipal socialism, particularly municipal housing. His thinking in this field was outlined in his book 'The Socialist and the City' (1907). 
But even before this publication Jowett's main area of activity had moved to Westminster. He had been a delegate to the founding conference of the Independent Labour Party (ILP) in 1893, and had stood as an ILP candidate for Bradford West in 1900, when he was narrowly defeated. He was elected in 1906 and represented Bradford West until the 1918 general election. Although he remained deeply involved in Bradford issues, for much of the remainder of his political life his primary role was in the House of Commons and within the central administration of the ILP. He wrote a parliamentary column in 'The Clarion' until 1909 and then in the 'Labour Leader'. 
Small in stature, Jowett was a fiery speaker who, unlike many of his contemporaries, retained his radicalism until the end of his life. In the period before the First World War he was an active spokesman in parliament on most issues affecting working-class life, notably the provision of school meals. During this period two of the key issues which were to dominate much of his political thinking emerged. The first was his concern to democratize parliament, for which he advocated a central role for committees of MPs to scrutinize all legislative and administrative matters relating to each department of state, as described in 'What's the use of Parliament?' (1909) and in his evidence to the select committee on House of Commons procedure (1913-14). The second was his active opposition to secret diplomacy in international relations. On the left of the party, he was strongly suspicious of Ramsay MacDonald, and of attempts to stifle the rights of Labour members to vote according to conscience. He campaigned against the 'National Insurance Bill' in 1911, objecting to its contributory principle, and this stand placed him at odds with the majority of the Parliamentary Labour Party. As a member of the select committee appointed to investigate the Putumayo scandal, he was deeply impressed by the evidence of the exploitation of the local labour force in the Amazon rubber collecting industry. Having previously been chairman of the ILP in 1909-10 he was re-elected for a further three-year term in 1914. 
Throughout his life Jowett passionately opposed war. He spoke out against the South African War, and during the First World War he was a bitter opponent of its conduct. He was never a pacifist, though, and believed in the right of national defence. As well as being a member of the executive of the Union of Democratic Control, he spoke out against secret diplomacy, which he believed responsible for the outbreak of war, and was a constant advocate for British war aims to be defined and peace negotiations to be entered into. 
Defeated at the 1918 general election, Jowett concentrated on his work within the central party apparatus: he was the ILP representative on the Labour Party executive and was chairman of the Labour Party in 1921-2. During this period he was often a member of overseas delegations: he made visits to Hungary to investigate reports of a 'White terror', to Geneva for the International Socialist Conference held to consider the post-war situation, and to Ireland to inquire into the policies of the British state during the war of independence. Jowett and his fellow Labour Party delegates recommended the withdrawal of British forces and the recognition of the right of the Irish to self-determination. 
In 1922 Jowett was elected for Bradford East, and in parliament he was chairman of the public accounts committee. After being re-elected at the general election of 1923, he became in January 1924 the first commissioner of works, with a seat in the first Labour cabinet. With John Wheatley he refused to wear morning dress and a top hat when receiving the seals of office from the king. As commissioner of works he was best remembered for authorizing Epstein's statue of 'Rima' as the central feature of the W. H. Hudson memorial in Hyde Park. He advocated socialist policies and opposed collaboration with the Liberal Party to keep the government in office. 
Jowett lost his Bradford seat at the general election of 1924, and during the next five years out of parliament he was closely associated with the leftward movement of the ILP, in conjunction with James Maxton and John Wheatley. He was again chairman of the ILP (1925-6) and was party treasurer from 1927 until his death. His thinking as expressed in the pamphlet 'Parliament or Palaver?' (1926) returned to the need for the democratization of both the party and parliament, and was coupled with a deep hostility to cabinet government as a result of his experience of the first Labour government. He restated his arguments for the reorganization of parliament on the basis of a committee system, and carried these proposals at the ILP conference in 1926. But they were opposed by Ramsay MacDonald and other Labour leaders who feared that they would make parliament a permanent coalition, and would emasculate a future Labour government (Morrison, 169). He worked for the ILP's 'socialism in our time' programme, and was a powerful supporter of the miners both during 1926 and after. He firmly opposed another west Yorkshire labour pioneer, Ben Turner, in his involvement in the Mond-Turner talks, which were concerned to develop a more co-operative relationship between employers and trade unions in the context of pressures for industrial rationalization. 
Jowett regained his seat at Bradford East in the general election of 1929. During the second Labour government he was associated with the left ILP rebels: he proposed a socialist amendment to the king's speech at the opening of the session in 1930 and opposed restrictions on entitlement to unemployment benefit. He also refused to sign a declaration that, if elected, all candidates should accept the standing orders of the Parliamentary Labour Party. For Jowett, as for a small number of MPs sponsored by the ILP, such a declaration would prohibit support in parliament for ILP policy when this was in conflict with the position of the majority of Labour MPs. He was defeated in the general election of 1931 and never sat in parliament again. At a special conference at Jowett Hall in Bradford (opened in 1927 by James Maxton in his honour) in July 1932, the ILP disaffiliated from the Labour Party. Jowett recognized that this was likely to lead to an increased marginalization of the ILP, but believed that commitment to principle was more important. The issue of standing orders was the basis of Jowett's support for disaffiliation. He did not share some ILP members' beliefs that disaffiliation in a context of capitalist crisis would permit the party to become an effective revolutionary alternative to both the Communist and Labour parties. For Jowett, this period, following the death of his wife of over forty-five years in September 1931, was not a happy one. Politically, he remained committed to the parliamentary road to socialism, and was appalled by the ILP's subsequent flirtation with ultra-left tendencies and willingness to co-operate with communists. He stood as an ILP candidate for Bradford East in 1935 but was defeated. 
During the 1930s Bradford was Jowett's major focus of activity, and he wrote a weekly article of 1000-1500 words for the Bradford 'ILP News'. In these articles he reflected on his political career and pushed forward a number of key issues: the reform of parliament, the 'living wage' and 'socialism in our time', anti-militarism, and -- arising out of the experience of the second Labour government -- an increasing concern with the role of finance and the need for a clear socialist policy in this area. He never embraced the populism of the ILP Clydesiders and was unusual on the left in taking a powerful interest in the reform of existing political institutions. 
In 1939 Jowett opposed the declaration of war, once again arguing for the clear articulation of war aims and proposing immediate peace negotiations. He died at his home, 10 Grantham Terrace, Bradford, on 1 February 1944, survived by two daughters, a son, and five grandchildren. He was cremated at Scholemoor cemetery. His memorial service was conducted in Bradford's nineteenth-century cathedral of nonconformity, Horton Lane Congregational Chapel, where James Maxton paid a glowing tribute to a friend and colleague, referring to him as one of the giants of the labour movement. 


@@@@@


doc= 45912


Junius (fl. 1768-1773), political writer, was the pseudonym adopted by the author (or possibly authors) of a series of letters which appeared once or twice monthly (sometimes more often) in the 'Public Advertiser', a leading London newspaper owned by Henry Sampson Woodfall, between 21 January 1769 and 21 January 1772. In this series Junius -- named after the popular republican hero Lucius Junius Brutus -- opposed the policies of George III and the administrations of the serving prime ministers, the duke of Grafton and Lord North. Now a classic of English political commentary, the correspondence owes its influence to three interrelated factors: the high whig philosophy espoused to attack tory policies and celebrated political personalities; the literary power of the letters, one of the most effective uses of slanderous polemic ever employed in English political controversy; and, finally, the uncertainty surrounding their authorship. 
In the complex political context of the period Junius was, in principle, a supporter of the former prime minister, George Grenville. On all public questions Junius positioned himself on the popular side, supporting the radical politician John Wilkes and the right of constituencies to elect to parliament anyone who had not previously been disqualified. (Junius's name had earlier appeared on a letter printed in the 'Public Advertiser' in defence of Wilkes on 21 November 1768, though this was not one he included in the collected edition of March 1772; Junius and Wilkes also conducted a private correspondence in the late summer and autumn of 1771.) Junius was equally critical of the overgrown privileges of parliament under which arbitrary imprisonment of a citizen might occur without appeal or redress. He vigorously supported the right of the press to report parliamentary business, in addition to the unrestricted right to petition the crown and the inviolability of private papers against arbitrary search in cases of libel. He argued for citizens to have their property undisturbed by interested and obsolete claims of the crown, to tell their rulers of their duties and liberties, and to threaten them if these freedoms were challenged. While accepting that parliament had the abstract or theoretical right to tax the colonies, Junius believed that this so-called right would never be exercised. The letters themselves provide no clear reason for Junius's conclusion of the series in January 1772, though private correspondence with Woodfall in the following year suggests his diminishing faith in the power of his attacks and declining public interest. Though the quality of the later letters is often considered less effective than the early campaign, the dominant tone of the series identifies Junius as a highly opinionated, shrewd, ironic, vituperative, even arrogant individual schooled in classics and the law. 
The letters proved an enormous success and were reprinted in other London newspapers, in weeklies, magazines, and pamphlets, and in the provincial and colonial press. The circulation of Woodfall's 'Public Advertiser', typically about 3000 copies daily, grew considerably as a result, with particularly substantial sales for specific letters (1750 extra copies, for example, were printed of the issue containing Junius's letter to George III of 19 December 1769 in which he warns the king that as the crown 'was acquired by one revolution, it may be lost by another'). Such comments prompted reviews from leading political observers both shocked at the tone and impressed by the power of the letters. 'How comes this Junius', Edmund Burke asked the Commons on 27 November 1770, 'to have broke through the cobwebs of the law, and to range uncontrolled, unpunished, through the land?... No sooner has he wounded one than he lays down another dead at his feet. For my part, when I saw his attack on the King, I own my blood ran cold... King, Lords and Commons are but the sport of his fury. ('Parl. hist., 16.1154')' Lord North in reply spoke of 'this mighty Junius' as 'the great boar of the wood', while the tory Samuel Johnson maintained, with an abusiveness second only to that of Junius himself, that 'he cries 'havock' without reserve, and endeavours to let slip the dogs of foreign and civil war, ignorant whither they are going, and careless what may be their prey' (Johnson, 'Thoughts on the Late Transactions Respecting Falkland Islands', 1771, in the 'Yale Edition of the Works of Samuel Johnson', ed. D. Green, 1958-90, 10.376). 
Junius's concern over the effects of unauthorized collections prompted the publication of his own edition of his letters as the 'Letters of Junius' (3 March 1772) which, printed by Henry Sampson Woodfall, superseded twenty-eight partial and unauthorized volumes. In addition to a preface and a 'Dedication to the English nation', this edition included forty-two letters signed by Junius, sixteen by Junius but signed 'Philo Junius', three unsigned letters, and eight replies, five of them from Sir William Draper, whom Junius had mercilessly attacked in the correspondence, and three from the Revd John Horne Tooke, who had been accused of covert work for the government. 
Following Woodfall's death in 1805, his son George Woodfall resolved to publish a new and more complete edition comprising the letters of the original 1772 edition together with further 'miscellaneous letters' by Junius from the 'Public Advertiser' (many of which are believed not to be genuine), and Junius's private correspondence with Henry Sampson Woodfall and John Wilkes. This edition, which appeared in 1812, was edited by John Mason Good, who added numerous notes and a 'preliminary essay'; usually referred to as 'Woodfall's edition', it is often confused with that of the elder Woodfall. In 1850 the publisher Henry George Bohn undertook publication of a new edition, 'Junius: Including Letters by the same Author under other Signatures', based largely on the 1812 volume and edited by John Wade. The two-volume Bohn edition, part of Bohn's 'Standard Library', was reprinted without change well into the twentieth century and, on account of its easy availability, became the standard edition despite its many deficiencies. The most recent and authoritative collection is John Cannon's 1978 edition published by Oxford University Press. 
Common to successive editors and reviewers has been a fascination with Junius's true identity. The mystery of authorship was established in the dedication to the 1772 edition. Adopting the motto 'Stat nominis umbra' (taken from Lucan, 'Pharsalia', 1.135: 'stat magni nominis umbra', 'he stands the shadow of a great name'), Junius maintained that 'I am the sole depository of my own secret, and it shall perish with me.' Few questions in literary or political history have given rise to so much debate as Junius's identity. In over two centuries some sixty candidates have been proposed, including persons eminent and obscure, those with views similar and antithetical to Junius's and those whom he favoured or attacked in his correspondence. Speculation began soon after the appearance of the first letter and included, among others, William Petty, second earl of Shelburne (later marquess of Lansdowne), and his political allies Isaac Barre, John Dunning, first Baron Ashburton, and William Greatrakes; Richard Grenville (later Grenville-Temple), second Earl Temple, and his brothers George Grenville and James; Lord George Sackville; Hugh Macaulay Boyd (who was connected with the letters only after his death in 1794); Philip Dormer Stanhope, fourth earl of Chesterfield; Edward Gibbon; Edmund Burke; the poet Richard Glover; Horace Walpole; Lauchlin Macleane ('c'.1728-1778); and Sir Philip Francis (see Cannon's edition of the letters, 540, for a more complete list). 
The 'Franciscan theory', proposing Francis as Junius, originated with John Taylor in his 'A Discovery of the Author of the Letters of Junius' (1813), which identified Sir Philip and his father the Revd Philip Francis as the authors. In 1816 Taylor attributed the letters to the younger Francis alone in his 'The identity of Junius with a distinguished living character [Sir Philip Francis] established' (2nd edn, corrected and enlarged, 1818), followed a year later by his 'A Supplement to Junius Identified'. Taylor's scholarship gave the Franciscan theory a special significance but it would not have achieved any special status (as against that of other claimants) had it not been for the attention of Thomas Babington Macaulay, whose widely read and much reprinted essay on Warren Hastings (originally in 'Edinburgh Review', 74, 1841, 227-41) elucidated 'five marks' in favour of Francis's claim to the Junian authorship. 
None the less several contemporaries, including Abraham Hayward and Charles Wentworth Dilke, rejected any connection between Francis and Junius. Dilke, the doyen of Junian scholars, achieved a knowledge of the subject subsequently unsurpassed in his efforts to disprove the authorship not only of Francis but also of Isaac Barre. A series of essays by William Fraser Rae in 'The Athenaeum' of 1888 further distanced Francis and others from Junius while failing to provide a credible candidate in their place. Even so, the second half of twentieth century saw a renewed confidence, based on Alvar Ellegard's 'A Statistical Method for Determining Authorship: the Junius Letters' (1962) and John Cannon's 1978 edition for Oxford University Press, that Francis was indeed the most likely author. Cannon's argument draws attention to the parallels between Francis's and Junius's political views, frequent references in the letters to the War Office (Francis's workplace), and close commentaries on Lords debates at which Francis was present. Corroborative evidence includes the connection between the dates of Junius's private letters to Henry Sampson Woodfall and the times when Francis was in and out of the country, Francis's proximity to London, and similarities (albeit inconclusive) between Francis's and Junius's handwriting. Needless to say, while the Franciscan theory has recently enjoyed new life, it remains contested and impossible to demonstrate categorically. 
In the light of this ongoing if now perhaps less heated debate, the comments of two leading nineteenth-century Junians are of continued relevance. Thus Charles Wentworth Dilke cautioned scholars 'never to believe a Junius 'rumour'', never to believe any story of or concerning Junius, no matter how confidently or circumstantially told, which is not proved (Dilke, 2.176), while for Abraham Hayward, 'The Junius secret [like buried treasure]... lies in the search, in the industry it stimulates, in the discriminating spirit of inquiry it promotes, in the biographical and historical harvest for which it prepares the ground' (A. Hayward, 'More about Junius: the Franciscan Theory Unsound', 1868, 1). 


@@@@@


doc= 45913


Naples, Joseph (bap. 1773), grave robber, son of Joseph Naples, stationer and bookbinder, and his wife, Mary, was baptized at St Paul's, Deptford, in London, on 24 October 1773. It is known that he served for some time aboard the 'Excellent' and saw action off Cape Vincent, after which he returned to England before joining a vessel which cruised the English Channel. Naples then abandoned the sea and returned to London, where he became a gravedigger at the Spa Fields burial-ground. It was here that he found his way into the body-snatching business that supplied the corpses demanded by the medical profession for the teaching of anatomy. 
It appears that Naples was persuaded to enter the trade by a man named White. When White was apprehended while transporting a body taken from Spa Fields, Naples was arrested and sentenced to two years' imprisonment. Naples managed to escape, however, from the house of correction but was recaptured after information was received from Ben Crouch, a fellow resurrectionist. Naples was saved from further punishment by the intervention of the eminent surgeon Sir Astley Cooper, one of the body-snatchers' most regular customers. 
On his release Naples continued in his work of providing corpses for London's anatomy schools. He became a member of the city's main gang of resurrectionists, led by Ben Crouch, and is probably the author of a diary that details their activities from 28 November 1811 until 5 December 1812. The manuscript, which is held at the library of the Royal College of Surgeons, provides unique evidence of the early nineteenth-century body-snatching business. The diary records that bodies were sent to Joshua Brookes, Henry Cline, Joseph Carpue, and Algernon Frampton -- all proprietors of anatomy schools -- and to St Thomas's Hospital, as well as to Edinburgh; teeth, foetuses, and the bodies of children were also sold. The gang frequently removed corpses from the burial-grounds of St Bartholomew's, Guy's, and St Thomas's hospitals; some bodies were even taken before a funeral could take place. The diary records the risks the gang took -- avoiding patrols and guard dogs, digging up diseased corpses -- and the problems caused by a bright moon. Naples earned about 11 guineas a week for his work during the period covered in the diary. 
Naples was described as 'a civil and well conducted man, slight in person, with a pleasing countenance, and of respectful manners' (Naples, 156). The passing of the 'Anatomy Act' in 1832, which increased the supply of corpses available for dissection, led to the decline of the resurrection gangs. Naples found employment as a servant in the dissecting room of St Thomas's Hospital, after which nothing more is known of him. 


@@@@@


doc= 45915


Kelly, Richard John (1860-1931), journalist, was born in Tuam, co. Galway, Ireland, the eldest son of Jasper Kelly (died 1873), newspaper editor, and his wife, Delia, daughter of John Daly. He was descended from the Ouseley family of Courteen Hall, Northampton, through Margaret Ouseley, who married his great-grandfather Anthony Kelly of Castle Park, near Mount Talbot. Richard Kelly was educated in Blackrock and at the Queen's College, Galway, and entered the King's Inns, Dublin, in 1883. He spent a term at the Middle Temple in the autumn of 1884. Called to the Irish bar in 1886, he took silk in 1914. Kelly married Edith, a daughter of Bryan Mackey of Southampton, a distant cousin of Dame Sybil Thorndike; they had one son and five daughters. 
Kelly's grandfather, also Richard John Kelly, was a follower of Daniel O'Connell, and founded the 'Tuam Herald' in May 1837. Jasper Kelly succeeded him as proprietor in 1864, and his son succeeded in turn, in 1868. In 1851 the paper was described as Liberal, and claimed to represent the Roman Catholic church in the district. Richard Kelly attended the inaugural meeting of the Land League in Irishtown, co. Mayo, in April 1879, and he was a long-standing and trusted friend of Charles Stewart Parnell and Michael Davitt. By the 1880s the 'Tuam Herald's' politics were nationalist. After the split in the Irish parliamentary party, and the death of Parnell, Richard Kelly supported John Redmond. 
Despite his work on the newspaper Kelly also had a considerable career as a lawyer. He was a revising barrister for Dublin city, co. Cork, co. Armagh, and co. Donegal, and was crown prosecutor for co. Sligo. The author of a number of books on the law of newspaper libel and landlord and tenant legislation, he also edited volumes of Irish patriotic poetry and a life of Charles Kickham. He became vice-president of the Galway Archaeological and Historical Society and wrote a history of Tuam. 
In the latter part of his life Kelly lived in Dublin, where he was a governor of Richmond Hospital, a member of the Statistical Society and the Royal Society of Antiquaries of Ireland. He was a governor of the National Bank. He died in Dublin on 3 September 1931 and was buried at Glasnevin cemetery. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 45917


Kenealy, William (1828-1876), journalist, was born in Cloyne, co. Cork, the son of a blacksmith. He became a schoolmaster, but was dismissed for writing an 'inflammatory pamphlet'. He was rescued by Dr Maginn, the coadjutor-bishop of Derry, who made Kenealy a teacher in his diocesan college and then arranged for him to work on 'The Lamp', a Catholic penny journal published in York, which was founded in 1850 and devoted to literature, science, and general instruction. Kenealy returned to Clonmel, co. Tipperary, to edit the 'Tipperary Leader', but in 1855 he was prosecuted by a local protestant clergyman who alleged he had been libelled; Kenealy refused to name the journalist responsible for the article and was sent to gaol and sentenced to pay damages which he was unable to meet. 
From gaol Kenealy successfully applied to be editor of the 'Kilkenny Journal', a long-established Liberal newspaper which proclaimed 'Ireland for the Irish' and was owned by Mary Anne Maxwell, the widow of Cornelius Maxwell, who had been a supporter of Daniel O'Connell. A number of men who later became Fenians were employed on the paper, including the foreman printer John Haltigan, who became the printer of the 'Irish People'. The writer Charles J. Kickham was another applicant for the post of editor. 
In 1858 Kenealy married Rose Maxwell, Mary Anne Maxwell's daughter, and on their marriage he received a half-share in the newspaper. He also had the option to purchase the other half on the decease of his mother-in-law, but in fact he predeceased her. He died in Kilkenny on 5 September 1876, aged forty-eight, and is buried in the churchyard of St Patrick's Church. 
Kenealy was not a Fenian; one of his political aims was to achieve tenant-right through constitutional means. He was an accomplished speaker, and his advocacy for tenant-right spread his reputation far beyond Kilkenny. He wrote poetry for 'The Nation', using the pseudonym William of Munster, and he was said to have been the anonymous author of the introduction to Edward Hayes's 'Ballads of Ireland' (1856). He was twice mayor of Kilkenny, in 1872 and 1873. After his death, Kickham wrote in the 'Kilkenny Journal' on 9 September: 'Though our opinions on some questions were as wide as the poles asunder, I am happy to think that our friendship was never dimmed... since I first long ago in early manhood made the acquaintance of 'William of Munster'.' 


@@@@@


doc= 45918


Killen, James Bryce (1845-1916), Irish nationalist and journalist, was born in Kells, co. Antrim, the fourth son of Samuel Killen and Mabel Shaw. He took a BA in 1863 at the Queen's University in Ireland, though it is not clear whether this was at Belfast, Cork, or Galway. He went on to read logic, metaphysics, and political economy at the Queen's University in Ireland at Galway and gained a poor MA in 1868. He was admitted to the King's Inns, Dublin, in 1865, and in 1869 he gained a first-class LLB at the Queen's University in Ireland at Galway. 
Killen was on three occasions in trouble with the authorities. In May 1869 he addressed the Queen's College, Belfast, Literary and Scientific Society on 'The spirit of Irish history'. He concluded that England could not rule Ireland because it had no idea of the concept of nationality, and the fact of union divided the two nations even more deeply. His speech precipitated a question in parliament by R. Peel Dawson, Conservative MP for Londonderry County, who accused Killen of 'very questionable expressions' and invited the authorities to prosecute him. There had been fears that the literary and scientific societies at both Belfast and Galway were being used by extremists, but in the case of Killen both the college council and the chief secretary for Ireland, Chichester Fortescue, decided to take no action. 
Killen was briefly editor of the 'Northern Star', a short-lived Belfast liberal Catholic newspaper founded in 1868, which was thought to hold 'advanced views'. By the opening of the land war he had become a member of the Irish Republican Brotherhood, and with Michael Davitt and James Daly he was one of the founding members of the Land League. In November 1879 he was arrested with Davitt and Daly for making seditious speeches at a land meeting at Gurteen, co. Sligo. In his speech Killen hoped that those present were armed with rifles and that 'the days of namby-pamby speaking were over'. The prosecution received enormous publicity, both in Ireland and abroad. However, the accused were released and the case was abandoned in January 1880. 
Killen was temporarily editor of 'United Ireland' after the arrests of William O'Brien and Edward O'Donovan in 1881. Killen himself was arrested in November 1881 and sent to Dundalk gaol on suspicion of inciting refusal to pay rent. Of his arrest 'The Nation' commented that the warrants had said that these arbitrary arrests and imprisonment were intended to be used for 'certain 'dissolute ruffians and blackguards' whom it was impossible to make amenable to 'the ordinary law'; but not even by the wildest stretch of imagination can any one consider such a man as... Mr Killen... either a ruffian or a blackguard. ('The Nation', 3 Dec 1881)' Killen frequently appeared as counsel to defendants prosecuted during the land war. He went to America some time in the 1890s and contributed to nationalist newspapers both in Ireland and America. He died in poverty in a Dublin lodging house on 26 December 1916. His obituary in the 'Freeman's Journal' spoke of his knowledge of the early stages of the land agitation as 'unrivalled, and his descriptions of scenes and personages of the time... intensely entertaining'. He wrote a number of pamphlets, including 'The Incompatibles: 'Sister' England and the Irish Cinderella' (1882) and 'A Sketch of Irish History' (1886), which includes the text of 'The spirit of Irish history'. 


@@@@@


doc= 45922


Dwelly, Edward (1864-1939), lexicographer, was born on 2 February 1864 at 4 Crown Crescent, Twickenham, Middlesex, the son of Thomas Edward Dwelly and his wife, Clara Isabella, 'nee' Hill. His father worked in Cox's Bank, Charing Cross, London, and Edward began his working career there. But his ambitions did not allow him to stay for long in banking. He was strongly attracted to playing the bagpipes and to learning Scottish Gaelic, and he served in the London Scottish Volunteers, and later in similar units connected with the Argyll and Sutherland and the Seaforth regiments, playing in their pipe bands; by the 1890s he was using the name Ewen MacDonald as one more appropriate for a highland piper. 
Dwelly left London in 1891 and took up work with the Ordnance Survey in Scotland. In 1896 he married Mary MacDougall at Doune, Perthshire. She was a native Gaelic speaker. It was about this time that he began to collect Gaelic vocabulary in a systematic way, corresponding with Gaels in many highland areas and recording local usages in a detailed way, as well as information about implements and practices that were already near the end of their lifespan, including a multiplicity of names for an early-morning dram of whisky. He also made extensive use of previously published Gaelic dictionaries. 
Later in the 1890s Dwelly returned to England, and settled in the village of Skeete, near Lyminge, in Kent. Here he set up his own hand printing press, did his own compositing, and began to publish small Gaelic almanacs, which appeared from 1901 to 1908. In 1902 he acquired a larger printing press and began to publish his Gaelic dictionary in parts, issued at four-monthly intervals and paid for by subscriptions of 61/2died per issue. This appeared in thirty-three parts between 1902 and 1911, under his pseudonym, Ewen MacDonald. In 1904 the family, now with three children, moved to Herne Bay. Bound volumes of the whole dictionary were also published there, using a Gaelic name, Camus-a'-Chorra, for Herne Bay, and emphasizing that the volumes were made with paper produced in Scotland. The dictionary is copiously illustrated, many of the illustrations made by Dwelly, with advice and help from his highland correspondents. No work of this sort can be perfect, and various inaccuracies and faults of emphasis have been identified over the years, but overall it was a remarkable achievement. A revised edition appeared in 1920, with a valuable listing of place names and personal names supplied by Professor W. J. Watson, and the dictionary remained in print throughout the century, published later by Alexander MacLaren & Son in Glasgow, and after 1971 by Gairm Publications, Glasgow. 
Dwelly continued to collect Gaelic words and usages after the publication of the dictionary, and these notes were deposited in the National Library of Scotland after his death. In 1991 they were edited and published under the title 'Appendix to Dwelly's Gaelic-English Dictionary', edited by Douglas Clyne. The additions are much more numerous for initial letters A, B, and C, presumably because additions under later letters were being made before 1911. 
Having published the dictionary Dwelly turned to investigating and publishing parish records, and about a dozen books appeared in the series 'Dwelly's Parish Records'. Unpublished papers of this kind were deposited at Bristol University, and later passed to the Society of Genealogists. Dwelly seems to have led a life driven by obsession, but he was loyally supported by his wife and family. He was given a civil-list pension, which helped to keep them above the poverty line. He died at Greenside, Kenilworth Road, Fleet, Hampshire, on 25 January 1939, and was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 45923


Forde, Florrie (1876-1940), music-hall entertainer, was born in Fitzroy, Melbourne, Australia, on 14 August 1876, the daughter of Francis Lott Flanagan, monumental mason, and his wife, Phoebe. She first appeared on stage at a concert at Sydney Polytechnic in 1893, singing 'He kissed me when he left me and told me to be brave'. The following year she joined Dan Tracy's Variety Company, appearing as William in 'Black-Eyed Susan' and Pat in 'The Work Girl'. In 1895 she appeared in pantomime at the Theatre Royal, Sydney, and was at once invited to return the following year. She was to make a long career as principal boy in pantomime; these early appearances attracted the attention of actor and manager C. B. Westmacott, who billed her in his touring company as the Australian Marie Lloyd. Her first British appearance was on the 1897 August bank holiday, when she appeared (as was typical of music-hall artistes at that time) at the London Pavilion, the Oxford, and the South London Palace on the same night. 
Like many successful principal boys, Forde was well built, her size a stock joke on the halls: fellow comedian Harry Weldon used to follow her act by stepping gingerly onto the stage and then announcing 'If it'll stand Florrie Forde, it'll stand me'. Rather than exploiting a comedy of self-deprecation, however, Forde used her size to convey both glamour and authority. Her costumes glittered with sequins and embroidery, and she made herself even wider and taller with ostrich plumes, capes and trains, and high-heeled shoes. She used the freedom of wearing tights rather than skirts to march about the stage vigorously, and a characteristic prop was a jewelled cane with which she would conduct the audience in the choruses of her songs; her style was that of a benevolent sergeant-major addressing raw recruits. Signed photographs of Forde show a signature full of confident and energetic flourishes. 
While memories of Forde herself faded, she lodged her songs firmly in popular memory. 'Oh, oh, Antonio', 'Down at the Old Bull and Bush', and 'She's a Lassie from Lancashire', which featured in the royal command performance of 1912, became staples of any music-hall revival. She reached the height of her fame during the First World War: 'It's a long way to Tipperary' was not written for her, but Forde transformed the song of a homesick Irishman into one of the most poignant anthems for British troops. 'Goodbye-ee', 'Pack up your troubles', and 'Take me back to dear old Blighty' symbolized the bouncy confidence with which the nation covered its anxieties about the realities of trench warfare. 
Forde was one of the few women to launch her own touring revue company, Flo & Co. (which included Chesney Allen), and for thirty-six summers she performed on the Isle of Man, entertaining tourists with 'Has anyone here seen Kelly?' and 'They're All Single by the Seaside'. Her 'Times' obituarist remarked that her bank-holiday debut back in 1897 had been prophetic: 'If ever there was an artist who seemed to personify the spirit of a holiday crowd, it was she' ('The Times', 19 April 1940). Her energy never seemed to flag, and she appeared in the 1935 royal variety show. However, the critic James Agate wrote wistfully that her performance as principal boy in 'Ali Baba' at the London Lyceum that same year (she was nearly sixty) was perhaps a mistake: she could no longer sustain the illusion of youth, her voice was weakening, and her weight was no longer a sign of her abounding energy. Her celebrated efficiency in marshalling her audience, however, was longer lived, and the affection with which she was regarded by fellow professionals (she was widely known as Aunt Flo) ensured that she was able to take a full part in entertainment activities as the Second World War broke out. Indeed, she seemed to acquire a new following among the younger generation who had missed her prime. She died suddenly on 18 April 1940 at 21 Albyn Place, Aberdeen, where she had gone to entertain wounded soldiers in a military hospital. Her husband, Laurence Barnett ('b'. 1875/6), a fine art and antique dealer, had died in 1934. Her likeness appears on the sign of the Bull and Bush, Hampstead, which also boasts a Florrie Forde bar. Louis MacNeice wrote an epitaph for Florrie Forde, 'Death of an Actress' ('85 Poems', 1959), in which he celebrated her style: ageing, sometimes vulgar, sometimes sentimental, but expressive of a kind of innocence lost to newer forms of popular entertainment: '
she stood 

For an older England, for children toddling 

Hand in hand while the day was bright. Let the wren and robin 

Gently with leaves cover the Babes in the Wood. 

' 



@@@@@


doc= 45929


Heathcote, Sir William, fifth baronet (1801-1881), politician, was born on 17 May 1801, the only son of William Heathcote (1772-1802) and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Lovelace Bigg Wither of Manydown, near Basingstoke. His father was rector of Worting, near Basingstoke, and prebendary of Winchester. Heathcote was educated at Winchester College and Oriel College, Oxford, at which he graduated on 29 November 1821, with a first class in 'literae humaniores', John Keble being his tutor. He was a fellow of All Souls College, Oxford, from November 1822 to 1825 (having failed to be elected in 1821), becoming bachelor of civil law in 1824; he was, with Gladstone, one of its first honorary fellows in 1858. He prepared himself for the bar, but on 22 February 1825 he succeeded his uncle, Sir Thomas Heathcote, as fifth baronet and as owner of Hursley Park, Hampshire, a modest estate whose wealth came from supplying wood to the navy, a declining source as iron replaced oak in shipbuilding. On 8 November 1825 he married Caroline Perceval, youngest daughter of Lord Arden, and brother of Heathcote's schoolfriend, Arthur Perceval. She died, following a minor operation, in 1835, leaving him with three sons and a daughter. On 18 May 1841 he married Selina (died 1901), eldest daughter of Evelyn Shirley of Eatington, Warwickshire; her good cheer and energy balanced her husband's pessimism and frequent illnesses; to Gladstone he 'always appeared unusually collected and ripe for death' ('Diaries', 10.113). They had four sons and four daughters. 
From his undergraduate days, Heathcote was much influenced by Keble, whom he invited to become curate at Hursley in 1825; but Keble had to retire in 1826 for domestic reasons. In 1829 he unsuccessfully invited Keble to become vicar of Hursley and in 1836 secured his acceptance. Heathcote restored Hursley church on Tractarian principles and introduced a set of religious rules for his household. He shared Keble's loyalty to Anglicanism and his distrust of continental Catholicism. Keble somewhat moderated Heathcote's tendency to ultra-conservatism. As squire, Heathcote rather reluctantly entered politics; the only election he had to contest was that of 1865. In 1826, he was elected for Hampshire, the seat held by his uncle until 1820; he retired from the seat in 1832. In 1837 he was elected for North Hampshire, holding the seat until he resigned from it, through ill health, in 1849. He was 'in favour of all the aristocratic parts of our Constitution', with 'a horror of democracy... unbounded' and he was 'no partisan of Peel's, for centralization is a favourite hobby of his, and a paid French police'; he preferred 'the old Saxon plans'. R. H. Dana found him 'not a compromise man, but a decided Tory and Tractarian' (Awdry, 69-70, 115). He would not have dissenters as tenants, despite this principle's leading to substantial losses during the agricultural depression. In 1854, after a short period as a director of the South Western Railway, he succeeded Sir Robert Inglis as one of the MPs for Oxford University; as such he quietly represented conservative opinion in the university, in marked contrast to the constant controversy surrounding his fellow member, W. E. Gladstone (whose earlier election he had supported as chairman of his London committee). As MP he supported Gladstone's 'Oxford University Bill' of 1854, though he had strongly disliked the royal commission to whose report the bill was a response; by his amendment, congregation included all resident members of the university. In the 1860s he strongly defended religious tests. Following an illness expected in 1868 to be fatal, Heathcote resigned his seat that year and devoted himself to the life of a country squire, managing his declining woods and estate, compiling a valuable library, and being active as chairman of quarter sessions, in diocesan affairs, and as guardian and subsequently friend of H. H. M. Herbert, fourth earl of Carnarvon. He died at Hursley Park on 17 August 1881 and was buried in its mausoleum. 
Heathcote was unusual as a Tractarian in remaining a staunch Conservative; he had little to offer national politics save his courteously expressed dislike of the tendencies of his age; but his role as 'Keble's Pupil, Squire and only Patron' ('Letters and Diaries of John Henry Newman', 29.410) and his friendship with his neighbour, Charlotte M. Yonge, and other members of the Keble circle such as J. T. Coleridge, gained him an otherwise unwarranted significance. 


@@@@@


doc= 45930


Barberi, Domenico Giovanni Luigi (1792-1849), Passionist priest, was born at Pallanzana, near Viterbo, then in the Papal States, on 22 June 1792. He was the youngest of the eight children, five boys and three girls, of Giuseppe Barberi (died 1798), a small farmer, and Maria Antonia (died 1803) 'nee' Pacelli. After the death of his mother he was brought up at Merlano by his uncle Bartolomeo Pacelli, who intended him to become a farmer and his heir, and to marry. 
At the age of twenty Barberi decided to join the Congregation of Discalced Clerks of the Most Holy Cross and Passion, an order founded by St Paul of the Cross in the 1720s in devotion to the sufferings of Christ. In 1814, while he was a lay postulant at Sant' Angelo at Vetralla, a retreat house of the congregation, he received what he believed to be a divine call to undertake missionary work in England. Barberi was without formal education, but his superior noted his knowledge of the 'Vulgate', and he was clothed not as a lay novice but as a cleric at Santa Maria di Pugliano near Paliano on 14 November 1814. He made his vows on 15 November 1815 and was ordained priest on 1 March 1818. In 1821 he was appointed lector of scholastic philosophy at Vetralla. From 1826 he taught theology and philosophy at the Passionist house in Rome. Much of his writing dates from this period; his unpublished works in the Passionist archives run to 180 titles and 100 volumes, including sermons, devotional works, a tract against the revolutionaries of 1831, and an entire course of philosophy in 1557 pages. 
In 1830 Barberi was asked to teach the Cornish convert ordinand Sir Harry Trelawney, who was visiting Italy, to say mass. Two other English converts to Catholicism, the Hon. George Spencer, who later became a Passionist, and the Leicestershire squire Ambrose Phillipps De Lisle, who founded Mount St Bernard's Cistercian monastery, refired Barberi's dream of converting England; De Lisle, who was equally struck by meeting Barberi for the first time in 1828, later translated and published Barberi's 'Lament of England' (1831), a threnody on the lost glories of the Catholic church in England in the style of 'Jeremiah'. Barberi was appointed rector of a new foundation at Lucca in 1831, and in 1833 the general chapter of the order referred to its next meeting his plea for an English foundation; he was elected provincial for three years of the Passionist southern province of the Sorrowful Virgin. He became first consultor in 1836, and gave heroic service in Ceprano in the Campagna during the cholera epidemic of 1837, when he also completed a commentary on the 'Song of Solomon'. 
In 1838 De Lisle and Spencer began among the French clergy a campaign of prayer for the conversion of England. In 1839 the Passionist general chapter accepted for 'an opportune time' a memorial drawn up by Monsignor Charles Acton and presented by Barberi asking for an English Passionist foundation. Barberi was elected provincial again in 1839, but was then chosen to head a new Belgian foundation in the Chateau d'Ere; on 26 May 1840 he left Italy for ever. 
Barberi first landed in England on 27 November 1840, after being offered Aston Hall, Staffordshire, by Bishop Walsh of the central district through his assistant Nicholas Wiseman, president of Oscott. Leaving the Belgian community in 1841, Barberi moved on 17 February 1842 into Aston Hall. A church was opened in nearby Stone in 1844, in the teeth of protestant opposition: Barberi was no beauty, short and stocky, with bushy eyebrows and piercing eyes, and his Passionist habit, with its emblem of a heart and cross, was a provocation in itself. Many Catholics were also repelled by this holy fool. His preaching in Britain, on scores of missions and retreats, his principal activity apart from his work as superior, combined fluency and wit with a poor command of English pronunciation, which both edified and amused, though the story that he told a convent of nuns: 'without face it is impossible to be shaved' is probably apocryphal. He also urged a congregation to become saints, 'but not canonized ones: it costs too much' (Wilson, 345). In 1841 he published 'To the professors of the University of Oxford' in response to a letter in 'L'Univers' from John Dobree Dalgairns, whom in 1845 he received into the church. He had no direct forewarning of the most famous action of his life: on 8 October 1845, dripping wet from a coach journey from Aston on his way to Belgium, he received John Henry Newman's submission to Rome at Littlemore. He admitted Newman to the church the next day. 
At the request of the convert William Leigh, Barberi made another foundation in 1846 at Northfield House, Woodchester, where the new church was designed by Charles Hansom; the Dominicans succeeded the Passionists in 1850. The first London foundation of the order was established at Poplar House, Hampstead, in 1848. Barberi died of a heart attack at the Railway tavern, Reading, on 27 August 1849. His body was buried at Aston, but was taken to Cotton Hall in 1855 and later in the same year to his last foundation, St Anne's, Sutton, where it remained incorrupt until 1886. Spencer was buried beside him. 
A mystic who experienced visions and had a wide reputation for sanctity, Barberi's life and its central enthusiasm, the conversion of England, touched the major figures of the early Victorian Catholic revival in England as well as many unknown Catholics in Staffordshire, London, and elsewhere. His posthumously published writings include 'La divina paraninfa' (1860), 'L'Anima fedele guidata da Jesu' (1877), 'Excellence de Marie' (translated into French by Canon Francis Labis, 1899), 'Il gemito della Colomba' (1954), and 'Autobiography' (1959). He was beatified on 27 October 1963. 


@@@@@


doc= 45931


Prout, Elizabeth (1820-1864), Roman Catholic nun, was born on 2 September 1820 in Coleham, Shrewsbury, the only child of Edward Prout, a cooper, and his wife, Ann Yates. She was baptized on 17 September 1820 in St Julian's church, Shrewsbury. By 1841 she and her parents were living in New Brewery Yard, at Stone, Staffordshire. After the arrival of the Passionist priest Dominic Barberi in nearby Aston Hall in 1842, Elizabeth became a Catholic under his influence. In July 1848, on the recommendation of another Passionist, Father Gaudentius Rossi, she entered the convent of the Sisters of the Infant Jesus in Northampton. By 1849, however, she had contracted tuberculosis in her knee and had to leave the noviciate. 
Back at Stone, Elizabeth Prout recovered her health, but met with so much opposition to her Catholicism from her mother that she decided to leave home. With the help of Father Rossi she found a teaching post in St Chad's, Manchester. She was then invited by him and her parish priest, Father Robert Croskell, to co-operate with them in founding a new religious order. Then aged only twenty-nine, she was the youngest and the first Catholic Englishwoman to found a religious order in nineteenth-century England. Her congregation marked a break with tradition, offering a consecrated religious life, with choir observance for all, no dowry, and no class distinctions, to women of the working and lower middle classes who could not afford the dowries required by the established orders. With the approval of Bishop William Turner of Salford, Elizabeth and five companions professed their simple vows of poverty, chastity, and obedience on 21 November 1854. From then she was known as Mother Mary Joseph of Jesus. Both contemplative and active, Mother Mary Joseph's congregation was distinguished, like the Passionist congregation, by the spirituality of St Paul of the Cross. The congregation helped to provide Catholic education in the working-class districts of Manchester, the inhabitants of which included the poorest Irish immigrants, many of them refugees from the famine of the late 1840s. The sisters also visited the poor in their own homes, instructed converts, provided retreats for women, and worked at vestment making and other forms of church needlework. 
In 1853, with the exception of Mother Mary Joseph, all the sisters caught fever. After a period of recuperation at Newton Heath, they moved to Levenshulme in April 1854. There, as well as opening a school for the poor children of the locality, Mother Mary Joseph kept a boarding-school for lower-middle-class girls. She made other foundations in Ashton under Lyne and in Sutton and Blackbrook near St Helens, Lancashire, in 1855. She had to close her convent in Ashton in 1857 when one of her sisters plunged the congregation into debt, but returned in 1862 to conduct sewing classes and night schools for the unemployed girls and women during the Lancashire cotton famine. She hoped to open a home for factory girls in Ashton but was unable to acquire the land. 
Although lively and enterprising, Mother Mary Joseph was small in stature and physically delicate. She died of tuberculosis at the Holy Cross Convent, Sutton, on 11 January 1864 and was buried in St Anne's Monastery cemetery in Sutton three days later. During the next century her congregation opened new houses throughout the British Isles and in North and South America, Botswana, Sweden, and Papua New Guinea, totalling sixty-three houses in 1964. In 1973 her remains were exhumed from the monastery cemetery and reinterred in the adjacent church of St Anne and Blessed Dominic, Sutton, beside those of Father Dominic Barberi and Father Ignatius Spencer. The cause for her canonization was opened by Archbishop Worlock of Liverpool on 18 May 1994. 


@@@@@


doc= 45932


Somervell, Sir Arthur (1863-1937), composer and educationist, was born on 5 June 1863 at Hazelthwaite in Applethwaite, Cumberland, the youngest of six sons and nine children of Robert Miller Somervell, leather merchant and founder of Somervell Brothers (manufacturers of K Shoes), and his wife, Anne Wilson. After a short period at Uppingham School (1878-9) he entered King's College, Cambridge, where he took an ordinary BA in history (1884). While at the university he studied composition under Sir Charles Stanford and, as an active member of the Cambridge University Musical Society, was introduced to Joseph Joachim and Sir Hubert Parry. At Stanford's recommendation he worked under Friedrich Kiel (Stanford's former teacher) and Woldemar Bargiel at the Berlin Hochschule fur Musik (1884-5). On returning to England he studied (again at Stanford's recommendation) for two years with Parry (1885-7) at the Royal College of Music before he began to make a living as a teacher, composer, and examiner, joining the staff of the Royal College of Music in 1894. Somervell married Edith Lance ('b'. 1862) (herself an educationist), daughter of James Collet, civil engineer, on 5 August 1890. They had twin sons (who both joined the shoe-manufacturing company) and two daughters. On his return from Australia in 1900, where he had been examining for the Associated Board, he succeeded John Stainer as inspector of music to the Board of Education, a controversial appointment, in that W. G. McNaught, Stainer's assistant, had considered himself the natural heir. In 1920 he became chief inspector, a position that he held until retirement in 1928. The following year he was knighted for his services to music education. 
During the 1890s Somervell produced the majority of his large-scale choral works for provincial festivals -- the mass in C minor (Bach Choir, 1891) and the cantatas 'The Forsaken Merman' (Leeds, 1895), 'The Power of Sound' (Kendal, 1895), and 'Ode to the Sea' (Birmingham, 1897) -- though arguably his finest work in this genre was 'Ode on the Intimations of Immortality' (1907) from Wordsworth's 'The Prelude'. He also produced two orchestral works, an orchestral ballad 'Helen of Kirkconnel' (1893) and the suite 'In Arcady' (1897), but it was not until much later in life that he turned seriously to the composition of instrumental music, even if his stylistic vision was by then rather dated. In 1912 he produced both the symphonic variations 'Normandy' and the more nationally inspired maritime symphony 'Thalassa', replete with programme (premiered by Arthur Nikisch); the slow movement of 'Thalassa' enjoyed a modicum of popularity through its frequent hearing on occasions of national mourning. Somervell's other orchestral essays, in spite of their temporary approbation from those such as Tovey and their pedigree -- the 'Concertstuck' for violin and orchestra (1913) was written for Jelly d'Aranyi, and the later violin concerto (1932) commissioned by her elder sister, Adila Fachiri -- failed to make an impression, which Somervell blamed on his broad reputation as a composer of songs. Nevertheless, it is as a songwriter and, more particularly, as the author of several song cycles, that his name has endured. The first cycle, 'Maud' (1899), a special favourite of Harry Plunket Greene, its dedicatee, was a highly successful selection of verse from Tennyson's dark monodrama in which the tensions of love and death are skilfully retained in the narrative. In 'A Shropshire Lad' (1904) Somervell's lyrical gifts reached their zenith (even though Housman's biting irony lay beyond his grasp), while 'James Lee's Wife' (1907) and, arguably his finest achievement, 'A Broken Arc' (1923), articulate a sympathy for Browning's unorthodox, and at times complex, world of faith and morality. Indeed, such was Somervell's fascination for the song cycle that he might easily be dubbed the English Schumann, a label that would also be a fair summary of his stylistic parameters. In 1903, on the strength of his compositions, he was awarded the MusDoc at Cambridge. 
Somervell's period in office as an inspector of music coincided with a major shift in education away from utilitarianism towards educational and artistic liberalism. His philosophy of musical education, derived from Plato and Aristotle, stressed the link between music and moral values, the essence of music as rhythm (reflecting the Edwardian preoccupation with the secular 'life force'), and a vision of childhood that emphasized emotion and instinct. Somervell hoped that music could instil a sense of emancipation for the many, notably for the manual worker; in practical terms he believed that such educational aims could be realized through the development of sight-singing, familiarization with notation, and the singing of traditional and national songs (proselytized through Hadow's 'Songs of the British Islands' of 1903 and Stanford's 'National Song Book' of 1906). But most importantly Somervell campaigned tirelessly for music to be considered an indispensable constituent of the school curriculum at a time when the Board of Education remained cautious in its commitment -- work for which he is now largely forgotten. After retirement, his experience in musical education was still called upon, notably as the chairman of the School Orchestra Festivals at Queen's Hall, which he undertook from 1932 until his death at his home, 105 Clifton Hill, St John's Wood, London, on 2 May 1937. He was buried in his beloved Lake District. 


@@@@@


doc= 45934


Carter, Sir Charles Bonham- (1876-1955), colonial governor and army officer, was born on 25 February 1876 at 91 Gloucester Terrace, Kensington, London, the ninth son of Henry Bonham Carter (1827-1921), barrister and company director, and his wife, Sibella Charlotte (1836/7-1916), daughter of George Warde Norman (1793-1882), merchant and director of the Bank of England. He was educated at Clifton College in 1889-94 and at the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, where he was awarded the sword of honour. It was while at Sandhurst that he realized the lack of general education in the army, and a determination to rectify this took root. In February 1896 he was commissioned 2nd lieutenant, 2nd battalion Queen's Own Royal West Kent regiment, spending a leave in London where he studied singing. He could have sung professionally, but instead remained a gifted amateur. 
A late developer, who never shone scholastically, Bonham-Carter found his niche in the army. When the South African War broke out he was in Egypt, but in 1899 he returned home to raise a mounted infantry unit to serve in South Africa. He served for nineteen months, including a short spell as adjutant, but he was invalided home in November 1901 with enteric fever, an illness which was to have later repercussions. He was awarded the queen's medal with four clasps. 
On 22 February 1902 Bonham-Carter married Gladys Beryl, daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel Arthur Blayney Coddington RE; they had two sons. That marriage having ended in 1909, he married on 3 January 1911 Gabrielle Madge Jeanette ('b'. 1886/7), daughter of Captain Ernest Fisher. This was a marriage of great happiness and companionship, and they had a son. In 1902-4 Bonham-Carter attended the Staff College, Camberley (p.s.c.). In 1904-6 he was an instructor at Sandhurst, where he was able to develop his views on broadening the role of education in the army. For eight years from 1906 he held staff appointments; first as brigade major at Gibraltar, followed by a spell with the coast defences of southern command at Portsmouth. In 1910 he was appointed company commander in the 2nd battalion Royal West Kent regiment, stationed on the north-west frontier, India. Two years later he was posted back to Britain. 
In July 1914 Bonham-Carter was ordered to Scotland as GSO2 to help organize the Cromarty Firth as a defended port. This probably saved his life, for his unit, the 1st battalion of the Royal West Kent regiment, was almost wiped out at the onset of war. Bonham-Carter rejoined his regiment in France on 14 November, when he immediately took a draft up to the front line. On 1 January 1915 he was transferred to First Army headquarters as liaison officer to Sir Douglas Haig. A year later he was promoted brevet lieutenant-colonel and appointed GSO1 to the 7th division. He fought in the battle of the Somme, and his outstanding qualities were recognized as those of a skilled and visionary planner, who was respected and liked by both superiors and subordinates. As a result he was posted as GSO1 to the senior of two staff schools at Hesdin, where his passion for training and education in the widest sense was given full rein. 
Between April and October 1917 Bonham-Carter acted as chief of staff to General Pulteney, commander of 111 corps. In October 1917 he was posted to general headquarters to take charge of the training of the whole of the British army in France. In that year Bonham-Carter was made a DSO, being appointed CMG in 1919. After the war he received command of the 2nd battalion of the Royal Dublin Fusiliers, with whom he served in Constantinople and in India in 1919-20. On his return to England he took command of the 129th South Wessex infantry brigade, Territorial Army. Though this was only a part-time post he was typically enthusiastic, and bought a house near Bath. In 1924 the result of his enteric fever in the South African War manifested itself, and he had four major operations in two and a half years. He was appointed to the rank of major-general in 1926, and from 1927 to 1931 was director of staff duties at the War Office. He was commander of the 4th division in 1931-3, gaining the rank of lieutenant-general in 1933. From 1933 to 1936 he was director-general of the Territorial Army. During these appointments he played an important role in educational affairs within the army. He was knighted in 1935. 
In February 1936, at the age of sixty, Bonham-Carter was appointed governor and commander-in-chief of Malta. He arrived at a vital time when all was not well in the island: the constitution had been suspended for three years and the political situation was confused, with fascist Italy posing a real threat. Aware of the anti-British feeling, and appalled by the exclusiveness of the British population on the island, it was Bonham-Carter's training as a commander and staff officer that now stood him in good stead. He began by making it his business to meet the most influential people on the island, the parish priests; he also attended every village club in Malta and Gozo, where the islanders foregathered. He formed a close working relationship with Malcolm Macdonald, who in 1938 had become secretary of state for the colonies, and between them they devised the 1939 Macdonald constitution, a step towards self-government for Malta. When war broke out in 1939 Bonham-Carter remained in overall command of the island, his main task being to oversee the defence of Malta. 
In April 1940, with one year of his term as governor to run, Bonham-Carter had a major heart attack. He was forced to retire, but his contribution towards gaining the loyalty of the Maltese people during the war was acknowledged to be very great. He was appointed GCB in 1941. Charming, cultivated, a born teacher, a thinker, and a man of vision, with the common touch, he contributed much to each post throughout his life, not least to the benefit of the army. In retirement he chaired the board of governors of two schools connected with the army. He was aide-de-camp general to the king in 1938-41. Bonham-Carter died on 21 October 1955, aged seventy-nine, at his home, Durford Height, Petersfield, Hampshire. His body was cremated at Petersfield and the ashes scattered in the crematorium garden. 


@@@@@


doc= 45935


Broome, John Egerton (1901-1985), naval officer and illustrator, was born in Seattle, Washington, USA, on 23 February 1901, the younger child and only son of Louis Egerton Broome (1875-1951), an explorer, and his wife, Clara Kathleen Lake (1863-1948). His grandfather was Sir Frederick Napier Broome (1842-1896). Broome's early years were spent in Alaska, Detroit, and Panama; he went to England in 1908 and was educated at Oakwood School, near Caterham, Surrey. It was decided that a career in the Royal Navy would be suitable for him and 'there were the inevitable exams, selection boards, and then waiting in endless suspense' (private information). Broome entered the Royal Naval College, Osborne, in September 1914 and was rushed through the Royal Naval College, Dartmouth. He left in August 1917 and was appointed a midshipman on the 'Colossus', commanded by Dudley Pound (later first sea lord). Broome watched the surrender of the German high seas fleet from the 'Colossus's' foretop. 
From 1918 to 1919 Broome was a midshipman on the destroyers 'Vivacious' and 'Malaya'. Promoted to the acting rank of sub-lieutenant, he served on the 'Scimitar', taking and passing the sub-lieutenants' exam and gaining a certificate 2 in seamanship. He served as a sub-lieutenant on the 'Clematis' in 1920 and the 'Courageous' in 1922. When he returned to England in October 1922 he entered Trinity Hall, Cambridge, where he became art editor of the magazine 'Granta'. Broome left Cambridge in 1923 and, holding the acting rank of lieutenant, was sent on a submarine course. From 1924 to 1937 he spent most of the time serving on and commanding submarines, apart from two brief periods: 1928-9, when he served on the 'Tiger', and 1932-4, when he served as a lieutenant-commander on the 'Royal Oak'. In 1928 Broome married Sybil (died 1963), daughter of Admiral Nicholas; they had a son and a daughter. 
Between 1936 and 1938 Broome was an instructor at the RAF Staff College, at the Royal Naval College, Greenwich, and at Andover. At the outbreak of the Second World War he learned that at thirty-eight he was too old to continue serving in submarines. However, he recommissioned the destroyer 'Veteran' and served in the western approaches, where he was involved in convoy work under the direction of Admiral Dunbar Naismith, commander-in-chief, western approaches. At the beginning of the Second World War Broome took part in the annual operations at Narvik, Norway, in 1940, and picked up survivors after the aircraft-carrier 'Glorious' was sunk. Broome briefly served ashore under Admiral Sir Percy Noble. While working for Noble, Broome helped to implement a scheme whereby escort ships would be formed into reasonably well-balanced groups which trained and worked together under the same commander. Because of his age and experience Broome was appointed senior officer (O), with the 'Victorious' serving as the 'father' to miscellaneous escorts. In 1941 he was appointed air liaison officer at Liverpool and was promoted temporarily to captain (D) at the Liverpool base. He was appointed Escort Group 1 in the destroyer 'Keppel' at Londonderry in September 1941. 
In mid-June 1942 Broome was the senior escort commander for Convoy PQ17, which was composed of thirty-five merchant ships -- mainly American -- commanded by Commodore J. C. K. Dowding. This convoy sailed from Reykjavik on 27 June 1942 bound for Archangel as Murmansk had been virtually destroyed by German bombing raids. The close escort force commanded by Broome in the 'Keppel' joined the convoy three days later on 30 June. On 1 July the destroyers attacked U-boats sighted on the surface and on 4 July the convoy, about 130 miles north-east of Bear Island, was attacked about 7.30 p.m. by German aircraft, some of the bombs falling near the 'Keppel' and the American cruiser 'USS Wainwright'. Broome remarked that it was the 'Wainwright's' 'Fourth of July enthusiasm' as she sped round the convoy firing at the aircraft that was largely the reason the German attack failed (TNA: PRO, ADM 234/369, p. 59). A further attack was launched an hour later and the leading aircraft hit the 'Navarino' in the middle of the convoy with two torpedoes before crashing in flames just ahead of the 'Keppel'. Two other ships were torpedoed, one of which was sunk while the other, a Russian tanker, Broome found 'holed but happy'. Following this attack on the convoy Broome's impression on seeing the resolution displayed by the convoy with its escort was 'provided the ammunition lasted, PQ17 could get anywhere' (ibid., 60). 
The Admiralty believed, however, that the 'Tirpitz' and other warships were planning to attack the convoy. In the event this fear proved to be tragically unfounded. The first sea lord, Sir Dudley Pound, decided shortly after 9 p.m. that the cruisers must withdraw and the convoy scatter immediately. The decision was relayed to Rear-Admiral Hamilton, in charge of the cruiser force, at 10 p.m. The message was sent to Broome who expected to see the cruisers open fire as the enemy's masts appeared over the horizon. He decided therefore to take the escort destroyers to reinforce the cruisers and ordered the two submarines P165 and P168 to stay with the convoy and to try to attack the enemy while the rest of the escorts sailed independently to Archangel. At 10.15 p.m. on 4 July therefore Broome passed on the order for the convoy to scatter and with his destroyers sailed to join Hamilton. As the escorting destroyers parted Dowding signalled to Broome, 'Many thanks; goodbye and good hunting', to which Broome replied, 'It is a grim business leaving you here' (TNA: PRO, ADM 234/369, pp. 63, 67). Broome later described his decision to leave the convoy as the hardest decision he had ever had to make, but in the circumstances it was clearly the right one and his action was later approved by the commander-in-chief, Sir John Tovey, and Rear-Admiral Hamilton. The convoy scattered as ordered, but on 5 July it was attacked by a German aircraft and submarines. Twelve of PQ17's ships were sunk. The attacks continued over the next three days and 23 merchant ships were sunk (10 bombed, 3 torpedoed by aircraft, and 10 by U-boats); only 11 merchant ships reached Russia. For his part in the action Broome was awarded the Distinguished Service Cross early in 1943. 
Broome was appointed captain of the escort aircraft-carrier 'Avalon' in 1942 and in April 1943 he was appointed captain of the 'Begum' in which he served with the Eastern Fleet under Admiral Sir John Somerville. In February 1945 Broome was mentioned in dispatches, as the 'Begum' had sunk a Japanese submarine; and in May he was appointed commandant of 'HMS Vernon II', the shore establishment at Portsmouth. Afterwards he was captain of the 'Ramillies'. 
In 1947 Broome retired from the navy and became editor-in-chief of 'Sketch Magazine', a position he held until 1952. In the 1950s he drew a set of drawings for the Royal Navy signal school which were based on the new NATO phonetic alphabet; and he also drew the 'crossing the line' certificate presented to Princess Elizabeth when she crossed the equator in 1947. In 1969 Broome sued the author David Irving for libellous remarks he had made about him in 'The Destruction of Convoy PQ17' and won the case. He was awarded $40,000 in damages and half the costs. The libel law was changed as a result of the case. Broome was the author of five books, including 'Make a Signal' (1955) and 'Make another Signal' (1973). He also illustrated a further six books between 1936 and 1971 including 'Fabulous Admirals' by Geoffrey Lewis (1952). He was the naval adviser on several films including 'The Cruel Sea' (1953) and, with Admiral Sir Roy Foster-Brown, wrote the scripts for the television series 'The War at Sea' in 1959. He was one of the original members of the Lords Taverners. 
Broome and his wife, Sybil, were divorced in 1954, and in the same year he married Joan Featherstonhaugh (died 1996), the daughter of Bernard Crisp. They had no children. Broome moved to Nettlebed, near Henley-on-Thames, in 1960 and played an active part in village life. He died at his home, Gannock Cottage, Nettlebed, on 19 April 1985. 


@@@@@


doc= 45937


Christie, Malcolm Grahame (1881-1971), intelligence officer, was born on 27 January 1881 at Richmond Hill Road, Edgbaston, Birmingham, the son of John Alexander Christie, a bank manager from London, and his wife, Annabelle Findley. He was educated at Malvern College and at the University of Aachen, where he obtained the degree of Doktor Ingenieur, with first-class honours in chemistry. He subsequently worked for a German company manufacturing coke ovens, as general manager of its English branch in Leeds. He was an early aviator, first taking to the air before 1910. On the outbreak of the First World War he naturally joined the Royal Flying Corps, transferring to the Royal Air Force on its foundation on 1 April 1918. He stayed in the service until 1930, serving as air attache first in Washington, DC (1922-6) and then in Berlin (1927-30). Illness then forced his early retirement. 
Christie never abandoned the belief, produced by his wartime experience, that Germany constituted a permanent threat to Britain, reporting on the German clandestine rearmament during the period of the Weimar republic and writing numerous warning reports after the final withdrawal of British occupying forces from the Rhineland in 1930. On retirement he continued his observation of German revanchism, using his reputation as a pioneer airman to meet Hermann Goering and, through him, Adolf Hitler in 1932. By 1934 his reports on German secret rearmament in breach of the treaty of Versailles had caught the attention of Sir Robert Vansittart, the permanent under-secretary to the Foreign Office, whose apprehension over German revisionism had already led him to bombard the cabinet with lengthy memoranda on the German threat and to press for British rearmament. Thereafter, Christie developed what amounted to a private intelligence service for Vansittart. 
Some of his sources were overt senior figures in the German air ministry and Luftwaffe, such as Erwin Milch, Goering's deputy. Others he identified only by codenames or initials in his notes, all of which he set down in German. To judge from those that can be identified, his contacts seem to have been exclusively with members of the German conservative bureaucratic and military opposition to Hitler from whose ranks eventually came the unsuccessful attempt on Hitler's life in July 1944. It was through Christie that Vansittart was first put in touch with Konrad Henlein, leader of the Sudeten German Party in Czechoslovakia, and with Karl Goerdeler, the former mayor of Leipzig, who was to die for his part in the July 1944 conspiracy. It was from Christie that Vansittart received a warning of the imminent German remilitarization of the Rhineland in March 1936. Later in that same year he provided accurate figures of the rate of German rearmament in the air. They proved unacceptable to the air ministry for nearly a year, by which time his source had disappeared. 
In 1938, through the Sudeten German princeling Prinz von Hohenlohe, Christie conveyed to Vansittart Henlein's apparent dissatisfaction with Hitler's policy over the Sudetenland and held out the prospect of a Czech agreement with the Sudeten Germans which would have led to Henlein being able to compete for the premiership of Czechoslovakia rather than suffering the fate of becoming gauleiter of a minor German province. This prospect encouraged Lord Runciman's mediatory mission to Czechoslovakia in July 1938. Only the extremist leader Karl Frank, encouraged by the SS (rather than by the German foreign ministry, as Henlein was), could look with equanimity on the prospect of a German-Czech war in which the Sudetenland itself would be left a devastated battlefield. 
After the Munich agreement of 30 September 1938, Christie's informants were at least in part responsible for the war scare of the third week in January 1939 which led to the adoption for the first time by a British cabinet in peacetime of a commitment of the British army to a continental war, to the subsequent doubling of the Territorial Army, and then in April 1939 to conscription. By then army and naval intelligence and other members of the Foreign Office had developed their own contacts with reluctant German diplomats and generals ridden by anxiety that a war between Germany and Britain would lead to Germany's defeat. Once war broke out, Christie's sources were involved for a time in the many different approaches made to Britain by sections of the German opposition to Hitler. But Winston Churchill's assumption of the premiership in May 1940 and the defeat of France led to an atmosphere in which such approaches were declared unwelcome, the more so as it became difficult from a British viewpoint to distinguish between Hitler's achievements and the opposition's conditions for making an attempt to overthrow him. From May 1940 Vansittart's private intelligence activities, and with them Christie's work, fade from the scene. 
Christie was to survive to the age of ninety. However, apart from a privately printed memoir by T. P. Conwell-Evans, one of his former British collaborators, 'None so Blind' (1947), his role in obtaining intelligence about Nazi Germany remained unknown until his family deposited his papers in Churchill College, Cambridge. 
On the German side, Christie's status as a semi-official contact with British authorities seems to have been an open secret, though he was never, as is often stated, a member either of the Secret Intelligence Service or of the 'Z' organization. The question as to how far he was a victim of deliberate misinformation (as for example in the case of the Hohenlohe-Henlein contacts or in some of his early information from Erwin Milch) remains open and probably always will. Nor was he the sole source of Vansittart's remarkable intelligence from Europe. But his steady and accurate reportage had a great deal to do with Vansittart's uncanny ability accurately to predict the development of German foreign policy, the more so as Britain's official Secret Intelligence Service was crippled by lack of funds and by the successive loss of and penetration of its principal centres of attack on the German target. 
Little is known about Christie's later years. However, according to his obituary in 'The Times', he devoted his energy and private means to encouraging young musicians 'in their early struggle for recognition'. He threw himself from a window on 3 November 1971 and was found dead on arrival at St Stephen's Hospital, Chelsea, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 45938


Villiers, Sir Charles English Hyde (1912-1992), merchant banker, was born on 14 August 1912 at 21 Ampthill Square, St Pancras, London, the only son and the older of the two children of Algernon Hyde Villiers (1886-1917), a stockbroker, grandson of the fourth earl of Clarendon, and his wife, Beatrice Eleanor ('c'.1891-1978), daughter of Herbert Woodfield Paul MP. His father was killed in action in November 1917, and his mother later married Walter Durant Gibbs, fourth Baron Aldenham, and had two more sons. 
Charles Villiers was educated at Eton College, and after working for a few months as assistant to the Revd 'Tubby' Clayton, founder of Toc H, he spent two years working for the merchant bank Glyn Mills before going to New College, Oxford, in 1933 to read philosophy, politics, and economics, graduating with a second in 1936. He returned to Glyn Mills, and on 9 June 1938 he married Pamela Constance Flower (1913/14-1943), daughter of Major John Flower: she died, with the child, at the birth of their second son on 17 October 1943. 
After the outbreak of the Second World War Villiers fought at Dunkirk with the Grenadier Guards, and was later transferred to the Special Operations Executive. In 1944 he was parachuted into Austria and Yugoslavia, where he helped to organize the Yugoslav resistance: in 1970 the Yugoslav government awarded him the Order of the People in recognition of this. By the end of the war he had reached the rank of lieutenant-colonel. On 1 October 1946 Villiers remarried: his second wife was Countess Marie Jose de la Barre d'Erquelinnes ('b'. 1915/16), daughter of Count Henri de la Barre d'Erquelinnes of Jurbise, Belgium: they had two daughters. After the war he returned to banking, joining Helbert Wagg & Co., and specialized in corporate finance. He was made a partner in 1948, and when the bank merged with J. Henry Schroder & Co. in 1960 to become Schroder Wagg, Villiers became a managing director. 
In 1968 Villiers was appointed managing director of the Industrial Reorganization Corporation (IRC), set up by the Labour government in 1966 under the chairmanship of Sir Frank Kearton to rationalize industries and promote mergers, in order to improve the international competitiveness of British industry. Villiers was very successful in handling these delicate negotiations, and the IRC usually achieved the result it wanted, including the merger of GEC and English Electric and the creation of British Nuclear Design and Construction in 1968, and British United Trawlers in 1969. When the IRC was wound up in 1971 he returned to merchant banking as chairman of Guinness Mahon & Co. Ltd. He also served as chairman of the Northern Ireland Finance Corporation from 1972 to 1973. He was knighted in 1975 for services to industry. 
Villiers succeeded Sir Monty Finniston as chairman of the British Steel Corporation (BSC) in 1976, and spent four difficult years trying to rationalize the steel industry and ensure its survival at a time when BSC's markets were crumbling, and the crisis in the steel industry was deepening. He embarked on a programme of closures, and clashed with the select committee on nationalized industries in November 1977 when he refused to disclose details of his plans to steer BSC through the crisis. In March 1978 his strategy for the future, 'The road to viability', which abandoned the ten-year development strategy adopted in 1973, was presented to parliament; by then he was about to announce losses of $443 million for 1977-8. He agreed to delay financial reconstruction until BSC broke even, which in June 1979 he predicted would be in March 1980, and continued closing loss-making plants -- eleven steelworks altogether. But Sir Keith Joseph, the new secretary of state for industry, announced that the government would not finance BSC losses after March 1980. BSC was still losing $1 million a day, and after Villiers closed the Consett steelworks in November 1979, with the loss of 4000 jobs, and announced a further 52,000 redundancies, and a pay rise of only 2 per cent, at a time when the rate of inflation was 17 per cent, union opposition to the reduction in the size of the steel industry culminated in a three-month national steel strike, starting in January 1980. The strike cost BSC over $200 million, and led steel-using industries to switch permanently to imported steel. 
Villiers's strategy began to work under his successor, Ian MacGregor, appointed in 1980 after the strike ended, but only when the government, realizing that BSC might be forced into liquidation, reversed its stand and pumped billions of pounds of public money into the company to ensure its survival with a view to future privatization. Until 1989 Villiers remained chairman of BSC (Industry) Ltd, the subsidiary set up to encourage new industries to move into former steelmaking areas, to provide jobs for former steelworkers. Villiers published 'Start Again Britain' (1984), an analysis of the problems facing British industry. His interests included Anglo-American relations, and in 1985 he set up the British American project for the successor generation. He was a trustee of the Royal Opera House, and chairman of the Theatre Royal, Windsor. He died from cancer on 22 January 1992 at his home, Blacknest House, Sunninghill, Ascot, Berkshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 45940


Agnew, Sir Andrew (1882-1955), oil industrialist, was born on 28 February 1882 at 30 Roxburgh Street, Greenock, the son of Andrew Agnew, grocer, and his wife, Margaret. He was educated at Holmscroft School in Greenock. In 1912 he married Belle McKissock, daughter of James McClymont of Girvan; they had two sons. 
Agnew's career in the oil industry began in 1903 when he went to the Far East as a member of the staff of Messrs Syme & Co., agents for marketing Shell oil in the Straits Settlements. After two years he was promoted to take charge of their petroleum agency work. When Asiatic Petroleum, Royal Dutch Shell's marketing company, opened its own office in Singapore in 1908, Agnew transferred to their staff and in 1911 was appointed manager and Shell's representative in the Singapore area. During his time in Singapore, Agnew was very active in the local community, being a member of the legislative council of the Straits Settlements and a justice of the peace. He also held positions on the Singapore Harbour Board and the Singapore chamber of commerce. In the First World War Agnew remained in the Far East, where he was commandant of the Singapore civil guard and chairman of the Mesopotamian river craft committee, which was responsible for dispatching workers and supplies to Mesopotamia. In 1918 he was made a CBE for this work, and was one of the first to be awarded this new distinction. 
In 1919 Agnew returned to London, where he remained for the rest of his career. He was appointed manager of the Anglo-Saxon Petroleum Company, a subsidiary of Shell, in 1920. Two years later he was made a director of Shell Transport and Trading (one of the Shell group's two parent companies), as well as of Asiatic Petroleum and Anglo-Saxon Petroleum. In 1924 he was appointed to the board of N. V. de Bataafsche Petroleum Maatschappij, Shell's Dutch company. In 1935 Agnew became managing director of Shell Transport and Trading, a position he held until ill health forced him to retire in 1953. His style of leadership was very personal. He was in constant correspondence with Shell offices throughout the world. All staff returning to London on leave were interviewed very thoroughly by him to ascertain detailed facts about their areas of business. He was also in close contact with the other Shell managing directors, especially with Frederick Godber, managing director from 1929 and chairman from 1946, with whom he had a family connection, as one of his sons married one of Godber's daughters. Agnew was energetic in his work, and a man of action rather than of long-term planning. He was described by a colleague as 'the very picture of a rugged Scot, and his actions did not belie his appearance' (Oriel, 215). His interests lay in dealing with immediate market shares and pricing, and negotiations with governments, especially during the difficult trading conditions of the depression. He played a key role, along with Sir John Cadman, chairman of the Anglo-Persian Oil Company, in the organization of the so-called 'As-Is' oil cartel, agreed at Achnacarry Castle, Scotland, in 1928, and this largely determined the strategies of the major oil companies in the 1930s (Ferrier, 463). 
Agnew's interests and influence extended beyond Shell to the wider petroleum industry. In 1923 the UK government proposed a petroleum bill, much of which was unacceptable to the industry. Agnew was chosen by the oil companies as one of two representatives to conduct their negotiations, which were ultimately successful. During the Second World War Agnew was chairman of the Petroleum Board, being unanimously nominated for the position by the British oil companies. The board ensured that competition between the oil companies was suspended in order to provide adequate supplies of oil. The success of this endeavour was due largely to Agnew's extensive knowledge of the oil industry and the respect that he commanded within it. He was elected to serve as president of the Institute of Petroleum, the industry's trade body, from 1946 to 1948. 
Agnew received many honours in addition to being made a CBE. He was knighted in 1938, was created a Commander of the order of Orange Nassau in 1939 and a chevalier of the Legion d'honneur, and was awarded the United States medal of freedom with silver palm. He died of a cerebral thrombosis on 4 March 1955 at his home at Glenlee Park, Kells, Kirkcudbrightshire, having suffered from ill health for the previous few years, and was buried two days later in Kells cemetery. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 45943


Owen, Daniel (1836-1895), novelist, was born on 20 October 1836 at 53 Long Row, Maes-y-dref, Mold, Flintshire, the youngest of the seven children of Robert Owen ('c'.1799-1837), miner, and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Edwards (1796-1881), laundress. He was only a few months old when his father and two of his brothers were killed in a pit disaster at Argoed colliery near their home, and his early years were marked by poverty which denied him a consistent formal education, although cultural and spiritual support was provided by the Calvinistic Methodist chapel in New Street, Mold, which the family frequented. In his early teens Owen was taken on as an apprentice tailor by Angel Jones, a deacon of that chapel. In his later years Owen referred to the tailor's workshop as 'a kind of college' where he experienced an intellectual and cultural awakening. 
During the 1850s Owen began competing in local eisteddfodau and published poems of moderate value under the 'nom de plume' Glaslwyn. His first venture as a prose writer was a serialized translation of a popular American temperance novel in 1859. Under the influence of his minister and mentor, Roger Edwards, Owen began to preach, and in 1865 he entered Bala Theological College with a view to becoming a minister of religion. His domestic circumstances (he remained unmarried and felt financially responsible for his mother and sister) forced him to leave without completing his course in 1867, and he returned to his craft as a tailor. He then settled into a life of public prominence in Mold in religious, political, and cultural circles, a life which left little room for any advance in his literary development, although he did publish a couple of character sketches in 1870, including his controversial 'Darlun' ('Portrait') of a prominent Calvinistic Methodist minister. His social career was cut short by a serious illness in 1876, but as his closest colleagues saw this as an opportunity to wake his dormant literary talents, this was also the year when his career as a writer began in earnest. Roger Edwards was the editor of his denomination's monthly journal, 'Y Drysorfa' ('The treasury'), and Owen published a series of sermons based on biblical characters in its pages during 1877. Religious hypocrisy and self-delusion were a recurring theme, thus anticipating a major preoccupation of his later work. 
Owen's first attempt at fiction appeared in the same publication the following year. 'Cymeriadau ymhlith ein cynulleidfaoedd' ('Characters among our congregations') combined portraiture with a story about the election of deacons. This short work included types that recurred in all his works, including the bombastic religious hypocrite and the plain-speaking Christian of the older generation. The sermons and story were published in a well-received volume, 'Offrymau neilltuaeth' ('The offerings of seclusion'), in 1879. By then Owen's next work, his first novel, was being serialized in 'Y Drysorfa'. 'Y dreflan' ('The town') ran for two years and was published in book form in 1881. Originally intended as a series of twelve sketches, 'Y dreflan' generated a momentum of its own as Owen became increasingly aware that his medium was a powerful vehicle for satirical social commentary. But it was his next novel, 'Hunangofiant Rhys Lewis, gweinidog Bethel' ('The autobiography of Rhys Lewis, minister of Bethel'), which ensured him fame and a small fortune. After its serialization in 'Y Drysorfa' from 1882 to 1884, Owen published the volume at his own expense in 1885 and then sold the copyright to Hughes & Son of Wrexham. The proceeds enabled him to build a new home for himself and his sister Leah. Owen made extensive use of his own life story in 'Rhys Lewis'; he had recently lost his mother and his elder brother, David. The novel's enormous popularity owed much to Owen's superb evocations of life in Victorian Wales, and some of its characters and sayings became assimilated into Welsh popular culture. The narrator's mother and brother, Mari and Bob Lewis, are two of his most famous characters, and the first half of the novel is charged by a series of debates between the conservative evangelical mother and her radical son. 
A miscellaneous collection of poems and prose, 'Y siswrn' ('The scissors'), appeared in 1886, by which time Owen had his own business as tailor and outfitter. 'Profedigaethau Enoc Huws' ('The trials of Enoc Huws'), published in 1891, is the novelist's finest achievement, and although it is not without blemish, its status as a major novel in the realist style cannot be denied. Originally conceived as a sequel to 'Hunangofiant Rhys Lewis', it shows similarities to 'Y dreflan' in terms of satirical social commentary, but Owen displays a greater authorial confidence and arrogance in 'Profedigaethau Enoc Huws' than was evident in the earlier works. The opening chapter, 'Cymru lan' ('Fair Wales'), confronts the tendency in Victorian Wales to present idealized and airbrushed images of Welsh life, and proclaims the author's unwillingness to compromise artistic and moral integrity. The world portrayed in the novel is one where deceit, hypocrisy, and self-delusion, as well as their more innocent and amusing cousins, misunderstanding and speaking at cross-purposes, are endemic. The church and the world alike are riddled with hypocrisy, most memorably incorporated in the person of Captain Richard Trefor, the outwardly respectable and religious mine owner, who uses chapel membership as a means to deceive prospective investors in his mining companies. Despite what some twentieth-century critics would regard as weaknesses in plot and structure, Owen used the realist novel with conviction and imagination in interpreting his life and times and places. 
Owen's final novel, 'Gwen Tomos, merch y Wernddu' ('Gwen Tomos, daughter of Wern-ddu'), was written during a period of failing health. Although a popular success, it lacks the vigour and conviction of his earlier work, and the brilliant contemporary observer has settled for being an accomplished storyteller. The strong strain of reminiscence is evident also in the stories which he wrote during his final years. 'Gwen Tomos' was published in 1894, and 'Straeon y pentan' ('Fireside tales') the following year. Despite his indifferent health, Owen participated in local politics during his final years, becoming a member of the Mold local board of health in 1889. He was elected a member of the new urban district council in 1894 and was its first chairman. He died on 22 October 1895 at 23 New Street, Mold, and was buried in Mold two days later. After his death a fund was established to erect a memorial to Wales's foremost novelist, and Goscombe John was commissioned to create the statue which stands by the entrance to the public library in Mold. The esteem with which he has continued to be held was reflected in a number of valuable memorial lectures, published between 1976 and 1984. 


@@@@@


doc= 45949


Beckett, Ronald Brymer (1891-1970), administrator in India and art historian, was born on 17 January 1891 in Micklefield Terrace, Rawdon, Yorkshire, the son of James Robertson Beckett (1855-1923), manager in a firm of silk and woollen merchants, and his wife, Annie Bertha Murray (1864-1952), a schoolteacher, the daughter of a Scottish land surveyor. When Beckett was four the family moved to Pocklington, where Beckett helped at a local farm. For the sake of his health, after an attack of measles he was sent at the age of six to the Talbot Heath School for Girls at Bournemouth, before attending the Highbury House School at St Leonards and then Woodbridge School. After achieving the highest grades in England in his higher certificate in 1907, he proceeded to Lincoln College, Oxford, where he cultivated a wide range of interests, learning Basque and Erse, joining the Gaelic League, studying the Elizabethan poets, and taking up morris dancing. He also developed a deep love of art, learning to paint himself, visiting Florence and Venice, and reading Vasari. 
Beckett's preoccupation with extracurricular interests was such that he attained only a third-class degree in classics, a result which shocked him as he had previously won several scholarships during his school career. On his father's advice he decided to enter the Indian Civil Service. After a probationary year at University College, London, he sailed for India, arriving at Bombay shortly after the outbreak of the First World War. He was assistant commissioner at Jullundur, where he was desperately lonely, before becoming tutor to the nawab of Mamdot, where he became a highly proficient polo player. Attempts to return to England and join the war were blocked by his superiors; when he did return in 1917 he was passed not fit for the army. He joined the Middle Temple and read for the bar, although he was not called until November 1936. On 12 November 1918 he married his second cousin Norah Ford Anderson (1891-1972), daughter of John Ford Anderson, a doctor, and his wife, Gabrielle Coudron; she was secretary of the prisoners of war in Turkey committee set up after the disaster in Kut in Mesopotamia, with which he had assisted during his leave. 
After recovering from a bout of the worldwide influenza epidemic, Beckett returned to India in January 1918, and was posted to Amritsar as city magistrate. There Beckett and his wife were involved in containing the demonstrations which preceded the events in Amritsar in mid-April 1919: Beckett, unarmed, with only three men, held back a large crowd from the Hall Bridge; he was later put in charge of escorting British and Indian women (including his wife) to the shelter of the fort. Both of the Becketts subsequently defended the actions of General Dyer, which they believed had saved their own and many other lives. Beckett was later transferred to Rawalpindi and then to Lahore, where he served as under-secretary to the Punjab government; further legal appointments followed. The family finances were tight, and Beckett attempted to supplement his pay by writing two novels and dealing in stamps and postmarks, becoming a philatelic expert. He also collected Indian art and sculpture; his collection of Mughal miniatures was sold to the Metropolitan Museum in New York in the 1960s. 
Norah Beckett twice returned to England in the 1920s, to give birth to the couple's two daughters, Antoinette and Elisabeth. Both were subsequently educated in England, visited by their parents during the long vacations which Beckett's legal career ensured him. In the early 1930s he held a variety of senior judicial positions in Lahore and Delhi; in 1932 he was chosen to deal with the serious problem of the maharaja of Alwar, who was removed from his position and replaced by his son. From February 1936 to February 1937 he was seconded to the India Office to draft the part of the 'India Act' of 1935 which dealt with Burma; his efforts were praised on the BBC Third Programme. Beckett returned to Lahore in 1937 and was appointed puisne judge in 1941; in 1946 he retired despite pleas to continue, declaring that he had given enough of his life to India. He attracted friendship among Indians and loyalty from his Indian servants, one of whom remained with him for twenty-nine years. 
On his return to England Beckett rejoined University College, London, studying psychology and philosophy, and also pursued his interest in art. He put on an exhibition of the work of Blake and Hogarth at the Tate Gallery, London, and published pioneering catalogues of the paintings of Hogarth (1949) and Lely (1951). His art historical research culminated in a magisterial edition of John Constable's correspondence (1962-8), in which he combined an immaculate transcription of the letters with a comprehensive chronological and explanatory narrative: it was described by Kenneth Clark as a masterpiece of editing. An additional volume, devoted to Constable's more public utterances, followed in 1970. He carried out much of his research by commuting his pension and buying drawings and paintings by English artists, including forgeries so he could learn to spot the differences between genuine and fake. His work on Blake was not published but is held by the Victoria and Albert Museum. He also published 'Constable and the Fishers' (1952), containing the correspondence between the artist and his close friend John Fisher. 
The Becketts lived first in Eldon Road, Kensington, where Beckett built up his art collection and received a constant stream of visitors. When this proved too much for them, they moved to 7 Farncombe Road, Worthing. In 1969 they moved to a bungalow, The Chanonry, in the orchard of their daughter Elisabeth, at Northmoor in Oxfordshire. There Beckett died on 1 December 1970, with his daughter beside him, calling on his wife's name. She survived him for just over a year. His remains were cremated and the ashes interred at Northmoor. Fair-skinned with red hair, Beckett stood 6 feet tall, and was always an elegant figure with a quietly charming manner. 


@@@@@


doc= 45951


Armstrong, Joseph (1816-1877), locomotive engineer, was born on 21 September 1816 at Bewcastle, Cumberland, the son of Thomas Armstrong (1785-1844), yeoman and later farm bailiff, and his wife. Joseph and his three older brothers went with their parents in 1817 to Canada where his brother George ['see below'] was born, before the family returned in 1824 to Newburn-on-Tyne in Northumberland. From 1824 Joseph attended Bruce's School in Newcastle and as he grew up he became interested in the locomotives at work in the local collieries. On leaving school at fourteen he was apprenticed to Robert Hawthorn, the engineer at Walbottle Colliery, and came to know George Stephenson and Timothy Hackworth, who encouraged him in his chosen career. He became an engine driver on the Stockton and Darlington Railway in 1836 and four years later moved to the Hull and Selby Railway as locomotive shed foreman. In the course of several further moves, including a time with the Shrewsbury and Chester Railway, he was married in Chester in 1848 to Sarah Burdon (died 1885), whose brother John married Joseph's sister Rebecca. By 1853 he was locomotive superintendent at the Stafford Road works of the Shrewsbury and Birmingham Railway in Wolverhampton. 
Joseph's long association with the Great Western Railway (GWR) began in 1854 when the works became part of the GWR's northern division and he continued in charge under Daniel Gooch, the locomotive superintendent of the GWR at Swindon. At that time the Wolverhampton works dealt with small-scale maintenance and repair, in contrast to Swindon, which undertook most of the broad gauge locomotive manufacture and repair for the GWR. The same policy was adopted for the standard gauge works at Wolverhampton where Joseph had first to reorganize and extend the works, while keeping as much as possible of his existing stock in reasonable running order. Over the next few years eighty-six standard gauge locomotives were built for him at Swindon and elsewhere, while almost two hundred more were acquired by amalgamations with a number of smaller railway companies. In the ten years from 1854 to 1864 he transformed a small repair shop into a major manufacturing facility. More than two hundred new or in-service locomotives came into his care, and after 1859 twenty more were built to his own designs. In 1864 Gooch and his carriage and wagon superintendent at Swindon retired and Joseph Armstrong was appointed to both posts. His brother George succeeded him as divisional locomotive superintendent at Wolverhampton. 
The move to Swindon brought greatly increased responsibilities and some unique problems. The Great Western Railway and its locomotives were built to the 7 foot broad gauge while the rest of Britain's railways (with minor exceptions) adopted the narrower gauge of 4 foot 81/2 inches recommended in 1846 by the gauge commission as the standard. It was clear long before 1864 that the standard gauge must prevail, and Joseph built only a few types of broad gauge locomotive. During his thirteen years at Swindon he designed six types of standard gauge locomotive, of which almost six hundred examples were built, some of them convertible to broad gauge; he introduced convertible coaching stock, and he witnessed the spread of the mixed gauge on the GWR which heralded the end of the broad gauge in 1892. 
Joseph Armstrong's concern for the welfare of his workforce led him to introduce a number of measures to improve health and safety in the Swindon works, including better lighting and ventilation, and the provision of safe crossings over the main running lines. Having served as president of the Swindon Mechanics' Institute and chairman of the new town local board, a member of council of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, and a local preacher in the Wesleyan Methodist church, in April 1877 he was elected a member of the Institution of Civil Engineers. He was by then in charge of almost 13,000 employees and the strain had begun to affect his health. He was persuaded to take a holiday, but on his way to Scotland Armstrong collapsed and died at Matlock Bank, Matlock, Derbyshire, on 5 June 1877 at the age of sixty, leaving a widow, four sons, and three daughters. He was buried in St Mark's churchyard, New Swindon. Two of Joseph's sons and one of his grandsons also became locomotive engineers. 

George Armstrong (1822-1901), locomotive engineer, was born in Canada on 5 April 1822 and after the family's return to England in 1824 he grew up at Newburn-on-Tyne. Like his brother Joseph he left school at fourteen to work under Robert Hawthorn at Walbottle Colliery and in 1840 followed Joseph to the Hull and Selby Railway where John Gray was the locomotive superintendent. Both Armstrongs moved with Gray to Brighton in 1845, but after a short time George went to northern France, returning to England in 1848 because of the unsettled conditions there, and rejoined his brother on the Shrewsbury and Chester Railway. He assisted his brother as locomotive foreman, and when Joseph was promoted to Swindon in 1864 George succeeded him as locomotive superintendent of the GWR northern division at Wolverhampton, with William Dean as his assistant. 
The northern division included no fewer than six railways acquired by the GWR at various times. George had to maintain many different locomotive types, and he embarked on a programme of building larger numbers of fewer basic types. In 1868 Joseph Armstrong called William Dean to Swindon and made him his chief assistant, to the considerable chagrin of his brother; Joseph, however, was determined to avoid any hint of nepotism, and when he died in 1877 Dean was appointed to succeed him. George refused to take orders from Dean, saying 'I only give orders, not take them', and it is to Dean's credit that he allowed George almost complete autonomy at Wolverhampton. George reigned supreme for a total of thirty-three years, during which time 626 engines were built and a further 513 were more or less extensively rebuilt. 
In 1866 George was elected a member of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, and although not as strongly religious as his brother he was a member of the Methodist church. He never married, and even after his retirement in 1897 at the age of seventy-five he maintained his contact with the works. On a very hot day, 11 July 1901, he collapsed and died at the flower show held in Wolverhampton's West Park. He was buried four days later at Bushbury church. 


@@@@@


doc= 45955


Eckford, Henry (1775-1832), naval architect and shipbuilder, was born on 12 March 1775 at Kilwinning, in Ayrshire, Scotland, the son of John Eckford and his wife, Janet Black. At the age of sixteen, in 1791, he went to Canada and began to study the principles and practice of ship design in the Quebec yard of his uncle John Black. After five years he moved to New York where he soon found work in a shipyard. He married, on 13 April 1799, Marion, daughter of Joseph and Miriam Bedell, and in the following year set up his own shipyard. 
Eckford's ships came to be known for their strength and speed, and after the outbreak of war in 1812 he built a number of notable US Navy warships, being appointed naval constructor at the Brooklyn navy yard in 1817. He resigned three years later and resumed work in his own yard, building the 'Robert Fulton' which made the first successful seagoing voyage by steam power from New York to New Orleans and Havana in 1822. He became interested in politics and made some influential friends, two of whom married his daughters. In 1825 the failure of an insurance company lost him much of his fortune, and three years later personal tragedy followed when three of his children died. The last ship he built was a corvette in which he sailed to Europe in 1831. The ship was bought by the sultan of Turkey who put Eckford in charge of the imperial naval shipyard, but in the following year he fell ill and died at Constantinople, on 12 November 1832. His body was returned to the United States in a barrel of spirits. 


@@@@@


doc= 45956


Hoban, James (1762-1831), architect and designer, was born in Callan, co. Kilkenny, Ireland, the son of Edward Hoban and his wife, Martha 'nee' Bayne. Details of his early life are not known, but he studied drawing under Thomas Ivory in one of the schools of the Dublin Society, and in 1780 was awarded a premium for drawings of architectural details. He was then employed, probably as a joiner, in the construction of several Dublin buildings, including the royal exchange (now the city hall) and the custom house. Seeking more opportunity for advancement, he emigrated to the United States after the American War of Independence and settled first in Philadelphia, where in May 1785 he advertised his services as a joiner and carpenter. 
Two years later Hoban moved to South Carolina, where he met George Washington, who was then on a tour of the southern states. This led to his selection as one of the nine architects who took part in the competition of 1792 to design the proposed federal public buildings. He won the competition for the design of the President's House, later called the White House, and was appointed to supervise its construction at a salary of 300 guineas a year. He thereupon moved to Washington, where he stayed for the rest of his life. The principal elevation was originally based on plate 51 in James Gibbs's 'Book of Architecture' (1728), and bore a distinct resemblance to Leinster House (1751) in Dublin. Subsequent changes, including some suggested by Washington and Thomas Jefferson, and later additions by Benjamin Latrobe which were executed by Hoban in 1824 and 1829, resulted in the present well-known facade. The corner-stone of the building was laid by President Washington on 13 September 1793, and Hoban assisted at the ceremony as master of the federal masonic lodge, which he had helped to organize a few days before. The building, still unfinished at the time, was first occupied by President Adams in 1800, and Hoban continued in charge until its initial completion in 1803. 
At the same time Hoban was employed at intervals to superintend the construction of the Capitol, until Latrobe became the surveyor of public buildings in 1803; he also engaged in the construction of other public and private buildings, and the purchase of numerous plots of land, in and around the federal capital. By 1799 he was captain of the Washington artillery, and in January of the same year he married Susannah Sewell, with whom he had ten children, one of whom, James ('c'.1808-1846), became the district attorney in Washington. During the presidency of Jefferson (1801-9), who was himself an accomplished architect, Hoban got few government commissions, but by that time he was no longer dependent on them as a major source of income. On the incorporation of the city of Washington in 1802 he was elected to the city council and remained a member until his death. 
Towards the end of the Anglo-American War a detachment of British forces under General Robert Ross marched on Washington and burnt some of the principal buildings, including the Capitol and the White House. The interior of the White House was destroyed but the stonework survived, and Hoban supervised the work of rebuilding from 1815 to 1829. During the same period he was responsible for the design and construction of the state department and war department buildings, commenced in 1818. The 'Dictionary of American Biography' describes him as 'quiet and conciliatory, but self-respecting and capable of firmness when occasion demanded' and refers to his 'knowledge, abilities and probity' as a 'solid citizen and patriarch of the city'. He died in Washington on 8 December 1831, leaving an estate valued at $60,000 ('DAB'). His grave was later moved to Mount Olivet cemetery in the city of Washington after it was founded as a Roman Catholic cemetery in 1858. 


@@@@@


doc= 45957


Holland, John Philip (1841-1914), inventor of the modern submarine, was born on 24 February 1841 in Castle Street, Liscannor, co. Clare, Ireland, the son of John Holland, a coastguard, and Mary Scanlon. Educated first at Limerick, he was prevented by poor eyesight from going to sea, so he took the initial vows of the teaching order of the Christian Brothers and studied at their schools in Ennistimon and Limerick. After 1858 he taught in a number of their schools in Ireland, but in 1872 his family emigrated to America and a year later he obtained a dispensation to quit the order on the grounds of ill health and followed his parents. He had become interested at an early age in the possibility of constructing submersible boats and, as an Irish patriot, saw how they might be used against the ships of the British navy in the fight for Irish independence. During the previous century there had been various proposals, of a more or less fanciful nature, for boats to go under water, but the technical problems were, at that time, insurmountable. By 1870 Holland had drawn up plans for such boats, and while working as a teacher in Paterson, New Jersey, he developed his projected submarine to the stage where he felt he could offer it to the United States Navy; in 1875 they rejected it as the fantastic scheme of a civilian landsman. The Fenians in America, through Clan na Gael, decided to finance his first experimental one-man craft which was tested with some success in 1878. They then gave him a further substantial sum to build a full-size submarine which they hoped would be capable of crossing the Atlantic and destroying the British fleet. He gave up teaching to build the 'Fenian Ram', completed in 1881, which was 31 feet long with a displacement of 19 tons and a crew of three. The first to be equipped with ballast tanks, horizontal rudders, and weight compensation, it was extensively tested in the waters of New York harbour and in 1883 dived to a depth of 60 feet. The Fenians were very impressed and took it out of the inventor's hands, but they were unable to achieve any of their objectives and abandoned it soon afterwards. 
Holland was married on 17 January 1887 in Brooklyn, New York, to Margaret Foley of Paterson, New Jersey. He continued his work but encountered various difficulties until in 1895 the J. P. Holland Torpedo Boat Company, which he had set up in 1893, was awarded a contract for $150,000 to build a submarine for the United States Navy. The 'Plunger' was, however, not built to his specification, the navy insisting on incorporating its own ideas, and it was not a success. With only $5000 of his own capital left he began to build the 'Holland' to his own design, 54 feet in length, 10 feet in diameter and with a submerged displacement of 75 tons. It was fitted with a petrol engine for surface propulsion and electric storage batteries and motor for running submerged. Armed with one torpedo tube and a pneumatic dynamite gun, it was launched in 1898 and, after searching tests, was purchased in 1900 by the United States government. A few months later six more were ordered, and within a short time further orders were placed by Russia, Japan, and Britain; five submarines were built under licence by Vickers at Barrow in Furness in 1902-3. One of these, HMS 'Holland No 1', was lost under tow in 1913 but was raised and restored at the Royal Navy Submarine Museum in Gosport. 
To Holland, therefore, belongs the credit for developing the submarine to a state of practical utility, and in December 1900 he contributed an article on 'The submarine boat and its future' to the 'North American Review', in which he foresaw many of the modern uses of the submarine in science, commerce, and exploration. This success was marred by animosity between Holland and the financial backers of the reorganized Electric Boat Company, and he turned his attention to other areas of research. In 1904 he invented a respirator for use in escaping from submarines underwater, and towards the end of his life he engaged in experiments in aeronautics. He died on 12 August 1914 in Newark, New Jersey, survived by his wife and four children. 


@@@@@


doc= 45958


Kennelly, Arthur Edwin (1861-1939), electrical engineer, was born on 17 December 1861 at Colaba, near Bombay, India, the only son of David Joseph Kennelly and Kathrine (or Cathrine) Heycock. His father, a native of Cork, Ireland, was then harbour master at Bombay; he later became a barrister in England and king's counsel in the province of Nova Scotia, Canada. Kennelly's mother died a few years after her son's birth. Kennelly was educated at University College School, London (1873-6), and at other private schools in England, Scotland, France, and Belgium. He entered the London office of the Society of Telegraph Engineers (later the Institution of Electrical Engineers) as an office boy and, having studied electrophysics in his spare time, was in 1876 appointed a telegraph operator in the Eastern Telegraph Cable Company based in London. For the next ten years he was engaged in submarine cable work, latterly as a chief electrician, for that company. 
In 1887 Kennelly went to the United States to join Thomas A. Edison as principal assistant in his electrical laboratory at West Orange, New Jersey, where he remained until 1894 when he joined a firm of consulting electrical engineers. From 1902, when he was appointed to the chair of electrical engineering at Harvard University, until his retirement in 1930, he devoted all his time to teaching and scientific writing. From 1913 to 1924 he was also professor of electrical communications at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, where for many years he directed electrical engineering research. On 22 July 1903 he married Julia Grice, a medical practitioner of Philadelphia; they had two children, a daughter who died in infancy and a son, Reginald Grice. 
Kennelly's most important contributions lay in the interpretation and explanation of electrical phenomena. His introduction of complex numbers and complex hyperbolic functions in the analysis of alternating currents was an advance on earlier methods, and his postulate of an ionized layer in the upper atmosphere that enabled radio transmissions to be received by reflection over thousands of miles was subsequently verified by Sir Edward Appleton. The same explanation was put forward shortly afterwards independently by Oliver Heaviside and it was named, after both men, the Kennelly -- Heaviside layer, now known as the E-layer in the ionosphere. 
Widely honoured at home and abroad, Kennelly was president of the American Institute of Electrical Engineers (1898-1900), the British Institution of Electrical Engineers (1916), and several other professional institutions; he served as a member of many national and international organizations, and received honorary degrees from four universities. His publications include twenty-eight books (as author or co-author) and more than 350 technical papers. Kennelly died on 18 June 1939, in Boston, of uraemic poisoning, and his ashes were scattered in Mount Auburn cemetery in Cambridge, Massachusetts. 


@@@@@


doc= 45959


Francis, James Bicheno (1815-1892), hydraulic engineer, was born on 18 May 1815 at South Leigh, Oxfordshire, the son of John Francis, a railway builder and superintendent, and his wife, Eliza Frith Bicheno. He attended school at Radleigh Hall and Wantage Academy, leaving at fourteen to work under his father on the construction of canal and harbour works. In the spring of 1833 he emigrated to America and found work on the construction of the Stonington railroad in Connecticut. A year later he moved to Lowell, Massachusetts, and by 1837 was chief engineer to the proprietors of the locks and canals on the Merrimack River. On 12 July that year Francis married Sarah Wilbur Brownell of Lowell; they had six children. About 1841 Francis began a series of measurements to determine the amounts of water drawn off by each of the mills along the canal, and these led to the development of the well-known Francis formula for the flow of fluids over weirs. The proprietors then decided to exploit the water-power potential of the river, and Francis designed a turbine based on the Howd patent but with the vanes reshaped to give a combination of radial and axial flow. This type, known as the mixed flow or Francis turbine, became the one most generally used for medium head hydro-electric installations. The results of his experimental work, conducted with his characteristic emphasis on thoroughness and accuracy, were published in 'The Lowell Hydraulic Experiments' (1855). Francis joined the American Society of Civil Engineers at its first meeting in 1852 and was elected president in 1880. He retired in 1885 and died at Boston on 18 September 1892. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 45961


Kennedy, James (1797-1886), mechanical engineer, born on 13 January 1797 in the village of Gilmerton, near Edinburgh, was apprenticed to a millwright near Dalkeith from 1810 to 1815, after which he took various jobs in Scotland to gain experience in mechanical engineering. In 1824 George Stephenson put him in charge of his engine works in Newcastle upon Tyne, where Kennedy was involved in the design and building of two pairs of stationary engines and the first four locomotives for the Stockton and Darlington Railway. At the end of 1825 he went to Liverpool and shortly afterwards joined the firm of Bury, Edward & Co. at their Clarence foundry in Liverpool as works foreman, supervising the construction of stationary, marine, and locomotive engines. One of his locomotives, the 'Liverpool', was in 1830 the first built in England to have horizontal cylinders linked directly to the crank axle. In 1842 Kennedy was taken into partnership, the firm becoming Bury, Curtis, and Kennedy. For many years the firm concentrated on building four-wheeled locomotives; their designs were sound and their workmanship excellent, but largely because of Bury's conservatism and reluctance to undertake larger locomotives, Kennedy left in 1844, to join Thomas Vernon & Son, shipbuilders in Liverpool, where he introduced the use of iron deck beams for vessels requiring exceptional strength. In 1847 he was elected a member of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, of which he served as president in 1860. Kennedy died on 25 September 1886 at his home, Cressington Park, Garston, near Liverpool. He was survived by his wife, Adelaide. 


@@@@@


doc= 45965


Titchener, Edward Bradford (1867-1927), experimental psychologist, was born on 11 January 1867 in Little London, Chichester, Sussex, the son of John Bradford Titchener, railway clerk, and his wife, Alice Field Habin. Titchener obtained successive scholarships to Malvern College (1881) and Brasenose College, Oxford (1885), where he took a first in classical moderations (1887) and a first in classics (1889) before taking a further year's research studentship in physiology. During this period he discovered Wilhelm Wundt, the Leipzig-based German founder of experimental psychology, some of whose work he translated (though did not publish). Oxford being unsupportive of such interests he went to Leipzig in 1890 where he gained his PhD in 1892. Here he met such fellow doctoral students, and subsequently eminent psychologists, as the Americans E. W. Scripture, F. Angell, L. Witmer, and H. C. Warren, and the Germans O. Kulpe and E. Meumann. Titchener's doctoral research concerned reaction times and perception. In 1892, after a term spent teaching biology at Oxford, he emigrated to Cornell University in the United States, initially as director of the psychology laboratory; he was then Sage professor of psychology from 1895 to 1910. There he remained, returning to Europe only for the 1896 Munich International Congress of Psychology. In 1894 he married Sophie Kellogg Bedlow, of Portland, Maine, who assisted his work in various ways thereafter; they had three daughters and a son. Titchener was professor in charge of music at Cornell (1896-8) and Sage professor of psychology in the graduate school from 1910. 
While Wundt's numerous American students usually abandoned both his methods and his concept of psychology, Titchener professed to remain loyal, casting himself as Wundt's leading apostle in the United States. It is, however, now generally agreed that Titchener's position actually diverged profoundly from the German pioneer's, his elementism, empiricism and positivism markedly differing from Wundt's neo-idealism. He did, though, successfully emulate Wundt's academic style. Titchener saw his task as being threefold. The first was to translate key German works, most importantly Wundt's 'Lectures on Human and Animal Psychology' (1894, with J. E. Creighton) and 'Physiological Psychology' (1902, the first six chapters of the fifth edition), and Kulpe's 'Outlines of Psychology' (1895). Second he produced a laboratory teaching manual, 'Experimental Psychology: a Manual of Laboratory Practice', which appeared in 1901-5 (two volumes each on qualitative and quantitative methods, the pairs comprising students' and instructors' manuals). Widely used even among those otherwise unsympathetic to Titchener, these were important in consolidating the scientific character of psychology courses. 'A Primer of Psychology' (1898), 'A Text-Book of Psychology' (1910), and 'A Beginner's Psychology' (1915) were also primarily pedagogic. Third he needed to state his theoretical position, which he termed 'structuralism', expounding this in 'An Outline of Psychology' (1896), 'Lectures on the Elementary Psychology of Feeling and Attention' (1908), and 'Systematic Psychology: Prolegomena' (posthumously published in 1929). Especially influential were two 'Philosophical Review' papers, 'The postulates of structural psychology' (1896) and 'Structural and functional psychology' (1899), which were responses to John Dewey's 'The reflex arc concept in psychology' ('Psychological Review', 1896). 'A Text-Book of Psychology' is, however, the only thorough single volume account of his position. Titchener's journal publications, both experimental and theoretical, exceeded 200. An insightful critique of the psychological research of the 1898 Cambridge anthropological expedition to the Torres Strait identified many problems in conducting research beyond the laboratory ('Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society', 1916). He was the American editor of 'Mind' between 1894 and 1920 and from 1921 to 1925 he edited the 'American Journal of Psychology' but his productivity, which had been declining since 1909, almost ceased after 1920. He was awarded a DSc Oxford (1906), LLD Wisconsin (1904), DLitt Clark (1909), and DSc Harvard (1909). Always a collector of curious artefacts, he turned in later years to numismatics (in which he became quite expert). 
For Titchener, psychology was the science of mind (as opposed to behaviour), the nature of conscious states being its immediate subject matter. Its initial task was to analyse consciousness into constituent elements, rather than study how it operates or how the elements interact. These latter must wait until the elements themselves have been identified. This analysis was a pure scientific endeavour with no immediate practical consequences. It could be undertaken only by rigorously trained introspection, avoiding stimulus error (confusing the properties of the conscious experience with those of the stimulus object itself). Doing this properly was an acquired professional skill. By 1915 German Gestalt psychologists were effectively challenging the clarity of this distinction. 
A fine lecturer, and combining independent mindedness with personal charm, Titchener occupied a respected place in American psychology, but his intellectual isolation became acute and relations with the American Psychological Association were chequered. First functionalism, then behaviourism and psychoanalysis overshadowed structuralism. Moreover, the very rationality, even possibility, of scientific introspection was called into doubt. The notion of pure private sensations unmodified by the introspector's concepts and expectations, 'and' capable of being unambiguously verbally reported, grew ever more dubious on numerous philosophical, theoretical, and methodological grounds. Additionally, Titchener's self-conscious combination of traditional English demeanour and autocratic German academic style did not help his cause, however much they reinforced his personal charisma. Perhaps a further factor was that such experiments were, as William James observed in 'Principles of Psychology' (1890), extremely dull. 
Titchener's former student E. G. Boring became psychology's leading historian in the United States. This requires additional comment. His highly influential 'History of Experimental Psychology' (1929, revised 1950) cast Wundt and Titchener in central heroic roles, and Titchener's canonical eminence is in part due to Boring's advocacy. From the late 1960s historians also argued that Boring's version of Wundt's original position reflected distortions of it made by Titchener. A major figure among those who created scientific academic psychology in the United States during the 1890s and early 1900s, Titchener's own version was always anomalous there, despite his indefatigable and sophisticated expositions and defences of it. In Britain his textbooks initially enjoyed a certain popularity, some early British psychologists not entirely lacking sympathy, but such influence rapidly waned after about 1920. Titchener's home was at Ithaca, New York state; he died suddenly on 3 August 1927. 


@@@@@


doc= 45966


Worsdell family (per. c.1800-1910), coach and carriage builders and engineers, originated with 


@@@@@


doc= 45967


Thomas Clarke Worsdell (1788-1862), born on 3 December 1788 at Hayes, near Bromley in Kent. He was the son of Thomas Clarke Worsdell (1748-1826), a market gardener in Kent, later an innkeeper, then agent for the Hand in Hand insurance company, and his wife, Elizabeth Carter ('b'. 1750). About 1800 the family moved to London where Thomas Clarke senior found employment at a coaching inn. On leaving school young Thomas was apprenticed to coach builders Howe and Shanks of Little Queen Street, Long Acre, London. In 1807 he married Elizabeth Taylor (1784-1863) in London, but other details of his early life are scarce. About 1812 he moved to north Lancashire where he continued to work as a coach builder. By 1816 he had joined the Society of Friends, and in time all five Worsdells became Friends, and this had a marked effect on their private and public lives. In 1827 Thomas was able to establish a coach building business with his son Nathaniel in Liverpool, which soon achieved a high reputation for the quality of its work. Through Quaker influence he was introduced to George Stephenson and with him planned the first carriages for the Liverpool and Manchester Railway (L&MR). In 1828 Thomas became superintendent of coaching for the L&MR, and at his Crown Street works he built large numbers of coaches, as well as tenders for the 'Rocket' and other locomotives, and a variety of goods wagons. Stephenson called him 'the best coach builder I ever knew'. In January 1837 he left England to take up the post of locomotive, carriage, and wagon superintendent on the Leipzig and Dresden Railway, returning about four years later as carriage inspector successively at Manchester, Euston, and Hull, where he was joined by his son George. He retired from railway work in 1847 and settled at Nantwich near Crewe, where he developed his lifelong interest in homoeopathic medicine, treating both people and animals with, it was said, considerable success. He died on 18 April 1862 at his home, 7 Welch Row in Nantwich, his wife surviving him by less than a year. They were both buried at the Friends' meeting-house, Nantwich. 
Thomas's eldest son, 


