@@@@@


doc= 45968


Nathaniel Worsdell (1809-1886), was born on 10 October 1809 in London. He attended school in Knutsford, Cheshire, to the age of thirteen, and was apprenticed to Jonathan Dunn, coach builder in Lancaster, in 1823. On 3 October 1833 he married Mary Wilson (1811-1869) of Bentham near Lancaster, and Nathaniel remained at the Crown Street works when the rest of the family moved to Leipzig in 1837. The carriage of mail on the railways began at a very early date, and Nathaniel built some mail vans in 1838 which incorporated his own patented device for the automatic picking up and setting down of mailbags in transit. The Post Office was very interested but would not agree to his asking price ($3500, subsequently reduced to $1500) for the right to use his patent, and it soon introduced a device of its own which was a clear infringement. As a Quaker, however, Nathaniel would not pursue the matter in the courts and he never received any compensation from the Post Office. In 1843 he moved as carriage and wagon superintendent to the new Grand Junction Railway works at Crewe where he remained until he retired in 1880. He was involved in many of the charitable and educational activities of the growing railway community and also served as a Liberal on the local council. He died on 24 July 1886 at his home, Southlea, 8 Chetwynd Road, Oxton, Birkenhead, Cheshire, a much respected man, strict but just, and ever mindful of his employees' welfare. His wife, Mary, had predeceased him; both were buried at the Quaker burial-ground at Briggflats near Sedbergh in Yorkshire. 



@@@@@


doc= 45969


George Worsdell (1821-1912) was Thomas's youngest child, born on 21 May 1821 at Preston, Lancashire, and on leaving school near Blackburn he trained under his father at the Crown Street works before moving with him in 1837 to Leipzig. He returned to England the following year and by 1845 had decided to set up his own business manufacturing railway equipment. Within six years his Dallam Forge at Warrington in Lancashire had been awarded a gold medal at the Great Exhibition of 1851 'for excellence of iron and of railway plant'. In the same year, on 27 March, he married Jane (1820/21-1903), the youngest daughter of Edward Bolton, a prominent local Quaker. Within a few years, however, both he and the Dallam Forge suffered serious setbacks: his health broke down in 1857 when the business failed and he was declared bankrupt, but he made a good recovery until forced again by ill health to retire in 1872 at the age of fifty-one. Relieved of stress, he lived to the age of ninety-one, and died on 1 December 1912 at his home, 70 Brookfield Terrace, Lancaster. Under new management from 1865 the Dallam Forge again prospered, and eventually it became in 1930 part of the Lancashire Steel Company, remaining in production until July 1980. 



@@@@@


doc= 45970


(Thomas) William Worsdell (1838-1916), Nathaniel's eldest son, was born on 14 January 1838 at 17 Laurel Street, Liverpool. He attended Quaker schools in Yorkshire and Hampshire, then about 1855 went as an apprentice to the Birmingham engineering works of his uncle Thomas Worsdell (1818-1893), another of Thomas Clarke's sons. He became manager of the works in 1861 but fell out with his uncle and emigrated to the United States soon after his marriage, on 29 June 1865, to Mary Ann Batt (1844-1918) at Yealand Conyers in Lancashire. He worked on the Pennsylvania railroad until 1871 when he returned to England as works manager under Francis William Webb at the London and North Western Railway's (L&NWR) Crewe works. After ten years in that post he was appointed locomotive superintendent of the Great Eastern Railway, leaving after four years for the same position, at twice the salary, with the larger and more prosperous North Eastern Railway (NER) at Gateshead. A strong advocate of compound cylinder locomotives, six of the fifteen classes he designed for the NER were of this type. Like all the Quaker Worsdells he was held in awe by his workforce but in spite of his imposing physique he did not enjoy good health and he resigned in 1890, to be succeeded by his brother Wilson. He joined the Institution of Mechanical Engineers in 1864, serving as a member of council in 1886-92. He had built a house, Stonycroft, at Arnside in Westmorland, as a holiday home and lived there during a very active retirement until his death there on 28 June 1916. His wife survived him by two years and they were both buried at the Friends' meeting-house in Yealand Conyers. 



@@@@@


doc= 45971


Wilson Worsdell (1850-1920), the second youngest of Nathaniel's sons, was born on 7 September 1850 at Monks Coppenhall, near Crewe. He attended the Friends' school at Ackworth from 1860 to 1866, and the following year joined his brother William in the Pennsylvania Railway's workshops at Altoona. They both returned to Crewe in 1871, and Wilson worked with the L&NWR there and later at Chester, where he was in charge of the locomotive sheds from 1877. On 1 June 1882 he married Mary Elizabeth (1856-1945), daughter of George Bradford, a linen draper, at St John's Church, Hanley, Staffordshire. In 1883 he moved to the NER at Gateshead as assistant mechanical engineer, finding himself again under his elder brother when William was appointed locomotive superintendent in 1885. William's early retirement in 1890 allowed Wilson to step into his shoes much earlier than he could have anticipated, and for the next twenty years he was in charge of locomotive building for the NER at Gateshead and Darlington. During that time he produced more than twenty different types of steam locomotive, and rebuilt some of those designed by his brother William to improve their performance. The brothers' engines played a notable part in the celebrated railway races to Edinburgh and Aberdeen in the 1880s and 1890s, sustaining average speeds hardly bettered by steam locomotives since. Wilson was also responsible in 1903-4 for the north Tyneside third rail suburban electrification scheme, one of the first in Britain. He served as a member of council of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers and as a JP. He took a keen interest in the welfare of his staff and workers, and was both liked and respected by all. He retired at the end of May 1910 and died suddenly on 13 April 1920 at his home, The Glebe, South Ascot, Sunninghill, Berkshire. He was buried at All Souls' churchyard, South Ascot. 


@@@@@


doc= 45973


Stewart, Charles Stewart Vane-Tempest-, sixth marquess of Londonderry (1852-1915), politician, was born in London on 16 July 1852. He was the eldest son, and one of six children, born to George Henry Robert Charles William Vane-Tempest, fifth marquess of Londonderry (1821-1884), and his wife, Mary Cornelia (died 1906), daughter of Sir John Edwards, bt. He was educated at Eton College and at Christ Church, Oxford, and also spent a year studying at the Royal University of Ireland. His marriage, on 2 October 1875, to Lady Theresa Susey Helen Chetwynd-Talbot ['see below'], eldest daughter of Charles John, nineteenth earl of Shrewsbury, united two great aristocratic families, and seems to have been a dynastic alliance rather than a love match. Londonderry, who succeeded to the family marquessate in 1884, had two sons and one daughter by this marriage, although the paternity of the younger son, Charles Stewart Reginald, was generally doubted. In 1885 he changed the family patronymic from Vane-Tempest to Vane-Tempest-Stewart, restoring a reference to the clan from which he was descended. 
The Londonderry family fortune spanned the Irish Sea, and united farming land in co. Down with coalmines in Durham. The second marquess of Londonderry (better known as Lord Castlereagh) had been MP for co. Down and one of the architects of the 'Act of Union' of 1801; and this legacy, combined with the family interest in Ireland, weighed heavily with both the sixth marquess and his wife. As Viscount Castlereagh he was returned for co. Down in 1878 in an expensive by-election that recalled his predecessor's contest in the same county in 1790. Although an inconspicuous MP, Castlereagh was -- like many Irish magnates -- frightened by the growth of agrarian agitation in Ireland after 1879, and the parallel development of the home-rule movement: at this time he joined the Orange order. He left the Commons in 1884 on the death of his father: thereafter he sat in the House of Lords as Earl Vane (the family marquessate being an Irish creation). 
In July 1886, after the formation of Lord Salisbury's second administration, Londonderry was appointed viceroy of Ireland, with Sir Michael Hicks Beach as the chief secretary. Londonderry was a much more trenchant Unionist and advocate of property right than Hicks Beach -- and this balance may well have been what Salisbury was seeking to achieve; in any event there were tensions between the two ministers that were resolved only in March 1887, when Hicks Beach was replaced by Arthur Balfour, a man much more in tune with Londonderry's loyalist convictions. Londonderry stoutly supported Balfour's programme of interactive coercion and conciliation, and was rewarded in 1888 with the Garter. He retired from the viceroyalty in 1889, having originally undertaken to spend no more than three years in this demanding and expensive office. 
Londonderry's intimate connection with the government of Ireland between 1886 and 1889 confirmed his antipathy for Irish nationalists and for agrarian radicalism. Unionism, and the defence of property, were the two central preoccupations of the rest of his career. He was a prominent critic of the second 'Home Rule Bill' in 1893. But he was also suspicious of Conservative legislation affecting Irish land, and he caustically rejected Gerald Balfour's 'Land Bill' of 1896. Like his friend Edward Saunderson, he harried the Conservative government of which he was nominally a supporter between 1896-7, urging the case of the Irish gentry. 
Londonderry had been offered the post of lord privy seal in 1895 but, anxious for departmental experience, he had declined. Between 1895 and 1897 he found the administrative discipline for which he craved through chairing the London school board. His vocal dissent in the House of Lords to the Conservative front bench increased the value of his acquiescence; and, in 1900, on the creation of Lord Salisbury's fourth administration, he was appointed postmaster general. In August 1902 he was translated to the Board of Education as its first president: he was responsible for guiding Balfour's 'Education Bill' through the Lords and for the administration of this controversial measure. After 1903 he held the education portfolio in association with the lord presidency of the council: he administered the board from the privy council offices because of their sunny outlook over Whitehall. He was a competent and conscientious minister, though excessively deferential to 'the stormy impetuosity' of civil servants such as Robert Morant and to the occasionally outrageous interference of his own wife. His conduct in parliament was characterized by what Almeric Fitzroy termed 'voluble vagueness'. 
After 1906, and the return of a Liberal government, Londonderry devoted himself to the Irish Unionist cause. This bond was fastened in 1910 with the election of his old friend and protege Edward Carson to the chairmanship of the Irish Unionist parliamentary party. Londonderry was one of the most prominent critics of the third 'Home Rule Bill', and the single most vocal Unionist in the House of Lords. He was a signatory of the Ulster solemn league and covenant of September 1912, and chaired the strategically vital standing committee of the Ulster Unionist Council. In September 1913 he presided over the Ulster Unionist Council meeting that brought about the creation of a provisional government in Ulster. Publicly he was prepared to sanction the most extreme forms of resistance to home rule: like Carson he subscribed $10,000 to an indemnity fund designed for the paramilitary Ulster Volunteer Force. Privately, like Carson, he was more circumspect than might have been guessed by such gestures. 
After the euphoria of the struggle against home rule, the outbreak of war in August 1914 brought anxiety and depression. He was concerned for the fate of the Unionist cause: chief among his personal concerns was the fate of his son and heir, Charles Stewart Henry, Viscount Castlereagh (1878-1949), who had gone to the western front. Londonderry fell victim to influenza and, later, to pneumonia in January 1915. He died at his co. Durham home, Wynyard Park, on 8 February 1915 and was buried at Long Newton, co. Durham. 
Londonderry was survived by his wife, and by his elder son, Charles Stewart Henry Vane-Tempest-Stewart, and daughter; his younger son, Reginald, had died in 1899. His relations with his wife, Theresa Susey Helen Vane-Tempest-Stewart, marchioness of Londonderry (1856-1919), had occasionally been strained by her infidelities -- an affair with Harry Cust led to a lengthy period during which the married couple were believed never to speak to each other except in public -- but the marriage survived and was characterized in later years by warmth and mutual support. Lady Londonderry, born on 6 June 1856 and known to her friends as Nellie, was perhaps the leading Conservative hostess of the Edwardian era. Deprived of a first-rate political role, she exploited every conventional resource in order to articulate and advance her opinions: she acted as patron to many emerging tory politicians, was an unflagging correspondent, and a relentless string-puller. After the election of Andrew Bonar Law, a reserved widower, to the Conservative Party leadership in November 1911, she came into her own as the presiding genius of tory high society. Like her husband, she was conscious of the Unionist traditions of the Londonderry family, and wrote a short memoir of the first Viscount Castlereagh. She was one of the architects, and first president of the Ulster women's unionist council. The death of her husband in 1915 brought social and political eclipse, and also nagging (if unfounded) financial worries. She survived him by only four years, and died at her home, 5 Carlton House Terrace, London, on 16 March 1919. 


@@@@@


doc= 45974


Brown, Sir David (1904-1993), industrialist, was born on 10 May 1904 at 8 Princess Street, Huddersfield, Yorkshire, the younger son of Francis (Frank) Edwin Brown (died 1941), joint managing director of David Brown & Sons, gear manufacturers, of Huddersfield, and his wife, Caroline (Carrie), formerly Brook. He was educated at King James's School, Almondbury, and Rossall School, and joined the family business, founded by his grandfather in 1860, as an engineering apprentice in 1921, attending classes at Huddersfield Technical College. He married Daisie Muriel Firth in 1926: they had a son and a daughter. Divorced in 1955, Brown made two further marriages: in 1955 he married Marjorie Deans, and following their divorce in 1980 he married his former personal assistant, Paula Benton Stone ('b'. 'c'.1951). 
Brown's early experience in the business included running the small Keighley Gear Company which the firm had acquired, and in 1928 he was sent to the United States, South Africa, and continental Europe to study new methods of gear manufacture. He was made a director in 1929, and in 1932 managing director, following the death of his uncle and his father's decision to confine himself to the chairmanship of the company. One of Brown's first decisions as managing director was in 1934 to buy a site at Penistone for a new foundry, and David Brown Foundries began making high grade steel, and steel castings, the following year. David Brown Tractors was formed in 1935, initially in partnership with Harry Ferguson, who later took his design to the Ford Motor Company. Working with a new designer, Brown launched his first tractor in 1939 at the Royal Agricultural Show, and moved the tractor company to a disused mill at Meltham to begin production. 
During the Second World War the Park works in Huddersfield made gears for all types of machines and vehicles, and began to make aircraft gears for the Rolls-Royce Merlin engine. The aero-gear division moved to Meltham in 1940, supplying gears for the Hercules engines of the Bristol Aeroplane Company, and for Spitfires: at one point during the battle of Britain, Meltham was the only factory making Spitfire gears. Brown established a tank gearbox division at Meltham, at Penistone produced armour plating for Churchill and Cromwell tanks, and steel casing for the blockbuster high-explosive bomb, developed an aircraft foundry at Penistone to make castings for aero-engines, and made cables for the oil pipeline system for the Normandy landings. 
The company continued to expand. In 1944 Brown bought the Muir Machine Tool Company of Manchester and moved the machine tool division there, where it made gear cutting and gear finishing tools which were exported all over the world. In the early 1950s David Brown Construction Equipment Ltd was formed to make industrial and earthmoving equipment. In 1951 all the businesses were brought into the new David Brown Corporation, with Brown as chairman and managing director and its headquarters in Huddersfield. A number of overseas subsidiaries were formed after the war, beginning in South Africa, where he set up David Brown S. A. (Proprietary) Ltd to import gears, and in 1955 David Brown Tractors (South Africa) Ltd to import and assemble David Brown tractors. He also set up companies in Ireland, Canada, and Australia, and in 1959 bought an interest in Foote Brothers of Chicago, a leading American gear manufacturer. There was another major reorganization in 1960 when ownership of the gear, foundry, and tool divisions was transferred to a new company, David Brown & Sons (Huddersfield) Ltd. 
David Brown bought Aston Martin for $20,000 in 1947, after he saw an advertisement in 'The Times' for the sale of an unnamed sports car company. A few months later he bought Lagonda, because he wanted the new 2.3 litre engine, designed by W. O. Bentley, Lagonda's technical director, for the Aston Martin chassis. Aston Martin Lagonda Ltd was founded at Hanworth Air Park, near Feltham, Middlesex, and the Aston Martin DB2, with a 2.6 litre version of the Lagonda engine, was launched in 1949. For a time the company continued to produce Lagondas but in 1958 it was decided to concentrate on selling one range of high-performance sports cars, the Aston Martin DB series, and the production of Lagondas ceased. Although the marque was revived from 1961 to 1965 with the new 4 litre Lagonda Rapide, it was never as popular as the Aston Martin DB4, launched in 1958, the first British car capable of speeds of up to 140 m.p.h. Brown bought Tickford Ltd, of Newport Pagnell, Buckinghamshire, a bodybuilding plant, in 1954, and in 1957 all Aston Martin Lagonda car production was moved there, and the other departments in 1964. 
A win at the 1948 twenty-four hour sports car race at Spa, in Belgium, led David Brown to enter the motor racing world in earnest in 1950, when he appointed John Wyer as racing team manager, with the ambition of winning the Mille Miglia, and the Le Mans twenty-four hour race. While racing successes undoubtedly brought prestige for the whole David Brown group -- from 1955 the cars were advertised as 'David Brown Aston Martins' -- racing also gave the designers and engineers the opportunity to test new cars and obtain technical information. However, during the 1950s racing cars became less and less like the models available to the public, until to compete at all it was necessary to develop and build a totally different car. In 1955 Wyer created separate design offices for the competition and road cars, and the DBR1 was built especially for racing. The Aston Martin team, led by Stirling Moss, won at Le Mans in 1959, and went on to win the World Sports Car Championship the same year, the first British car manufacturer to do so. Even so, following these wins Brown decided to withdraw from sports car racing and concentrate on the development and manufacture of production cars, and in 1960 he pulled out of grand prix racing as well. Despite the enormous publicity surrounding the use of an Aston Martin DB5 in the James Bond film 'Goldfinger' in 1964, with special features such as a passenger ejector seat and chariot scythes, the company was unable to reap the benefits as the factory was only able to make eleven of the hand-assembled cars a week. Brown always claimed that he had bought Aston Martin as a hobby, and it never made a profit. 
David Brown was knighted in 1968, but by the early 1970s the David Brown Corporation was in severe financial difficulties. In 1971 he was removed from executive control for a year by the bankers supporting the corporation, and in 1972 he sold David Brown Tractors, following a drop in worldwide tractor sales, and then Aston Martin, saddled with $5 million debts. After his shipbuilding company, Vosper Thorneycroft, was nationalized in 1978, he resigned from the chairmanship of the David Brown Corporation and moved to Monte Carlo. He died on 3 September 1993 in Monte Carlo, Monaco, and was survived by his third wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 45975


Trickett, Sir Henry Whittaker (1857-1913), slipper manufacturer, was born on 23 July 1857 at Miller Barn Lane, Newchurch, Waterfoot, in the Rossendale valley, Lancashire, the eldest of five children of Henry Whittaker Trickett (1831-1904), a journeyman woollen carpet printer, and his wife, Alice, 'nee' Whittaker (1832-1886). At eight years of age, after a very brief education at the local church school, he went to work for his uncle, Joshua Trickett, who ran a small felt-printing works a mile or so from Waterfoot. Starting as a 'tier' boy, supplying printers with colours, he subsequently completed a five-year apprenticeship at the age of twenty-two. Meantime, at Bethel Baptist Church, Waterfoot (where he was baptized on 7 January 1877, and where he later served as deacon, Sunday school superintendent, treasurer, and trustee), he met Elizabeth Alice, daughter of John Ormerod, a cotton weaver; they were married on 23 January 1879. 
The Greenbridge carpet works, where Trickett worked, hit hard times, and his career took a different turn. In 1881 he became a commercial traveller for Gregory & Co., one of the small slipper manufacturing concerns which had sprung up in the Waterfoot area in the 1870s and originated from the crude slippers of waste felt worn by block-printers for walking on carpets in the process of manufacture. Trickett stayed with Gregory & Co. for less than two years, crucially learning that the footwear industry (then mainly concerned with boots and shoes) had entered a period of revolutionary change. Large-scale factory production, the emergence of wholesale and retail networks, the rising purchasing power of the working and middle classes, the possibilities of attaining volume sales in mass markets: such developments persuaded Trickett to set up on his own in 1882. 
Trickett borrowed $75 from relatives and rented an old weaving shop, measuring barely 10 by 15 yards, and with six employees started making slippers. A vigorous marketing campaign brought orders from all parts of the country. All profits were invested in specialized machinery or stocks of material. Within about twelve months Henry Trickett employed over sixty people. In 1889 he purchased Gaghills Mill, a large disused cotton mill in Burnley Road, Waterfoot, where he installed the latest American machinery: power presses, high-speed sewing machines, heel-fixing machinery. An export drive expanded his sales into Europe (previously supplied by German manufacturers) and the Far East. A decade later he leased the latest machinery from the newly formed and monopolistic British United Shoe Machinery Company. By 1900 the Gaghills factory, with a labour force of about 1000 people, was producing 72,000 pairs of slippers monthly. In 1913 1200 employees produced 2.5 million pairs of slippers annually. Others emulated Trickett, who was widely known as the Slipper King. By 1893 there were ten slipper firms in the Rossendale district and by 1900 thirteen, none of which failed before 1914. However, Trickett's was the largest firm, employing a third of all the district's slipper workers in 1900. Trickett paid close attention to design, new materials, and marketing, including eye-catching and humorous advertisements. He set up a chain of sales offices and depots across the UK, the white-dominated parts of the British empire, and the USA. 
Trickett genuinely cared for his workers and for Rossendale. Continuity of employment, payment of better than average wages, and provision of clean working conditions, refreshment rooms, medical facilities, a training school, sick (1893) and holiday (1897) clubs, and a bowling green and gardens next to the mill -- as well as a terrace of houses and an arcade of shops in Waterfoot -- enhanced Trickett's good reputation, eased his labour relations, and facilitated the introduction of new machinery. 
Trickett became a Liberal town councillor for Rawtenstall (of which Waterfoot was part) in 1891, and between 1898 and 1902 he served a record five times as mayor of the borough, being elected alderman in 1900. He declined offers to stand as a parliamentary candidate (supporting Sir William Mather's candidature in 1900) but between 1901 and 1913 he served variously as president of the Rossendale Liberal Association, vice-president of the Lancashire and Cheshire Free Trade League, vice-president of the Lancashire and Cheshire Liberal Federation, and JP. He was knighted in 1909. 
Management of his business was entrusted by Trickett to five senior employees to whom he gave a share of net profits. In 1901 the firm was registered as H. W. Trickett Ltd. Trickett relinquished sole ownership for $5335 in cash, $40,000 in 5 per cent cumulative preference shares, and 31 per cent of the issued ordinary share capital of $18,100. His managers bought shares. However, Trickett retained control by limiting share sales and preserving the lifetime right to appoint and dismiss his fellow directors. Trickett died suddenly at the age of fifty-six on 3 August 1913, and was buried in the Baptist graveyard, Waterbarn. He was survived by his wife and two daughters and left an estate valued at $120,907 gross. 


@@@@@


doc= 45976


Gallagher, John Andrew (1919-1980), historian, was born at the maternity hospital, Birkenhead, on 1 April 1919, the only child of Joseph Gallagher and his wife, Mary Adeline, 'nee' Welsh. His father, a working-class Irishman, had fought in the 1st Canadian contingent during the First World War, and subsequently worked in Liverpool as a warehouseman and then a railwayman during the depression. In 1937 a major open scholarship took Gallagher from the Birkenhead Institute to Trinity College, Cambridge, where he took a first class in part one of the historical tripos (1939) before his studies were interrupted by the outbreak of the Second World War. He enlisted in the Royal Tank regiment and saw action as a sergeant tank driver (he refused a commission) in north Africa, Italy, and Greece. Returning to Cambridge after the war, he took a first in part two of the tripos (1946) and by 1948 had completed a dissertation, 'The British penetration of west Africa', resulting in his election to a prize fellowship at Trinity in the same year. In 1950 he was appointed as lecturer in colonial studies at Cambridge. 
Gallagher migrated to Oxford in 1963 to become Beit professor of the history of the British Commonwealth. Though he developed many friendships in Oxford and was impressed by the quality of his students, he never really settled at Balliol, and eagerly returned to Trinity and Cambridge in 1971 to accept the Vere Harmsworth professorship of imperial and naval history. Trinity, in particular, he adored, as the college in turn adored him. From 1960 to 1963 he served as its dean, and from 1972 until his death as its vice-master. Many of the most moving tributes to Gallagher came from his Trinity colleagues. 
Gallagher was an inspirational figure. A powerful historical imagination, a prodigious memory seasoned by extensive reading and travel, and a natural facility of expression all made for exhilarating conversation. Moreover, though in many ways a secretive and lonely man -- he never married -- he gave unstintingly of himself: he was patient with undergraduates, generous to research students, and loyal to colleagues. His company was thus highly sought after, as indeed were his opinions. In an era when there was less pressure to publish, he was able to write sparingly. But when he did put pen to paper the results were always luminous and transformative. Though he is mainly (and justifiably) known as a half of an internationally famous partnership with Ronald Robinson ['see below'], equally important work was published under his sole name. Two fields of research merit particular attention, the first being his Ford lectures of 1973, the second his contribution to modern Indian historiography. 
The publication of the Ford lectures -- 'The Decline, Revival and Fall of the British Empire' (1982) -- owed much to his Trinity colleague, Anil Seal, with whom Gallagher worked in collaboration on modern India. Cited far less frequently than the work published jointly with Ronald Robinson, in many ways it is the Ford lectures that provide the key to Gallagher's thinking. Indeed, such was the importance he attached to the lectures that they were given a trial run in Cambridge seminars during the previous year. With typical economy of expression, the period from the Napoleonic wars through to the Suez crisis is covered in a mere eighty pages, testimony to what has since been described as Gallagher's 'all-embracing global range' (Hyam, 84). The empire is presented as a dynamic 'system of power' whose decline was by no means a continuous process. We are told of its shifting geographical centre, the multiple techniques of expansion by which it was sustained, the sources of its fragility, and the way its history interlocked with events elsewhere in the world. Organized with beautiful simplicity around the categories of domestic, international, and colonial factors impinging on expansion, the lectures are also full of fun -- literary allusions and a variety of metaphors provide the vehicles for an irreverent yet sympathetic sense of humour. They remain one of the most accessible, the most enjoyable, and the most rewarding introductions to the history of the modern British empire. 
Gallagher's second solo contribution was to the historiography of modern India. Later in his career he gradually turned his attention away from colonial Africa toward the raj, which he had long regarded the nerve centre of the British imperial system -- a mainstay of its military and economic power. The so-called Cambridge school of Indian historiography drew deeply on the ideas elaborated in two of his essays -- 'Congress in decline' ('Modern Asian Studies', 7, 1973) and 'Nationalisms and the crisis of empire' ('Modern Asian Studies', 15, 1981). While Gallagher had already pointed to the security of the Indian empire as the reason for the creation of an east African empire in the late nineteenth century, and a Middle Eastern empire after the First World War, he now began to explore the bases of Indian nationalism and the effect of government intervention thereon. He was particularly fascinated by the complex web of relationships which linked locality, province, and nation, the ways in which resources were bargained for and distributed in each of these spheres, and the part played (unintentionally) by the British in inducing Indians to organize themselves in ever larger groups. 
Gallagher's thesis was that after 1918 financial imperatives impelled increasing levels of bureaucratic meddling in Indian social life, thus breaking the unwritten rule of colonial administration -- 'salutary neglect'. In self-defence Indians had to mobilize politically; once they had done so, policy-making became more constrained by indigenous opinion, and 'collaborators' (that is, 'moderate' and constitutionally-minded nationalists) more necessary than ever before. Gallagher was extremely sceptical regarding the inflated claims of Congress: Gandhi and Nehru constantly talked up the representativeness of the movement, but they spoke of a unity which neither it, nor India, in fact possessed. None the less he had a sharp eye for the circumscriptions which colonial politics imposed on the working of imperialism in the subcontinent, not least over the use of the Indian army. Hitherto deployed freely overseas as an 'imperial mobile reserve', by 1939 the Indian army was being bankrolled by the British taxpayer rather than by the Bombay merchant or Bengali ryot. This, as Gallagher wryly remarked, was to be the true test of Britain's will for empire. 
Ultimately, however, Jack Gallagher's name will always be linked with his collaborator, 
Robinson returned to St John's with a fellowship in 1949, and was appointed to a university lectureship in 1953. From 1966 to 1971 he was Smuts reader in the history of the British Commonwealth at Cambridge, and from 1971 to 1987 Beit professor of the history of the British Commonwealth at Oxford and a fellow of Balliol College, as well as chairman of the modern history faculty at Oxford (1974-6). Unlike Gallagher he enjoyed Balliol and almost, perhaps, became an 'Oxford man'. He was also very much a family man, with a very happy marriage to the American newspaper correspondent Alice Josephine Denny, whom he wed at Wandsworth Unitarian Church, London, on 12 August 1948; she was the daughter of Ludwell Howard Denny, a newspaper editorial writer. They had two sons and two daughters, of whom he was extremely proud. Alice Denny's role in the publication of 'Africa and the Victorians' -- acknowledged on the book's front cover -- should not be underestimated. It was she who took charge of the project and gave the two men a timetable -- Gallagher, in particular, did not relish the discipline of sitting down to write. 
In appearance Jack Gallagher and Robbie, as Robinson was known, could not have been more different. Gallagher presented a well-rounded figure; 'the Living Buddha' was how some described him. The don Johnson Fruylen ('all big-headed and baldy, with spindle-shanks and a bit of a tummy') in the novel 'My Friend Judas' by Andrew Sinclair, is modelled on Gallagher. Robinson, by contrast, was a beanpole -- tall and straight of back. But their similarities are perhaps equally striking. They were both ebullient and enthusiastic, well known for their conviviality and generous hospitality; equally elusive, both men could make themselves invisible when they wished (something that frustrated administrators in particular); they were both innately conservative, while at the same time being anti-establishment, a tendency perhaps born of their working-class roots; and they were both born communicators, with a fund of choice phrases, who delighted in words and revelled in controversy. None the less, this was a partnership of thought as much as (or more than) it was a matter of sympathetic personalities. From the beginning they shared an intense interest in Africa, its partition, and the interplay of nationalism and imperialism in the continent; they also shared an impatience with Marxist scholarship, and were eager to refute the theory that imperialism was simply the economic exploitation of the wider world by European powers. 
Robinson and Gallagher first came together in their seminal essay 'The imperialism of free trade', published in the 'Economic History Review' in 1953. How far the ideas and themes elaborated in this essay were truly original, or had in fact been anticipated by others and merely given a new 'spin' by Robinson and Gallagher, is a moot point for future historians to decide. Either way, it is justly acclaimed as a landmark in the study of the British empire, and remains one of the most widely cited and influential articles in any field of post-war British history. It portrayed the nineteenth century as a period of relentless expansion, taking many different forms, whereby Victorian governments worked to establish British paramountcy by whatever means seemed locally most appropriate. The preferred mode of expansion was 'informal', resulting from the forces of economic and cultural attraction; the actual annexation of overseas territory ('formal empire') was always a last resort -- a departure from the normal pattern of securing British interests in the wider world, undertaken not in response to organized opinion or electoral pressures, but in response to the perceptions of a policy-making elite (the 'official' or 'collective' mind). Yet this policy-making elite did not have an entirely free hand. If the limits on the independent action of statesmen in foreign and imperial policy were far looser than in other areas of policy, Britain's pursuit of profit and power was none the less constrained by a variety of external forces, which often obstructed overseas expansion. Central to the calculations of this official mind was India. Indeed, the early nineteenth century witnessed a major and conscious shift in British imperial policy -- a 'swing to the East' -- whereby India became the nucleus of the British empire. Its unique political, economic, and strategic value meant that Victorian statesmen were prepared not only to intervene much more directly in its affairs than in those of other colonies, but to contemplate the acquisition of territory in other parts of the world to ensure its future safety and stability. 
These themes were elaborated in Robinson's and Gallagher's co-authored book 'Africa and the Victorians: the Official Mind of Imperialism', first published in 1961, reprinted seven times, and issued in a second edition twenty years later. The book was a fearless and frontal assault on the Marxist interpretation of the late nineteenth-century partition of Africa. As one right-wing scholar later remarked, 'it annoyed all the right people' (Norman Stone in the preface to C. Bayly, ed., 'Atlas of the British Empire', 1989, 6). Robinson and Gallagher argued that the main impulse for Britain's involvement in these events was not to be found in the metropolitan economy but in local crises and proto-nationalisms on the periphery and in the colonial pretensions and policies of other European powers, in particular France. Rather than a new, industrially or financially motivated drive to empire at the end of the Victorian era, Robinson and Gallagher insisted that British imperialism was, if anything, more cautious, tentative, and defensive. Certainly, public opinion played little part in producing a more forward policy, as the main calls for expansion did not emerge until the 1890s when partition was already well under way. Similarly, the records of the Foreign, India, and Colonial offices gave no ground for thinking that business or commercial opinion was capable of pressuring government into taking new territory overseas. Rather, the motives of the official mind were first and foremost strategic. It was the defence of India which provided the key to understanding when, where, and why Britain reluctantly decided to extend its African empire. 
The idea that imperialism needed to be redefined in terms of the interconnections between its European and extra-European components was revisited by Robinson in two important essays, 'Non-European foundations of European imperialism' (published in R. Owen and R. B. Sutcliffe, eds., 'Studies in the Theory of Imperialism', 1972), and 'The excentric idea of imperialism' (published in W. J. Mommsen and J. Osterhammel, eds., 'Imperialism and after: Continuities and Discontinuities', 1986). These essays were typical of Robinson's social scientific frame of mind. His 'modus operandi' was to test hypotheses, to probe for the general principle, and to generalize from detailed case studies. This brought both clarity and analytical rigour to his work. 
In Robinson's writing on 'collaboration' two main propositions were advanced. The first was that the longevity of imperialism ultimately depended on working out a basis of co-operation (or collaboration, as Robinson preferred to call it) with the local population. The second stated that not only was collaboration inherent in the imperial relationship, but the choice of collaborators determined the organization, depth, and character of colonial rule. Though the word 'collaboration' suggested that Europe was able to profit from the divisions and rivalries which riddled African and Asian societies, this was no mere theory of 'divide and rule'. To be sure, the balance of terms between indigenous collaborators and their imperial masters was always unequal. But if terms became too unequal, they could not for long be sustained: either collaborators were alienated from their rulers, and withdrew their co-operation, or they were alienated from their subjects, and thus of little value. In many ways, therefore, the strength of imperialism rested on identifying and encouraging an influential yet pliable collaborating elite. This was no easy task. As Britain found to its disappointment, and sometimes cost, in Turkey, China, and parts of Africa, such collaborators were not always forthcoming, and even when they were, their improved organization frequently turned the terms of co-operation progressively in their favour. Moreover, the British public's notorious parsimony meant that it was extremely difficult to commit the resources to these relationships that might have helped to shore them up. 
It would be difficult to overestimate the scholarly impact of Robinson and Gallagher. Dubbed by one scholar the 'Morecambe and Wise' of imperial history (Clarke), they were said by another to have 'a sort of Laurel and Hardy quality to them' (Louis, 17). The most appropriate analogy for their importance may arguably lie, however, not in the field of comedy but in another sphere of the arts. It would probably not be an understatement to say that Robinson and Gallagher were to Commonwealth-imperial history what the Beatles were to popular music. Their multifaceted theory, first outlined in 1953, set the agenda for everyone else; after the publication of 'The imperialism of free trade' the discipline could never be the same again. Indeed, in many ways it was Robinson and Gallagher who created the subject that we know today. Hence the shift in emphasis toward periphery-based, area studies from the 1960s onwards. Hence the proliferation of essays and books which have explicitly or implicitly set out to review (and revise) their work. Hence the inclusion of regions of informal empire (the Middle East, China, and Latin America) in the new 'Oxford History of the British Empire'. And hence the way in which the discipline of Commonwealth-imperial history has in recent years been developing rather differently in the USA and in the UK: the former more open to new post-colonial perspectives, but concentrating on culture (in particular race) at the expense of the material and political dimensions to Britain's imperial past; the latter so steeped in the ideas and idioms of Robinson and Gallagher that it perhaps runs the risk of ignoring some of the more innovative areas of research. 
Gallagher, who from humble beginnings rose to become one of the twentieth century's most distinguished and most cherished historians, died tragically, of acute cardiac and renal failure, at Trinity College, Cambridge, on 5 March 1980. Much of his research on India was still to be written up. Robinson, a self-assured character who made a powerful impression on the people who knew him, died of cancer at his home, 79 Mill Road, Cambridge, on 19 June 1999. At the time of writing, several scholars are trying to chart a new course for Commonwealth-imperial history for the twenty-first century, but the future of the discipline remains uncertain. It cannot yet be said whether anyone will succeed in stepping into their shoes. 


@@@@@


doc= 46306


Tennant, Mariquita Dorotea Francesca (1811-1860), social reformer, was born on 1 November 1811, the daughter of Don Antonio Eroles of Barcelona, an army officer. Her sister, Rosa Florentina Eroles, married Francis Beaufort Edgeworth (died 1841), the half-brother of the novelist Maria Edgeworth. Mariquita Eroles was married twice, firstly to David Reid (1807-1835), fourth son of Andrew and Janet Reid of Lyonsdown near Barnet. They lived in Florence and had a daughter, Mary. After David Reid's death in November 1835 his widow remained in Florence, where she married the Revd Robert John Tennant (died 1842), Anglican chaplain to the British congregation there. The marriage, which may have been the occasion for her conversion from Catholicism to Anglicanism, was short-lived. Robert Tennant died in July 1842, and after remaining a few months more in Florence, Mariquita Tennant joined her widowed sister at the Edgeworth's family home, Edgeworthstown, in Ireland. 
By the end of 1848 Mariquita Tennant was living at The Limes, a medieval house belonging to her sister, situated near St Andrew's Church in the village of Clewer, near Windsor. On 29 December 1848 she gave refuge to a young woman called Marianne George who had been abused by her stepfather, the father of her four children. Tennant intended simply to remove her from her surroundings and train her as a servant, but the rector of Clewer, Thomas Thellusson Carter (1808-1901), was anxious to provide a safe refuge for other women in moral danger. Not only was Windsor a garrison town, but two railway companies were bringing their lines into the town, and there were many itinerant workers. Mariquita Tennant therefore offered to help any women wishing to escape from the beerhouses and brothels of Clewer Fields, a notorious slum area not far from Windsor Castle. On 14 June 1849 she admitted two more young women to her house. Both had sought refuge in Clewer Fields but, hearing of Mariquita Tennant, they approached her and were taken to The Limes. Others followed, so that very soon there were more than a dozen, with numbers continuing to increase. 
Clearly Mariquita Tennant could not cope with so many women single-handedly: many of them were unruly and some violent. Within a strict disciplinary framework she endeavoured to teach them basic domestic skills interspersed with religious instruction. As the work proceeded she began to cherish the notion of founding a religious sisterhood (of which she would be the self-styled lady superior), similar to that founded by E. B. Pusey at Park Village West. To that end she adapted the Park Village rule to suit her own needs. That the sisterhood never became a reality was due to the lack of reliable volunteers. Indeed, her only really committed helper was Charlotte Julia Weale (1829-1918), who came to Clewer in February 1850 for a period of six months. During her time at the Clewer house of mercy Charlotte Weale kept comprehensive notebooks detailing the case histories of the women, the daily timetable, and religious instructions. She also kept copies of correspondence between Tennant and supporters of her work, such as Elizabeth Herbert (1822-1911) and W. E. Gladstone, in whom Mariquita Tennant found a kindred spirit. Their mutual concern for a young woman called Emma Clifton led Tennant (despite her poor health) to travel to London and personally seek her out in the hope of bringing her back to Clewer -- a mission which ultimately proved fruitless. 
It is clear from Charlotte Weale's writings that Mariquita Tennant was not an easy person to work with, which is probably why none of her helpers stayed very long. This, in addition to the difficulty of establishing and maintaining order and discipline within the house, took its toll on Mariquita Tennant's health. There was also the stress of finding alternative accommodation, The Limes having been a temporary measure. But in February 1851 the house of mercy finally moved to a large house in Hatch Lane, Clewer, called Nightingale Place, which had a 15 acre estate. By this time Tennant had already resolved to resign, and finally left in April 1851. 
Following her retirement from the house of mercy, Mariquita Tennant withdrew to her private home, Trinity House, in Windsor, where she lived with her daughter Mary in increasingly poor health. When well enough she attended Holy Trinity Church close by, and shortly before her death she opened a meeting-room in Bier Lane not far from Clewer Fields, which was known as Our Room. She died on 21 February 1860 at 9 Claremont Road, Clewer, after a short illness, prematurely aged and worn out. She was buried in Clewer churchyard within sight of The Limes. A visitor to Clewer in 1864 described her gravestone as representing an open coffin containing a 'Bible' and a cross on top of an empty shroud, with the words 'Non est hic, sed resurrexit' (Not here, but risen) carved inside the open lid. This ornate memorial was later replaced with a simple stone cross. 
Mariquita Tennant was an enigmatic woman whom history has bypassed. She was a pioneer in the great wave of moral rescue work begun in the mid-nineteenth century and later undertaken by the religious communities which sprang from the Oxford Movement. The Clewer house of mercy which she left behind in Hatch Lane evolved quite differently under the wise, gentle, but firm guidance of Harriet Monsell (1811-1883). Nor was the quasi-sisterhood envisioned by Mariquita Tennant in any way like the Community of St John Baptist which took over her work. But though she cannot claim to have founded a religious community, she can rightly be credited with the foundation of a religious work in the house of mercy; she was the forerunner of all who followed at Clewer. 


@@@@@


doc= 46307


Hoare, Angelina Margaret (1843-1892), missionary, was born on 17 May 1843 at 13 New Street, Spring Gardens, London, the sixth of the twelve children of Henry Hoare (died 1866), banker, and his wife, Lady Mary 'nee' Marsham (1811-1871), third daughter of the second earl of Romney. Her parents were active members of the Church of England, and her father campaigned vigorously for the revival of convocation. She was educated at home, but as a young woman she developed a weak heart; nevertheless she led an active life, and was strongly attracted to missionary work. 
Angelina's brother Walter Hoare became curate to Robert Milman at Great Marlow, Buckinghamshire; Milman became bishop of Calcutta in 1867 and in 1874 his sister Maria invited Henry Hoare's daughters to Calcutta to help in the zenana missions for Indian women. Angelina Hoare arrived in Calcutta in January 1876. Within weeks Milman died, but his successor was supportive. Hoare soon realized that schools were more effective as specifically missionary agencies than the zenana houses, which were closely supervised by husbands who objected to the Christian teaching being given to their wives. In 1878 she started village schools south of Calcutta in the extensive rice-growing area called the Sunderbunds. There were no roads and the only means of communication was by flat-bottomed boats. About thirty schools were established, funded by money raised in England principally among Angelina Hoare's banking family connections. In 1882 she bought a large house in Calcutta with 9 acres of land, to serve as her mission house, and began a number of schools for Indians, some of whom became teachers in the Sunderbunds. Hoare adopted Indian dress and learnt Bengali: in return she won widespread admiration and support. 
Failing health hastened Hoare's decision to retire from the mission house, and the sisters from the community of St John Baptist, at Clewer, who had been working in Calcutta, were invited to run the mission house while she agreed to retain the schools. Soon after returning from a visit to England she became ill and died from a brain haemorrhage, on 10 January 1892. She was buried in the English cemetery in Calcutta and a memorial was placed in the cathedral. Following her death the Clewer sisters also took over the village schools. 


@@@@@


doc= 46309


Bowles, John (1751-1819), barrister and author, was the son of John Bowles, a printseller in Cornhill in the City of London. He is said to have received a bachelor of laws degree from the University of Douai on 25 March 1779 and to have been licensed by the same university on 11 May 1781. While he was reading for the bar he often attended the Robin Hood Debating Society in London with his friend John Taylor, where he was a well-respected speaker. Bowles later also practised as a magistrate in Surrey. He married but his wife's identity remains unknown. 
Bowles wrote at least thirty-three pamphlets between 1791 and 1817, most notably and prolifically on the subject of the British wars against revolutionary France. He produced sixteen pamphlets on this conflict, including 'The Real Grounds of the Present War with France' (1793), and he also wrote for the 'Anti-Jacobin Review'. He was a committee member and leading pamphleteer for the Crown and Anchor Loyal Association, and from 1792 he received government secret service pay for his efforts. He was also made a commissioner of bankrupts, and in 1795 he was appointed a commissioner for the sale of Dutch prize ships. By the mid-1790s, when his writing career was at its height, he had abandoned the legal profession. Despite his various emoluments, his opinions on the war went beyond those of mainstream loyalism, which generally supported the government through thick and thin, and he urged instead a more hardline, Burkean war strategy; that is to say, he was convinced that no peace could be had until revolutionary principles were extinguished in France itself. These views drew him into friendship with men such as John Reeves, John Gifford, William Windham, and William Cobbett. His other writings dealt with such matters as the freedom or restraint of the press, morality, the education of the poor, savings banks, temperance, and the authority of the Church of England. 
Bowles's fierce anti-Jacobinism was partly driven by his belief that religious and moral degeneracy were at the root of Britain's political and social troubles. By 1804, when he revised the 1801 edition of his 'Reflections on the Moral and Political State of Society at the Close of the Eighteenth Century', he explicitly declared Britain's moral danger to be greater than that posed by a French invasion. One of the circle of high-churchmen surrounding Joshua Watson and the developing 'Hackney Phalanx', Bowles was briefly, in 1802, a member of the Proclamation Society. Within a year of its foundation (also in 1802) he joined the Society for the Suppression of Vice, and until 1809 he was probably its most active executive member. He led the group within the society which supported the obtaining of evidence against, for example, traders in obscene literature, using somewhat dubious means; this policy led to the alienation of William Wilberforce and other evangelicals from the society's activities. 
The controversy over the society's activities was compounded in 1809 by the scandal which surrounded Bowles and the other four Dutch prize commissioners. Allegations of fraud were brought against them in the House of Commons, as part of the anti-corruption drive of the later years of the war which centred around the accusation that the duke of York's mistress had sold army promotions. The commissioners' case was eventually decided against them in the court of exchequer in May 1819. During the ten intervening years Bowles continued to be energetic in public work, such as the foundation, in 1811, of the National Society for the Education of the Poor, but now less conspicuously. He was intensely loyal to his friends although he lost a number of them through his aggressive moralism and his disgrace after 1809. Bowles died on 30 October 1819 at Bath, and a tablet was placed in his memory in the abbey church there. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 46310


Birch, Sir Joseph, first baronet (1755-1833), politician, was born on 18 June 1755, the first son of Thomas Birch (died 1782), a merchant at Liverpool. Like his father Birch was a merchant and had diverse commercial interests, ranging from shipowning and brewing to landholding in Jamaica and stock in the East India Company. It was this personal wealth that allowed him to pursue his political interests, especially in such notoriously expensive boroughs as Liverpool and Nottingham. On 6 March 1786 he married Elizabeth Mary, the daughter of Benjamin Heywood, a prominent Liverpool merchant banker, with whom he had one surviving son and three daughters. 
Birch's first foray into politics came in 1802, when he unsuccessfully contested his home town of Liverpool; he was returned as a whig, however, for the borough of Nottingham, not only because of his political sentiments but also because he was willing to use his own money to finance the campaign and possibly because of his nonconformity (he was a Unitarian). His success was short-lived: the defeated tory candidate Daniel Parker Coke successfully petitioned against Birch's return on the grounds that the returning officer, magistrates, and corporation of Nottingham had been biased against Coke in favour of Birch. Birch's election was declared void and at the subsequent by-election in 1803 Coke defeated him. In 1803 Birch made an explicit appeal to the 'working class' of Nottingham and portrayed the election of that year as a struggle between rich and poor, but such early radicalism was not much manifested in his later political career, which was one of 'an orthodox, well behaved, reforming Whig' (Thomis, 156-7). 
Birch stood at Nottingham again in 1806 but was defeated, and in 1812 he was nominated against his wishes only to be withdrawn when it became clear that he was contesting St Ives, as it turned out, unsuccessfully. He eventually succeeded in becoming an MP again when shortly after the 1812 election he was returned on the influence of Joseph Hague Everett for the constituency of Ludgershall, Wiltshire. He served throughout the remainder of the parliament of 1812 for Ludgershall, his whig credentials being confirmed by his joining Brooks's Club in April 1815. At the election of 1818 his attention returned to Nottingham. By 1818 the corporation of Nottingham had 'abandoned any last remaining pretence to neutrality in Parliamentary contests' (Thomis, 146) but Birch's successful return at the head of the poll for Nottingham in 1818 was also seen at the time as stemming in part from his support among moderate tories who put aside politics and recorded a personal vote in his favour. Birch served as MP for Nottingham until he retired in 1830. He was created a baronet in September 1831 and died on 22 August 1833. 


@@@@@


doc= 46313


Armour, James Brown (1841-1928), minister of the Presbyterian Church in Ireland, was born on 20 January 1841 in the townland of Lisboy, near Ballymoney, co. Antrim, the youngest of the six children of William Armour (1795?-1864), farmer, and his wife, Jane Brown, daughter of William Brown of Ballynaloob, near Ballymoney, co. Antrim. He was born into a strongly Presbyterian farming community, attended Kilraughts Presbyterian Church, and received his early education at the nearby Ganaby School. His education continued at Ballymoney model school and the Royal Belfast Academical Institution. He entered the Queen's College, Belfast, in 1860 and completed his undergraduate degree course at the Queen's College, Cork, where he graduated with a BA general degree in 1864; in 1866 he was awarded the degree of MA, with second class honours, at the Queen's College, Belfast. 
After some initial hesitation, Armour decided to become a Presbyterian minister and was ordained on 19 July 1869 by the Route presbytery, as assistant and successor to J. L. Rentoul of Second or Trinity Presbyterian Church, Ballymoney. Known as 'the black wolf', the young Armour had black hair and sharp features, wore spectacles, and invariably sported a beard. A later portrait by William Conor shows him to have become white-haired, with the gold-rimmed spectacles and beard still in evidence. Armour was in some respects a man of generous and liberal instincts but he also had a considerable temper and frequently used quite violent language to denounce political opponents. While he was an advocate of generous treatment of Irish Roman Catholic demands for denominational educational provision, for example at university level, he was extremely hostile towards the Anglican church in Ireland, with regard not only to its doctrines and its clergy, but above all, as he believed, because of its role as part of the conservative landlord ascendancy. In particular he constantly stressed the sufferings of Presbyterians at the hands of the Church of Ireland. Although theologically orthodox, he could best be described as something of a natural nonconformist in other matters. 
Armour did not marry until he reached the age of forty-two. His bride, whom he married on 19 March 1883, was a widow, Jennie Adams Stavely Hamilton ('nee' Stavely). She already had two sons by a previous marriage to her cousin A. M. S. Hamilton, and was to have three sons with Armour -- Max, William, and Kenneth. The Armour family lived in the manse adjoining the church. 
Armour was to remain in Ballymoney for the rest of his life, retiring as minister of the Trinity congregation on 2 September 1925. He was actively involved in the fields of temperance and education, acting as the first principal of Ballymoney intermediate school, teaching classics on a part-time basis at Magee College, Londonderry, until 1908 and serving on the first senate of the newly established Queen's University of Belfast (1910-14). He enjoyed a brief period of official favour after 1906, when he was appointed as one of the personal chaplains to the new viceroy, Lord Aberdeen. 
However, it was Armour's political activities which made him a well-known figure in the north of Ireland and beyond. His views were expressed at the local level in north Antrim through his involvement in election campaigns and also on the wider stage of the annual general assemblies of the Presbyterian Church in Ireland, for example in 1893 and again in 1913. These views were given considerable press coverage and he contributed a chapter entitled 'A Presbyterian view' to J. H. Morgan, ed., 'The New Irish Constitution' (1912). Prior to the introduction of Gladstone's 'Home Rule Bill' in 1886, Armour was an enthusiastic supporter of the Liberal cause, as were considerable numbers of Ulster Presbyterians. His support for land reform and the aggressive character of his Presbyterianism were important factors influencing Armour's political outlook. For him, Conservatism was closely linked to the Anglican church and the landlord class. 
Following the split in the Liberal Party over home rule in 1886 Armour at first favoured the Liberal Unionist position. However, he became increasingly unhappy, principally because of the allegedly unfair treatment of Liberal Unionists by their Conservative Unionist allies, especially with regard to the selection of parliamentary candidates. Indeed, he continued to complain of discrimination against Presbyterians in the whole area of public appointments. From the 1892 election campaign onwards he was to be publicly identified as a supporter of home rule, perhaps more for negative than positive reasons. Inevitably, this commitment exposed him to considerable public and private criticism over the years. 
Armour was not a nationalist in the Irish Ireland sense, hence his hostility to cultural nationalism, the Sinn Fein movement, and the Easter rising. Like John Redmond, he conceived of home rule as a means of strengthening rather than weakening the bonds between Ireland and Britain. Thus Armour gave his patriotic support to Ireland's participation in the First World War. He saw home rule as a force for reconciliation, undoing 'the evils of the paper union of 1800'. He believed it would stimulate Ireland's commerce and trade, but he also justified it on the grounds that it was the principle of Presbyterian church government applied to secular affairs. Home rule would benefit protestantism generally by ending the political monopoly of Anglicanism. As far as Presbyterians were concerned, the vital consideration was that they 'cannot possibly under home rule have a lesser share in the offices of emolument and dignity than they had all down the years from 1800 to 1912' (Armour, 'A Presbyterian view'). 
When partition became a reality in 1920, Armour condemned it in principle but also because he saw the new government of Northern Ireland as anti-Presbyterian. He caught a chill at a luncheon given in honour of the Unionist prime minister Sir James Craig in 1928. This subsequently developed into pneumonia and his death followed at the Trinity manse, Ballymoney, on 25 January 1928. He was buried on 28 January in Ballymoney cemetery. His widow survived him until 1931. 


@@@@@


doc= 46314


Barlow, Jane (1857-1917), poet and writer, was born on 17 April 1857 at Clontarf, Dublin, the eldest daughter of the Revd James William Barlow (died 1913), later vice-provost of Trinity College, Dublin, and his wife, Mary Louisa (died 1893/4). Barlow was educated at home and was said to have been 'frail in body and slight in build' ('Irish Book Lover', 141). 
Using the pseudonyms Antares Skorpios and Felix Ryark, Barlow was a frequent contributor to the 'Dublin University Review' from 1866. Her first poem was published in the 'Dublin University Magazine' in 1886. However, it was through her stories that she gained popularity. 'Bogland Studies' appeared in 1892 and contained narrative poems making abundant use of the supposed dialect of the peasantry, including words such as 'begorrah', 'musha', and 'bedad'. 'Irish Idylls' was also published in 1892. Set in the fictional Connemara village of Lisconnel, the tales deal with the peasantry in a sentimental way. Lady Augusta Gregory was attracted by Barlow's account of peasant life and declared that 'Irish Idylls' was 'one of my sermon books' ('Diaries', xx). 
Barlow lived quietly in Raheny, near Dublin, for most of her adult life. She never married. In February 1893 Douglas Hyde described her as 'the great 'incognita'' (Daly, 160). Hill walking was her main pastime. A friend of a number of Irish literary figures of the period, Barlow knew William Butler Yeats and Katherine Tynan, who first met her in 1893 at an afternoon party hosted by the artist Sarah Purser. Tynan noted Barlow's shyness and observed that she found it difficult to speak to anyone (Tynan, 'Middle Years', 74). Tynan and Barlow became good friends and corresponded for over twenty years. Purser, who maintained a weekly correspondence with Barlow for some time, painted a portrait of her in 1894. She also illustrated a number of Barlow's stories and painted portraits of her mother and father. 
Barlow's novels were usually critical of the Irish landowning class. 'Kerrigan's Quality' (1894) describes the effect of the famine and evictions from the viewpoint of a returned Irish-Australian emigrant. In 1895 William Butler Yeats chose 'Irish Idylls' as one of his 'Best Irish Books', praising Barlow's mastery of the 'circumstances of peasant life' but regretting that she seemed 'to shrink from its roughness and its tumult' ('W. B. Yeats: Uncollected Prose', 370). 'Strangers at Lisconnel', a second series of stories, was published in 1895. Further collections followed: 'Maureen's Fairing' (1895), 'Mrs Martin's Company' (1896), and 'A Creel of Irish Stories' (1897). Barlow's work was much admired in America, where her books went into many editions. In her novel 'Flaws' (1911) she gives a satirical view of middle- and upper-class Anglicized protestants in the south of Ireland, depicting them as full of petty jealousies and snobbishness. 
Although Barlow subscribed to the foundation of the Abbey Theatre, her one play, 'A Bunch of Lavender' (1911), which was produced there, was a notable failure. She continued to write and publish until ten days before her death. Her last sketch, 'Rescues', appeared in the 'Saturday Review' in April 1917. Jane Barlow died on 17 April 1917 at St Valerie, Bray, co. Wicklow. Her last novel, 'In Mio's Country', was published posthumously in 1917. 


@@@@@


doc= 46315


Bourke, Ulick Joseph (1829-1887), Roman Catholic priest and writer, was born near Castlebar, co. Mayo, in December 1829. He was educated at Errew monastery, Castlebar, where he was said to have been taught Irish by James Hardiman. He then went to St Jarlath's College, Tuam, co. Galway, and to St Patrick's College, Maynooth, where he was ordained in 1858. He returned to St Jarlath's as professor of Irish, classics, and logic, and remained there for twenty years, thirteen of those as president. During this period, Bourke rebuilt the college and acted as private secretary to his cousin John MacHale, archbishop of Tuam. St Jarlath's received as pupils a number of the sons of men who were important figures in Irish nationalism; they included the sons of Jeremiah O'Donovan Rossa, founder-member of the Irish Republican Brotherhood, whose fees were paid by Richard Pigott. Bourke's influence as a tutor of young men preparing to enter a seminary, and his teaching of the Irish language and history, were remembered by future members of the Irish Republican Brotherhood. One of his students was Mark Ryan, Fenian and founder-member of the Gaelic League, who calculated that many of his contemporaries at St Jarlath's subsequently became members of the Fenian movement. 
In December 1870 Bourke founded the 'Tuam News', a weekly paper that aimed to provide 'a popular exponent of national and local opinion...'; it claimed to provide special information about the Roman Catholic church and circulated in Tuam and the province of Connaught. The newspaper had a regular column in Irish, for which Bourke had cast a special fount of type. Bourke also founded the 'Keltic Journal and Educator' in 1869, but this was short-lived. However, this influenced the publication of 'An Gaodhal', a periodical published in Brooklyn, New York, which printed extracts from the 'Tuam News' and articles by Bourke and John MacHale. 
Bourke was a founder-member of the Society for the Preservation of Irish. In his 'College Irish Grammar' (1856), written while still a student at Maynooth, he said: 'The language of a nation is the exponent of a people's antiquity; the index of their refinement; the mouthpiece of their history.' His 'Easy Lessons on Self-Instruction in Irish' (1867), written at the suggestion of A. M. Sullivan, was published in 'The Nation' in weekly instalments during the 1860s. This work made Bourke's name known across Ireland and was regarded as a standard treatise on the subject. He was elected a member of the Royal Irish Academy in 1871 for his work on ethnology, which was embodied in his 'Aryan Origin of the Gaelic Race and Language' (1879). He was critical of the more fanciful theories of some scholars on the origin of the Irish language, and this book and his 'Pre-Christian Ireland' (1887) are serious attempts to dispel some of these myths. He also wrote a life of Archbishop MacHale. 
On his retirement from St Jarlath's in the late 1870s, Bourke became parish priest of Claremorris, co. Mayo. Although he was sympathetic to Fenianism, Bourke was not himself a Fenian, but circumstances of time and place, and his influence as a teacher of the Irish language and history, made it inevitable that he was caught up in the politics of the land war. His founding of the 'Tuam News' was in part motivated by his drive to give local feelings a voice. He had been influenced by the theories of John Stuart Mill and advocated a peasant proprietary. In 1879, immediately after the meeting in Irishtown, co. Galway, which was the beginning of the Land League, he presided reluctantly at a land meeting in Claremorris, addressed by Michael Davitt. This was the first such meeting to be chaired by a priest and addressed by priests -- an important element in the subsequent development of the Land League. Bourke's message was that they should be worthy of the title of free men and should not defy landlords and the government. He wrote a pamphlet addressed to Gladstone on the condition of evicted peasants in co. Mayo (1883). 
Bourke died in Castlebar on 22 November 1887 and was buried at Claremorris. At his death he was working on an Irish-English dictionary, which he left incomplete. 


@@@@@


doc= 46316


Frances Bedingfield (1616-1704). Frances went to Rome in 1632 to join Mary Ward, who was regrouping the remnants of her suppressed order there, and was professed on 8 September 1633 in the church of Santa Maria Maggiore. Frances remained a close companion of the founder, returning to England with her and remaining with her until her death at Heworth near York in 1645. At some date after 1650 Frances went to Paris and then to Rome to assist the superior of the institute; later she was superior of the mother house of the order at Munich. She returned to England, probably in 1667, as superior of the newly established house in Hammersmith in Middlesex. Operating from there she travelled between London and Yorkshire during the 1670s looking for a suitable site on which to establish a community and a school for Catholic girls, with money which her friend Sir Thomas Gascoigne had provided. We have a vivid picture of her in these years, learned in Latin, Greek, and Hebrew but busying herself with practical affairs, both legal and domestic, and with a 'majestical presence' which awed those magistrates required to administer the recusancy laws against her (Kirkus, 43). Frances eventually moved to York in 1685, and on 5 November 1686, with Gascoigne's money, she purchased a house and garden in York on a site just beyond the city walls at Micklegate Bar where she established a community which still exists today, and a school which continued until 1985. The deeds were signed using an alias, Frances Long, which she continued to use during her time at York, and the convent possesses a portrait of their founder revealing a matronly but steely figure. During its early years Frances provided effective leadership to the fledgeling community of nine or ten nuns and to the school, adding a school for poor girls to the establishment in 1699. Her reputation for holiness gained her admirers among the protestant leaders in the city, though this did not protect her from brief periods of imprisonment and the community from harassment during the 1690s -- until in 1696 or 1697 she placed the York convent in the care of her great-niece, Dorothy Paston Bedingfield. In 1699, aged eighty-four, she was recalled to the mother house in Munich, where she died on 4 May 1704, the last surviving sister to have had direct contact with the institute's founder. 
The lives of all these sisters, in both senses of the word, reveal a history often lost in national accounts: they provided spiritual leadership to religious communities spread across five European states and stretching from York to Munich, as well as an enduring network of contacts for English Catholics abroad which could be replicated in other families, though perhaps not quite so extensively. At least two of the sisters were succeeded in office by other family members, and the importance of these women in sustaining English Catholicism by providing education for gentry children and hospitality to travellers cannot be overestimated. Moreover, the influence of this cousinage endured well into the eighteenth century, as the case of the Caryll family of West Grinstead demonstrates. Frances Bedingfield of Oxburgh, the daughter of the first baronet, married into that family which, in subsequent generations, produced eight Benedictine nuns, two Augustinian canonesses, two nuns of the Holy Sepulchre, two Benedictine monks, and three Jesuits, who served their co-religionists at home and abroad. The Redlingfield branch provided a base for a Jesuit mission in the later seventeenth century and, as recusants, registered their lands at the annual value of $275 11's'. 1/2died in 1715. The cost of their recusancy, and the succession of children into the clergy and religious life, resulted in the family line having no direct heirs, and the Redlingfield property was sold some time before 1747, when it was owned by the Willis family. 
The century following the accession of Elizabeth I had taken its toll on the fortunes of the family, whose commitment to Catholicism had cost it much in financial terms, so that the estate was somewhat diminished and decayed by the Restoration. The family then regained its chief properties and returned to reside at Oxburgh in 1666 following the marriage of the first baronet's son, 


@@@@@


doc= 46317


Craft, William (c.1825-1900), slavery abolitionist, was born into slavery in Georgia, and apprenticed as a carpenter in Macon. His family was broken up when his parents, brother, and sister were sold separately to pay off their master's debts. At the age of sixteen William was mortgaged to the local bank to raise capital to speculate in the cotton boom, and was later sold to the bank cashier to meet his master's mortgage payments. His new master, Ira H. Taylor, sent him back to the cabinet shop where he had been apprenticed. He married another slave, Ellen Craft, nee Smith (1825/6-1891), about 1847, and in December 1848 the two made a daring escape to the north. 
The Crafts spent about eighteen months in Boston, where William worked as a cabinet-maker. In September 1850 the 'Fugitive Slave Bill' threatened their freedom, and two agents of their Georgia masters arrived in Boston intent on recapturing the couple, who were 'legally' married on 7 November 1850 and had their first child in 1852. The Crafts had by then established themselves as leading members of Boston's black community, William having given an anti-slavery lecture tour with another fugitive slave, William Wells Brown, in January 1849; the community rallied to their defence, and the agents were forced to leave without them. The Crafts left Boston late in 1850 and, like other American fugitive slaves, sought refuge in England. 
In Britain the Crafts participated with William Wells Brown in immensely popular lecture tours on the evils of slavery, travelling widely throughout Scotland and the north and west of England. They then spent three years at an agricultural school in Ockham, Surrey, supported financially by Lady Byron and others, which was to be the model for the schools that Craft later founded in Dahomey and Georgia. 
After leaving Ockham, Craft returned to lecturing, continuing to denounce slavery and also promoting the boycott of slave-grown produce. In May 1859 the London Emancipation Committee, which aimed to influence British opinion against American slavery, was formed; the Crafts were both executive committee members. They published the story of their escape in 'Running a Thousand Miles for Freedom' in 1860. Craft afterwards turned his attention to Africa, and in 1862 visited Dahomey (Benin) in the hope of persuading the king to abandon human sacrifices, cease participating in the slave trade, and encourage the cultivation of cotton. Craft's first short visit to Dahomey was followed in 1863 by a three-year stay, during which he opened a school at Ouidah and acted as an agent for the Company of African Merchants. 
After William's return to London, in 1867 the Crafts concentrated on raising money for their planned return to Georgia, where they hoped to run a co-operative plantation which would allow freed slaves to escape contract labour. Leaving England in 1869 they lived in Boston briefly before returning south, first to Hickory Hill, South Carolina, then to Woodville, an 1800 acre plantation at Ways Station in Bryan county, Georgia. Their egalitarian farming methods met with resistance from neighbouring planters and Craft was also accused of mismanaging funds collected for the Woodville Co-operative Farm School which he had opened for seventy-five boys and girls to attend free of charge. Severe financial problems dogged the latter years of his life. Craft died on 28 January 1900 at the Charleston house of his daughter Ellen and her husband Dr William Demos Crum, and was buried in the Humane Friendly burial-ground in that city. 
The return of the Crafts to America after the civil war to work with freed slaves showed courage and a commitment to improving the lot of Georgia's black population. Craft's activities in Dahomey may also have contributed to ending the slave trade there. The couple's famous escape from slavery and their many public lectures undoubtedly did much to further the abolitionist cause in both Britain and America. 


@@@@@


doc= 46318


Craft, Ellen (1825/6-1891), slavery abolitionist, was born into slavery in Clinton, Georgia, the daughter of Major James Smith and Maria, one of his slaves. In 1837, aged eleven, she was given to her mistress's daughter, Eliza, on her marriage to Dr Robert Collins of Macon, Georgia. As a favourite servant the conditions of her slavery were mild. In Macon she met William Craft (c.1825-1900), a slave apprenticed as a carpenter, and they were married about 1847. 
Afraid of being separated from one another or having future children taken away to be sold, the Crafts devised a plan in late 1848 to escape to the north. Ellen, who could pass for white, disguised herself as a slave master travelling to Philadelphia for medical treatment while William, who was darker-skinned, acted as her servant. Ellen put her right hand in a sling to avoid having to write her name, and wrapped up her face to reduce the need to converse with strangers during the journey. With Christmas holiday passes from their masters the slave couple escaped without arousing suspicion. William had saved some money, as slave artisans sometimes could, which paid for Ellen's clothes and their fares, first on a train to Savannah and then by boat, train, and coach to Philadelphia. Four days after leaving Macon they were being hidden by a Quaker family outside Philadelphia. Three weeks later they moved on, no longer in disguise, to the safety of Boston. 
For the next eighteen months the Crafts lived in Boston safe, they thought, from possible recapture. Ellen worked as a seamstress, William as a cabinet-maker. Befriended by William Wells Brown, an anti-slavery lecturer and himself an escaped slave, they recounted their stories at many anti-slavery meetings, becoming well known among Boston's 2000-strong black community, about 20 per cent of whom were also fugitive slaves. The 'Fugitive Slave Bill' in September 1850 threatened their freedom; within three days of the bill's passage some forty fugitive slaves fled Boston for Canada. In October 1850 two agents of Ellen and William's Georgia masters arrived in Boston intent on seizing them, but through a combination of legal suits and public protests the agents were forced to leave Boston without them. 
On 7 November 1850 Ellen and William were 'officially' married by Theodore Parker (their earlier 'slave' marriage not being legally recognized). Later the same month they left Boston for England, travelling via Maine, Nova Scotia, and New Brunswick, where they caught the steamer for Liverpool. England was the safest, most logical haven; it had harboured fugitive slaves from America for many years. The Crafts toured widely with William Wells Brown in Scotland and the north and west of England, publicizing the slavery issue at public meetings and talks. With help from English abolitionists they studied for several years in the early 1850s at a trade school for rural youth in Ockham, Surrey. Here they learned to read and write, and also taught some manual skills to their fellow pupils. 
Ellen and William had five children, all born in England: Charles Estlin Phillips ('b'. 1852), William, Stephen Brougham Dennoce (known as Brougham), Alice Isabella Ellen (known as Ellen), and Alfred. Both Crafts continued to be involved in the anti-slavery movement. Ellen was adamant that she would not return to live under a regime which endorsed slavery: 'I had much rather starve in England, a free woman, than be a slave for the best man that ever breathed upon the American continent' ('Anti-Slavery Advocate', December 1852). After leaving Ockham the Crafts settled in London. From 1857 to 1867 their home was 12 Cambridge Road (afterwards renamed 26 Cambridge Grove), Hammersmith. 'Running a Thousand Miles for Freedom', the story of their early life and escape written by William Craft, was published in London in 1860 and was an immediate success. 
During the 1860s William made two visits to Dahomey (Benin), his aims including that of bringing an end to the slave trade there. Ellen, who remained in England with the children, was active in the British and Foreign Freed-Men's Aid Society, and also raised money for a boys' school in Dahomey which her husband had founded and a girls' school in Sierra Leone. Through the efforts of friends, in November 1865 Ellen's mother, Maria, was brought over to London to join the family. 
In August 1869, American slavery now abolished, the family (except for William junior and Brougham, who remained in England to continue their education until 1873) returned on the 'Siberia' to Boston, where they lived for a time before buying a plantation at Woodville, Ways Station, in Bryan county, Georgia. The plantation was run as a co-operative to allow freed slaves to escape contract labour. Ellen died in 1891, in Bryan county, and was buried at her request near a favourite oak tree on the plantation. 


@@@@@


doc= 46322


Jones, David Martyn Lloyd- (1899-1981), Calvinistic Methodist minister, was born on 20 December 1899 in the family home at Donald Street, Cardiff, the second of three sons of Henry Lloyd-Jones (died 1922) and his wife, Magdalene Evans (1872-1951). The family owned a shop and milk-round business first at Llangeitho, Cardiganshire, then in August 1914 at Regency Street, London. 
Lloyd-Jones won a scholarship in 1911 to Tregaron county school, from there gaining a place in January 1915 at Marylebone grammar school. He became a medical student at St Bartholomew's Hospital, London, in October 1916. At Bart's he received his MRCS and LRCP in July 1921, later gaining his MB and BS (with distinctions) and MD. In October 1921 Lloyd-Jones was selected by Sir Thomas Horder, physician to the royal family, as his junior house physician. 
While fulfilling his duties at Harley Street, Lloyd-Jones saw the emptiness of the world around him. At some point in 1923-4 he was converted to Christianity and decided to enter the Christian ministry. As he told Sir Thomas Horder, who tried to dissuade him, 'when you and I as doctors have done all that we can do for our patients, they still have to die. I am going to deal with that part of a man that never dies' (Harrison, 98). 
Lloyd-Jones formally accepted a call to Bethlehem Calvinistic Methodist Chapel, Sandfields, Aberafan, south Wales, on 22 December 1926, and on 8 January 1927 married another physician, Bethan Phillips (1898-1991). They had two daughters. 
Until July 1938 Lloyd-Jones ministered successfully in Aberafan. He preached from the 'Bible' emphasizing the great Reformation themes of God's person, man's sin, God's free salvation, justification by faith alone, and the sufficiency of scripture. The church was soon full, and he preached to packed churches wherever he went. With his clear expository preaching style he was much sought after. 
In 1938 Lloyd-Jones became colleague and then assistant to G. Campbell Morgan at Westminster Chapel, London. The war years were difficult, and the congregation dwindled to 200. As sole pastor in 1943 Lloyd-Jones began to build on the work. By the mid-1950s 2000 churchgoers regularly attended his ministry and were enthralled by his biblical message. The historian G. M. Trevelyan, after hearing Lloyd-Jones preach on 'the limit of man's knowledge and the power of Christ', congratulated him saying, 'Sir, it has been given to you to speak with great power' (Dudley-Smith, 68). Emil Brunner, the Swiss reformed theologian, called him 'the greatest preacher in Christendom today'. His ministry at Westminster Chapel continued until he retired due to ill health in 1968. 
Lloyd-Jones had three preaching styles: teaching for believers (morning services), evangelistic (evening services), and doctrinal (Friday night meetings). Like Charles Spurgeon before him, Lloyd-Jones's written sermons sold in their thousands, the most significant being his mammoth expository series on 'Romans' and 'Ephesians' and the sermon on the mount. 
Lloyd-Jones was influential in reformed evangelical circles, playing an important role in a number of organizations: these included the Inter-Varsity Fellowship, the Leicester Ministers Conference, the Evangelical Library, the Evangelical Movement of Wales, the London Bible College, and also the International Fellowship of Evangelical Students. In later years Lloyd-Jones was no stranger to controversy, proposing in 1966, for example, that evangelical churches should leave their denominations, and his Westminster Chapel seceded from the Congregational Union. 
In later years Lloyd-Jones remained active: preaching, editing his sermons, and advising ministers on practical and doctrinal matters. He died peacefully in his sleep on 1 March 1981 in Ealing, London, and was buried on Friday 6 March in the Cardiganshire town of Newcastle Emlyn. 


@@@@@


doc= 46323


Cousins, Margaret Elizabeth (1878-1954), social reformer and women's activist, was born on 7 November 1878 at Boyle, co. Roscommon, Ireland, the first child of Margaret Shera and her husband, Joseph Gillespie (died 1930). Her father was the clerk of petty sessions in the Boyle court house, a unionist, and a protestant. Her parents provided a materially and emotionally comfortable middle-class childhood. Margaret attended Victoria High School for Girls in Londonderry on a scholarship and matriculated with distinction in 1898. She then went to the Royal Irish Academy of Music in Dublin where she acquired academic and professional reinforcement for her lifelong interest in music and earned the bachelor's degree in music from the Royal University of Ireland in October 1902. In 1900 she met James Henry Sproull Cousins (1873-1956), an aspiring poet and playwright who had come from Belfast to Dublin where he was active in the Celtic revival. They married on 9 April 1903; at their wedding banquet she announced her commitment to the vegetarianism which her husband practised. 
During the early years of the twentieth century Margaret Cousins became involved in organizational activities related first to vegetarianism and then to women's suffrage. In her memoirs, written with her husband, Margaret linked an invitation to speak at a vegetarian conference in Manchester with her initial awareness of the women's suffragist movement after attending a meeting of the National Council of Women held simultaneously in December 1906 (Cousins and Cousins, 128-9). Subsequently she began to campaign with women suffragists in Ireland and in England. In November 1908 she joined Francis and Hannah Sheehy Skeffington to found the militant Irish Women's Franchise League, which sought the franchise for Irish women on the same basis as that granted for Irish men. For not subordinating female suffrage to Irish home rule, the league was criticized as unpatriotic and its members as selfish. Disillusioned by the lack of impact that outdoor meetings and written propaganda had during the league's initial years, Margaret took up the militant tactics of the suffragettes, breaking windows on Downing Street in November 1910 and then at Dublin Castle in January 1913, and serving a one-month sentence of imprisonment in each case. Although she became an ally of English suffragists such as the Pethick-Lawrences, Cousins was careful to articulate the need for Irish suffragists to formulate goals and tactics suitable in the Irish situation. 
Intimately linked with this public, political activity was Cousins's exploration of the occult and of theosophy. From the early 1900s she deemed herself to be especially receptive to the world of spirits and able to communicate with the spirits of deceased friends. Theosophy was congenial to such communication and to some feminist values. Theosophical authors proclaimed that males and females were on equal planes and that intuition, usually viewed as more developed in women than in men, was a higher means of knowing the world of spirits. Theosophical thought also emphasized the underlying unity of diverse elements such as religions and ethnic groups. Theosophy provided both a propitious ideological base and the entry to India, where Cousins would work for the remaining four decades of her life. 
In 1913 the Cousinses moved to Garston, near Liverpool, where James worked for a vegetarian food company. Since Margaret was unable to establish close ties with English women activists in the Liverpool area, she felt rudderless and was eager to move to India when her husband obtained a position as literary editor on 'New India', a newspaper launched by Annie Besant, then the president of the Theosophical Society, at Adyar in the suburbs of Madras. Soon after arriving in Madras in November 1915 James Cousins lost his editorial post. In late 1916 the couple moved to Madanapalle, in the hinterland of Madras, where both taught at a theosophical college. Here Margaret became involved with women's rights issues. In 1917, when constitutional reform was imminent, she organized a deputation of Indian women and drafted a petition asking Edwin S. Montagu, the secretary of state for India, and the viceroy, Lord Chelmsford, for female suffrage. From then until the late 1930s she worked behind the scenes to gain and extend women's suffrage in India: briefing Indian women who lobbied British officials in London, writing supportive articles for Indian newspapers, and organizing campaigns for Indian women candidates when they became eligible for election to provincial assemblies. 
Although content to be in the shadow of Annie Besant, Margaret was an active propagandist for theosophy as well as for women's rights. In 1917 she helped Dorothy Jinarajadasa, a British theosophist, to organize the Women's India Association, and became the editor of its journal, 'Stri Dharma', which was published in English, Telugu, and Tamil versions. The association and its journal linked political and social programmes. In 1926 Cousins embarked on planning for the All India Women's Conference, which focused initially on developing women's education, then on broader social and legal issues such as age of marriage, birth control, and a uniform civil code, while trying to remain aloof from political objectives which were deemed potentially divisive. Margaret was a long-time member of the standing committee of the conference and its president in 1936-7. She was particularly active as a propagandist, publishing numerous articles and two books on Indian women, 'The Awakening of Asian Womanhood' (1922) and 'Indian Womanhood Today' (1941). In the early 1940s poor health and 'the feeling that direct participation by me was no longer required, or even desired, by the leaders of Indian womanhood who were now coming to the front' (Cousins and Cousins, 740) led to her withdrawal from public activity. In 1943 Margaret suffered the first in a series of debilitating strokes. 
A feminist first and a nationalist second, whether in Ireland or in India, Cousins sought to reform patriarchal ideology, practices, and institutions to equalize educational, political, and economic opportunities for women. Her ideology of the 'femaculine' which strove for 'a synthesis of the virtues of the masculine and feminine in which the defects of each are balanced if not eliminated' (M. Cousins, 'Irish Citizen', 12 June 1912, 10) was both conservative and radical. It reflected a belief that men and women had inherent characteristics, and led her to extol women's distinctive qualities as both biological and social mothers. At the same time she sought to achieve transfigured gender relationships based on equality. In Ireland and England she focused on suffrage issues, while in India her purview expanded to include better educational opportunities, health care, and working conditions for women as well as suffrage. She also became a vocal proponent of Indian freedom and supporter of Mahatma Gandhi, and protested against a government ban on free speech in Madras in 1932 which earned her a year's imprisonment. Although she was articulate about the inequities of class divisions within Indian society, her reform programme was directed at the concerns of middle- and upper-class Indian women. Even so, Cousins worked tirelessly to identify with Indian women as a colleague, to develop organizational and propaganda infrastructures which Indian women could utilize to pursue their own agendas, and to foster contacts between Indian women and women activists around the world. A life of service was her ideal, and in India she sought to be a builder of bridges between women. 
Margaret Cousins died on 11 March 1954 in Adyar, Madras. She was cremated according to Hindu practices, and her ashes were deposited in the Ganges River at Varanasi. The All India Women's Conference honoured her contribution by naming their library at their national headquarters in New Delhi after her. 


@@@@@


doc= 46325


Bull, George Stringer (1799-1865), Church of England clergyman and social reformer, was born on 12 July 1799 at Stanway, Essex, the sixth child and sixth son of eight sons and two daughters of the Revd John Bull (1767-1834), curate of Stanway, and his wife, Margaret Towndrow (1766-1833). He joined the Royal Navy at the age of eleven and served in the Napoleonic wars. In 1816 he left the navy and went to live with his father, by now rector of Tattingstone, near Ipswich. In 1818 he sailed to Sierra Leone to work as a missionary and teacher under the auspices of the Church Missionary Society, but sickness forced him to return to England in 1820. Three years later he was ordained and became curate of Hessle, near Hull, where he met Mary Frances Coulson (1796-1878), the daughter of a Hull merchant, whom he married on 5 December 1825 and with whom he had six children. 
After moving to the West Riding of Yorkshire in 1825 Bull was initially curate of Hanging Heaton, near Dewsbury, and then, from 1826 until 1839, of Byerley (Bierley), near Bradford, where he became known as 'Parson Bull of Byerley'. He campaigned for slave emancipation abroad and temperance at home, and from 1831, having become increasingly aware of the often appalling conditions in many Yorkshire factories, he allied himself with Michael Sadler, Richard Oastler, and John Wood in the Ten Hours Movement, which long pressed for a reduction in the working hours of children and young people. Bull laboured tirelessly in this cause, thereby earning the nickname 'the Ten Hours Parson'. He organized and spoke at rallies and demonstrations, wrote numerous pamphlets, and was co-editor of the 'British Labourer's Protector, and Factory Child's Friend' (1832-3). It was he who in 1833 was largely responsible for persuading Lord Ashley, later the seventh earl of Shaftesbury, to lead the agitation for a 'Ten Hours Act' in parliament. Though a firm churchman he advocated the reform of abuses in the Church of England, notably in his pamphlet 'The Church her Own Enemy' (1834). He was sympathetic towards the emerging trade unions and opposed the 'Poor Law Amendment Act' of 1834, which he regarded as a retrograde measure. However, during his later years at Byerley he drew back somewhat from public campaigning because of the growth of militant Chartism, of which he disapproved. In 1840 Bull went to Birmingham. He became perpetual curate of the newly formed district of St Matthew, Duddeston, and from 1847 rector of St Thomas's, near the Bull Ring, a parish of 30,000 people. By 1864 he was in poor health and accepted the benefice of Almeley, Herefordshire, where he died on 20 August 1865. He was buried in St Thomas's churchyard, Birmingham, on 26 August. 
Throughout his ministry Bull, small in stature but stockily built, was an energetic and highly effective pastor, establishing numerous schools and other parochial institutions and attracting large congregations. His outspoken advocacy of social reform ensured that he was a very popular and respected figure among the working classes in industrial areas, but his uncompromising tory churchmanship and his prominence within the Ten Hours Movement led to periodic clashes with both dissenters and Liberals. In the novel 'Michael Armstrong' (1840), Frances Trollope, mother of Anthony, depicts factory life in Derbyshire and introduces Bull, thinly disguised as 'George Bell of Fairly'. 


@@@@@


doc= 46326


Devoy, John (1842-1928), Irish nationalist, was born on 3 September 1842, at Kill, co. Kildare, the son of William Devoy (1807-1880) and Elizabeth Dunne, who were married about 1833 and lived in a cottage on half an acre given by Elizabeth's family. A literate and able man, William came of a family with an inheritance of some self-esteem as tenant farmers and well-placed servants of titled families. He played a prominent local role in the O'Connellite and temperance mobilizations of the 1820s, 1830s, and 1840s. He took occasional jobs in canal, road, and railway construction, cultivated his little holding intensively, and improved his cabin to accommodate a growing family. However, the famine crisis undermined this economy and in 1849 he moved his household to Dublin, where, through connections, he obtained full-time employment, eventually becoming managing clerk of Watkins's Brewery in Ardee Street. John, who had briefly attended Kill national school, continued his formal education in Dublin at O'Connell's (Christian Brothers) schools, Marlborough Street model school, a small private school off the South Circular Road, and School Street model school. Although at the last-named institution he was a paid monitor from the age of fourteen for two and a half years, his disciplinary record was not unblemished; by his own account he was dismissed from Marlborough Street for kicking a teacher on the shin, and he records a number of other altercations with teachers. After leaving school he obtained an office job. 
Devoy soon took up the learning of Irish (a task which he never completed) at evening classes, where he was also introduced to nationalist movements, firstly the national petition campaign of 1859-61, and then the Fenians, into whose organization he was sworn in 1861. His father, conscious of having himself invested too much in patriotic endeavours, put pressure on Devoy to attend to his further education and his prospects in life. The eighteen-year-old responded by leaving home to join the French Foreign Legion. After a year in Algeria he returned to Dublin and then moved to Naas, co. Kildare, to promote the Fenian organization in the town and surrounding area. In September 1865 James Stephens put him in charge of Fenian recruitment among Irishmen in British army regiments. After Stephens himself had been arrested on a charge of treason two months later, Devoy was a key figure in planning and effecting his rescue from Richmond prison, which occurred on 24 November 1865. On 20 and 21 February 1866 Devoy attended a council of war at which Stephens effectively backed away from an immediate rising. Devoy was himself arrested on 22 February 1866 and after a year of detention was formally charged with treason felony. Unlike the line of Fenian leaders who had preceded him into the dock, he pleaded guilty, pragmatically estimating that this might produce a more lenient sentence. In the event he was given fifteen years of penal servitude. He subsequently served almost four years in various English prisons -- Millbank, Portland, and Chatham -- before being released in January 1871, whereupon he went into exile in the United States. 
Finding the Irish-American movement in a chaotic state, Devoy and other released Irish prisoners threw their weight behind a new organization, the Irish Confederation. This proved to be a disappointment and around 1873 Devoy joined Clan na Gael, which dated from 1867. Thanks largely to Devoy it became the premier Irish-American nationalist association; despite explosive internal conflicts it was to be his principal vehicle for fifty years of purposeful endeavour on behalf of Irish independence. Through the Clan he masterminded the rescue of six Fenian prisoners from Western Australia in 1876, a spectacular achievement. The resulting prestige helped Devoy to secure an arrangement with the supreme council of the Irish Republican Brotherhood (IRB) under which Clan na Gael influence over the home movement was copper-fastened and a joint revolutionary directory created. These successes encouraged Devoy to think of taking advantage of the prospective conflict between Britain and Russia over the Balkans: a Clan delegation met the Russian ambassador in Washington in November 1876. Devoy was still planning for an imminent Irish revolution when Michael Davitt, the recently released IRB leader, arrived in New York in August 1878. Following consultations with Davitt, in October 1878 Devoy launched the 'new departure': this was intended to link the IRB and Clan na Gael with the 'obstructionist' section of home-rule MPs supporting Charles Stewart Parnell, in a campaign that would draw on the rising sense of anxiety caused by agricultural depression. In furtherance of his objective, Devoy attended a gathering of the IRB supreme council in Paris in January 1879 and held meetings with Parnell and Davitt in Dublin. The understandings achieved contributed greatly to the emergence of the Land League by October 1879 and to the character of the ensuing land war. Devoy and the Clan contributed massively to the political and financial success of Parnell's triumphant US tour in early 1880. However, the political effect of the land war was to advance constitutional 'home rule' nationalism rather than the radical separatism which Devoy wished to promote. 
There ensued decades of conflict within and around Clan na Gael as Devoy and others struggled for control of militant Irish nationalism in the USA, and for influence over Irish nationalism at home. But, largely under the influence of Devoy, Clan na Gael was available to support Irish radicals and militants at crucial moments. He gave significant encouragement to the Gaelic Athletic Association and the Gaelic League. He was a vital supporter of the military council within the IRB, which planned the rising of Easter Week 1916, and he was a key figure behind the Friends of Irish Freedom, an open organization backed by Clan na Gael which by late 1919 had raised a million dollars in support of the independence movement. Relations between the Friends of Irish Freedom and the Sinn Fein leadership subsequently became very sour and very complicated, and Devoy acquired another batch of bitter enemies, this time including Eamon de Valera. With division rampant on both sides of the Atlantic, Devoy gave his support to the Anglo-Irish treaty of December 1921 and to the new Irish Free State. He visited the country in August 1924, when the Tailteann games in Croke Park, Dublin, provided an opportunity for formal public expression of respect and gratitude. He also made sentimental visits to the haunts of his early life. Back in the United States, he gathered together his memoirs in a volume which appeared in 1929 as 'Recollections of an Irish Rebel'. He died on 30 September 1928 in Atlantic City, New Jersey, and was interred temporarily in New York before final burial in Glasnevin cemetery, Dublin. 
Small and pugnacious, Devoy was the most able, tenacious, and pragmatic individual to devote his life to the cause of Irish separatism. Journalism, and especially the weekly 'Gaelic American', had been throughout his American career at once a source of income and a means to his political ends; he died unmarried and with little money. 


@@@@@


doc= 46327


Gairdner, William Henry Temple (1873-1928), missionary, was born on 31 July 1873 in the family's summer home at Ardrossan, Ayrshire, the second of five sons and four daughters of Sir William Tennant Gairdner (1824-1907), professor of medicine at the University of Glasgow and Glasgow's chief medical officer, and his wife, Helen Bridget Wright. James Gairdner, the Tudor historian, was his uncle. He was educated first at St Ninian's preparatory school in Moffat, Dumfriesshire, and subsequently at Rossall School from 1887 to 1892. In October 1892 he entered Trinity College, Oxford, as an exhibitioner, emerging in 1896 contrary to his own and his friends' higher expectations with a second-class BA degree in both classical moderations and Greats. 
In Trinity Gairdner's circle of close friends included J. H. Oldham, and while there, in reaction to the death of his brother Hugh, he became very actively involved, through the strongly evangelical Oxford Inter-Collegiate Christian Union, in the work of the Student Volunteer Missionary Union. He declared his intention to become a missionary at the annual Keswick Convention of 1893, and his enthusiasm was further fired there the following year by the American student leaders J. R. Mott and R. G. Speer, with their challenge to 'the evangelization of the World in this generation'. On leaving Oxford he spent twelve months as a lay brother assisting the Oxford pastorate clergy, while also studying theology with F. J. Chavasse, principal of Wycliffe Hall. This was preparation enough to secure his acceptance as a missionary by the Church Missionary Society (CMS) in November 1897. 
Gairdner had no doubt that his destination lay in Egypt and the Sudan, his thoughts crystallizing in response to several influences. Thrilled by the royal jubilee celebrations of 1897, he was prompted to declare 'I should like to serve my Queen. Can I do it better than by taking Christ to her Empire?' (Padwick, 51). Like many of his contemporaries Gairdner had also been brought up a great admirer of General Gordon, whom he regarded as the embodiment of heroism and Christian service; as the reconquest of the Sudan went slowly ahead, the opportunity to complete Gordon's work there seemed very real. There was also a more general preoccupation with Islam at this time, especially in evangelical Anglican circles where eschatological reflections on Christianity's confrontation with 'Mohammedanism' resonated with the student movement's commitment to a missionary strategy which would hasten Christ's second coming. 
From 1897 to 1898, based in London, Gairdner worked as travelling secretary for the British College Christian Union (forerunner of the Student Christian Movement), and then in 1899 spent a final two terms at Wycliffe Hall preparing for ordination and starting to learn Arabic. Ordained deacon in St Paul's Cathedral by the bishop of London early in October 1899, he left England six weeks later under instructions from the CMS to join his Oxford friend Douglas Thornton for work with students and educated Muslims in Cairo. With missionaries barred from the Sudan by the British authorities, Gairdner became steadily more settled in Cairo. Ordained priest in Alexandria in February 1901 by G. F. P. Blyth, bishop of Jerusalem, and abandoning earlier thoughts of a celibate life, on 16 October 1902 he married an old Glasgow friend, Margaret Dundas Mitchell ('b'. 1875), who had joined the CMS in Palestine the previous year. They had three sons and two daughters. 
Increasingly convinced of Cairo's importance as the publishing and literary centre of the Islamic world, Gairdner came to share Thornton's belief that their task was not only to expound Christianity to Muslims but to stimulate Anglican understanding and sympathy for Islam. The creation of an educational, apologetic literature thus became his principal concern, a literature at once imaginative and wide-ranging in content and rid of its traditional yet ever more lifeless trading of theological argument. For Muslims, Gairdner produced a steady stream of lectures, leaflets, and pamphlets in Arabic, and in 1905 with Thornton set up a regular Arabic and English paper, 'Orient and Occident', which flourished unbroken until 1942. With similar inspiration he turned his own considerable musical talents to the adaptation of traditional local music for Christian worship. For readers at home, two of his books became of particular importance: 'D. M. Thornton: a Study in Missionary Ideals and Methods' (1908), a biography of his friend who died of typhoid in 1907, was immediately followed by his survey for students, 'The Reproach of Islam' (1909). Appearing in the setting provided by the Pan-Anglican Congress of 1908 and the Edinburgh World Missionary Conference of 1910, which paid considerable attention to the expansion of Islam, both books were widely read. Gairdner's prominence in the early twentieth-century encounter between Christianity and Islam was finally confirmed by his commission to write the popular report of the Edinburgh conference. ''Edinburgh 1910': an Account and Interpretation of the World Missionary Conference' (1910), written in only eight weeks, in part restated for a new generation the challenge presented by Islam and its centrality in what he interpreted as a major turning point in world history. 
The lines of Gairdner's career were now well established. After Edinburgh he visited the United States, Germany, and Hungary to update his knowledge of Arabic scholarship, before returning to Cairo. Continuing his own study and writing, he also acquired an outstanding reputation as a linguist and teacher of Arabic, activities concentrated in the Cairo Study Centre which he set up in 1912. However, administrative obligations constantly intruded, never more so than for the duration of the First World War, when he was obliged to take over the secretaryship of the Cairo mission. Ever anxious to influence the growing nationalist movement, Gairdner also fostered the YMCA in Cairo. He worked constantly to improve relations both with other churches, such as the Copts, and between the different missionary societies. 
Gairdner was tall, athletic, and clean-shaven, and somewhat short-sighted. An impulsive, versatile, warm, and unpretentious man, he was much loved, and much mourned when he died on 22 May 1928 of septicaemia in Cairo's Anglo-American Hospital. He was buried in Cairo. A memorial appeal made possible the building of a new church in Old Cairo, completed in 1934 as home to the Egyptian Episcopal church. 


@@@@@


doc= 46328


Kelly, Thomas (1769-1855), hymn writer and founder of the Kellyites, was born at Kellyville, Queen's county, on 13 July 1769, the only son of Thomas (died 1809), the Rt Hon. Chief Baron Kelly of Kellyville, Queen's county, justice of the Irish court of common pleas. He was educated at Portarlington and Kilkenny before entering Trinity College, Dublin, on 14 November 1785 and taking his BA degree in 1789. Initially Kelly intended to practise law. While studying for the bar in London he attracted the attention of Edmund Burke, in whose house he was a frequent guest. He was admitted to the Middle Temple on 4 July 1786. Back in Dublin, after being challenged by John Walker on the necessity of inward conversion, he passed through an ascetic period, eventually emerging as an articulate exponent of the tenets of 'serious religion'. Against the wishes of his family Kelly then decided to abandon law in favour of ordination in the Church of England, which occurred in 1792. Three years later, in July 1795, he married Elizabeth, eldest daughter of William Tighe (died 1782), MP (and Irish patron of John Wesley), of Rosanne, co. Wicklow, who brought a sizeable fortune to the marriage. They had at least one daughter. 
Inspired by the visit of the English evangelical Rowland Hill in 1793, Kelly began preaching the 'doctrines of grace' in and around Dublin. In early 1794, together with three clerical allies, Kelly began preaching the Sunday afternoon sermon at St Luke's, Dublin, until his success awakened the opposition of the rector. Soon afterwards they were inhibited by Robert Fowler, the archbishop of Dublin, for preaching 'certain strange and pernicious doctrines'. The focus of their spiritual efforts then began to disperse throughout the country, Kelly abandoning Dublin for Athy. After his marriage he migrated to Blackrock, outside Dublin, preaching at an Anglican chapel of ease recently constructed from his own resources. Here Kelly appeared, as Walker described it, 'all on fire, as if he would set the world in a blaze' ('Evangelical Magazine'). 
For some years Kelly continued to preach at the principal evangelical churches and chapels throughout Ireland. In 1802 he founded the Kellyites, a religious connexion based on a congregational plan. Although the precise details of the Kellyites remain uncertain, it is known that congregations were founded at New Ross, Waterford, Blackrock, Dublin, Athy, Kilkenny, Cork, Limerick, Portarlington, and Wexford. Some pulpits were filled by laymen and local ministers, others with students from the academy formed by Robert and James Alexander Haldane in Scotland. In 1803, concluding that a national establishment of religion was incompatible with 'New Testament' principles, Kelly severed his relationship with the Church of England. 
At first glance Kelly's secession and the advancement of his connexion outside the established church appear a mere episode in the complex religious history of Ireland; yet when they are considered within the overall context, occurring simultaneously with John Walker's spectacular secession and the founding of his connexion, the Walkerites, they take on added significance. 
Kelly continued to minister to the bodies meeting at Dublin and Athy until his death in Dublin on 14 May 1855. By the following year a number of the chapels had closed. Congregations still met at Dublin, Waterford, New Ross, Athy, and perhaps elsewhere, but the number of adherents had begun to diminish considerably. Kelly published a number of controversial religious tracts, although he is best known as the author of some 765 sacred hymns which appeared in three principal volumes: 'A Collection of Psalms and Hymns Extracted from Various Authors' (1802), 'Hymns on Various Passages of Scripture' (1804), and 'Hymns by Thomas Kelly, not before Published' (1815). 
One of the outstanding figures in early Irish evangelicalism, Kelly was a deeply learned man, skilled in oriental languages; his friends and acquaintances alike found him a likeable man, frank and generous in manner. 


@@@@@


doc= 46329


Morgan, George Campbell (1863-1945), Congregational minister, was born on 9 December 1863 at 12 Cutwell Street, Tetbury, Gloucestershire, the second child of George Morgan (1828-1907), unattached minister, and his wife, Elizabeth Fawn Brittan (died 1911). His father was a Baptist minister before working as an independent preacher. Soon after Morgan's birth the family moved to Roath in south Wales and began attending a Wesleyan Methodist church. At first Morgan was educated at home, but after a family move to Cheltenham he attended Gratton House School in the town. He preached his first sermon in Monmouth Methodist Chapel in 1876, at the age of thirteen. 
After an adolescent crisis of faith, Morgan had to abandon plans for a university education in order to earn his own living. A year in a teaching post in the Wesleyan School for Boys in Birmingham was followed in 1883 by three years in a similar post in the Jewish Collegiate School for Boys. Here his interest in Hebrew and the 'Old Testament' was stimulated, and the principal, Lawrence Levy, became a personal friend. His interest in preaching was unabated, and while acting as one of the team of helpers on the occasion of the visit of Dwight L. Moody and Ira D. Sankey to Birmingham in 1883 he became convinced of a vocation to preach. When he was made redundant because of the imminent closure of the collegiate school, he applied to the Wesleyan Methodist church as a candidate for ministry, but was rejected. This did not dim his resolve, and he continued with mission preaching in Hull, following the work of the evangelist Gypsy Smith. 
Three months after his rejection Morgan married his cousin, Annie (always known as Nancy) Morgan, on 20 August 1888. He soon received a call to minister to the Congregational church in Stone, Staffordshire, where he began a two-year ministry on 18 August 1889. He was ordained on 22 September and the following day received into the Congregational Union as an accredited minister. 
There followed three further ministries in England, at Rugeley (1891-3), Westminster Road, Birmingham (1893-7), and New Court, Tollington Park, north London (1897-1901). During these years Morgan began the systematic 'Bible' lectures which formed an essential part of his ministry, and began his regular visits to the United States. He made a deep impression on D. L. Moody and on many others when he participated in the Northfield summer conference. After Moody's death in 1899 his son, Will Moody, invited Morgan to carry forward the work of the Northfield extension programme. He left London in 1901 and travelled all over the United States engaged in this work for the next three years. Chicago Theological Seminary conferred the degree of DD on him in 1902. 
Under repeated pressure to return to his homeland Morgan accepted a call to Westminster Chapel, in central London, in 1904. Despite an initially small congregation in a large building, this proved to be the scene of his greatest work during two outstanding ministries (1904-17 and 1933-43). Here he became known as one of the world's finest expository preachers. A tall, lean, striking figure in the pulpit, with a strong, well-modulated voice, he attracted congregations of more than 1500 to his regular Friday evening 'Bible' lectures. He did not engage in theological controversy, but throughout his life concentrated on the detailed study and exposition of the 'Bible'. His great work was preaching, whether in London at the weekends, elsewhere during the week, or at the annual Mundesley 'Bible' conferences in Norfolk. A staff of assistants carried on the regular activities of the church. For three years, from 1911 until 1914, he also made time to combine his London weekend ministry with the training of future Congregational ministers as president of Cheshunt College, Cambridge (where he was the inspiration behind a new building programme). 
Morgan resigned from Westminster Chapel in 1917 and, after short spells of lecturing at the YMCA's Mildmay College and a brief ministry at Highbury Quadrant Church, he returned to the United States in 1919, and remained until 1932. At first he had an itinerant ministry based in Indianapolis and then in Athens, Georgia; there followed work at the Biblical Institute in Los Angeles, ministry at Tabernacle Presbyterian Church, Philadelphia, and teaching at Gordon College, Boston. 
In 1933 Morgan began his second ministry at Westminster Chapel (at first in collaboration with Hubert Simpson, later with Martyn Lloyd-Jones). His expository preaching continued unabated until his health began to give way in 1943, leading to his resignation. He died at home, 345 St Ermins, Westminster, on 16 May 1945, and was cremated three days later at Golders Green. A memorial service was held in Westminster Chapel on 28 May. He and his wife had four sons (all of whom followed their father into ordained ministry) and three daughters (one of whom died in childhood). Morgan published more than forty books, most of them based on his biblical expositions, which had a wide circulation in the English-speaking world. 


@@@@@


doc= 46330


Rossa, Jeremiah O'Donovan (bap. 1831, d. 1915), Irish nationalist, was baptized Jeremiah O'Donovan (Diarmuid O Donnabhain) on 10 September 1831 in Ross Carbery, south-west co. Cork, the son of Dennis O'Donovan 
(Donnchadh O Donnabhain; died 1847)
, an impoverished tenant farmer of Carrig-a-griannan, and his wife, Nellie O'Driscoll ('b'. 'c'.1803), daughter of Cornelius O'Driscoll and Anna-ni-Laoghaire. 
With the obvious exception of Daniel O'Connell, O'Donovan was the only native Irish speaker among modern Irish nationalist leaders, having been taught to read and write the language by his father. Early education (until 1844) at the newly formed national school under John Cushan gave him a comparable love for the English language and literature but the old tongue haunted him throughout his life. So did the death of his father on 25 March 1847, followed by the family's eviction in the worst depths of the great famine and the subsequent emigration of his mother and siblings to Philadelphia. He contrasted their fate with his ancestors' alleged pre-Cromwellian ownership of Rossmore, whence he added Rossa to his name in 1854. The Gaelic version, Rosa, simply means 'of Ross', not necessarily betokening the land claims which he asserted by its adoption. His later preference for calling himself Rossa may derive from Sir Walter Scott's 'The Antiquary' or similar Scottish works where landowners are addressed by place name. 
O'Donovan worked as apprentice clerk and general manager in the hardware store of a cousin-in-law, Mortimer Downing at Skibbereen, from 1848 to 1853, thereafter establishing himself as a retail general storekeeper. Having bought a pedlar's stock of 240 volumes for $1, he gained the hold on literature that enabled him to exchange quotations with Lord Devon during interrogation in 1870 on his prison experiences. Applying for postmastership in 1858 he described himself '
like bards of high and low degree 

Of amative propensity 

I married, just at twenty-one, 

Since then four years are past and gone, 

And every year that past me o'er 

An Irishman came on my floor. 

I, with these youths, my time beguile, 

Half-idle in my domicile 

Which in a large and central street, 

For a post office would be meet. 

I trust I'll meet not disaster 

Till you address me as 'Postmaster'. 

Excuse my lord, the wish most fervent 

I have to be your lordship's servant. 
(Rossa, 'Recollections', 1972 edn, 215)' But his arrest on a charge of treason-felony on 5 December 1858 proved the disaster in question. Rossa's high-spirited versification reflected a mingling of ideological iconoclasm, personal good nature, and facile passions, which may help to explain the homicidal, even genocidal, politics that he continually offset by extraordinarily genuine kindliness. He had been a youthful repealer, knowing songs in honour of Daniel O'Connell and shaking the great man's hand after the Skibbereen repeal meeting in 1843. The famine hardened his nationalism as it did that of west Cork in general. His first reported speech, at the Phoenix National and Literary Society, Skibbereen, on 2 January 1858, claimed that in 1846-7 'England allowed thousands of our people to starve, and blasphemously charged God Almighty with the crime'. James Stephens reached Skibbereen in May 1858 and swore in Rossa to his new Irish Republican (or, as Rossa would always maintain it was called, Revolutionary) Brotherhood, together with many other Phoenix Society members. Rossa's constant travels to Bantry and Kenmare on hardware business had built up good contacts and would expedite recruitment. But the police easily penetrated local ranks, and he was among the thirty-one arrested in December 1858. 
The prisoners heard nothing from Stephens, now in the USA; according to Rossa his message telling them not to plead guilty never reached them. One prisoner was convicted, and the rest pleaded guilty on the promise of remission of his ten-year sentence and their own release (after eight months in gaol without trial). Stephens now renewed contact, and in 1861 Rossa helped to manage the Cork-Dublin leg of the funeral of the Young Irelander Terence Bellew MacManus, an escaped convict from the 1848 rising who had died in poverty in San Francisco, from which the Fenians derived impressive propaganda and personnel gains. He was also active in 1861 in the national petition movement, which collected half a million signatures, and from which the Fenians claimed further recruits. By this time Rossa's own retail business had been blacklisted by most local landlords, but was used by local authorities for disseminating food to starving islanders off Cape Clear in 1862, albeit briefly. He went to the USA in summer 1863 and later claimed that he formed the intention of taking out American citizenship at that time, but returned to Ireland to become manager of the Fenian paper the 'Irish People', whose initial losses he subvented. The paper lasted from November 1863 to 16 September 1865, the day after Rossa's arrest, which was followed by those of the editor, John O'Leary, and the publisher, Thomas Clarke Luby. They were indicted for high treason, the Dublin prosecutor Charles Barry QC asserting that they intended to have all the landed aristocracy and Catholic clergy massacred. These charges were baseless and they were silently dropped, but their ventilation probably sealed the prisoners' fate when the more easily provable offence of treason-felony was substituted. After Luby and O'Leary had been sentenced in December 1865 to ten years' imprisonment apiece, Rossa dismissed his counsel, and harangued the court for a day with extracts from the 'Irish People' largely chosen for their offensive comments upon the past political vicissitudes of Mr Justice William Keogh, who presided. The press in general abused rather than reported Rossa, whose former plea of guilty in 1859 entitled Keogh to pass the sentence of life imprisonment in England, which he served chiefly in Pentonville, Portland, Millbank, and Chatham. 
The fastidious John O'Leary instructed his colleagues to bear any ill treatment stoically, but Rossa's puritanism was horrified at the want of sexual privacy. His sex drive was strong: his first marriage on 6 June 1853 to Nora (or Nanno) Eager (died 1859) produced four sons; he then married Eilean ni Bhuachalla of Castlehaven, co. Cork, in 1861, but she died aged nineteen in 1863, leaving one son, who was reared by her family. Rossa's 'Recollections' merely includes her, unnamed, in his assertion that 'I never was rich; I never will be rich; but I got some of the best and handsomest girls in the country to marry me -- simply on account of myself and my name'. On 22 November 1864 he married his third wife from west Cork, the nineteen-year-old Mary Jane Irwin (1845-1916) of Clonakilty ['see 'Rossa, Mary Jane O'Donovan], who gave birth to thirteen children and was pregnant with her first by the time of his sentence in December 1865. From this, bitter conflicts with British prison warders ensued, featuring Rossa's being forcibly stripped, with violent usage from his custodians, including the use of illegal restraining devices. At one point he flung a chamber pot in the face of the Chatham governor, for which he would have been flogged if not a Fenian prisoner: as it was, he was handcuffed at the back for 35 days with breaks for meals. He also suffered 123 days' restrictions to bread and water, and 25 days' confinement in dark cells. Rossa smuggled a letter of protest out of Portland prison, published by the sympathetic Richard Pigott in 'The Irishman' of 16 March 1867. A campaign on his behalf was mounted in the House of Commons by John Bright, supported by Sir John Gray of the Dublin 'Freeman's Journal', McCarthy Downing, John Francis Maguire, and others. A commission (the Knox-Pollock) rejected complaints, but Rossa found a friend in the chief director of convict prisons, Edmund Du Cane, who proposed in October 1868 that prisoner and authorities make a fresh start, after which Rossa's conduct was exemplary. 
On 22 November 1869 Rossa was nominated for a vacant House of Commons seat for Tipperary. This began as a nomination-day stunt by the editor of the Nenagh 'Tipperary Advocate', the colourful Peter Gill, but transformed into a whirlwind campaign ending in Rossa's victory on 27 November by 1131 votes to 1038 in an electorate of 9498, although the open ballot kept many voters from the poll in fear of priests and landlords. The result 'did not signify the upsurge of support for Fenian revolutionism that English politicians and leader-writers discerned at the time' (Comerford, 178-9), yet 'O'Donovan Rossa's victory... though he himself was unseated and the verdict narrowly reversed three months later, marks the birth of modern Irish politics... Rossa defeated the Catholic candidate of a Unionist party who had swept to unprecedented victory the previous year. (Lee, 165)' Rossa jokingly asked the Chatham governor to return him to Millbank as convenient for Westminster, where he promised to speak only in Gaelic. As a convicted felon he was quickly declared ineligible. But for all of his anti-constitutionalism he had inaugurated a politics that sealed the fate of landlord influence and turned the tide against priestly control, henceforth chastened into dependence on lay support. 
No less paradoxically, Rossa's prison life gave noteworthy aid to British prison reform. Gladstone's first government set up a commission under William Reginald Courtenay, eleventh earl of Devon: O'Leary once again told the prisoners to eschew all co-operation beyond civility, but Rossa again played his own game. The record shows a meeting of minds that is deeply honourable to Rossa and to the commissioners alike. The prison authorities attempted an extended cover-up of what had occurred during the period before Du Cane, and the commissioners broke down official evidence to find for Rossa, whose honesty was almost heart-breaking. The unionist commissioner G. C. Brodrick found the case 'fully proved', adding that Rossa 'certainly impressed us all favourably by his manly bearing; and, after his release I received a letter from him which did credit to his better feelings' (Brodrick, 165-6). Rossa was particularly upset by a decision early in his imprisonment to proclaim a detected contraband letter to his wife as a seduction attempt on the wife of another convict, and also by official concealment from wife and husband of each other's censored communications. The Devon commissioners sometimes interviewed husband and wife together, partly in order to give them time together in decent conditions. Mary O'Donovan Rossa had made her way to America, raised money by poetry readings, published a volume of verse, campaigned in Ireland for amnesty for the prisoners, and organized other women in support of arms purchase and amnesty agitation alike. 
Rossa's evidence to the committee shows him at his eloquent best, revealing a dawning of concern about his fellow prisoners, political and criminal, and of a human desire to help alleviate their torments. But his subsequent memoir of imprisonment suffers from self-advertisement to a mass audience even more than from its propagandistic status. It was originally published in New York as 'Six Years in English Prisons' in 1874; reprinted there as 'Irish Rebels in English Prisons' (1882, 1889), and later reprinted in Ireland in abridged form as 'My Years in English Jails: the Brutal Facts', ed. Sean Ua Cearnaigh (1967). His later 'Recollections' (New York, 1898; reprinted in Ireland, 1972, with an introduction by Sean O Luing) contained the poem 'Jillen Andy', which he composed in gaol, an impressive description of a great famine burial from the standpoint of a retarded child. The humanity shown here and in his evidence help to explain the intense personal affection he aroused among so many who abominated his hatreds. 
Rossa and thirty-two other amnestied Fenians were released in January 1871, on condition of remaining outside British dominions for the remnant of their sentence. Together with John Devoy and three others he arrived in New York. Here he was promptly cornered by Thomas Murphy, the collector of the port of New York appointed by the republican Ulysses Grant, and as such ambitious to annex the Irish vote. Rossa, hopelessly out of his depth, was cajoled and flattered into standing for the state senate against the Tammany Hall boss William Marcy Tweed, then on the verge of his fall. Rossa was admitted to American citizenship on 21 February 1871, for which he supposedly qualified by his visit in 1863 and his wife's domicile during part of his imprisonment, in lieu of the usual requirement of five years' residence. Tweed's forces retained the senate seat in November: no doubt the majority was inflated fraudulently, but the victory was almost certainly genuine. Tweed, under heavy investigation, fled, but was captured, tried, and died in prison. Thus Rossa was led to believe he had won, with resultant inflammation of his conceit and frustration. 
Rossa became weekly American correspondent of Pigott's 'Irishman' from July 1871 until its take-over by Parnell in 1881. He joined the proliferating lecture circuit, showing himself fluent, fiery, possessed of wit and irony. He became an emigration ticket agent; edited a weekly, 'The Era' (New York, 1871-2), and went into the hotel business. He was drinking heavily at this time, as he had when under pressure in his 'Irish People' days; his wife bullied and weaned him into a return to total abstinence in the 1880s as their family grew larger. In the mean time he moved back into the Fenian front line of publicity. Devoy had started his own body, the Clan na Gael, but Rossa, Luby, and others reconstituted the old Irish Republican Brotherhood (IRB), pledging support late in January 1876 to its dethroned leaders, John O'Mahony in the USA and Stephens in Europe. Meanwhile in December 1876 Rossa wrote a letter to the New York 'Irish World' (then the best-selling American weekly) proposing a 'skirmishing fund' to subsidize parties which 'would keep striking England year after year while the revolutionary organisations are preparing for the heavier work': Patrick Ford, the editor-owner, withheld the letter until March 1876 and then endorsed it. This effectively launched the idea of Irish patriotic urban terrorism and was promptly repudiated publicly by O'Leary, and privately by Stephens and other Fenian leaders. Rossa justified hanging cabinet ministers who proposed hanging Fenians 'or in burning up on the previous evening, the town or the city which they were to be hanged in, 'to prevent it' so that the murder could not take place there'. O'Leary doubted that he was serious, though Rossa went on to advocate saturating the House of Commons with 'osmic gas', which touched off enthusiastic reactions from many Irish-Americans, reflecting their growing militancy. The growing fund was at first put to propagandistic use, as in the shipping home in 1877 of the body of O'Mahony, who had virtually starved to death: Rossa was elected in his place as head centre of the IRB on 2 February that year. 
Rossa operated as secretary of the skirmishing fund until 23 May 1878 when he was smoothly ousted by the Clan na Gael for indiscretion, irregular accounting, and genial alcoholic sprees. Hence he was bitterly opposed to Clan co-operation with Michael Davitt and the Land League formed in 1879, however sympathetic he would otherwise have found its ideals. The IRB was hopelessly moribund. In 1880 Rossa started a personal newspaper, the 'United Irishman', which he and his wife, Mary, ran for thirty years. Its companion organization, the United Irishmen of America, had less effect, save to ensure his expulsion from Clan na Gael and his isolation in exile politics, and to involve him occasionally in sending urban guerrillas to Britain, who numbered far fewer than contemporaries assumed. On 14 January 1881 an explosion at Salford barracks killed a boy of seven, and on 16 April that year 40lb of coarse blasting powder in a wooden box with a burning fuse attached was discovered in the Mansion House, London. Rossa claimed responsibility for these and other explosions, some of which had natural causes. A blast shook the House of Commons on 15 March 1883, for which Rossa gnomically implied his authority: some money from him was traced to dynamiters' possession, and rumour noisily identified him with outrages, but he seems to have been largely 'the shadow of a dynamiter' in the sense that Sean O'Casey's eponymous play speaks of the 'Shadow of a Gunman'. On 2 February 1885 Lucille Yseult Dudley, an Englishwoman, shot Rossa; she was pronounced insane at her trial on 30 June, put in an asylum, and later discharged. Rossa was convinced of her British secret service credentials. Possibly in retaliation, the 'United Irishman' printed an advertisement offering $10,000 for the prince of Wales, alive or dead. Rossa himself incited Irish readers in the British forces to murder their officers in the heat of battle. The dynamite campaign of the early 1880s was mostly the action of Clan na Gael or its splinter groups; but Rossa's rhetoric bears more responsibility than his actions, in that the Clan may have acted in part to prevent his stealing their thunder. However empty, drunken, or insane his conduct, the horrors of IRA murder campaigns in the twentieth century derived from the legitimacy he gave to urban guerrilla bombing. 
Rossa's finances led him into dependence on revolutionaries, some of whom were British agents, such as Red Jim McDermott. On 12 November 1888 the radical MP Henry Labouchere asserted in the Commons that Rossa was himself in British pay. The enraged Rossa was then fined $100 in a New York libel suit for declaring P. S. Cassidy, a leading Clan critic of his own McDermott connection, to be the latter's successor in the British secret service. Later, when a much respectabilized Rossa was admitted to the Commons gallery, he had to be ejected for denouncing Labouchere (7 May 1895). Subsequently he revisited former Irish haunts and met surviving companions of former years, whence came the impulse to write his 'Recollections', serially published in the 'United Irishman' (1896-9), and later published in book form (New York, 1898; reprinted, 1972). The 'Recollections' may disappoint the student of Fenianism, apart from its transcripts of a few letters between Fenian leaders. But it is a first-class source on west Cork social history, captivating in its use of the Gaelic story-teller or 'Seanchai' manner, and merits close examination by the historian of emigration antecedents. 
Former IRB colleagues, now high in the Irish Parliamentary Party support groups, found employment for the financially embarrassed Rossa in 1904 -- as corresponding secretary under Cork county council, whence he joined Maud Gonne McBride as vice-president of the Cork Young Ireland Society. But he returned with his ailing wife to New York in 1906 and remained there to his death. As an employee of UK local government Rossa had thus made his peace with the constitutional nationalism which he had so long denounced, though he was posthumously recaptured by revolutionary forces. Devoy learned from Mary O'Donovan Rossa of Rossa's increasing debility in February 1913, and they were reconciled on St Patrick's day. Rossa had entered hospital by October 1913, where he reverted to speaking in Gaelic and rather happily believed himself to be once more in prison, 'a very healthy place where the people are kind'. His wife kept close links with Devoy, who manipulated her rejection of Redmondite auspices for the inevitable funeral, which he envisaged as a propaganda coup for the IRB. Rossa was by now an inspiration to the Gaelic League, particularly to Patrick Pearse. He died at Staten Island, New York, on 29 June 1915 and his widow oversaw the removal of his remains to Dublin, where the funeral on 1 August was masterminded by Thomas Clarke, Devoy's Dublin agent, and amounted to an overture for the Easter rising in the following year. 'Pearse's oration... was more than an unqualified denunciation of the British attitude towards Ireland; it was a declaration of war by the Irish revolutionaries against England. Pearse ignored Redmond and Home Rule, and asserted that the national tradition of freedom was that of Tone, Mitchel and Rossa. (Dudley Edwards, 208-9)' Rossa was buried in Glasnevin cemetery, Dublin. His wife died on 17 August 1916, after writing an account of the funeral for Devoy's 'Gaelic American'. Pearse described Rossa as the most typical Fenian, a euphemism for his intellectual inferiority to Stephens, O'Leary, Luby, and Devoy: Rossa's resultant complex compounded his problems. But in reputation he maintained a heroic if at times demented image, a Hercules or Cu Chulainn occasionally insane, which harmonized with the images Pearse wished to invoke. Significantly, press observers credited him with 6 feet in height, although he was in fact little more than 5 feet 9 inches (and weighed 154 lb after five years in gaol). He was usually bearded, but his clean-shaven convict portrait reveals a hard if crudely sensitive face. He spoke with post-Gaelic syntax in a resonant if somewhat harsh west Cork accent, but after his American sojourn was credited with some American accent (at his 1865 trial, amid fears of attack from demobilized Irish-American soldiers from the civil war, his voice marked him as a dangerous figure). He had a command of French and Latin, and occasionally intruded elements from each into his speech. Few likeable men have done greater harm, in his case with less than normal responsibility. 


@@@@@


doc= 46331


Mowll, Howard West Kilvinton (1890-1958), archbishop of Sydney, was born in Dover on 2 February 1890, the eldest son of Henry Martin Mowll ('b'. 1860), solicitor, and his wife and first cousin, Gertrude Emily Worsfold (died 1935). He was educated at the King's School, Canterbury, King's College, Cambridge (BA, 1912; MA, 1915; honorary DD, 1922), and Ridley Hall, Cambridge (1912-13). He served a record five terms, in 1911-12, as president of the evangelical Cambridge Inter-Collegiate Christian Union, following its split with the Student Christian Movement. His leadership here led to his appointment as tutor (1913) and professor (1916-22) at Wycliffe College, Toronto. Before emigrating he was made deacon on 21 September 1913, by Bishop E. A. Knox of Manchester for the bishop of London for the colonies, with a notional title at St James, Dover; he was priested while on leave on 7 June 1914 by Archbishop Randall Davidson of Canterbury. 
On the nomination of the Church Missionary Society (CMS) to superintend its missions in western Szechwan (Sichuan), Mowll was consecrated assistant bishop in west China in Westminster Abbey on 24 June 1922. On 23 October 1924 in Mienchu (Mianzhu) he married a vivacious and experienced missionary, Dorothy Anne Martin (1890-1957); to their grief, there were no children. In August 1925 near Mienchu, the Mowlls and other missionaries were kidnapped by red-lamp brigands, mistreated, and eventually ransomed; the incident aroused worldwide attention. Appointed diocesan of west China in 1926, he adopted the CMS policy of devolving authority upon local bishops, including native-born suffragans, as opposed to that of the China Inland Mission, which favoured European missionaries with Chinese subordinates. During a deputational tour to Australia in August 1931 Mowll so impressed leaders of the Anglican Church League, the conservative evangelical strategists of the diocese of Sydney, that in April 1933 the league secured his almost unanimous election as archbishop. He was enthroned on 13 March 1934. Liberal evangelicalism in the diocese was thereafter subjugated. 
As archbishop, Mowll worked prodigiously and kept ungodly hours, sometimes summoning his archdeacons at two in the morning. Chaplains rarely stayed the course, but the diocese responded enthusiastically. In November 1935 he appointed the Revd T. C. Hammond, head of the Irish Church Mission, as principal of his theological college, and in May 1936 Canon Charles Venn Pilcher, of Wycliffe College, Toronto, was consecrated as his coadjutor. Pilcher never supplied the archbishop's scholarly shortcomings, but Hammond proved a tenacious defender of conservative evangelicalism. In February 1938 a group of fifty clergy active in the diocese presented him with a memorial claiming that men of one school of thought alone were preferred. Mowll declined to interview the signatories; he replied instead with a questionnaire of Hammond's devising, then sailed for Vancouver. To the public he was known for his sustained protests over the opening of the Sydney Royal Easter (Agricultural) Show on Good Friday, and for organizing an annual procession of witness on that day. During the war both he and Mrs Mowll actively promoted the Church of England National Emergency Fund; for this work, Mrs Mowll was made OBE in 1956. In December 1942 he appointed a special chaplain to youth and valued the employment agency and summer beach camps and youth conferences thus initiated. 
In March 1935 Mowll had been narrowly defeated as primate of the Anglican church in Australia. His election to that office, in November 1947, proved the watershed of his episcopate. His perspective widened. Despite opposition from within his diocese he supported both the World Council of Churches, nationally (as president) and internationally, and also the proposed constitution for an autonomous Anglican church in Australia. He visited CMS missions and those of the evangelical Bush Church Aid Society all over the continent. After the expulsion of the CMS from China in 1949 he urged it to establish missions in New Guinea (where he toured in 1951) and south-east Asia, especially Borneo, Sarawak, and Malaya. He encouraged the formation of autonomous provinces in missionary fields worldwide, including east Africa, south Asia, and the Pacific. He and his wife loved to travel. In 1948 they attended the Lambeth conference, the first assembly of the World Council of Churches, in Amsterdam, and the International Missionary Council at Oestgeest. Almost every year thereafter they travelled abroad, for meetings of missionary councils or the World Council of Churches. After 1953 Mowll personally promoted an appeal for missions in south-east Asia. From October 1956 to January 1957 he and his wife, with other Australian bishops, made a visit to China. 
Mowll's latter years were marked by a far-reaching post-war expansion of his diocese, though he found himself increasingly isolated because of the death or retirement of faithful retainers. Australian clergy, diocesan-trained, were consecrated as his coadjutors; the death of his wife on 23 December 1957 deprived him of his last confidante. He died unexpectedly in Sydney on 24 October 1958, and his ashes were buried beside the throne of his cathedral on 11 November. 
A man of great height and commanding presence, and an unhesitating evangelical who proclaimed a simple gospel, Mowll became one of the most significant figures of the evangelical wing of the Anglican communion. To his many disciples within his diocese (including his biographer), he shone with a 'lustrous' light; to his detractors he was known as Holy Mowlly. His ecumenism and his interest in missions worldwide never diminished his loyalty to the Church of England. 


@@@@@


doc= 46332


Nicholson, William Patteson (1876-1959), Presbyterian minister and evangelist, was born on 3 April 1876 at Cottown, Bangor, co. Down, one of seven children of sea captain John G. Nicholson and his wife, Ellen Campbell (died 1931). The Nicholsons were devout Presbyterians; William Patteson was the name of their minister in Bangor and three of their children became foreign missionaries. William, however, originally chose a different path, going to sea at sixteen, following education at Fisherwick Presbyterian church school and the Model School in Belfast, to where the family had moved. After a spell as a hard-drinking railway construction worker in South Africa he returned home and experienced a sudden conversion on 23 May 1899. He entered the Glasgow Bible Training Institute in 1901 and among his lecturers were James Orr and James Denney of the Glasgow United Free Church College and the famous Edinburgh preacher Alexander Whyte. In his vacations he assisted his former Belfast minister, Dr Henry Montgomery, in his Shankill Road mission, gaining experience of open-air evangelism. 
In 1903 Nicholson began his apprenticeship as an evangelist, employed by the Lanarkshire Christian Union, preaching with some success in a community of coalminers and steelworkers. He married Ellison D. Marshall (died 1926) of Bellshill, Lanarkshire, in 1907 and the following year he joined the team of American evangelists Chapman and Alexander, with whom he worked in Australia and America. His growing reputation as a preacher led to his ordination in 1914 as an evangelist in the Presbyterian church in the USA and to his appointment in 1918 to the staff of the Los Angeles Bible Institute under its dean, the prominent American fundamentalist R. A. Torrey. 
On a visit to his native Ulster in 1920 he was persuaded to undertake a mission in Bangor; this led to a series of missions in Portadown, Lurgan, Newtownards, Lisburn, Belfast, Londonderry, Ballymena, and Carrickfergus, which had a tremendous impact in the province, making his name a household word. The political situation was explosive in the context of the partition of Ireland, accompanied by widespread sectarian violence. Gunfire could be heard during mission services in Belfast and in the first week of the mission in the Albert Hall in February 1922 more than thirty people were killed and almost one hundred wounded in Belfast, yet thousands attended. Nicholson's populist presentation of the gospel attracted large numbers of working men, particularly shipyard workers, normally beyond the ministrations of the churches. His message was simple and stark: turn or burn, Christ or hell, reject the 'world' -- alcohol, tobacco, dancing, the theatre, and the cinema. Thousands responded -- and more than 20,000 in the province professed conversion. 
Nicholson has been credited with saving Ulster from civil war, and a republican commented that the men who had been trying to shoot him were now trying to convert him. It has also been suggested, however, that, as in the revival of 1859, the Nicholson 'revival' confirmed Ulster protestant consciousness of being different from Catholic Ireland, thereby justifying partition. Nicholson returned to Los Angeles in 1923 but a year later he was back in Ulster to lead a new series of missions, including one in Dublin. His ministry had always been divisive, but now the divisions were sharper. A militant fundamentalist, coming from the conflict between fundamentalists and modernists in America, he attacked alleged modernism in Irish Presbyterianism, contributing significantly to a campaign which culminated in the trial for heresy before the Presbyterian general assembly of a theological professor, Ernest Davey. Davey's acquittal led to a small schism in Irish Presbyterianism but many of Nicholson's converts became ministers and elders in the mainstream Presbyterian church, undoubtedly strengthening its conservative puritan and pietist traditions. 
It was not only in Ulster that Nicholson was effective as an evangelist: he held successful missions in Australia, New Zealand, South Africa, and the United States. Perhaps his most improbable evangelistic success was in Cambridge University in 1926. His irreverent populism attracted some undergraduates who affectionately called him 'Willie Nick', though others, including the future archbishop of Canterbury, Michael Ramsay, were permanently prejudiced against evangelicalism by Nicholson's buffoonery and vulgarity. The Cambridge Inter-Collegiate Christian Union, which had invited him, was greatly strengthened both by the large number of converts and by the impact of Nicholson's ministry. 
Later in 1926, while Nicholson was leading a mission in Australia, his wife died suddenly. Subsequently he himself suffered a heart attack and in 1927 he married the matron of the Australian hospital in which he had been treated, Fanny Elizabeth Collett (died 1979). She returned with him to his home in Glendale, Los Angeles. He had resigned from the Los Angeles Bible Institute in 1924 but had retained his home there and his son worked for the Bible Institute. There were also two daughters of his first marriage. 
Nicholson's cardiac problems handicapped his later life and ministry, though he made frequent visits to Ulster and conducted a number of missions without making the impact of earlier years. The Revd Ian Paisley claims that at the beginning of his ministry in what was then a mission hall on the Ravenhill Road in Belfast, Nicholson gave him his blessing, praying that God would give him a tongue as sharp as a cow's in the service of the gospel. Returning to Ireland in 1959, Nicholson suffered a final heart attack and died on 29 October in the Victoria Hospital, Cork. He was buried in Clandeboye cemetery in his native Bangor on 2 November 1959 after a service in Hamilton Road Presbyterian Church. 


@@@@@


doc= 46333


Roberts, Evan John (1878-1951), preacher and miner, was born on 8 June 1878 in Island House, Bwlchymynydd, near Loughor, Glamorgan, Wales, the ninth child of fourteen children born to Henry Roberts ('b'. 1844), a collier, and his wife, Hannah Edwards ('b'. 1849). His education was confined to the local primary school, and he left at the age of twelve to become a miner. From 1890 to 1902 he worked as a coalminer in Loughor and Mountain Ash, and in a smithy in Pontarddulais from September to December 1902. 
Since his childhood Roberts had been a devout member of the local Calvinistic Methodist chapels at Loughor and Mountain Ash, and in December 1903 he began preaching. As he had no secondary educational background, he entered the Newcastle Emlyn Academy, which was kept by John Phillips, on 13 September 1904. The same month he attended a meeting at Blaenannerch, near Cardigan, where he received a charismatic experience. He called 29 September 1904 the 'most terrible' but also the 'nicest day' of his life. 
Roberts decided to return to Loughor, between Llanelli and Swansea, where more revival meetings were held. In a short period of time, between November 1904 and January 1906, the religious revival spread throughout the mining valleys of south Wales, then to the towns and villages of north Wales as well as to the Liverpool and Birkenhead Welsh communities. 
Roberts visited every county in Wales as well as addressing large meetings on Merseyside. Singing predominated: individuals would burst into song everywhere and the hymns of William Williams and Ann Griffiths were sung by his assistants, in particular Sam Jenkins, his brother Dan Roberts, and a number of female soloists who supported him. His future brother-in-law Sidney Evans, as well as R. B. Jones from Porth in the Rhondda valley and W. W. Lewis, were key figures. Roberts himself wrote hymns for the revival which were published in a volume in Aberdar in 1905 under the title 'Emynau wedi eu cyfansoddi gan Mr Evan Roberts (Y Diwygiwr)' ('Hymns composed by Mr Evan Roberts (the revivalist)'). 
Chapels were filled daily, miners went straight from the collieries to services without so much as bathing, and would remain for hours singing, praying, and witnessing. Thousands were admitted into the churches; many thousands remained steadfast, while others lost their interest or joined the Independent Labour Party. To some young men, like James Griffiths, the religious revival and the Independent Labour Party were complementary movements. The revival, while stressing individual conversion, also awoke men and women to the realization that personal emancipation needed a social context. The revival created a situation which was ripe for a changing order of society, and ministers such as J. H. Howard (who had accompanied Roberts to scores of services) became Labour Party parliamentary candidates. 
The daily press, in particular the 'Western Mail', did a great deal to spread the revival, and some journalists, like E. Morgan Humphreys of the 'Liverpool Daily Post', followed the revivalist to more than eighty meetings. He claimed that the homilies delivered by Roberts were not emotional, but an appeal to the conscience and the intellect. Roberts was supported by leading preachers of the day, though a few, such as the Congregationalist minister Peter Price of Dowlais, near Merthyr Tudful, were scathing in their criticism of the emotionalism involved in the services (which could last up to seven hours). A great deal of good work was done as far as crime statistics were concerned, with the revival spreading to the mission field of the Welsh Presbyterians in north-east India. 
New denominations appeared, such as the Apostolic church, with its headquarters in Pen-y-groes, Carmarthenshire. By early 1906 Evan Roberts was completely exhausted and he was invited to stay at the home of Mrs Jessica Penn-Lewis at Great Glen, near Leicester, who enlisted him for her work in the Life of Faith crusade, and where he wrote a Welsh-language booklet, 'Gwasanaeth a milwriaeth ysbrydol' ('Service and spiritual militancy'), published in 1912. For twenty years he was exiled in Great Glen, and London, and then took part in the occasional meeting in Wales between 1926 and 1931. But, as he admitted, no human being could stand the strain of another revival as an itinerant catalyst. He stayed with admirers in Porth-cawl and Rhiwbeina, a suburb of Cardiff, and he died, unmarried, on 29 January 1951 at Hillside, Ty Gwyn Road, Cardiff, being buried in the family grave at Moriah Chapel, Loughor, on 1 February. Later, in 1953, a statue to him was unveiled outside Moriah. 


@@@@@


doc= 46334


Sangster, William Edwin Robert (1900-1960), Methodist minister and writer, was born on 5 June 1900 at 3 Edmund's Place, near City Road, in London, one of the five children of Henry George Sangster (1872-1931), foreman at a collar-box factory, and his wife, Martha Deal (1871-1954). His parents did not attend church; 'they were', as Sangster stated, 'devoted Church of England, but just stayed away' (P. Sangster, 26). He received his early education at Holy Trinity church school (1903-9), before obtaining a scholarship for Shoreditch secondary school, where he was a pupil until 1915. 
From 1909 Sangster began to attend the Methodist mission hall on Radnor Street, London, where he underwent an evangelical conversion experience in 1913 and met Margaret Conway, whom he later married in 1926. On leaving school at the age of fifteen he commenced work as an office boy at a London accountancy firm. In 1917 he became a fully accredited local preacher. 
In June 1918 Sangster joined the army and began serving with the Queen's Royal West Surrey regiment, quickly gaining the rank of corporal and sergeant. In 1920 he attended Handsworth College, Birmingham, and later Richmond College, in Surrey, to train as a Methodist minister. He served as a probationer minister at County Road Methodist Church, Liverpool, in April 1923, and then, three months later, at Littlehampton, Sussex. On 27 July 1926 he was ordained in Wesley Chapel, Priory Street, York. Sangster served as minister at Conwy, Caernarvonshire and Llandrillo-yn-Rhos, Denbighshire (1926-9), during which time his wife gave birth to twins. He gained an external London University degree in philosophy, and then ministered at Fazakerley and Aintree, Liverpool (1929-32). In 1931, due to overwork and doubts about his sincerity as a Christian, he experienced a spiritual crisis culminating in a total commitment to God and his first publication, 'Why Jesus Never Wrote a Book'. Now more effective as both a preacher and a pastor, he was appointed minister at the Queen Street Central Hall, Scarborough (1932-6), and Brunswick Church, Leeds (1936-9). While at Leeds he worked also on the BBC northern region religious advisory committee and as a British representative to the General Conference of the Canadian Churches. From 1939 he was the minister of the Westminster Central Hall, regularly sharing pulpits with Dr Leslie Weatherhead and Donald Soper. During the war years Sangster supervised the air-raid shelters in the Westminster area, using the basement of the hall as a centre of both social and evangelistic activities. He was awarded a doctorate by the University of London in 1942 for his thesis on Christian perfection, later published as 'The Path to Perfection' (1943). 
In the post-war period Sangster travelled to America on several occasions and made a world tour, rapidly becoming one of the most influential preachers of his day, his reputation reaching far beyond denominational barriers at home and abroad. As an ecumenicist he served on the Methodist delegation which met to discuss closer relations with the Anglican church, and was involved in the Free Church Federal Council and the National Sunday School Union. 
A regular contributor to the 'Empire News', the 'Daily Sketch', and other newspapers, Sangster criticized the 'moral rottenness' of the nation, calling for a 'new penitence' among the people. In 1953 he made headline news with a sermon entitled 'What would a revival of religion do for Britain?', in which he argued that faith in Jesus Christ was the ultimate panacea for the problems of modern Britain. 
Sangster served as president of the Methodist conference in 1950 and was involved in the work of the Evangelical Alliance, various evangelistic campaigns with Billy Graham and other speakers, and, with the Africa Bureau, in taking a stand against apartheid. He helped found the Christian Publicity Organisation, which attempted to use advertising as a means of evangelism. He was also involved in the formation of the Prayer Life Movement: this set out to establish prayer groups throughout Britain and other countries, with a view to religious revival. 
After leaving Westminster Hall in 1955, Sangster worked as general secretary of the Methodist home mission department. He was also for several years a member of the senate of London University. A prolific writer, he was best known for his two books on preaching: 'The Craft of Sermon Illustration' (1946) and 'The Craft of Sermon Construction' (1949), later republished in one volume as 'The Craft of the Sermon' (1954). His numerous devotional books include 'God does Guide Us' (1934), 'He is Able' (1936), and 'The Secret of Radiant Life' (1957). His two-volume 'Westminster Sermons' (1960-61) proved to be of use to both minister and lay person alike. Throughout the 1950s he published the 'Westminster Pamphlets', a series of tracts aimed at providing the 'spiritual check-up of ourselves and our churches'. 
Although at times Sangster could appear domineering and imperious, he was a man of piety, dignity, and vitality, possessing 'a colourful and dynamic personality' ('Minutes of Conference'). In appearance he had 'a strong, erect figure' and, especially in later life, had a 'striking mane of grey-white hair' ('Sangster of Westminster', 28). From 1957 Sangster's health was steadily deteriorating. He was diagnosed as suffering from progressive muscular atrophy. He died at his home, 52 Lyford Road, Wandsworth, London, on 24 May 1960. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 46336


Scully, William Francis John (1821-1906), land speculator, was born on 23 November 1821 at Kilfeacle House, co. Tipperary, Ireland, the youngest child of Denys Scully (1773-1830), barrister and political activist, and his wife, Catherine Eyre (died 1843). One of his brothers was Vincent Scully (1810-1871) ['see under 'Scully, Denys]. William Scully was born into a dynasty founded on command of the law, the assertion of Catholic claims, and commercial exploitation of land. He was sent to the Jesuit school at Stonyhurst, Lancashire, when aged fourteen, and he remained there for one school year. He was then apprenticed to a Dublin solicitor but did not proceed into the profession. 
Scully devoted himself instead to the acquisition and management of land. The share of the family's landed holdings available for him was greatly increased with the death in 1842 of his eldest brother, James, who was brutally assassinated, apparently in revenge for harsh behaviour towards tenants. This did little to diminish the robustness of Scully's behaviour as a landlord. His passion for the use of advanced agricultural techniques, of which he had a thorough grasp, was an additional source of friction with his tenants. In August 1865 at Kilkenny crown court he was given a sentence of twelve months' imprisonment (which he may not have served), for striking the head of the wife of a tenant resisting the service of an eviction writ. In August 1868 he attempted to serve eviction notices on the tenants of Ballycohey, co. Tipperary, a recently acquired townland whose inhabitants had refused to accept new, highly restrictive leases. On 14 August, in a carefully planned ambush, two of Scully's party were killed and he himself received gunshot wounds. The affair was reported in sensational terms throughout Ireland and Britain. Even the most fervent upholders of landlord rights tended to agree that Scully's behaviour was insupportable, not least because of his personal participation in what convention saw as work proper to subordinates. The Ballycohey affray had a significant impact on Gladstone's perception of the Irish land question, and so on the genesis of the 'Land Act' of 1870. Scully continued to be an Irish landlord almost to the end of his life but in 1870 he took up residence in London. 
Starting in 1850 Scully also acquired land in Illinois, USA. From 1866 onwards this investment yielded profit and already by 1870 Scully was a dollar millionaire. Huge acquisitions that year in Kansas and Nebraska were added to subsequently. From his home in Holland Park, London, Scully methodically organized and managed a transatlantic landed empire which relied on systematic drainage, scientific soil improvement, a distinctive 'cash rent' lease (the 'Scully lease'), paternalistic estate regulation, a talented hand-picked management team, and intensive three-month visits every other year by Scully himself. By 1896 his American landholdings amounted to 250,000 acres. In October 1902 Scully was granted USA citizenship. He had been living in Washington, DC since 1900, but he returned to London later in 1902. 
In 1851 Scully married Margaret Mary Sweetman of Dublin; they had three daughters before her death in 1861. On 10 February 1876 he married Enriqueta Angela Chynoweth (1849-1932), of London, and they had three sons and one daughter. John Scully (1849-1885) was the child from an earlier liaison of Scully's. His mother's name is not known, and he attended Rugby School at his father's expense and was later employed on the Scully estates in the USA. In his will (dated 1901, at Washington) William Scully explicitly disinherited the children of his first marriage for reasons that are unknown. An imperious response to anything or anyone that thwarted him was characteristic. In 1867 or 1868 he had reacted to a parish priest's criticism from the altar by becoming an Anglican, to the distress of his siblings, two of whom were nuns. He died at his home at 12 Holland Park, London, on 17 October 1906, and was buried at Kensal Green cemetery. He was survived by his second wife. Estimates of his wealth ranged between 10 and 50 million dollars. 


@@@@@


doc= 46338


Thomas, (William Henry) Griffith (1861-1924), Anglican evangelical theologian and educator, was born at Bailey Street, Oswestry, Shropshire, on 2 January 1861, the only child of William Thomas ('c'.1838-1860), a linen draper, and his wife, Annie Nightingale, 'nee' Griffith (1840-1926). His parents were married in Liverpool just four months earlier, on 30 August 1860, but his father died of typhoid on 22 October, so Annie returned to her native Oswestry to give birth. Thomas spent his early years there in the home of his grandparents, Dr William Griffith, a local surgeon and apothecary, and his wife, Rosamond. His mother was remarried in 1864, to Joseph Charles, an accountant, with whom she had three more children. The deaths of Dr and Mrs Griffith within six weeks of each other in autumn 1869 led to protracted litigation over the estate (TNA: C16/680/T21). Thomas went to live with the Charles family in Shrewsbury and then Gobowen, but had to leave school at the age of fourteen as a result of their financial difficulties. He spent much of the next twenty years trying to compensate for the early educational opportunities he was denied. 
Thomas dated his Christian conversion to 23 March 1878, through the witness of friends in the Young Men's Society at Holy Trinity Church, Oswestry. He knelt down in prayer to submit his life to Christ, and later recalled: 'When I awoke the next morning... my soul was simply overflowing with joy, and since then I have never doubted that it was on that Saturday night I was 'born again', converted to God' ('Herald of Salvation', Feb 1941, 6). He began to consider Anglican ordination or missionary service, but this met with strong opposition, chiefly from his stepfather. Instead, Thomas moved in 1879 to Clerkenwell, north London, where he worked for three years as a watch dial maker in the firm of his stepfather's brother, William Charles. He studied theology and 'New Testament' Greek late into the evenings, and his health suffered through overwork. 
The offer in 1882 of a lay curacy under Benjamin Oswald Sharp at St Peter's, Clerkenwell, provided Thomas with an opportunity to extend his education. He spent the afternoons and evenings in parish work, and the mornings attending lectures at King's College, London, where he formed a lifelong friendship with the principal, Henry Wace (later dean of Canterbury). He was ordained by the bishop of London at St Paul's Cathedral in May 1885 and continued as Sharp's curate. Determined to read for a theology degree, he moved to Oxford in February 1889 as senior curate under Alfred Christopher at St Aldate's Church. He combined this with part-time study at the university, where he matriculated as a non-collegiate student in October 1891. Migrating to Christ Church, Oxford, he was awarded a first-class degree in Trinity term 1895, aged thirty-four. 
Thomas was invited to speak at the Islington Clerical Conference in January 1896 -- it was rumoured to be the only time a curate had been honoured in that way and it was a sign of his growing esteem within the Anglican evangelical movement. Shortly afterwards he returned to London as minister of Portman Chapel, a proprietary chapel which under his leadership became an ordinary parish as St Paul's Church, Portman Square. Here he began to publish at a prolific rate. His first substantial book, 'Methods of Bible Study' (1902), originated as a series of articles in 'The Life of Faith' newspaper. His weekly 'Bible' lectures became devotional commentaries on the life and letters of Peter (1904), the 'Acts of the Apostles' (1905), 'Genesis' (1907), and 'Romans' (1911); and lectures to his confirmation class appeared as 'The Catholic Faith: a Manual of Instruction for Members of the Church of England' (1904), which went through multiple editions as a standard of Anglican evangelical doctrine. In 1902 he led a parish pilgrimage to Palestine and the following year he crossed the Atlantic for the first time to speak at the annual 'Bible' conference at Northfield, Massachusetts, established by D. L. Moody. During these years in London, Thomas was married on 2 August 1898 to Alice Monk (1864-1953), who gave birth to three children, of whom only Winifred Mary (1902-1998) survived infancy. 
Thomas's teaching gifts brought him to the attention of the trustees of Wycliffe Hall, Oxford (one of whom, Lord Kinnaird, was a member of his congregation at Portman Square). He became Wycliffe's fourth principal in October 1905 and six months later the university awarded him a doctor of divinity degree for his research on the Lord's supper, published as 'A Sacrament of Our Redemption'. The burden of teaching and college administration slowed the rate of his publications, but he still found time to edit 'The Churchman', write a regular column in 'The Record' newspaper, and organize a series of 'Anglican Church Handbooks', to which his own contribution was 'Christianity is Christ' (1909). His pastoralia lectures at Wycliffe Hall were published as 'The Work of the Ministry' (1911), dedicated to his ordinands, and his doctrine lectures appeared posthumously as 'The Principles of Theology' (1930), a classic interpretation of the 'Thirty-Nine Articles'. 
Thomas enjoyed a growing sphere of ministry, preaching for the first time in 1906 at the Keswick Convention, where he became a regular visitor. He addressed the Pan-Anglican Congress of 1908 on the subject of theological education and visited Sweden at the invitation of Prince Oscar Bernadotte. During a lecture tour of Ontario under the auspices of the Canadian Bible League in spring 1910 he was approached by Wycliffe College, Toronto, to become their professor of systematic theology, which he initially declined, but it seemed a significant opportunity to strengthen Anglican evangelicalism in North America. Although he would be a loss to England, Wace encouraged Thomas to accept this 'large and important sphere which Providence seems to offer you' ('The Record', 20 May 1910, 485). 
Thomas's years in Toronto were the unhappiest period of his career. He arrived at Wycliffe College only to discover that the chair of systematic theology had been assigned to another, and he was required to teach 'Old Testament' literature and exegesis to junior classes. His international reputation as an author, speaker, and Oxford college principal seemed to be viewed with jealousy by some Canadian colleagues, who criticized his English mindset, and he felt humiliated and unwelcome. Thomas instead invested his considerable energies in itinerant ministry throughout North America. He spoke often at 'Bible' conferences, church missions, and theological seminaries, edited the 'Canadian Churchman', and contributed to numerous journals including the 'Sunday School Times', 'Bibliotheca Sacra', and the 'Evangelical Christian'. At the invitation of Benjamin Warfield he delivered the Stone lectures at Princeton Theological Seminary, published as 'The Holy Spirit of God' (1913), a series originally proposed (but rejected) for the Bampton lectures in Oxford. He also became a prominent apologist of the Victorious Life Movement to promote Keswick holiness principles (an emphasis on total surrender to Christ and 'entire consecration' in his service) in North America. He addressed several of their 'Bible' conferences, beginning with the first in Pennsylvania in 1913. Thomas's frequent absence from Toronto was one of the aggravating factors that led to a final breakdown of relationships at Wycliffe College and in 1919 he left by mutual agreement. A return to Britain was mooted, and he was talked of as a possible bishop of Chester, which see was then vacant, but the prime minister, Lloyd George, did not act on the suggestion. Instead Thomas moved south with his family to Philadelphia, from where he continued his itinerant ministry. 
During his last decade Thomas became increasingly vocal in defence of conservative theology, for example on biblical inerrancy and evolutionary theory. His place in the annals of North American fundamentalism was assured when his essay on 'Old Testament criticism and New Testament Christianity' appeared in 'The Fundamentals', though it was originally written for a British readership and had earlier been published by Drummond's Tract Depot in Stirling in 1905. He defended the 'verbal inspiration' of scripture in 'Stronghold of Truth', lectures delivered to the Montrose 'Bible' conference in 1915 (sponsored by R. A. Torrey), and was one of the founders of the World Christian Fundamentals Association. He also stirred up controversy by his expose in the 'Princeton Theological Review' of the inroads of modernism among protestant missionaries in China and Japan, which he witnessed at first hand during a Victorious Life excursion in 1920 with Charles Trumbull of the 'Sunday School Times'. None the less, Thomas was never completely at home among North American fundamentalists and his outlook remained that of a displaced Anglican evangelical. He was most content back in the Lake District, among old friends at the original Keswick Convention, where he gave the 'Bible' readings on his last visit to England in 1922. 
In his final months Thomas helped Lewis Sperry Chafer and A. B. Winchester to lay plans for the new Evangelical Theological College in Dallas (later renamed Dallas Theological Seminary). He was due to be a visiting professor at the seminary but a few months before it opened he was taken gravely ill, on 16 May 1924, during a lecture tour at Duluth, Minnesota. After a week's rest Thomas made the long journey home and full recovery was expected, but on 1 June he was rushed into Germantown Hospital, Philadelphia. He died there early the next morning, 2 June 1924, of an embolism which had closed a mesenteric artery, and was buried at West Laurel Hill cemetery. His personal library of 4500 volumes and 1500 pamphlets was purchased for the new seminary in Dallas, where an annual Griffith Thomas lecture was established in his memory. 


@@@@@


doc= 46340


Bruce, Frederick Fyvie (1910-1990), biblical scholar, was born on 12 October 1910 in Elgin, the eldest of the seven children of Peter Fyvie Bruce (1874-1955), an evangelist among the Christian Brethren, and his wife, Mary Maclennan (1883-1965). From Elgin Academy (1921-8) he proceeded to study classics at Aberdeen (MA, 1932) and Cambridge (BA, 1934), followed by a year in Vienna as holder of the Sandys scholarship. The possibility of further doctoral study in philology was overtaken by appointment to a junior teaching post in Greek in Edinburgh (1935-8) and then to a lectureship in classics in Leeds (1938-47). During this period he developed his scholarly interest in biblical studies and in the 'New Testament' in particular; he won the Crombie scholarship in biblical criticism in 1939 and took a diploma in Hebrew in 1943. Although he had no degree in biblical or theological subjects and was never ordained he was appointed to the headship of the newly created department of biblical studies in Sheffield in 1947, and worked to such good effect that he was appointed to a chair in 1955 and was awarded an Aberdeen honorary DD in 1957. In 1959 he was appointed to the Rylands chair of biblical criticism and exegesis in Manchester (in the distinguished succession of A. S. Peake, C. H. Dodd, and T. W. Manson) where he remained until retirement in 1978. 
Bruce had an international reputation as a biblical scholar. He travelled and lectured in institutions throughout the world. He shared with only one other scholar the honour of being president of both the (British) Society for Old Testament Study (1965) and the (international) Studiorum Novi Testamenti Societas (1975); he was elected a fellow of the British Academy (1973) and was awarded its Burkitt medal (1979). He was awarded a DLitt from Leeds University in 1988. He received three Festschriften by colleagues and former students. 
Bruce was a prolific writer with some fifty books and hundreds of articles to his credit. His scholarly career began with a major commentary on the 'Acts of the Apostles' (1951) in which he dealt with the Greek text linguistically and historically from the vantage point of a classical scholar; simultaneously he was also at work on a more theologically orientated volume, 'The Book of the Acts' (1953). From 'Acts' he moved naturally into the Pauline literature and wrote commentaries of varying scale on most of the letters; those on 'Galatians' (1982) and '1 and 2 Thessalonians' (1982) are the most substantial. A host of public lectures and essays formed the basis for his major study, 'Paul: Apostle of the Free Spirit' (1977). He also wrote a fine commentary on 'Hebrews' (1964). He was among the first scholars to discuss the impact of the discovery of the Dead Sea scrolls on biblical studies ('Second Thoughts on the Dead Sea Scrolls', 1956; 'Biblical Exegesis in the Qumran Texts', 1959). He wrote standard textbooks on early Jewish history ('Israel and the Nations', 1963) and the history of the early church ('The Spreading Flame', 1953; 'New Testament History', 1969). 
Bruce's scholarship was marked by the way in which he brought his classical training to the study of the biblical texts. This tended to liberate him from the theological bias and even prejudice that can interfere with objective biblical study. He was able to harvest the results of archaeological study for the illumination of the written texts of the 'Bible'. Writing initially at a time when so-called 'higher criticism' often disparaged the historical value of the biblical writings, he came to a much more positive evaluation of their historical worth. Admittedly this conclusion was congenial to his own theological position. He was nurtured in a conservative, evangelical tradition in the Christian Brethren and never wavered from it, but his scholarly conclusions were not preformed but relied on sober study of the evidence, and he was certainly not afraid to differ from his more conservative colleagues when he was convinced that the evidence required him to do so. At the same time he was respected by scholars who took a more radical view of the evidence than he did, precisely because he respected them and their work. 
Bruce played an important part in stimulating the development of biblical and theological scholarship in his own evangelical Christian constituency. He was a founder member and sometime chairman of the Tyndale Fellowship for Biblical Research, and he was honorary president of the Inter-Varsity Fellowship in 1955. Particularly in Manchester he guided the studies of a remarkable number of doctoral students. 
Bruce was an outstanding example of the genus 'Scholar' rather than 'Researcher'. He had an encyclopaedic and exact knowledge in many fields, and the ability to express himself in a lucid and attractive manner. His scholarship was entirely free from eccentricity and weakly based hypotheses. 
Bruce was an active member of the church and much in demand as a lay preacher and speaker. His spoken style could be somewhat dry, but he shone in panel discussions and informal occasions when his capacity for relating anecdotes and his pawky Scottish humour came to the fore. He wrote an autobiographical account, 'In Retrospect: Remembrance of Things Past' (1980), which is a delightful description of the academic and Christian scene, especially during his earlier years in the north-east of Scotland. He married Annie Bertha Davidson, known as Betty (1910-1994), daughter of A. B. Davidson, a Scottish farmer, on 19 August 1936, and they had two children, Iain and Sheila. He was an essentially humble and ordinary person with no side, able to fit in with whatever company he was in. He never drove a car nor acquired a computer; he corrected the proofs of the English translation of the 'Theologisches Worterbuch zum Neuen Testament' on his daily train journeys. Bruce died at his home, The Crossways, 2 Temple Road, Buxton, on 11 September 1990 and was buried at Buxton cemetery a week later. 


@@@@@


doc= 46341


Stone, Samuel John (1839-1900), Church of England clergyman and hymn writer, was born on 25 April 1839 at the rectory at Whitmore, near Newcastle under Lyme, Staffordshire, the son of the Revd William Stone (1805-1877), author. He was educated at the Charterhouse (1853-8) and Pembroke College, Oxford, becoming boat captain at the latter and graduating BA in 1862 and MA in 1872. He was ordained in 1862 by Samuel Wilberforce, bishop of Oxford. It was principally for the poorer congregation of his first curacy in the parish of New Windsor, Berkshire, that he wrote a series of hymns, based on the apostles' creed, entitled 'Lyra fidelium' (1866), the most famous and enduring of which is 'The church's one foundation'. Written at a time of doctrinal controversy in the wake of the Colenso judgment, his primary motivation seems to have been to teach the faith of the church to the poor in a way they would remember. 
In 1870 Stone became his father's curate at St Paul's, Haggerston, in east London, and in 1874 succeeded him as vicar. He had a special gift with young people and saw the parish schools as a means of providing good elementary education firmly rooted in the church. He fought vigorously, and successfully, against the establishment of board schools which would have taken children away from St Paul's, and by means of the parish schools, he built up a flourishing body of young people in the congregation. In 1883 he published 'Order of the Consecutive Church Service for Children, with Original Hymns'. But his ministry was not narrowly confined to young people. As an obituarist stated: 'If the world knew him as a sacred poet, east London knew him as a parish priest' ('The Guardian', 5 Dec 1900). Mother Kate of St Saviour's Priory, Haggerston, wrote of his pioneering work among the sick poor which evolved into the Hoxton and Haggerston Nursing Institute. 
In 1890 Stone became rector of All Hallows, London Wall, a City church much in need of repair. He addressed these material problems but also introduced order and dignity to the worship. He tackled this parish's different pastoral needs inventively. Each morning he opened the church from 6.30 a.m. until 9 a.m. so that young women coming into the City by public transport would have somewhere to go before their workplaces opened. He led the gathering in hymns and prayers at 7.30, and there were often 160 young women present. 
In 1899 Stone was diagnosed as being terminally ill with cancer and he spent his last year in rooms in the Charterhouse. He died on 19 November 1900, after much suffering, and was buried on the 23rd near Anerley, London, following his funeral at All Hallows conducted by the bishop of Stepney. A memorial font and tablet in this church were dedicated on 3 November 1901. 
Samuel John Stone never married, but he was typical of the parish priest who devoted himself to his work and people. Strikingly handsome and with a full beard, he loved animals. During his time in Haggerston he often took a fishing party to Windsor, and he started a rowing club on the River Lea. Stone combined the vigour of a 'muscular Christian' with the oratory of a preacher, the challenge of a campaigner, and the sensitivity of a poet. Mother Kate described him as the 'poet of Haggerston', and while his most famous hymns were written in his youth, he continued to write throughout his life. 


@@@@@


doc= 46343


Morton, Henry Canova Vollam (1892-1979), travel writer and journalist, was born on 26 July 1892 at 17 Chester Square, Ashton under Lyne, the son of Joseph Thomas Vollam Morton, newspaper editor, and his wife, Margaret Mary Constance Ewart. Educated at King Edward's School, Birmingham, Morton married Dorothy Vaughton ('b'. 1886/7) on 14 September 1915. The marriage failed, and on 4 January 1934 Morton married Violet Mary Muskett, 'nee' Greig ('b'. 1900/01), herself a divorcee, who was to survive him. 
Except for his First World War service in the Warwickshire yeomanry, in which he enlisted as a private in 1914 and rose to the rank of second lieutenant by 1916 and lieutenant in 1918, Morton's entire career was devoted to popular journalism and travel writing. Between 1910 and 1912 he worked for the 'Birmingham Gazette and Express', becoming an assistant editor. In 1913 he moved to London, first editing the 'Empire Magazine' and later working briefly for the 'Daily Mail'. He returned to London after the war to write for the 'Evening Standard'. In 1921 he moved to Lord Beaverbrook's 'Daily Express', where two years later he gained widespread notice reporting the opening of Tutankhamen's tomb. 
H. V. Morton, as he styled himself, emerged in the 1920s as one of the 'Daily Express''s most successful columnists. The pivotal moment in his career came in April 1926 when he began to write the series of articles which would be published the following year as 'In Search of England'. The book was an immediate success, as it engagingly interwove human interest accounts of a journey around a pastoral England with potted historical and literary vignettes and pronouncements on national identity. Once the approach was set, Morton followed up with similarly titled books on Scotland (1929), Ireland (1930), Wales (1932), South Africa (1948), and London (1951). A prolific writer, who also published accounts of his travels in the Holy Land, Spain, and Italy, and fifteen other works on the British Isles, he had by 1964 sold 2.9 million books, establishing his position as the most popular British travel writer of the twentieth century. Morton was keenly aware of his readers, particularly those in the lower-middle class, insisting that the price of his guides be kept low in order that they might appeal to, and at the same time educate, a large audience in what was the first age of mass democracy in Britain. 
Three interrelated themes informed Morton's writings. The first was the claim that the strength of a nation was ultimately determined by the condition of its villages and small towns. Reflecting the ideals of the late Victorian arts and crafts movement and drawing upon the deep love of the countryside he had developed as a youth bicycling through Warwickshire lanes, Morton insisted that only the rural world offered a setting where the occupations, pre-eminently agriculture, which were essential to the physical and emotional well-being, indeed the very survival, of the British people could thrive. The second was the insistence that the industrial and urban revolutions had inflicted fundamental damage on the nation, particularly the rural yeomanry, now subject to ever-increasing foreign competition, and its urban counterparts, the upper-working class and the lower-middle class. Morton developed this line of argument through grim portrayals of city life as well as more humorous accounts of bourgeois American tourists who had achieved material success but who lacked any appreciation of their cultural heritage. The third theme was the hope that through a recognition of the central continuities of British history and national character renewal might be achieved. To Morton the most important element shaping this continuity was Christianity, and it is revealing that he chose to conclude 'In Search of England' in a vicar's garden, uniting the pastoral and the spiritual. This approach also carried over into Morton's travel writing on areas other than the United Kingdom, in which he focused only on places and countries, from the Holy Land to Ireland, where faith and life were inextricably linked. 
Morton believed that these themes were national in appeal and scope, transcending the narrow confines of any one political party. He espoused them while writing for the 'Daily Express', and equally he espoused them after being lured to its left-wing rival the 'Daily Herald', for which he worked as a special writer between 1931 and 1942. Morton almost welcomed the coming of the Second World War, as he thought it might rescue Britain from the false ideas and malaise which had dominated since the early nineteenth century and reunite the country in a life-and-death struggle to protect its historical and ecological heritage. While Morton did recognize that success in a modern war depended on technology and precision engineering, his wartime writing, which included an account of the 1941 Churchill-Roosevelt meeting which led to the Atlantic charter and a propagandistic novel of what life would be like under a Nazi occupation, emphasized the 'chivalry' of the Royal Air Force and characterized Churchill as an emotional Elizabethan who rose above class to lead a national crusade. 
Despite the wide acclaim and wealth which his works had brought Morton, after the Labour Party's 1945 victory he became disenchanted with life in a Britain whose leaders, he argued, were pandering to an increasingly powerful working class and promoting Marxist ideology and state planning over Christian values. To escape these contagions, Morton decided in 1947 to move his family to South Africa, where he believed conditions were not unlike those in England in the 1920s. Morton became a South African citizen, and life at Somerset West, where he settled, brought a measure of contentment. He contemplated writing a memoir to be entitled 'Fair generally', but he abandoned the idea. The last years of Morton's life were increasingly darkened by fears sparked by the decline of British power and the growth of black nationalism, and doubts about the ability of Western governments to survive in a time of crisis that Morton believed was similar to the French Revolutionary era. Morton died on 17/18 June 1979 in South Africa. 


@@@@@


doc= 46344


Mais, Stuart Petre Brodie (1885-1975), writer and radio broadcaster, was born on 4 July 1885 at St Mary Street, Ladywood, Birmingham, the only child of John Brodie Stuart Mais (1860/61-1941), rector of Tansley, Derbyshire, and his wife, Hannah Horden, 'nee' Tamlin (died 1939). 
'S. P. B.', as Mais was known, was educated at Heath grammar school, Halifax, and Denstone College, Staffordshire. He worked as a teacher for two years and then attended Christ Church, Oxford, in 1905. He won a blue for cross-country running, took third-class honours in mathematical moderations (1907), and graduated with a third class in English literature in 1909. From 1909 to 1920 he was a schoolmaster, mainly in English, at Rossall School from 1909 to 1913, where he fought hard to 'bring about an educational reform that most of my colleagues regarded as unnecessary and dangerous' (Mais, 'All the Days', 55). He married on 6 August 1913 Doris Lilian Frances (1892-1978), daughter of Alexander Duffel Snow, a major in the West of Scotland Artillery; they had two daughters. Mais does not name his wife in his autobiographies and refers to her as a 'comparative stranger' (ibid., 59). He became an assistant master at Sherborne School in September. He became an officer in the Officers' Training Corps in 1913 and remained as such, much against his will, when the First World War broke out. In July 1914 during an operation to remove his appendix Mais 'died' but was resuscitated. 
While teaching, Mais edited Shakespeare for schools and published 'An English Course for Army Candidates' (1915) and a series of articles in 'A Public School in War Time' (1916). He wrote his first novel, 'April's Lonely Soldier' (1916), in epistolary form, followed by a second, 'Interlude' (1917), which so closely detailed life at Sherborne that he was forced to resign in 1917. From Sherborne he went to Tonbridge School, where he was elected examiner in English by London University. Immediately after the war he was made professor of English at the new cadet college at Cranwell, but was forced to resign yet again over what were considered to be his 'experimental' teaching methods. His textbook 'An English Course for Schools' (1918) sold 20,000 copies. 
From 1918 to 1931 Mais was successively literary critic on the 'Evening News' (1918) and 'Daily Express' (1921-3), and literary editor of the 'Daily Graphic' (1923-6). From 1926 to 1931 he was leader writer and book reviewer on the 'Daily Telegraph'. This was Mais's last regular employment. In 1924 his marriage broke down on the discovery of his wife's adultery. She moved to Paris and Mais began a relationship with Winifred May Schiller Doughty (1905-1993) and had two further children. In 1931 Winifred Doughty changed her name by deed poll to Gillian Mais. He remained legally married to Doris Mais, whose petition for divorce was dismissed in July 1936 by Mr Justice Bucknill on the ground that both parties were guilty of adultery. From 1927 he and Gillian rented a large eighteenth-century house in Southwick, Sussex. 
A keen cricketer, Mais became president of the cricket club at Southwick and when the local council tried to stop cricket on the village green he led the opposition. Truculent by nature, he enjoyed his role of a 'latter day Hampden' and was undeterred by threats of legal action (Mais, 'All the Days', 14). But he overreached himself by refusing to pay his rates, and prosecution led to his eviction. A newly elected council restored the villagers' ancient right and today a plaque on the house commemorates his spirited fight. 
In 1932 the BBC commissioned Mais to travel through England, Scotland, and Wales and describe his experience in seventeen talks. They were published later in that year under the title 'This Unknown Island'. The book was reprinted three times in as many months. The need to compress his material into 20-minute talks curbed his habit of slack and gossipy writing and produced one of his best books. 
This book, together with the earlier 'See England First' (1927) and 'England's Pleasance' (1935), undoubtedly helped to awaken townspeople to the recreational uses of the English countryside and the need to protect it from the expanding suburbs. In pursuit of this aim Mais worked closely with the railways to produce book-length guides to several counties, footpath guides, and ramblers' booklets. One of his most adventurous ideas was to run night trains from London so that jaded office workers could be shepherded to the top of the south downs by Mais to watch the sunrise. On the first occasion forty walkers were expected; 1440 turned up. 
Throughout the 1930s Mais gave radio talks in the United States and Britain. During the Second World War Mais's voice became familiar in most households through his almost daily radio talks entitled 'Kitchen Front'. The war restricted his travelling, but as soon as it ended he found publishers, tourist agencies, and foreign governments eager to fund his holidays abroad in return for the holiday guides which he wrote 'en route'. Books on Norway, Madeira, Austria, Italy, Spain, Majorca, South America, the Caribbean, South Africa, and many others, flowed throughout the fifties and sixties, culminating in the 'Round the World Cruise Holiday' (1965). In 'Who's Who' he gave his recreation as 'travel of any sort anywhere'. Mais also wrote two rambling, evasive, and anecdotal autobiographies: 'All the Days of my Life' (1937) and 'Buffets and Rewards' (1952), several further lightweight novels, and some books of literary appreciation. The latter, such as 'From Shakespeare to O. Henry' (1917), lacked any pretension to academic literary criticism but were likeable and enthusiastic studies. 
Publishers' records show that few of Mais's books sold more than 3000 copies and none of the 200 or so is now in print. When asked, 'How many books have you written?' he replied, 'Too many'. Yet he continued writing until he was in his late eighties, driven by financial worries. He died of heart failure on 21 April 1975 at Compton House Nursing Home, Compton Road, Lindfield, Sussex. 


@@@@@


doc= 46349


Becher, Martin William (1797-1864), jockey, born on 18 May 1797, possibly at Hillington, near King's Lynn, was the son of William Becher (died 1816), an army man turned Norfolk farmer and horse-dealer. He secured a position in the storekeeper-general's department at Brussels, supplying Wellington's troops. His own later rank of captain was an honorary one in the Buckinghamshire yeomanry cavalry. On his return to Britain he worked initially as a horse-coper but later as first jockey for Thomas Coleman. Proprietor of the Turf Hotel at St Albans, Coleman is generally credited with pioneering the commercial development of steeplechasing when he promoted the St Albans steeplechase in 1830. He encouraged Becher to take up riding over fences; not that the gallant captain required much persuasion, for he had been taught to ride all manner of horses as a child and was a skilled horseman. Although accepted as qualified to ride in races restricted to gentlemen, Becher made a living from riding and from schooling horses over fences for their owners. On 14 August 1825 he had married Susan, only daughter of John Dobree. 
Becher's name is associated in the national memory with the Grand National steeplechase. In 1836, riding The Duke, he won William Lynn's inaugural chase at Aintree and two years later he came third on the same horse. However, it was in the 1839 race, usually recognized as the first Grand National (even though the title was not formally adopted until 1847), that Becher gained racing immortality. When running second in a field of seventeen, his mount, Conrad, fell at a specially constructed jump in which a brook had been dammed to make it 8 feet wide and a 31/2 foot wooden fence set back about a yard in front of the water. The hazard was increased by the landing area being a yard or so lower than the take-off side. Becher landed in the water and sensibly crouched in safety in the deepest part of the brook until the rest of the horses had passed by. Less sensibly, perhaps, he remounted only to take another soaking at the next water jump. Although he never rode again in a Grand National, such was his celebrity that the fence at which he fell became known as Becher's brook. 
Becher's last public ride was at Doncaster's Cantley Common course on 19 March 1847. His horse fell. After giving up racing he was appointed inspector of sacks for the Great Northern Railway at Boston, Lincolnshire. A boisterous character, he would drink and sing late into the night at post-race celebrations. His favourite party trick was to run around a room on the wainscoting without touching the floor. In later life he was described as being thickset, with bushy hair and a kindly, rugged face enlivened by small but penetrating eyes. Becher died on 11 October 1864 at 21 Maida Hill, St John's Wood, London, and was buried at Willesden cemetery. At an auction to dispose of his estate, his seven silk riding jerseys brought 5's'. Becher's brook was filled in 1990 but remains a challenging fence on the Aintree circuit, a fitting memorial to a tough and intrepid rider. 


@@@@@


doc= 46350


Lynn, William (1792-1870), hotelier and sports promoter, was born in 1792 at East Grinstead, but nothing else is known about his early life. He first ventured into the catering trade in London before moving to Liverpool, where in the 1820s he leased the Waterloo Hotel in Ranelagh Street in the suburb of Aintree. He was renowned for the excellence of his seafood -- for over forty years he supervised the city's municipal banquets -- but his efforts as a sports promoter led to the establishment of the Waterloo cup, hare-coursing's premier event, and the Grand National, the world's most famous steeplechase. Nevertheless, like many publicans and hoteliers of the time, it is probable that he provided sports events as an adjunct to his hotel trade, anticipating that customers would be attracted by the entertainment. 
Lynn's first race promotion was in 1828 when he provided the Waterloo Gold Cup, value $100, for a flat race at the Maghull racecourse's second recognized meeting. The next year he leased the adjoining Aintree course, erected a grandstand, and ran a flat-race meeting. Soon he was organizing three meetings there a year and in October 1835 he devoted one of them to hurdle events. Captain Martin Becher (after whom Aintree's Becher's Brook fence is named) rode two winners, both with the same horse, Vivian, and in an ensuing conversation remarked on the success which his friend Tom Coleman had had with the Great St Albans Steeplechase. This tempted Lynn to announce the running of a steeplechase at Aintree for 29 February 1836, appropriately leap year day. The event proved popular with spectators as, unlike most steeplechase courses, which were point-to-point across country, this involved two circuits of a 2 mile course, most of which was visible from the grandstand. In 1839, however, Lynn's name was missing from the Aintree card. The traditional story is that ill health forced him to withdraw from the project, but, given his longevity, this may have been a diplomatic excuse to cover his precarious financial position. He continued to act as secretary to the Aintree Racing Company until 1843 but was declared bankrupt in June 1844. 
Lynn has certainly been treated unfairly in sports history: not only does the official history of the Grand National fail to mention his name, but, somewhat illogically, turf historians have always regarded the 1839 race as the first Grand National, despite the earlier races. The title of the race remained the Grand Liverpool until 1843, when it became the Liverpool and National; the more famous name was adopted only in 1847. 
Lynn's other sporting achievement was the founding of the Waterloo cup for hare-coursing in 1836. Melanie, a dog nominated by Lynn, won the event, though its owner was Lord Molyneux, eldest son of the earl of Sefton on whose Altcar land the contest was run. The prize at the inaugural meeting was a silver snuff-box and 16 sovereigns -- the stake money from the eight participants. 
Little is known about Lynn's activities from 1843. He continued as a hotelier until August 1870 when the Waterloo was acquired by a railway company in order to construct a station. He died two months later in the early hours of 11 October 1870 at his home, Norwood Lodge, Norwood Grove, West Derby, Liverpool. He was buried in the grounds of Liverpool Cathedral. His obituary in the 'Liverpool Mercury' makes no mention of wife or children. 


@@@@@


doc= 46353


Duberly, Frances Isabella (1829-1902), diarist, was born on 27 September 1829 at Rowdeford House, Devizes, Wiltshire, the youngest of the eight children of Sir Wadham Locke, a banker in Devizes, and his wife, Anna Maria Selina Powell. Her father died when she was six, her mother when she was eight. Her upbringing owed much to her eldest sister, Selina; she received a sound education at a boarding-school in High Wycombe, Buckinghamshire, and became a skilled horsewoman. In 1846 she met a 24-year-old lieutenant, Henry Duberly (1822-1891), at a family wedding; they married at New Alresford, Hampshire, four years later, on 21 February 1850. 
In February 1854 Fanny accompanied her husband when his regiment, the 8th hussars, sailed to Constantinople on the eve of the Crimean War. She ignored orders from the commander, Lord Raglan, excluding wives from the war zone and remained with the hussars at Varna and in the Crimea longer than any other woman, in her last months sharing her husband's hut in the light brigade lines. Although she missed the battle of the Alma and saw only the aftermath of the battle of Inkerman, she witnessed the cavalry charges at Balaklava and the assault on Malakhov, experienced the winter privations, and rode into Sevastopol soon after it fell. 
Fanny recorded these events daily. She possessed a ready pen, eyes perceptive to detail, youthful self-confidence, and an incisive style softened by candid pathos. Anonymous extracts from her letters home were leaked to the London press, encouraging her to ask her sister Selina's husband, Francis Marx, to edit her journal for publication. He toned down suspected indiscretions and the book reads less vividly than her letters (now held in the British Library), but a convincing realism survived the excisions and the 'Journal Kept during the Russian War' sold well at Christmas 1855. Readers who anticipated a more heroic romanticism were, however, left uneasy, while Queen Victoria was offended by Fanny's ingenuous wilfulness. The queen had already declined an optimistically proffered dedication, and in May 1856 she snubbed Mrs Duberly when the hussars were inspected on returning to Portsmouth. Fanny was never appreciated as much in England as she had been in the Crimea, notably by the French chasseurs d'Afrique. 
After two years in Ireland the 8th hussars sailed for India, in October 1857, with Fanny again accompanying her husband. She kept a journal covering the next twelve months and chronicling a march across Rajputana, during which she was in the saddle for 1800 miles. By this time, however, she was writing self-consciously and with mounting weariness; the earlier spontaneity had gone. 'Campaigning Experiences in Central India and Rajputana during the Suppression of the Mutiny' appeared in July 1859 but was less successful than her earlier book. 
At Balaklava, Fanny 'prayed that [she] might 'wear' out [her] life and not rust it out' ('Journal Kept during the Russian War', 102). However, she was denied this hope. The hussars returned from India in 1864; thereafter she remained the dutiful wife of a serving officer in dull garrison towns until Henry retired, as a lieutenant-colonel, in 1881. The Duberlys purchased St Clair, a villa in The Park, Cheltenham, Gloucestershire. Henry died there in 1891; Fanny outlived him by almost twelve years. She died at St Clair on 19 November 1902. 


@@@@@


doc= 46354


Friederichs, Hulda (1856/7-1927), journalist and writer, was born in Ronsdorf, Prussia, and educated in Ronsdorf and Cologne. Having moved to London as a young woman, she was living in 1881, when she was twenty-four, at Monterey, St Mary's Road, Wimbledon Park. From that address she studied English literature under an extension scheme run by the University of St Andrews to help open up higher education for women, and in 1883 passed the first part of its higher certificate. 
Hulda Friederichs spent her working life as a journalist on London newspapers. In the nineteenth century journalism became a fashionable literary pursuit for women, although much of the work was freelance, and few could earn a living wage. By the 1890s significant numbers were contributing to the daily and weekly papers, albeit confined to the lighter sections. They were less evident in the mainstream press and on the news desks. Hulda Friederichs began her career on the 'Pall Mall Gazette' in 1883 and served under the editorship of W. T. Stead, whose flamboyant eye and personality made the paper a leading example of the new journalism. Stead was sympathetic to the cause of women's rights, and promoted their interests and talents. Hulda Friederichs was marked out as a protegee, and given opportunities which enabled her to establish a reputation as a serious journalist. Unusually for the time, she was employed on the same terms and conditions as male reporters. She specialized in serious women's issues -- uncommon in daily papers in this period -- and the kind of reporting that characterized the new age of social realism. A series on women and work included a vivid, firsthand account of the 'lasses' of the Salvation Army; the investigative research on which this piece was based became the genesis for her later study 'The Romance of the Salvation Army' (1907). 
Not all Hulda Friederichs's colleagues approved of her success, or of her close proximity to Stead when he made her his private secretary. Stead acknowledged his affection for her and worried about the possible jealousy of his wife, but it seems unlikely that there was ever anything intimate between them. She seemed to gravitate to men of stature and to win their confidence. A friendship with Gladstone's daughter and visits to Hawarden led to 'Mr. Gladstone: in the Evening of his Days' (1896), a study of his retirement, while her professional relationship with the publisher Sir George Newnes brought invitations to Wildcroft, the family home, and material for a biography (1911). 
To her less admiring colleagues on the 'Pall Mall Gazette', such as Robertson Scott, Hulda Friederichs was 'the Friederichs' and 'the Prussian Governess', and Robertson Scott's waspish comments about her suggest something of the difficulties of being a woman in a man's world. She remembered her time rather differently; she recalled the heady days of the new London journalism and the sense of comradeship and enthusiasm: 'We were all young together, the whole of the editorial staff, and one and all worked for it not merely as a matter of duty, but because the paper was our pride and glory' (Friederichs, 220). The sudden sale of the paper in 1892, when E. T. Cook was editor, was a great shock to them; it was bought by W. W. Astor and became a tory organ. Along with other members of the editorial staff, Hulda Friederichs transferred to the 'Westminster Gazette', an evening penny paper which was started by Cook and Sir George Newnes. It continued the 'Pall Mall''s tradition of radical Liberalism, becoming a highly influential paper in political circles. Its stable of writers, including Friederichs, were greatly concerned with issues of social reform, and by the Edwardian years were helping to shape the climate of new Liberalism. 
At Newnes's request Hulda Friederichs subsequently edited the 'Westminster Budget', an illustrated weekly digest aimed at the family market, from 1896 to 1905, and then worked on the 'Saturday Westminster' as deputy to J. A. Spender. The editorship of the 'Budget' was a landmark appointment, not least because it offered a woman the opportunity to put her political stamp on a mainstream paper. An additional duty, on behalf of her employer, was to administer the annual Christmas fund, dispensing money to children and the aged poor for pensions and Christmas parties, and supporting various worthy projects such as a medical mission and a convalescent home. In 1903 a day nursery at Rotherhithe in London's docklands was established, partly financed by the fund and by Lady Newnes. Some of this money was dispensed through the Salvation Army, with Hulda visiting the recipients in the poorer parts of London -- a throwback, perhaps, to her days as a reporter, but also providing material for her writing. 
Hulda Friederichs's other publications show that she was multilingual. She translated poems from Russian, Swedish, Spanish, and French into English and German, and translated Rudolf Martin's 'The Future of Russia' (1906). She never married, and died on 12 February 1927, at her home, 2 Norfolk Mansions, Santos Road, Wandsworth, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 46355


Macartney, Carlile Aylmer (1895-1978), historian of central Europe, was born on 24 January 1895 at Newlands, Crockham Hill, Westerham, Kent, the youngest of five children of Carlile Henry Hayes Macartney (1842-1924), barrister, landscape artist, and horologist, and his wife, Louisa, 'nee' Gardiner. The family, whose most renowned member was George, Earl Macartney, was of Scottish origin but long resident in Ulster. Aylmer's infancy and much of his boyhood were spent at Foxhold, a small house at Crockham near Newbury, Berkshire. In 1909 he went to Winchester College as a Pitt exhibitioner and scholar. He was elected to a scholarship at Trinity College, Cambridge; but, as he matriculated in October 1914, his classical studies were cut short by the war, in which he fought in France and was wounded in the leg. His only brother, Maxwell, fifteen years his senior, was already widely respected as a reporter for 'The Times', specializing in central Europe and the Balkans. Aylmer began to share many of his interests, travelling to Vienna, where he was acting vice-consul from 1922 to 1925. While there he married Nedella (1899-1989), daughter of Colonel Dmitry Mamarchev, of the Bulgarian army. 
In his first book, 'The Social Revolution in Austria' (1926), Macartney drew on his experiences of the new, post-Habsburg republic, emphasizing the disparities between living conditions in the huge capital city and the rural or mountainous provinces around it. But his attention soon shifted to Hungary, the inter-war 'kingdom without a king', whose problems, historical and contemporary, were to fascinate him throughout his academic life. He became fluent in Magyar, visited every region in the country, and established personal contacts with scholars and with some leading Calvinist landowning families. In 1930 he published a study entitled 'The Magyars in the Ninth Century', subsequently analysing the earliest Hungarian chronicles in a series of critical articles published in Budapest over several years. This scholarly achievement he made available for Western students in 'The Medieval Hungarian Historians' (1953). Meanwhile he worked in the international department of the League of Nations Union from 1928 to 1936 and was recognized by the Royal Institute of International Affairs (Chatham House) as the leading authority on the problems of the Danube basin, and the relationship between 'national states and national minorities', a title he chose for a judicious study published in 1934. This problem was also at the heart of his 'Hungary and her Successors' (1938), a survey of the political and economic consequences of the treaty of Trianon of 1920, by which two-thirds of pre-war 'historic Hungary' was ceded to neighbouring states. 
In 1936 Macartney was elected a research fellow of All Souls College, Oxford. When war came in 1939 he was attached to the research department of the Foreign Office. Hungary remained neutral until June 1941, and early in 1940 Macartney travelled to Budapest for talks with the prime minister, Count Pal Teleki, and others who hoped to curb the mounting Nazi influence in their country. Subsequently Macartney began broadcasting regularly in Magyar for the BBC's World Service. Although firmly anti-German in content, the broadcasts showed a tolerant understanding of the existing order in Hungary which, by 1942, angered more radical colleagues. The Foreign Office backed Macartney, realizing that his combination of restrained comment and gently ironic reproach offered his listeners an impartiality lacking in their own media and German propaganda. 'Macartney acquired a reputation in Hungary which survived the vicissitudes of the war', the official history of British broadcasting observes (A. Briggs, 'History of Broadcasting in the United Kingdom', 3.428). 
Until 1949, when the republic adopted a Soviet-style constitution, Macartney maintained links with scholars under the new regime as a foreign member of the Hungarian Academy. He interviewed detainees in occupied Germany (including the former regent, Horthy) and survivors of the war years in Budapest, from whom he received several unpublished memoirs and other documents. This varied material, supplemented by information from emigres, encouraged him to write a two-volume history of Hungary between 1929 and 1945, which he entitled 'October Fifteenth' to recall that confused Sunday in 1944 when Horthy vainly sought a separate peace with the allies. The critical assessment of his sources took Macartney almost nine years but in 1956 'October Fifteenth' was at last published by the University of Edinburgh, where from 1951 to 1957 he held the chair of international relations. 
In November 1956 Macartney was on the Austrian frontier during the flight of refugees after the failure of the uprising in Budapest against Soviet occupation. He continued to help Hungarian exiles in London, but in his academic work he abandoned recent history to study the Habsburg lands as a whole, from Leopold II's accession to the end of dynastic rule, and concentrating on domestic affairs. His 'The Habsburg Empire, 1790-1918' (1968) was an undertaking affectionately contemplated for forty years; it grew into a book of half a million words, not easy reading, but a quarry of detailed scholarship into which no dedicated student of the region could fail to hack. Other works, smaller in compass, included: 'Independent Eastern Europe: a History' (1962), in collaboration with A. W. Palmer; a single-volume history of Hungary (1962); and a brief life of Maria Theresa (1969). 
Macartney was elected a fellow of the British Academy in 1965, the year he retired from All Souls. In 'Who's Who' he listed 'travel' as his recreation: he was able to visit the USA and was welcomed once more in Hungary and Bulgaria. He retained the thin, ascetic figure of a good walker. Perhaps his greatest pleasure in later years came from cultivating the irises at Hornbeams, his home on Boars Hill, south of Oxford. There, in early June each summer, with flag flowers in full colour, the Macartneys would welcome friends to a garden party. On 18 June 1978, a few days after the last of these celebrations, Aylmer Macartney collapsed and died at Hornbeams. A funeral service in the chapel of All Souls College, Oxford, on 23 June was followed by private cremation at Oxford crematorium. 


@@@@@


doc= 46359


England, George (1811/12-1878), engineer and locomotive builder, was born in Newcastle upon Tyne. He was probably the George England baptized on 28 July 1811 in Newcastle, son of George England and Mary Whinney. Both were presumably English. George England trained at John Penn's Deptford boilerworks and shipyards. He patented the traversing screw jack (patent no. 8058, 1839), which enabled a derailed locomotive not only to be lifted but also to be moved laterally so that it could be lowered back onto the rails. 
About 1839 England established Hatcham Iron Works in Pomeroy Street, New Cross, London. Here he manufactured patent jacks and other tools, and towards the end of the 1840s he started to build locomotives, specializing in light locomotives of the type originated by W. Bridges Adams. George England's locomotive 'Little England' was awarded a prize medal at the Great Exhibition of 1851, and his works then became busy constructing locomotives for railways in Britain -- for collieries and contractors -- and for export to India and Australia. He is best-known for having built in 1863 the first locomotives for the Ffestiniog Railway (FR), with its exceptionally narrow gauge of under 2 ft. These two tiny machines were very successful: with them C. E. Spooner, the railway's engineer, was able to replace horses by locomotives and then to introduce passenger trains -- the first in Britain -- on a gauge substantially less than the standard 4 ft 81/2 in. 
England built four more similar locomotives for the FR, two of them to an enlarged design. Then in 1868 he commenced construction for the FR of a double-bogie, double-boiler locomotive of the type patented by Robert Fairlie. This locomotive, 'Little Wonder', was the first wholly successful 'double Fairlie': warranted by England to be as powerful as two of the small locomotives, it proved almost as powerful as three. Demonstrations of it as it hauled immensely long trains up grade through sinuous curves were a vital influence in worldwide adoption of economical narrow gauges. 
England was elected a member of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers in 1853, and he became a director of the Crystal Palace Company about 1857. He was twice married: to whom and when for the first time is not known, but by 1843 he was living with Sarah Hannar, whom he eventually married after his first wife died. On 6 July 1843 he and Sarah Hannar had a daughter, Eliza Ann; there was an older daughter, Mary, and subsequently a son, George. 
In appearance, England was tubby, even jovial; in character, he became increasingly irascible and contentious as he grew older. In 1858 he was fined for assaulting and beating an apprentice. In 1862 he indicted Robert Fairlie, who had eloped with Eliza Ann, for perjury, on the grounds that Fairlie had not, as claimed, received her father's consent to their marriage. When England was obliged to reveal his own marital history the case collapsed. The next general meeting of the Crystal Palace Company consisted largely of uproar as England, following these revelations, was forced to resign his directorship. 
Increasingly tyrannical behaviour towards employees at Hatcham led in 1865 to a disastrous strike. Much business was lost. England himself retired from ill health in 1869; the works was taken on lease by Fairlie, George England junior, and J. S. Fraser, under whom 'Little Wonder' was completed. England junior died a few months later and locomotive building ceased. 
George England died at Cannes, France, on 2 March 1878; his estate was left to George William Linghorn, born 17 July 1871, who adopted and became known by the name of George England. Five locomotives built by George England survive: 'Shannon', on long-term loan to Didcot Railway Centre from the National Railway Museum, and 'Princess', 'Prince', 'Palmerston', and 'Welsh Pony', on the Ffestiniog Railway. 


@@@@@


doc= 46360


Spooner, Charles Easton (bap. 1818, d. 1889), railway engineer, was born at Maentwrog, Merioneth, and baptized on 25 May 1818 at Maentwrog church, the fourth of ten children of James Spooner (1790-1856), surveyor and civil engineer, and his first wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Easton (1787-1850). His father was English, his mother English or perhaps Scottish. At the age of twelve or thirteen, he helped his father to survey the Ffestiniog Railway (FR); James Spooner then supervised construction, and in 1836 the line was opened from slate quarries near Blaenau Ffestiniog to Porthmadog harbour. Its gauge was very narrow, less than 2 ft, which enabled the track to follow a serpentine route along steep mountainsides; this in turn facilitated a continuous gradient down which laden trains ran by gravity. Horses hauled the empty wagons uphill. 
From about 1834 until 1840 Charles Spooner trained as a civil engineer and surveyor, successively under his father, under Joseph Locke, and under I. K. Brunel. In 1856 he succeeded his father as manager and engineer of FR. On 14 September 1848 he married Mary (1823-1860), daughter of George Barker; sadly, she died just twelve years later, leaving him with four young children. 
If, as seemed probable, a standard-gauge steam railway was to be built to Blaenau Ffestiniog, FR would have been unable to compete. Its route inhibited conversion to standard gauge, but no public railway of so narrow a gauge was then worked by steam. None the less, in 1860 Spooner was instructed by his board to enquire into the practicability of using locomotives. George England eventually built two small locomotives -- the first of several for FR -- in 1863. With these, Spooner was able to replace horses, and to introduce steam-hauled passenger trains in 1865. 
Traffic increased rapidly and was catered for by the introduction in 1869 of the double engine 'Little Wonder', the first wholly successful locomotive built to the patents of Robert Fairlie. The spectacle of 'Little Wonder' as it hauled a train 400 yards long, up grade through curves as sharp as the sweep of Oxford Circus (as a contemporary put it), was rendered the more dramatic owing to the 'Railway Regulation (Gauge) Act' (1846). This act had made 4 ft 81/2 in. the standard gauge and had had the effect of prohibiting the construction of new passenger railways to narrow gauges. 
Nevertheless, railways in Britain had cost too much, it seemed, and cheaper railways were needed, particularly for overseas territories then being opened up. Engineers, often trained in Britain, were already starting to build railways overseas to narrow gauges such as 3 ft 6 in., which was still far wider than that of FR. The Ffestiniog Railway, cheap and very profitable, demonstrated what could be done, and its example led to the construction of narrow-gauge railways all over the world. As Spooner's obituary in 'Engineering' eventually put it, 'hundreds of engineers have been received with kindness by Mr Spooner and courteously conducted over the Ffestiniog Railway... his experience was freely put at the service of all'. Much of that experience was incorporated into Spooner's book, 'Narrow Gauge Railways', published in 1872. 
In Britain, where the railway system was already extensive, comparatively few narrow-gauge railways were built. Although Spooner was closely concerned with promotion of the North Wales Narrow Gauge Railways Company in 1872, this company completed only one line of an intended network. His greater contribution to home railways was probably his introduction, on the Ffestiniog Railway in 1872-3, of the first bogie passenger coaches to go into regular service in Britain. The use of bogie coaches was already standard practice in North America, and before long it became so in Britain also. The original two coaches still ran on the Ffestiniog Railway more than a century later, as did Fairlie's double engines. 
Spooner was also consulting engineer to many slate quarry companies. He remained manager of FR until shortly before his death, on 18 November 1889, at Bron-y-garth, his Porthmadog residence. He was buried on 23 November at Beddgelert, Caernarvonshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 46361


Newlands, James (1813-1871), architect and civil engineer, was born in Edinburgh on 28 July 1813, the son of Thomas Newlands, a rope maker, and his wife, Janet, 'nee' MacKay. He was educated at the Edinburgh high school and at Edinburgh University where he was a student of John Leslie and excelled in mathematics and natural philosophy. In 1827 he began working in the office of Thomas Brown, architect to Edinburgh corporation, and became a skilled draughtsman. From 1833 to 1836 he assisted David Low, professor of agriculture at Edinburgh, on a large work on agriculture concerned with the laying out of farms and the design of farm buildings (probably his work 'On Landed Estates', 1844). About 1838 Newlands also began to study chemistry, another of Low's interests. For most of the next decade Newlands was in private practice as an architect and surveyor. He is said to have designed the manses for several Scottish churches, and to have been valuing agricultural land in connection with railway bills. He had also by this time become an accomplished painter, exhibiting at the Royal Scottish Academy, and was a skilled flautist. On 11 August 1845 he married Joanna Handerson at St Cuthbert's Church, Edinburgh; she died in 1848. 
On 26 January 1847 Newlands was appointed, from among five candidates, engineer to Liverpool corporation at a salary of $700 (ultimately raised to $1300). This was a new post established by the 1846 'Liverpool Sanitary Act', which also established the first medical officership of health, held by Dr William Henry Duncan. While some large towns, including Liverpool, employed surveyors to look after town buildings, and while some metropolitan sewers commissions employed sanitary engineers, the Liverpool post was the first for a municipal engineer who would be concerned with comprehensively improving the health, amenity, and efficiency of the city. 
During his first year in office Newlands carried out a detailed survey of the city on a scale of 1 inch to 20 feet. His first report of April 1848 included plans for a complete system of sewers, but addressed much else as well. It has been rightly said that it 'elucidates with clearness and precision almost every matter connected with the sanitary arrangements of a great population' ('PICE', 229). Indeed, in many ways it presaged the structural changes that characterize Haussmann's Paris. Much concerned with access of light and air, Newlands proposed regulations on building height, street width, and room size. He proposed a series of boulevards along the parliamentary boundary, and to rebuild courtyard housing to allow communal cooking, baking, and washing. Newlands's sewer scheme was adopted, and while most of his other suggestions were deemed too radical to be adopted in full, he was successful in leading Liverpool to undertake responsibility for municipal services in many areas. Newlands's report pioneered both the regulation of housing and the provision of new public housing, as well as the provision of baths, wash-houses, and swimming baths. Supplementary reports appeared every few years reviewing the sanitary progress of the city and identifying new needs. 
While in many ways Newlands's efforts paralleled those of Edwin Chadwick, who was attempting to establish state responsibility for sanitary reform, the two were not close. Newlands's survey, carried out by private practice surveyors, undermined Chadwick's claim that a corps of military engineers should do such work; Newlands's successful working relationship with Liverpool council seemed to indicate that successful sanitation was not necessarily predicated on the existence of a general board of health. 
In 1855 Newlands took leave from his post to advise on the sanitation of army camps in the Crimea. In 1860 he published 'The Carpenter and Joiner's Assistant', a treatise that went through five editions during his life and was republished in 1890. He was elected associate member of the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1848, and to full membership in 1857. 
The first municipal engineer, Newlands was also for more than twenty years an exemplar of the profession which was only beginning to take formal shape at the end of his life. He quietly managed to begin the transformation of many aspects of the urban landscape by introducing a concept of urban planning, all the while maintaining popularity with all segments of the community in a city where there were deep political divisions. By the late 1860s he was being treated for the effects of chronic bronchitis and exhaustion through overwork. Rest cures did not help. In early June 1871 he moved to a role as consulting engineer, and died six weeks later, on 15 July. Crowds lined the route of his funeral procession. He was buried in the Liverpool necropolis. 


@@@@@


doc= 46362


Busch, John (c.1730-1795), nurseryman and landscape gardener, was born at Luneburg, Hanover. Christened Johann, he later signed himself Johann Busch, John Busch, or John Bush. The family retained the spelling Busch. Although his early education and training are uncertain, it is likely that he studied gardening in Germany and Holland, probably working at George II's garden in Hanover, which would have provided the connection with England. He is said to have settled in London in 1744, though he would have been only about fourteen then and could hardly have had horticultural training in Germany and Holland. 
Busch did, however, set up a nursery in Mare Street, Hackney, in 1756. This nursery -- later to achieve greater fame under another gardener from Hanover, Conrad Loddiges -- was particularly known for North American plants and trees obtained from John Bartram in Pennsylvania through Peter Collinson in London. Not only did this spur on those owners who wished to vary the planting in their new landscape gardens, but the nursery acted as a focal point for German owners eager to adopt the landscape style. Some came over to England in person, and others sent their gardeners. Sometimes a tour of English parks and gardens was involved, but the German gardeners also came to Busch for instruction. On the home front, the nursery supplied plants for such celebrated gardens as Kew. Busch groomed gardeners at his nursery for future appointments elsewhere, for example John Graefer, who went to work for the sixth earl of Coventry at Croome Court, Worcestershire, and afterwards became head gardener to the king of Naples. Lord Coventry was one of Busch's major customers. Married to Ann (died 1785), he had at least three sons, who were employed as his assistants, and two daughters. 
Busch's German connections may have led to his coming to the notice of Catherine the Great of Russia, herself of German origin. At Catherine's invitation, and with the offer of a large salary, he went to Russia in the summer of 1771, selling his Hackney nursery to Loddiges. He was scheduled to work at the palace of Kolomenskoe, near Moscow, but in the event seems to have switched to St Petersburg. He worked at the Oranienbaum Palace, whence he sent Lord Coventry a box of plants via Dr John Fothergill, who had replaced the now deceased Collinson as the principal agent in England for collecting seeds and plants. The contents included ferns, vacciniums, birch, aloe, lilies, rhododendrons, and geraniums. Busch was then commissioned to create a garden on a hill at Pulkovo, outside St Petersburg. Catherine paid a visit in 1774 and was delighted by a shaded gravel walk planted on both sides and a fine lawn bordered by gravel walks. Her enthusiasm led to Busch being given charge, together with the architect Vasily Neyelov, of the gardens at Tsarskoye Selo, the grandest of all his projects. Catherine conversed with him in German and the two clearly had a rapport. 
Busch's role at Tsarskoye Selo covered landscape design, plantings, and the nurture of plants and fruit in a large number of hothouses. Melons, peaches, nectarines, watermelons, and oranges were cultivated, among others, and one hothouse was more than 250 metres in length. Busch and his family lived in part of the orangery. Thanks to his experience and care a variety of trees and shrubs was grown, which surprised visitors, given the difficulties of the climate. While more formal areas survived close to the palace, Busch and Neyelov (who had been to England) landscaped much of the park in a naturalistic style, with a central lake and many diverse architectural constructions, some of which were derived from English parks or pattern-books. Busch was head gardener from 1775 to 1789, and although it is difficult to determine exactly how much he actually designed, the hanging garden and the garden near the Cameron gallery were certainly his work. 
In 1784 Busch's daughter Catherine married the architect Charles Cameron, who worked for the empress at Tsarskoye Selo and also at the great park at Pavlovsk, where he might possibly have been aided by Busch. For the park at Gatchina, Busch is thought to have provided the plan, which was implemented by the Scottish brothers John and Charles Sparrow. Woods, lakes, streams, bridges, and pavilions, linked by winding paths, provided a highly pictorial scene. Busch worked on Gatchina from 1779 to 1783, but the Sparrows had been there since 1769, so part of the park at least must have been their creation. Apart from his gardening duties Busch had to attend to some private requests from Catherine, such as dressing up as the innkeeper of a pretended tavern (really the bath pavilion in the park) for a visit by Count Falkenstein in 1780, who was used to travelling incognito and staying in taverns. 
In 1789 Busch returned to Britain, and ended his days employed at Syon House rather sadly, being accused of neglecting the orange trees. He lived in Isleworth, Middlesex, and died in May 1795, being buried in the parish churchyard at Isleworth, adjacent to Syon, on 22 May. His house in Isleworth later became a school. 
His son 
As they shared the same forename initial, Busch father and son are sometimes difficult to distinguish in contemporary sources, causing uncertainty as to which of them is meant. Their achievements were considerable. Between them they were responsible for the formation of some of the greatest parks around St Petersburg, a legacy that has lasted in good measure into the twenty-first century. 


@@@@@


doc= 46363


Joseph Charles Busch (bap. 1760, d. 1838), who was baptized at St John-at-Hackney, London, on 7 December 1760, followed his father as superintendent of Tsarskoye Selo gardens from 1789 to 1810. He drew a plan of the park as it was in 1789 rather than as a proposal. The gardens were extended and complemented by a late creation of Catherine, the Alexander Palace and park, intended for her favourite grandson, the future Alexander I. The palace was built in 1792-6, and the park was laid out by Joseph Busch; considerable architectural embellishments were added during the nineteenth century. He landscaped the park at Yelagin island, a favourite summer haunt of St Petersburg citizens, from 1797, and was also responsible for the gardens of Alexander's palace on Kamenny island. At Yelagin he instigated a prodigious amount of earthmoving, even altering the size and shape of the island. A series of waterways and an embankment were constructed, and profuse tree-planting ensued, with groups arranged for form and colour. He designed the white metal railings round the palace garden and its flowering herbaceous borders. He also laid out the gardens at Babolovsky Palace for one of Catherine's favourites, Potemkin. Joseph Busch was dismissed from Tsarskoye Selo in 1810, for refusing to work to a reduced budget, but remained in St Petersburg. Twice married, he died in St Petersburg of cholera in 1838. 


@@@@@


doc= 46369


Theobald, James (bap. 1688, d. 1759), merchant and antiquary, was baptized at St Mary's, Lambeth, Surrey, on 21 June 1688, the eldest surviving son of Peter Theobald (1656-1742) and his wife, Elizabeth ('b'. 1662), the daughter of Thomas Gleane. He was apprenticed to his father in the Barber-Surgeons' Company from 1704 until 1712, and, together with his brother Peter (1694-1778), became a freeman of the City on 4 July 1727. They were both elected court assistants in 1745, James was master in 1750, and Peter became warden in 1753. On 22 March 1715 James married Sarah, the daughter of Josiah Kingsman of Horndon-on-Hill, Essex (to whose son William Peter Theobald was apprenticed). Of their three daughters, only Martha ('b'. 1716), the eldest, reached maturity; a son, James, was baptized at Lambeth on 9 May 1720. 
The Theobalds were prominent timber merchants. James's grandfather, Daniel, had been a Southwark shipwright; his father, who was importing Norwegian timber by the 1680s, built up a thriving trade at Lambeth, and was joined by his two sons before 1722. In 1733 they provided the trustees for Georgia with a large model of a Dutch sawmill, which was shipped to the colony. From 1728 they acted as trustees to Archbishop Tenison's girls' charity school at Lambeth and to Peterson's charity in St Saviour's parish, Southwark, where James acquired property, including the local workhouse. In a document for 1727 the two brothers are named as lords of the manor of Old Paris Garden, Southwark. Theobald Street, Southwark, commemorates the family. 
From 1723 Theobald lived at Belvedere House in Lambeth. By 1739 he had moved to Surrey Street, off the Strand, and in 1743 inherited considerable property from his father in London, Surrey, and Leicestershire. The following year he purchased as his country residence Hill House, which he renamed Waltham Place, at White Waltham in Berkshire. From 1728 to 1734 he was the duke of Chandos's main financial intermediary, enabling John Wood to build Queen Square in Bath; he also lent the contractor Ralph Allen capital to resurface St Bartholomew's Hospital with Bath stone between 1730 and 1732. As a governor and committee member of Thomas Coram's Foundling Hospital, he made manuscript corrections in July 1740 to a report entitled 'A Sketch of the General Plan for Executing the Purposes of the Royal Charter'. 
James and Peter Theobald's private Bank of England drawing office accounts, dating from 1727, reveal extensive Scandinavian trading. James owned wharves, docks, warehouses, and a timber yard in Southwark. He ran his own company (1742-9), served as a bank director (1743-56), and held bank stock. (Peter was also a director, from 1756 to 1768.) They joined the Russia Company in 1741, and James became a governor of the Merchant Seamen's Corporation in June 1747. 
Theobald was elected fellow of the Royal Society on 4 November 1725; he later served as council member and auditor (1728-42). He supplied the society with its firewood and helped to reorganize and conserve its museum collections. In February 1742 he was awarded the society's Copley silver medal for his work on a committee set up in December 1736 to produce the medal. An influential member, he made 121 introductions and signed thirty-two certificates between 1727 and 1757. He also communicated a considerable amount of material about Scandinavian natural history and antiquities to the society and the Society of Antiquaries (to which he was elected on 23 November 1726). In particular he summarized and read an account of Swedenborg's 'Principia rerum naturalium' (1734) to the Royal Society at three meetings held in 1737 and 1738. 
Theobald served as joint secretary to the Society of Antiquaries from 3 January 1728 to 1735, and became an honorary member of the Spalding Gentlemen's Society on 28 June 1733. He was elected a vice-president of the Society of Antiquaries in November 1750, and was a leading force in procuring the society's deed of incorporation in 1751 and implementing numerous innovative changes (1733-54). In 1754 the society published his questionnaire, designed to obtain factual data about antiquities, natural history, agriculture, and manufactures on a parochial basis; he himself compiled the histories of eighteen parishes in ten counties between 1755 and 1758, illustrating them with his own pen and wash drawings. His handwritten account of Margate in 1756, with well-executed sketches of the church, the harbour, and a horse-drawn bathing machine, is bound up with the society's library copy of John Lewis's history of the Isle of Thanet (1736). When Henry Baker suggested that members should record significant contemporary events for posterity, Theobald wrote some useful accounts of the York Street Watergate (May 1757) and the Arundel marbles, followed, in June 1758, by 'An account of the rise and progress of the Society of London for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures & Commerce' (Society of Antiquaries of London, Ants. Papers 1758), on which Thomas Mortimer's anonymous 'Concise Account of the Society of Arts' (1763) was largely based. This manuscript, which was rediscovered in 1994, is a valuable source of additional information about the society, which Theobald joined in December 1754 and of which he became vice-president on 5 February 1755; his brother Peter and son James were also active members. Theobald's antiquarian miscellany (BL, Add. MS 45663) is a good indicator of his wide interests. 
Theobald was a pallbearer at the funeral of his friend Sir Hans Sloane in January 1753 and a Sloane trustee; he had presented Sloane with seventy-nine specimens for his natural history collections. Theobald also promoted the career of the naturalist George Edwards, who singled him out as one of his earliest patrons. Theobald's magnificent lustre chandelier, presented in 1754, forms the centrepiece of Barber-Surgeons' Hall. His impressive collection of natural history objects, coins, medals, prints, and drawings was auctioned in 1768. Peter Theobald's house at Kew Green later became the herbarium of the Royal Botanic Gardens. 
Theobald's second marriage, on 18 March 1735, to Elizabeth, the daughter of James Whitchurch and a niece of Baron Scrope, brought a dowry of $10,000. In 1749 he also inherited the Somerset manors of Nunney Castle and Nunney Mawdley from the Whitchurch family, and in 1754 he bought Grays Thurrock Manor, Essex. He died on 20 February 1759, and his widow, Elizabeth, on 18 June 1759, in Surrey Street. 


@@@@@


doc= 46371


Magens, Nicholas (1697?-1764), merchant and author, was born in Germany. Nothing is known about his parents, apart from the fact that they had six children, five sons and a daughter. Gaining early experience as a merchant in Hamburg and Spain, Magens settled in London in the early 1700s. There he became a successful insurance trader and director of the London Assurance Company. His earliest publication in English, 'The Universal Merchant' (1753), was allegedly translated from German by William Horsley, although the German edition appeared only in 1762. This book started with a general treatise on trade, which according to Horsley reflected 'many of Mr [William] Woods Sentiments', followed by an enquiry concerning bullion and an exposition of the theory and practice of banking. The work established Magens's reputation as an authority on monetary and commercial matters. The political economist James Steuart, referring to him as Mr Megens, called him 'a very knowing man, and a very judicious author' and quoted among other things his estimate of the amount of coin preserved in the Bank of England (Steuart, 3.212). In the first book of 'The Wealth of Nations' (1776) Adam Smith, spelling his name as 'Meggens', adopted from 'The Universal Merchant' and from 'Farther Explanations of Subjects' (1756) the estimates of the precious metals imported into Europe and into Spain respectively. 
Magens's second influential study, 'An Essay on Insurances' (1755), was a much amended and increased translation of his 'Versuch uber Assecuranzen' (1753). Additions in the English edition to the general treatise on insurance, with which volume 1 commences, include some interesting mathematical notes on the calculation of insurance premiums. Most of this volume, however, consisted of leading cases. The second volume was a collection of ordinances and laws on insurances from several European states and cities. Magens further demonstrated his detailed knowledge in commercial matters in a memorial and four letters to the duke of Newcastle written in the period 1758 to 1761. Advising on such matters as the best way to finance the provisioning of British troops in Germany, he showed that, as Horsley put it, he was 'an Alien by birth [but] an Englishman by Interest' (N. Magens, 'The Universal Merchant', preface). 
That Magens did not neglect his own particular interest either is evinced by the considerable wealth he accumulated, estimated to be about $100,000 at his death ('GM'). In 1763, using some of this wealth, he became lord of the manor by buying Brightlingsea Hall and Moverons, the two manors of Brightlingsea, near Colchester. Not long after, on 18 August 1764, he died. He was buried in All Saints' Church, Brightlingsea, where upon the death of his wife, Elizabeth, in 1779 a sumptuous marble monument was erected to his memory. There is no evidence of any surviving child; his brother William held the manors from 1779. 


@@@@@


doc= 46376


Jones, (William) Kennedy (1865-1921), newspaper manager and editor, was born on 4 May 1865 at Glasgow, the son of Henry Jones of Newry, co. Down, and his wife, Jeanie Kennedy of Ayr. He married Hetty, daughter of James Staniland of Birmingham, in 1892, and was the father of one son and three daughters. 
K. J., as Jones was known, was educated at Glasgow high school, leaving at sixteen to start a career in newspapers. He worked first as a reporter and sub-editor in Glasgow, notably with 'The News' and the 'Evening News'. He later moved south, and took with him the advantages of a practical apprenticeship in journalism and a sure instinct for the human-interest story that would sell newspapers. 
After brief engagements in Leicester and Birmingham, Jones sought work in London. 'Morning', which he helped to start in 1892, failed to prosper, but the experience convinced him that there was a market for a halfpenny morning daily if the right formula could be found. Jones moved to T. P. O'Connor's 'Sun' as news editor after a few months but, in 1894, undeterred by lack of capital, he gambled boldly, acquiring with Louis Tracy, assistant editor of 'The Sun', an option to purchase the London 'Evening News', then running at a loss despite a respectable circulation of about 100,000. The idea was to sell it on quickly to Alfred Harmsworth, whom Jones had identified as a potential buyer. 
The sale secured Jones a 71/2 per cent stake in the profits of the 'Evening News' and, after a short interval, the editorship, which he retained until 1900. The paper was completely refashioned, with political coverage reduced to make way for sport, prize competitions, serialized fiction, and the kind of eye-catching feature articles with which Harmsworth had successfully entertained the readers of 'Answers'. Its fortunes were transformed, and Harold Harmsworth was soon referring to the 'Evening News' as 'our gold brick' (Pound and Harmsworth, 172). 
Alfred Harmsworth, with no previous experience of newspapers, allowed Jones to steer his early ventures as a proprietor. At Jones's suggestion the Glasgow 'Daily Record' was acquired in 1895 as the first of a projected chain of provincial dailies. This project, however, was soon eclipsed by the 'Daily Mail', launched in May 1896, flagship of a new style of popular journalism which originated in Jones's vision of a halfpenny paper produced in London and wired to provincial cities for printing, distribution, and early-morning sale. Though not burdened with the routine duties of editorship Jones was given overall responsibility for content and style. The runaway success of the 'Mail' owed much to Harmsworth's abrasive, ambitious deputy. It was typical of Jones that he should boast of his part in transforming journalism, once a profession, into 'a branch of commerce'. He had an instinct for news that would make newspapers sell. War, which 'not only creates a supply of news but a demand for it', featured prominently, as well as funerals, football results, and the 'First-class Murder' (Jones, 173, 198-201). 
As his newspaper empire expanded Harmsworth came to rely on Jones's shrewd commercial judgement and his aggressive business mentality. Jones appeared to relish his reputation as Harmsworth's hard man and minder. 'He had', it has been observed, 'almost none of the elements of personal popularity' and 'many enemies whose existence seemed to give him pleasure' (Pound and Harmsworth, 173-4). When more subtle skills were required, however, Jones was adept, acting in 1908 as an intermediary in the negotiations which led to Harmsworth's purchase of 'The Times'. His intervention was critical in enabling Harmsworth to snatch the prize from Arthur Pearson's grasp at the eleventh hour. Jones then modernized the 'Times' printing works, but was denied the editorial influence which he had anticipated. In 1912, following a period of ill health, he sold his newspaper interests. After two further years as chairman of Waring and Gillow, the London furniture store, Jones retired from business. 
Jones entered politics in April 1916 as an independent candidate at the Wimbledon by-election. His robust radical right-wing campaign led to a substantial protest vote against the wartime party truce, sending a clear message to the ailing Asquith government 'on behalf of the Do-it-now party' ('The Times', 26 April 1916). Elected unopposed as Unionist member for Hornsey a few months later, Jones spent his remaining years in parliament. He took an unpaid appointment with the Ministry of Food in 1917 and, after the war, showed a particular interest in London's traffic and transport problems. His 'Fleet Street and Downing Street', published in 1919, is a useful source, not only for the origins of popular journalism in Britain, but also for relations between politicians and the press. 
Jones died of pneumonia at his home, 123 Victoria Street, London, on 20 October 1921 and was cremated at Golders Green crematorium on 24 October, after a memorial service at St Margaret's, Westminster. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 46383


Sutton, John (bap. 1777, d. 1863), corn dealer and seedsman, was baptized at St Mary Somerset, London, on 1 June 1777, the fourth son in a family of six sons and four daughters of James Sutton (1744-1789), partner in Sutton and Winckworth, flour factors, and his wife, Anne Martha (1749-1789), daughter of John and Rachel Johnston, also of London. Both parents died prematurely in 1789, and the seven surviving children were brought up by the Winckworths. After apprenticeship in the firm, about 1800 John and his elder brother James moved to Reading, and ran some mills which they had inherited along the River Kennet. In 1806 John established a corn and meal business in King Street; three years later he married Sarah, daughter of Joseph Norris of Shinfield, near Reading. Three sons and three daughters survived infancy. 
During the final decade of the Napoleonic wars, the brothers built up a thriving business. Then early in 1815 their Reading bank, Marsh and Deane, failed at the same time as a major customer in London to whom they regularly consigned substantial quantities of flour. They had very large overdrafts, which the commissioners of bankruptcy put intense pressure on them to repay. James, owing $1450, had to declare himself bankrupt, and died of drink in 1826. John apparently reached an accommodation with the commissioners for the $960 he owed and was able to continue trading on a modest scale. His only known portrait reveals the face, under an impressive stovepipe hat, of a man who has known genuine misfortune. During this critical period his second son, Martin Hope Sutton (1815-1901), was born, the name Hope expressing his parents' aspiration for better times to come. 
Owing to indifferent health and his wife's prolonged illness before she died in 1834, John Sutton was by 1827 barely capable of managing on his own. Martin therefore had to leave school at the age of twelve, and enter the firm. From 1829 onwards he took over the counting-house, and with the help of an outside loan -- not paid off until 1841 -- he restored the finances. Aware that the corn trade had only a limited commercial future, Martin soon began to deal in the more profitable line of seeds. However, his father insisted that he must carry out all seed activities, as well as the study of botanic works, outside working hours, and only after a time allowed him to open accounts with London seed wholesalers. In 1836, when Martin was twenty-one, he became a partner. 
While Martin was energetically building up all sides of the business, John Sutton was little more than an adviser and helper. His lethargy sprang from the result of his doctor's earlier advice -- that he should fortify himself daily with strong drink. By 1838 he had become so forgetful, bilious, and irritable that Martin resolved to cure him of his addiction, distracting him by spending as much time with him as could be spared, and thereby restoring him to health. John Sutton finally retired in 1850. 
John Sutton is of interest as typifying a provincial tradesman of the period: limited in his education but, by dint of reading, well up in history and public affairs, and, as a moderate whig, able to trace current political ills back to those ultimately responsible. Originally a Unitarian, he later worshipped in the established church, audibly and fervently joining in that part of the liturgy acceptable to him and ostentatiously silent when he disagreed. 
A man of the utmost probity, John Sutton's family respected and feared rather than loved him. He had ambitions for his brighter children, training his eldest son for medicine and briefly apprenticing Martin to a surveyor. As he refused to entertain or be entertained, his three daughters never had the opportunity of marrying; after working hard in the early days, they were later condemned to idleness. They lived with him until he died at his home, Southampton Villa, Reading, on 31 May 1863. He was buried in Reading cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 46390


Arnot, Frederick Stanley (1858-1914), missionary in Africa, was born on 12 September 1858 at his parents' home, 8 Byrnbank Terrace, Glasgow, the son of William Arnot, a merchant, and Elizabeth Helen, 'nee' Macdonald. The family moved to Hamilton in 1864, where Frederick became a playmate of David Livingstone's children. In 1868 the family, led by Arnot's father, left the Free Church of Scotland to join the Plymouth Brethren, a fundamentalist protestant sect without clergy. In Tayport from 1870 and in Glasgow after 1873, to prepare himself to be a missionary to Africa, Arnot learned navigation, shoemaking, tailoring, blacksmithing, and carpentry, as well as acquiring a basic knowledge of medicine, and he preached on tours of England and Scotland. 
In 1881 Arnot left for Africa, intending to found missions on the upper Zambezi. He reached Lealui, capital of the Lozi kingdom, where he lived from November 1882 to May 1884. Few converts were made, attendance at his boys' school was fitful, and he failed to convert King Lewanika; and when civil war threatened, Arnot abandoned the venture. 
Arnot then travelled to Angola, where he established a chain of mission stations reaching into the interior. In 1886 he extended his travels into the large kingdom ruled over by Msiri in the Katanga area of the Congo, where Msiri accepted him as a British pawn to be played against Arab, Portuguese, and Belgian influences. This allowed Arnot to bring in successor missionaries in December 1887. In the same month he returned to Britain, in failing health, to receive something of a hero's welcome from the press, and honours from the Royal Geographical Society. 
During 1889 Arnot met Harriet Jane Fisher ('b'. 1864/5), of Erfort Lodge, Hyde Vale, Greenwich. They married on 26 March 1889 and went together into Angola, where Arnot was installing new missionaries. Ill health forced his return to Britain in 1892, where he settled in Waterloo, near Liverpool. For the next twenty years he acted as the effective director of the Plymouth Brethren missions in southern Africa, raising money for supplies, deciding on sites, recruiting missionaries, and making frequent visits to Africa, despite his poor health. 
In 1908 Arnot moved to Johannesburg, but he spent most of his time in Northern Rhodesia, expanding stations. In 1910 Arnot and his wife opened a new mission station north of Barotseland, but they were forced back to Johannesburg by his bad health. In 1913, once again attempting to open up a new mission in Rhodesia, he suffered a ruptured spleen and was taken by canoe and train back to Johannesburg, where he died after surgery on 15 May 1914. 


@@@@@


doc= 46391


Lloyd, Albert Bushnell (1871-1946), missionary in Uganda and Church of England clergyman, was born at home, in Bosworth Terrace, King Richard's Road, Leicester, on 22 February 1871, the son of Thomas Howard Lloyd, a druggist, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Bushnell. Both his parents were devout Christians, and he had at least one sibling, his sister Elsie. An adventure-loving boy, he read all the African travelogues he could and trained as an engineer to equip himself as an explorer. At the age of eighteen he experienced an evangelical conversion and determined to become a missionary instead. 
Accepted by the Church Missionary Society in 1892, Lloyd left for Uganda in 1894 and arrived in March 1895 having walked from the coast through German East Africa. In 1896 he was sent to the western Ugandan Bantu kingdom of Toro, recently restored under its king, Kasagama, by the British authorities. There, as later in Bunyoro, he was friendly with the African ruler and chiefs. During his time in Toro he visited the mission outpost of Mboga (afterwards Boga) in the Belgian Congo where he first met the saintly Ugandan missionary to the Bambuti pygmies, Apolo Kivebulaya. He travelled home on leave via the Congo in 1898. On 15 August 1899 he married Mary Ethel Masters, the daughter of Henry Masters, a draper, at St Mark's Church in New Milverton, Warwickshire; they returned to Uganda together in 1899. Also in 1899 Lloyd published 'In Dwarf Land and Cannibal Country'; a substantial account of his travels and of Uganda, spiced with adventures with lion and elephant, it was reprinted several times. 
On his second tour of service Lloyd worked first in the kingdom of Bunyoro. Then in 1904 he pioneered his mission's first venture into a non-Bantu area of Uganda, going to the Acholi who lived north and east of the Nile. Lloyd himself was the instigator, believing the Acholi to be hungering for the gospel. This proved to be a misapprehension, largely fostered by Bunyoro Christians who reworded enquiries to make them more attractive to the missionaries. Lloyd's account of an exploratory journey to the Acholi in 1903, of what he could learn of the people and their history, and the beginnings of mission work with the Acholi, are among the most valuable sections of 'Uganda to Khartoum' (1906), another exciting read. 
By the end of 1907 it was clear that a series of calamities and the opposition of the Acholi had made the mission untenable. It was temporarily abandoned, and the Lloyds were re-posted to Bunyoro on their return from leave in 1907. Lloyd was ordained deacon and priest in 1909, and the following year he returned to Toro. There he settled down to steady pastoral and administrative church work, including oversight of Mboga where Canon Apolo Kivebulaya worked. Lloyd was made rural dean of Toro in 1916 and archdeacon of western Uganda in 1922, and he remained in Toro until he left Uganda in 1926 to join the mission's home staff. 
Lloyd retired in 1930 to become vicar of Combe Down, Bath; from 1936 he was vicar of Stanstead Abbots, Hertfordshire; and finally he became rector of Ladbroke-with-Radbourne, Rugby, in 1938. His ties with Uganda continued: in 1926 he was appointed bishop's commissary of the newly established diocese of the upper Nile, and in 1933-4 he returned to Africa briefly to Mboga after the death of Apolo Kivebulaya. Lloyd's later writings were slight, but they kept Kivebulaya's memory alive until the work of the biographer Anne Luck was published in 1963. Lloyd produced 'Dayspring in Uganda' in 1921 and three short works about Kivebulaya in 1923, 1928, and 1934; 'A Life's Thrills', a brief memoir, was published posthumously in 1948; it comprised mainly a retelling of his earlier works. 
Lloyd was an uncritical admirer of British colonialism and believed in the civilizing agency of mission and empire. Like most of his contemporaries he saw his call as one to save Africans from depravity and heathen darkness. Yet he liked and respected his African colleagues and acquaintances, and could not quite square his experience with this stereotype. He found himself profoundly moved, for instance, when a heathen diviner prayed for his safe passage on a dangerous river crossing, and could not believe that these prayers would be unheard by the Christian God (Lloyd, 'Uganda to Khartoum', 103-4). Lloyd died of a brain haemorrhage at his home, 7 Eastnor Grove, Leamington Spa, on 13 December 1946. 


@@@@@


doc= 46394


Triggs, (Harry Benjamin) Inigo (1876-1923), architect and garden designer, was born at Holly House, Turnham Green, Chiswick, Middlesex, on 28 February 1876, the son of James Triggs, a carpet manufacturer, and his wife, Celia Anne, 'nee' Bryant. The boy's third name came from his collateral descent from the seventeenth-century architect Inigo Jones, and was soon adopted by the family as his first name. James Triggs died while his son was still at school. At sixteen Inigo decided to leave the Godolphin School in Hammersmith and take articles with Peter Dollar, a City architect. He went to Chiswick School of Art, and attended the Royal Academy Schools where he won prizes for his work, and a travelling studentship. Having proved his ability, he gained more experience from a series of assistantships to architects such as Leonard Stokes, Sir Henry Tanner, and William Frederick Unsworth (1850-1912). He won a prize for design from the RIBA, which admitted him as an associate member in 1899. 
His illustrious ancestor in mind, Triggs set off on his bicycle with the younger Henry Tanner to collect material for a book, 'Some Architectural Works of Inigo Jones' (1901). Pleased with its success, and having visited and made drawings of 'some of the most complete and historical gardens now extant in this country', he decided to write another, which highlighted his interest in and attitude to garden design. 'Formal Gardens in England and Scotland' (1902) made early use of photography to illuminate the accounts of the gardens, to demonstrate 'the principle involved in their planning and arrangement in relation to the house, which is the essential element in what is the custom to call a Formal Garden' ('Formal Gardens', xiii). As well as the geometry of the layout Triggs portrayed the decorative stone vases, lead cisterns, metal gates, sundials and dovecotes, mazes, and topiary. Triggs's interests lay in the seventeenth century, in particular the architecture and gardens of Andre le Notre (1613-1700). He believed those making gardens should have a good knowledge of their history. Triggs won the Godwin bursary from the RIBA in 1906, which gave him money to travel. He visited villas and palaces in Italy, and in 1906 'The Art of Garden Design in Italy' followed the same thorough and empathetic form as before. On 9 October 1907 he married, at the cathedral church of Llandaff, Gladys Claire ('b'. 1873), daughter of Sir Edward Stock Hill (1834-1902), shipowner and MP. 
At some time in the early part of his career Inigo Triggs became ill. A reference to a haemorrhage, and the fact that he went to Switzerland to recuperate, suggest that this illness might have been tuberculosis, which stayed with him throughout his life. He was well enough to return to England in 1908, where he rejoined the practice of William Unsworth, and worked on a number of gardens in Hampshire. In 1910 he bought and renovated an old farmhouse at Liphook, Hampshire, which he called Little Boarhunt. He excavated part of the farmyard to make a sunken garden divided by a canal, placing a figure on a brick column in the middle, and enclosing it with low rubble walls in which flowers were planted. Unsworth had made measured drawings of the generalife in Granada. At Ashford Chace near Petersfield for the explorer Aubyn Trevor-Battye in 1912 Unsworth and Triggs added Moorish effects to a sunken garden with a fountain court and a lily tank filled by a conduit. Later Triggs was to lay out the Canadian military cemetery in Bramshott, Hampshire, near the church in which there is a memorial plaque to him. 
Triggs's work for the Godwin bursary of 1906 showed that he had become interested in city planning. He recorded the practical and aesthetic aspects of parks, squares, and open spaces in Paris, Berlin, Vienna, and Munich with photographs, neat diagrams, and thoughtful analysis, noting that his chosen subject 'has hitherto passed almost unnoticed in England' ('Planning of public squares', 1). His research, enlarged and acknowledging the influence of J. Stubben, Cologne's city architect, and the Viennese architect Camillo Sitte, appeared later in 'Town Planning, Past, Present and Possible' (1909). Visits to the continent continued to enlarge Triggs's knowledge of historic gardens in Europe, and in 1913 Batsford published his 'Garden Craft in Europe', in which a portrait of Andre le Notre looks out from the frontispiece and reaffirms Triggs's delight in seventeenth-century garden design. At the same time he was working on the landscaping for Whiteley Village, Surrey, a model settlement built from 1912 following a bequest from William Whiteley, the founder of the London drapery store. To house retired members of the firm, a village was built near Cobham in Surrey, by a number of architects under the guidance of Frank Atkinson. 
Triggs had never really shaken off the illness which no doubt held back the development of his career. His versatility in designing buildings and formal gardens was matched by his excellent books recording the historic landscapes of gardens and towns, which were just as valuable as bricks, mortar, and plants. He died on 8 April 1923 in Taormina, on the eastern coast of Sicily, leaving his wife and two daughters. He had been building there the Anglo-American Church of St George, in which he was buried. 


@@@@@


doc= 46395


Chisholm, Catherine (1878-1952), paediatrician, was born on 2 January 1878 at 10 Railway Street, Radcliffe, near Manchester, the first of two daughters of Kenneth Mackenzie Chisholm (died 1902), a general practitioner, and his wife, Mary Thornley, the daughter of a Lancashire mill owner. She was educated at a local private school. Her father, an Edinburgh graduate, a respected family doctor, and a magistrate, was the major influence in her life. Sympathetic to the cause of women in medicine, he allowed his daughter to accompany him on his rounds and encouraged her to take up the study of medicine at a time when most medical schools admitted only male students. In 1895 she enrolled at Manchester University and graduated with a BA in classics in 1898; the following year she became the first female student to enter the Manchester medical school. As a student Chisholm played an active role in feminist politics, and was mainly responsible for the founding of the Women Students' and Athletics' Union in 1899. In 1904 she became the first woman to graduate in medicine (MB ChB) from the University of Manchester, gaining first-class certificates in forensic medicine, obstetrics, surgery, and pathology. 
After graduation Chisholm spent a year as resident medical officer at the Clapham Maternity Hospital in London -- an institution founded by Annie McCall in 1887, and one of the few hospitals which employed only women doctors. This was followed by a further six months as medical officer at a children's sanatorium in Bingley, Yorkshire. In 1906 she returned to Manchester and set up in general practice near the university, drawing her patients from among the female students and middle-class women living in the area. Although Chisholm later specialized in child health she always maintained an interest in health issues which affected the lives of female students and working women, and was regarded as an authority on all aspects of women's health. She was medical inspector for girls for the Manchester education committee, women's medical officer for the university, and an adviser on the health of female workers for a number of Manchester organizations including the civil service and some insurance companies. 
Chisholm's MD thesis on 'Menstrual molimina' (1912) was an attempt to promote a healthy attitude to menstruation; she argued that schoolgirls and young women needed a sound knowledge of their physiology to counter the prejudice of old wives' tales. She was the school medical officer for the Manchester Girls' High School from 1908 to 1945, and the university medical officer for women students from 1918 to 1947 -- positions which allowed her to influence attitudes to hygiene and sex education. Chisholm was devoted to the high school, where she was considered a role model as well as a medical adviser. She was a strong advocate of sports and gymnastics; in her book, 'The Medical Inspection of Girls in Secondary Schools' (1914), she denied that competitive pressures at school were in any way detrimental to girls' health; in her view the best pupils often excelled both academically and on the sports field. 
About 1912 Chisholm decided to specialize in children's diseases -- an area of medicine which at that time was dominated by male physicians and surgeons. In 1914 she was appointed as a children's physician at the Northern Hospital, a voluntary institution in Manchester, and also at Hope Hospital, a workhouse infirmary in Salford. Chisholm's medical work became increasingly interlinked with the infant welfare movement, and the campaign of feminist reformers in the Women's Citizens' Association to improve social conditions for women and children. James Niven, medical officer of health for Manchester, appointed her as a medical adviser on child health to the public health committee; together with Margaret Ashton, the committee's chairman, and Manchester's first woman city councillor, she helped to expand the health visitor service and introduce infant welfare clinics. 
Chisholm opened the Manchester Babies' Hospital on 4 August 1914, established with financial help from Miss Ashton and the city council. The hospital became the main focus of her career as a consultant children's physician; she built a reputation for the care of very small and delicate babies, and she can be regarded as one of the founders of modern neonatology. During the 1920s she set about organizing the hospital of her dreams -- a service for children of all ages. A special ward for rickets, a human breast milk bank, laboratory, and teaching facilities, were all added. Chisholm's appointment as CBE in 1935 was an acknowledgement of her important contributions to child health; her hard work at the Babies' Hospital was further recognized by the duchess of York, who officially opened the new surgical block on 10 July 1935 and renamed the hospital the Duchess of York Hospital for Babies. 
In addition to her work with sick children and a wide range of publications in the field of paediatrics, Chisholm made a significant contribution to improving the education and status of women doctors in Britain. The babies' hospital became one of the country's main women-run hospitals. Employing only women doctors, its medical posts were highly prized, and Chisholm trained more than 150 medical women at the hospital between 1914 and 1947. She was also mainly responsible for the foundation of the Medical Women's Federation in 1917, an organization established to counter sexual discrimination and protect women's interests within the medical profession. During her presidency (1928-30) she greatly expanded the membership and increased the influence of the federation with the British Medical Association (BMA) and the Ministry of Health. 
Munk's 'Roll' described Chisholm as a strong feminist who could be counted on to support 'anything affecting the welfare of women and children likely to have a liberalising influence'. She was an advocate for women's education, and a role model for young women doctors, the first woman to be chairman of the Manchester branch of the British Medical Association (1938), first woman president of the Manchester Medical Society (1943), founding president of the Manchester Paediatric Society (1948), first woman to be awarded an honorary fellowship from the Royal College of Physicians (1949), and first woman president of the British Paediatric Association (1950). 
Politically she was Liberal and a suffragist, sympathetic to Margaret Ashton's feminist movement -- the North of England Society for Women's Suffrage. In 1914 Chisholm helped Miss Ashton and Mrs Shena Simon to found the Manchester and Salford Women's Citizens' Association (WCA), established to increase the role of women in local government. The WCA was a complex women's network which allowed Chisholm to link her different interests in public health, infant welfare, and women's rights. During the 1920s the WCA influenced the Manchester city council to introduce a number of municipal reforms, including infant welfare clinics, to improve the health of women and children. 
During the Second World War, Chisholm's work never slackened; indeed she took on extra work as senior consultant at Manchester's Booth Hall Children's Hospital. She persuaded Sir John Stopford, dean of the medical school, to admit more female medical students, and was influential in establishing Wilfred Gaisford as the first professor of paediatrics in Manchester. She retired in 1947 but continued to visit the Duchess of York Hospital until 1950. 
Chisholm never married, but lived with her sister, Alice, at 34 Broadway, Withington, Manchester. She enjoyed entertaining a wide circle of medical friends, and her interests included hiking, swimming, driving, and music. She died at home from heart failure on 21 July 1952, and was cremated at the Manchester crematorium three days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 46396


Simon, Shena Dorothy, Lady Simon of Wythenshawe (1883-1972), politician and educational reformer, was born in Croydon, Surrey, on 21 October 1883, the second of nine children of John Wilson Potter (1856-1933), a shipowner of Scottish descent, and his wife, Janet Boyd, 'nee' Thompson (died 1946). Educated at home, she passed the higher local education examination and went on to read economics at Newnham College, Cambridge, from 1904 to 1907. She narrowly missed a first in the new economics tripos and in 1907 began postgraduate study at the London School of Economics, where she developed a close friendship with Beatrice Webb, and came into close contact with the new Liberal theorists Graham Wallas and Leonard Hobhouse. She failed to complete her thesis, which focused on the emergence of the Labour Party, largely because she undertook the role of honorary secretary to the legislative committee of the National Union of Women Workers. This prompted an interest in wage boards, which she investigated in Australia and New Zealand. This in turn led to her involvement in a special committee formed to ensure that the rights of married women were safeguarded in Lloyd George's 1911 'National Insurance Bill'. 
Shena Potter was also closely involved in the female suffrage campaign. Despite opposition from her family she spoke at suffrage meetings and joined marches. She admired the militant leaders and recognized the value of militant tactics for the vote to be gained, but she herself refused to participate in any militant actions. Her Newnham contemporary Eva Hubback introduced her to the Mancunian social reformer Ernest Emil Darwin Simon (1879-1960), who 'wanted a wife who could play Beatrice to his Sidney Webb' (Harrison, 285). They married on 22 November 1912 in a register office, since both were agnostics, and formed a happy and effective partnership, moving in progressive intellectual circles between the wars. Settling in Manchester, they started a family: a first son was born in 1913, a second son, Brian Simon (1915-2002), the educationist and historian, followed two years later, and a third and last child, a girl, was born in 1917, but died aged twelve after a long illness. 
After her marriage Shena Simon became increasingly involved in Liberal politics in Manchester, and was elected in 1924 as a Liberal city councillor representing Chorlton ward. She quickly established a reputation as a leading radical on the city council, pursuing educational reform. She became chairman of the education committee in 1932, the first woman to hold that office. She was also closely involved with the development of the Wythenshawe estate, developed after Ernest bought Wythenshawe Park and Wythenshawe Hall and presented it to the city of Manchester to allow the development of a model satellite town for the relief of Manchester's overcrowded centre. Shena Simon sat on the city council's Wythenshawe estate special committee from 1928, becoming its chairman in 1931. In 1933 she was defeated in Chorlton as a result of a Conservative backlash. In 1935, after a period out of party politics, she joined the Labour Party a decade before her husband. Although she failed to be elected when she contested the Moston ward in 1936, she returned to the education committee as a co-opted member and continued to hold this position until she retired in 1970. 
Shena Simon's work was not confined to Manchester city council. Between 1929 and 1931 she served on the royal commission on licensing and in 1931 she was appointed to the consultative committee of the Board of Education, contributing especially to its work on secondary education. She served on the University of Manchester council from 1921 until 1966. In 1938 she served on a departmental committee on rating and valuation, her appointment reflecting her reputation as a notable authority on a highly technical subject. In 1942 she was involved in forming the Council for Educational Advance. In the years following the Second World War she was a strong advocate of comprehensive education in Manchester. Her 'Three Schools in One' (1948) was an influential contribution to the debate on the tripartite system of secondary education in England. Her other publications addressed topics of local government finance and administration. 
Shena Simon also continued to pursue feminist issues. In 1922, as lady mayoress, she refused to attend a function at a hospital with no women on the medical staff or the board of management. This action forced a change in policy. Her membership of the city council enabled her to champion feminist causes, the most notable being a campaign against the marriage bar on women teachers in Manchester, which was lifted in 1928 as a result of her efforts. Like others who had campaigned for women's suffrage, she became involved in the inter-war movements for equal citizenship, and was a founder of the Manchester and Salford Women Citizens' Association. With her husband she also helped to found in 1934 the Association for Education in Citizenship to promote the study of democratic politics in schools and universities. Her civic consciousness underlay her reforms in the field of public housing, and her advocacy for raising the school-leaving age and for the introduction of comprehensive schools. 
Shena became Lady Simon in 1932 when her husband was knighted. In 1947 her husband was raised to the peerage as the first Baron Simon of Wythenshawe. After his death in 1960 she considered moving to London, but resolved to stay in Manchester. She wanted to continue to serve the university and the education committee. A number of personal honours followed in later life: in 1964 she was made a freeman of the city of Manchester; in 1965 she became an honorary fellow of the London School of Economics; in 1966 she was awarded an honorary degree by the University of Manchester. In her later years she allowed more time for the leisure pursuits that she had enjoyed throughout her life, especially detective novels, cinema, and the music of Gracie Fields. She continued to lead a full and active life until her death, in Manchester, owing to failing health through old age, on 17 July 1972. Her contribution to education in Manchester was recognized in 1982 with the opening of Shena Simon College. 


@@@@@


doc= 46397


Cane, Stephen Percival (1881-1976), garden designer and writer, was born on 20 September 1881 at High Street, Braintree, Essex, the eldest of the five children of William Stephen Cane, a corn dealer, and his wife, Ellen Wagstaff. He spent his childhood at Bocking Mill on the River Blackwater, near Braintree, and was educated privately from 1891 at a school run by Lygon Graham Pakenham. From February 1903 to January 1908 he worked for Crittalls, the firm of window manufacturers owned by family friends. A visit to the garden at Easton Lodge, designed in 1902 by Harold Peto (1854-1933) for the countess of Warwick, inspired him to become a garden designer. 
Cane left Crittalls and enrolled at Chelmsford College of Science and Art to study art and architecture. The principal, C. H. Baskett, offered him an introduction to the secretary of the Architectural Association, F. R. Yerbury. Cane arranged to study part-time, as a pupil of one of the senior students, Stephen Rowland Pierce (1896-1966), who was later vice-president of the Royal Institute of British Architects (RIBA) from 1951 to 1955. He began a career in journalism in 1915 by writing for 'My Garden, Illustrated', a monthly magazine which he owned and edited from May 1918 to June 1920. He finished his training by studying at the Chelmsford County School of Horticulture in 1918, and by 1919 was established in London as a garden architect. 
Within a decade Cane had become one of the most sought-after designers of his day, and had received commissions for Llannerch Park, north Wales (1927-9); Ivy House, Hampstead, for Anna Pavlova (1926); Bodens Ride, Ascot (1929); and Hascombe Court, Godalming (1928-9). He designed gardens in Britain, France, Austria, and Greece, for the British pavilion at the New York World Fair (1939), for the King's House, Burhill, for the Royal Warrant Holders' Association (1935), and for Hungerdown House, Seagry, Wiltshire (1945-6). After the Second World War he received a number of large commissions, which gave him the scope to design on a grand scale: Falkland Palace, Fife (1947); the imperial palace, Addis Ababa, for Emperor Haile Selassie (1955); and his most important undertaking, Dartington Hall, Devon, for Leonard and Dorothy Elmhirst (from 1945 onwards), where his work survives in excellent condition. Westfields, at Oakley in Bedfordshire (1953-64), has all the characteristic Cane features at their best: a glade of flowering trees and shrubs, a rock and water garden of Westmorland stone, a formal lily pool, and a paved rose garden. The artist Harold White illustrated Cane's design proposals from the 1920s to the 1950s. The landscape architect and pioneer of the modern movement in gardens Christopher Tunnard (1910-1979) and Frank Clark (1902-1971), landscape designer, author, and teacher, were both articled to Cane from 1932 to late 1934. 
Cane worked mainly in the larger private gardens, and remained one of the most prominent designers from the 1930s to the 1950s. His commissions provided the material for his books on garden design: 'Modern Gardens, British and Foreign' (1926-7), 'Garden Design of Today' (1934), 'The Earth is my Canvas' (1956), and 'The Creative Art of Garden Design' (1967). He contributed articles on gardens to 'The Studio' magazine during the 1920s and from 1930 to 1938 served as founder editor of the quarterly journal 'Garden Design'. From 1921 until 1953 he exhibited regularly at the Chelsea flower show, where he was awarded eight gold (1936, 1937, 1938, 1947, 1948, 1949, 1951, 1952) and three silver-gilt medals (1934, 1935, 1950). Although very much a lone worker, he was appreciative of contemporary designers; at one stage he joined the Institute of Landscape Architects but later resigned. A small, reserved, dapper man, he was a perfectionist in his work. Modest and courteous in character, he allowed his social life to revolve round his career, and he never married. 
In 1926 Cane described successful garden design as 'the inclusion of formal terraces and gardens suitable to the character of the house, and the relation and contrast of these with beautifully balanced glades and planting... It is the harmonious relation of the garden to the house, and of the gardens to the surrounding scenery. ('Modern Gardens, British and Foreign', 1926-7, 1-2)' He drew inspiration from the Italianate garden designs of Peto and greatly admired the aesthetics and carefully prescribed rules of Japanese gardens. He chose shrubs and trees of Japanese origin -- evergreen azaleas, maples, and flowering cherries -- and his rock and water gardens were often designed in the Japanese spirit, with a precise placing of rocks and shrubs and an atmosphere of elegant reserve. Cane coined the use of the word glade and gave it a particular significance in the context of his garden designs: with curving borders of ornamental trees and shrubs, glades were a manageable alternative to labour-intensive bedding schemes. Cane was concerned about cost-effective garden schemes: in April 1957 he took part in a symposium promoted by the Royal Horticultural Society entitled 'Garden design in relation to reduction of labour and maintenance costs', with Brenda Colvin and L. Milner White. 
In 1963 Cane was awarded the Royal Horticultural Society's Veitch memorial medal for his work as a designer of gardens and a landscape architect. He continued to practise as a garden architect in London until September 1972, when he suffered a severe stroke. He spent his last years in a nursing home, Eastfield House, Whitchurch, Oxfordshire, paid for by the Elmgrant Trust, and died on 23 February 1976 in St Mary's Hospital, Wallingford, Oxfordshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 46398


Roper, Lanning (1912-1983), landscape gardener and journalist, was born on 4 February 1912 at West Orange, New Jersey, USA, the youngest of the three sons of Willet Crosby Roper (1877-1966), a banker, and his wife, Florence Emeline Eveleth (1874-1961). He had a happy and well-regulated childhood in West Orange and later Closter, New Jersey, governed by his father's daily commuting to the Wall Street bankers Brown Brothers, Harriman & Co.: where Willet Roper spent his entire working life, and rose to be a director. The Ropers were proud of their ancestry, which was well documented back through eight generations to mid-seventeenth-century pilgrim settlers in Massachusetts: intensely patriotic, but Anglophile, they were liberally and intellectually inclined members of the dominant east coast white, Anglo-Saxon, protestant society. While his brothers chose conventional careers in farming and the law, Lanning was undecided about a profession. After high school in Englewood, New Jersey, he went to Harvard University to read fine arts and graduated with honours in 1933. He was advised against postgraduate landscape architecture, as it was felt that this infant profession was eminently disposable in those times of high unemployment; accordingly he went on to study architecture at Princeton University. Here he failed to finish his first year. He left to take up tutoring posts and eventually settled to teaching Latin and English at the smart Buckley School in midtown New York. 
In his early twenties Roper was tall and well built, with blonde hair and blue eyes, always smartly dressed, he had a sunny sense of humour and great charm. He made the most of New York's musical and cultural offerings, and enjoyed life among a group of lively friends. In the long summer vacations he chose to tutor the children of well-to-do families so that he could indulge his passion for sailing and ocean racing; if a chance to visit the historic gardens of Newport, Rhode Island, or the Carolina shores was also part of the holiday, he was blissfully happy. This pursuit of pleasures had no time to pall: his family's sensitivity to events in Europe made him volunteer for the ranks of the national guard in early 1941, almost a year before the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, and he gained a commission in the United States Naval Reserve on 16 March 1942. Service on shore patrols was succeeded by training to command large landing craft, and he crossed the Atlantic in the spring of 1944 to take part in the D-day landing at Omaha Beach with the US 115th infantry regiment. He was wounded in the action and awarded the US gold star medal. His war was completed at the 'stone frigate' HMS Mastodon -- Exbury House, near Southampton -- and in naval intelligence at the headquarters of Naval Forces Europe in Grosvenor Square: here he was released from duty on 15 November 1945. His war experience had introduced him to the English landscape and gardens, and to such friends as Herbert and Barbara Agar, Walter and Margery Fish, Patrick Leigh Fermor, and the marquess of Normanby, all of whom encouraged him to stay in England and create gardens. 
Although Roper had gardened happily as a child with his father at weekends, he realized the subject was taken more seriously in England and that he had much to learn. After some false starts he became a student at the Royal Botanic Gardens at Kew and then in Edinburgh: soon gardening and garden visiting filled his life, as he realized he had found his vocation. In the autumn of 1951, just six months short of his fortieth birthday, he joined the staff of the Royal Horticultural Society in Vincent Square as assistant to the editor of the journal and other publications, Patrick Synge. His garden-writing career flourished with Synge's support, and through friendships formed with Christopher Hussey, who encouraged him to write for 'Country Life', and Eric Savill, deputy ranger of Windsor Great Park. His first book, 'Royal Gardens', was published in coronation year, 1953, with a foreword by Geoffrey Jellicoe; it was followed in 1959 by a larger volume, 'The Gardens in the Royal Park at Windsor'. 
On 19 December 1952 Roper married the artist Primrose Harley (1908-1978) ['see 'Roper, Primrose] and they lived at Park House, Onslow Square, in South Kensington. It was a marriage of complementary talents, embodied in the flowering of Park House as one of the most famous gardens of the day; it was photographed by Cecil Beaton and visited by thousands when it was opened as part of the National Gardens Scheme. A country garden in the heart of the city, achieved on a low budget and with minimal paid help, it was a tonic and an inspiration to town gardeners throughout Britain, and the workshop for Roper's 'Successful Town Gardening', published by 'Country Life' in 1957. In that year he established himself as an independent garden consultant, and received a leaving commission from Patrick Synge to write 'Hardy Herbaceous Plants' in the 'Penguin Handbooks' series (1960). He was appointed gardening correspondent of the 'Sunday Times', a post which he held for thirteen years; his first piece appeared on 7 January 1962. 
The garden of Park House is also featured in 'The Sunday Times Gardening Book' (1967), Roper's finest book, which manifested his encyclopaedic knowledge of plants and his characteristic charm and enthusiasm for his subject. His contribution to a BBC Radio 3 talks series and book, 'A Gardener's Dozen' (BBC/Royal Horticultural Society, 1980), offers further evidence of his almost sensual preoccupation with all things horticultural: he celebrated July, his allotted month, as a 'gourmet's delight' -- Roper was a keen cook -- and wrote of roses, his 'great fondness for lilies', and 'weakness for clear yellow day-lilies, and an aversion to orange'. He ended with the reflection that: 'the pleasures of July are heightened by the arrival of the first of the spring bulb catalogues. They lie temptingly on the table, perhaps near a big bowl of sweet peas or apricot and pink Ligtu Hybrid alstroemerias. So strong is the pull of the garden next spring that I for a moment forget the bounty of summer. Such is the nature of gardeners. ('A Gardener's Dozen', 91-103)' Roper's well-defined tastes, his fine judgement, and his belief in doing all important planting and pruning work himself endeared him to a string of distinguished clients in almost 200 garden projects in Britain and Europe throughout the 1960s and 1970s. He worked on eight American gardens (he never relinquished his US citizenship and returned annually to visit family and friends). He was consultant to the National Trust for gardens including Scotney Castle, Chartwell, Tatton Park, Anglesey Abbey, and Waddesdon Manor, and to the National Trust for Northern Ireland on Castlecoole and Castle Ward. Among long-standing clients were Prince Sadruddin Aga Khan, several members of the Sainsbury family, Peter Palumbo, and Henry P. McIlhenny, who was Roper's classmate at Harvard and the owner of Glenveagh Castle in co. Donegal. 
Roper worked on gardens for major contemporary architectural projects, including the Sainsbury Centre for the Visual Arts at the University of East Anglia (Norman Foster Associates) and the Hambro Life Centre, Swindon (Yorke, Rosenberg, and Mardall), and created the roof garden for the Ismaeli Centre, South Kensington (Casson, Conder & Partners and Sasaki Associates). He also readily gave his time to charitable projects and to help young friends: the soul of discretion, he was much appreciated in royal gardening circles and was photographed by Lord Snowdon. His proudest moment was undoubtedly when he was invited to help the prince of Wales with his newly purchased garden at Highgrove House in Gloucestershire in early 1981. Their first meetings were promising, but by the time of the royal wedding in the summer of that year Roper knew that his health was failing, and he had regretfully to decline both an invitation to the ceremony and the garden commission. 
Roper and his wife lived apart from the early 1960s and divorced in 1968, a source of deep sadness for Roper until the end of his life. From 1965 his London home was 29a Clarendon Gardens, Maida Vale, a comfortable 'pied-a-terre' with the tiniest courtyard garden. He died from cancer on 22 March 1983, at St Mary's Hospital, Praed Street, and a memorial service was held at St Mary's, Paddington, on 21 April 1983; his ashes were scattered on the Mulgrave estate. In his will he gave personal gifts to his friends and bequeathed the remainder of his assets to the National Trust for the upkeep of Scotney Castle. 
Roper was remembered with affection by many, including those who met him only through books and articles. His infectious enthusiasm and fine judgement of plants contributed much to the late twentieth-century popularity of gardening, while the 'restrained prettiness' of his planting style was accessible to even the owners of very small gardens, with whom he always had a special empathy. 


@@@@@


doc= 46400


Colvin, Brenda (1897-1981), landscape architect, was born on 8 June 1897 at Simla in India, where her father, Sir Elliot Graham Colvin (1861-1940), became resident in Kashmir (1902) and later agent to the governor-general in Rajputana (1905-17). Her mother, Ethel Bayley, was the elder daughter of Sir Stewart Colvin Bayley, who also served with distinction in India, as had previous generations of the Colvin family. She had a brother and a sister. Her earliest schooling was on a houseboat on the River Jhelum, a childhood which she remembered for the wild flowers, almond blossom, orchards, and picnics on the banks of the lakes and in the gardens of the Shalimar. Formal education came later, when she lived with a family friend in a Hampton Court apartment and attended a variety of schools in England and France. She was fond of remarking that this background and upbringing classified her on the census as an illiterate immigrant. 
In 1919 Colvin attended Swanley Horticultural College to study gardening and market work, preceding by a year Sylvia Crowe, her lifelong and sympathetic colleague. However, during the first year she became interested in the design course under Madeline Agar, a landscape architect trained in the United States then working on the rejuvenation of Wimbledon Common; she worked for two years as a pupil and foreman in Miss Agar's office. Then about 1922 Colvin founded her own practice, which remained at the centre of her endeavours throughout her long working life. For the next two decades she advised on the creation and improvement of gardens, both private and institutional, writing many articles on design with plants, a field in which she excelled. The few remaining black and white photographs of her early work show an architectural handling of texture and form in foliage design combined with a delicate overlay of flowers, sometimes like a short-lived mist over massy landforms. She was conscious of the need to arrange gardens to provide interest throughout the year and to achieve coherence of colour in both foliage and flowers. By 1939 she had advised on about 300 gardens. Her largest work before that date was an extensive addition to the garden at Zywiec in Poland for Archduke Charles Albert Habsburg; it is a measure of her reputation during the 1930s that she should have received such a commission. 
No account of Brenda Colvin is complete without reference to the two books she wrote in the late 1940s. 'Trees for Town and Country', written with Jacqueline Tyrwhitt and published in 1947, describes, with fine line illustrations by S. R. Badmin, the character, size, and requirements of selected common trees, and was long a standard reference work. 'Land and Landscape', published in 1948, was a book of tremendous vision, an inspiration to all land-based professionals, in which the benefits of landscape architecture were lucidly expounded. A revised edition, dedicated to Geoffrey and Susan Jellicoe, was published in 1970. It became a standard textbook and was translated into Japanese. This classic work reviewed the state of the British landscape and foreshadowed movements promoting applied ecology and countryside conservation as the backbone of a sophisticated design philosophy. Its opening lines sum up Brenda Colvin's views: 'The control which modern man is able to exert over his environment is so great that we easily overlook the power of the environment over man... We should think of this planet, Earth, as a single organism, in which humanity is involved. The sense of superior individuality which we enjoy is illusory. Man is a part of the whole through evolutionary processes, and is united to the rest of life through the chemistry of lungs and stomach; with air, food and water passing in constant exchange between the soil and the tissues of plant and animal bodies. (Colvin, 'Land and Landscape', 2)' 
'Land and Landscape' arose from a memorable series of lectures delivered to students at the Architectural Association which had a direct influence on many post-war architects, leading them to see buildings as part of the landscape at large. 
Finally in 1977 Colvin published privately a collection of poems and short prose statements under the title 'Wonder in a World'. This very personal work belies the dry pessimism which she sometimes expressed about the world. It reveals both her sparkling intellect and a great joy in life; for instance: 'Well may we count our blessings and be grateful for the conditions on this planet so amazingly adapted to the evolution of the creative spirit of man' (Colvin, 'Wonder in a World', 19). 
Writing and serving her profession occupied only the smaller part of Brenda Colvin's energies from 1945. Always the first demand on her time was design. Until about 1965 she practised from an office in Gloucester Place, London, which she shared with Sylvia Crowe (though they never worked as partners). After reaching the age of fifty she designed at least another 300 landscapes, most of which were carried out; some were small, some very large. She still designed many gardens, sometimes within a flowing but never a random line, always effortlessly planted. However, she had come to believe that the design of the landscape at large is a more significant contribution to human and terrestrial well-being. Therefore it was with delight that she accepted commissions to design extensive urban and industrial landscapes. These commissions arose in response to strategies being promoted by the landscape profession, that all construction work should include assessment and design of the landscape, and that schemes to disturb land should include creative ideas for its subsequent restoration. 
Colvin was early to design one of the new generation of reservoirs, at Trimpley in Worcestershire (from 1962), and studied with the engineers means of integrating the bunding into its setting by judicious adding of soil along the face and an elegant detail of rockwork at water level on the inner concrete face. She designed the landscape for the new University of East Anglia, but fell out with the architect, Sir Denys Lasdun, because she insisted upon providing paths for students to walk across grassland and remodelling the landform alongside the buildings to look undisturbed. She ensured a natural setting, incorporating native habitats, for the university, which later became a centre for environmental studies. She designed industrial landscapes around several of the new generation of power stations, including Stourport (from 1952), Drakelow (from 1963), Rugeley (from 1963), and Eggborough (from 1961), emphasizing the need to work on a large scale compatible with the undertaking. Colvin fearlessly opposed proposals of which she did not approve. For example, she represented the opponents of a proposed electricity power line along the Thames at Goring Gap. Her colleague representing the promoters at a public inquiry, Dame Sylvia Crowe, could only agree with the principles which she expounded. 
In 1962 Colvin was appointed landscape consultant for the rebuilding of Aldershot military town, a project on which she worked for over fifteen years. The macadam atmosphere of the barracks was slowly converted into a community in a woodland setting. This was achieved by perceiving that on the thin Bagshot gravels two fundamentally different types of landscape were needed. Trim grass with well-spaced trees provided military precision as a foil to naturally regenerating woodland in fenced enclosures. So effectively was nature called in to assist design that the original budget was halved in the face of inflation without loss of content. Aldershot was also given a new park: by extracting gravel an ornamental lake was created; behind this a long hill was built of urban rubbish and covered with the gravel. The project cost less than removing the rubbish. However, Colvin's tetchy capacity for effective tactlessness was illustrated at Aldershot, when she criticized the brigadier in command, in front of aghast subordinates, for allowing her planting to be poorly maintained. A particularly long-term project was Gale Common in Yorkshire (begun in 1962), a hill of waste coal ash from power stations, about a square mile in size and 50 metres high, designed with tracks and woods spiralling up the carefully profiled sides. These unapologetically man-made silhouettes, derived from the patterns created by ancient lynchets on chalk downs, illustrate Brenda Colvin's ideas about the connection between past and future, about time as a dimension in the creation of landscapes, and about aftercare as an essential corollary to design. 
Brenda Colvin's whole life was devoted to landscape architecture, both to its practice and to the promotion of the profession. In 1951 she was elected president of the Institute of Landscape Architects, and was the first woman to be president of any of the environmental or engineering professions; she had been a founder member of the institute in 1929, and from that date she was re-elected for forty-seven years without a break as a member of council of the institute, a mark of her standing among her peers. In 1948 she was a British representative at the foundation of the International Federation of Landscape Architects. She served tirelessly on professional committees, and her tall, thin frame and distinguished profile were to be seen at meetings and conferences; while she was shy on social occasions, she was concise and unhesitatingly to the point when her profession was under consideration. 
In 1969, at the age of seventy-one, with several long-term commissions in hand, Colvin converted her practice into the partnership of Colvin and Moggridge. Having formerly always worked on her own with only a few assistants, she started afresh, handing work on to younger colleagues. On this basis she initiated a practice which could gradually expand beyond her own lifetime to suit changing circumstances, discussing partnership policy and landscape ethics over lunches of asparagus freshly cut from the garden. She was appointed CBE in 1973. 
Brenda Colvin died on 27 January 1981, unmarried, at her home, Little Peacocks, Filkins, in west Oxfordshire, where she had created around her home and office an exquisite small garden. She was buried in Filkins cemetery. She pursued her long professional life, starting when both landscape and women were equally undervalued, into an era when both began to receive recognition. Part of that recognition was the result of her own intellectual force, applied with dry wit, idealism, and energy to the art of landscape design. 


@@@@@


doc= 46401


Creswell, Frederic Hugh Page (1866-1948), politician in South Africa and mining engineer, was born on 13 November 1866 in Gibraltar, the youngest of the thirteen children of Edmund Creswell (died 1877), then deputy postmaster-general of Gibraltar, and his wife, Mary Fraser of Belrain, Inverness. At the age of nine he was sent to Bruce Castle, England, then to Derby School for his education, before training as a mining engineer at the Royal School of Mines. After working briefly in Venezuela as an engineer in 1888-9 he became assistant manager of a mine in Turkish Syria, but was enticed to south Africa by news of the spectacular development of the goldmines on the Witwatersrand. When he arrived in Cape Town in 1893 he joined an expedition to Rhodesia, where he surveyed a new railway line before in 1894 settling on the Witwatersrand; there he became manager of the Durban Deep mine. Before the South African War he was active in the Uitlander Reform Committee, and when war broke out he joined the Imperial light horse and served as a lieutenant, fighting in the battle of Elandslaagte, at Ladysmith, and in Transvaal. In November 1900, with Transvaal under British rule, he became general manager of the Village Main Reef mine. 
Creswell's first significant involvement in politics occurred on the Chinese labour issue. Given white unemployment, he rejected the plan to import Chinese labourers, and instead advocated employing only whites, skilled and unskilled, in the goldmines. When he attempted to implement this at the Main Reef mine, he was at first allowed to experiment, but when the experiment was rejected by both miners and the company headquarters he resigned in 1903. His white labour policy, which he set out in a pamphlet, 'The Chinese Labour Question from within', published in London in 1905, was not practical, given that most white miners wanted to be members of a labour aristocracy and that the mine owners wanted to employ as many low-paid African labourers as possible. When in England early in 1906 he campaigned strongly for the Liberals against Chinese labour, and urged the prime minister, Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman, to grant self-rule to Transvaal. 
Back on the Rand, Creswell spoke for the white mine workers against the capitalists and what he claimed was their kept press. Though twice defeated in elections for the new Transvaal parliament, standing for a pro-Botha British party, he was returned for Jeppe in September 1910 in the first Union parliament. He had joined the South African Labour Party that June, and had probably been promised that he would become leader of the parliamentary party if elected. As leader he worked closely with his friend Thomas Boydell, whose political career paralleled his own in many respects. 
When the mine workers struck in 1913-14 Creswell was arrested and imprisoned for distributing pamphlets, and was released only so that he might attend the opening of parliament. His attack on Smuts for deporting nine leading strikers to Britain was published in Cape Town as 'The Attempt to Crush Labour: a Reply to General Smuts' (1914). When war broke out he served with the Rand rifles in the German South-West Africa campaign, and then in 1916 in German East Africa, where he was promoted lieutenant-colonel of the 8th South African infantry regiment and made a DSO. Despite his support for Britain he became increasingly friendly with General J. B. M. Hertzog, leader of the National Party. Both men claimed in speeches to favour total territorial separation between black and white. 
Defeated in Jeppe in 1915 because of his support for the war, Creswell was elected for Troyeville in 1916. Five years later he lost that seat, but was returned for Stamford Hill, Durban, in 1922 and 1924. In July 1922 he held talks, as leader of the Labour Party, with Hertzog, which led to an agreement to form a united opposition against Smuts. This produced the formal pact between the National and Labour parties in April the following year. In 1924 the pact won the general election on a platform built around 'Civilised Labour'. Creswell was given the key portfolio of labour, as well as defence, in Hertzog's cabinet. He began to build up the new department of labour, and introduced segregationist measures, most notably the 'Colour Bar Act' of 1926. Creswell was given strong support in his later political career by his wife, Margaret Philippa Bingham Groenewald, 'nee' Boys, whom he married on 1 December 1920. The widow of Albert Groenewald, a medical man, she was twenty years younger than Creswell but they were admirably suited to each other. 
By 1928 the Labour Party had split, with a majority section believing that the party's national council should be able to dictate to Labour members of parliament. Creswell rejected this and lost the leadership of the party, but kept Hertzog's support, and was retained in the cabinet after the 1929 general election. His career as a minister ended early in 1933 when Hertzog joined Smuts, who would not have Creswell in his cabinet. Creswell was returned as member of parliament for Bellville in 1933 and remained in parliament until 1938. In 1933 he was elected vice-president of the International Labour Organization conference in Geneva, and in 1935 became its chairman. 
Though not a 'man of the people', Creswell tried to hold the Labour Party together, but with the rise of Afrikaner nationalism there was no long-term future for a party of white labour. His key ideas -- all-white labour in the mines and total territorial segregation -- were impractical, and his main political significance lies in the way he helped bring the National Party to power in 1924, enabling it to implement more segregationist legislation. He was a competent minister and a man of integrity and culture, who had a wide circle of friends among English-speaking and Afrikaner whites, though he did not suffer fools gladly. Inclined to be autocratic, he was derided by critics, one of whom called him 'the pregnant sardine' (Nicholls). Creswell retired to Kuilsriver, outside Cape Town, and died there of a stroke on 25 August 1948. He was cremated at Epping, Cape Town. His widow wrote a memoir of her husband which was published in 1956. 


@@@@@


doc= 46402


Leving, William (d. 1667), parliamentarian army officer and spy, was a native of co. Durham, although his parentage and early life are very obscure. He served as a junior officer in the regiment of Sir Arthur Hesilrige in the course of the civil war. In 1659-60 he took the part of John Lambert in the divisions that arose in the army as the English republic began to falter, and as a consequence lost both his post, and any arrears of pay which might have been due to him. Dismissed from the army, he returned north at the Restoration, but he remained one of many unsettled former soldiers there under the new regime of Charles II. 
Leving played a particularly prominent role in the northern plot of 1663. Alongside his father he was part of the plan to raise Durham for the rebels under Captain Roger Jones. In October 1663 any chance of a rebellion ignominiously collapsed, the conspiracy having been penetrated by government informers at an early stage. In the subsequent round-up of the participants Leving was imprisoned in York Castle. Sir Thomas Gower claimed to have 'two witnesses against him which will hang him upon a triall', but Leving's execution was averted by his turning king's evidence against his accomplices (TNA: PRO, SP 29/97, fol. 41'v'); he claimed that pangs of conscience rather than fear turned him round. Sir Roger Langley, the high sheriff of Yorkshire, suggested to the earl of Arlington in April 1664 that: 'if a way could be founde to gett... [Leving]... out of the gaole soe as he might not be suspected by his owne party he might be of greate use, for he assures me if hee were out he would not question to let you knowe some of the [names of the rebel] Councell now in London.(TNA: PRO, SP 29/97, fol. 41'v'; SP 29/98, fol. 132)' A relieved Leving accepted this offer and in May 1664 was transferred to the Tower of London. During his incarceration there he suggested that his use could be further extended by allowing him to escape and 'shift as a banished man' ('CSP dom.', '1663-4', 616). His escape was arranged that same year and he promptly went to ground in London. 
Leving was supplied with funds, albeit irregularly, and a paper revealing his status as an agent to any officious government servants whom he might meet. During the difficult period as a double agent that followed he used various aliases, including that of Leonard Williams. While ostensibly playing a major role in the many schemes of his friends, he betrayed them, passing on his information by letter and meetings with 'Mr. Lee', the disguised Sir Joseph Williamson. Eventually Leving overplayed his hand and began to be suspected by his fellow plotters. In February 1665 they bundled him into an obscure house, where he was held for some days and threatened with pistols. That he managed to bluster his way out and pass the blame for the recent betrayals onto someone else shows his personal coolness in a situation of great danger. 
Over the next year Leving, with various unreliable partners, turned to more criminal activities, becoming a highwayman in an attempt to supplement his already limited finances. His criminal activities soon led to his moral decline and made him less useful to his masters. He was arrested in Leicestershire in May 1665, but released on revealing his identity. The regime then insisted that he remain in London during the plague months and as a consequence he lost most of his family to the epidemic. Lacking funds he begged for a customs post to supplement his income and to provide an excuse to stay in London in order to remain close to his erstwhile friends and victims. The latter were now becoming suspicious of his loyalties once more and in late 1666 Leving was sent to Ireland to undertake espionage work on behalf of the government. After returning to England in December 1666 he once again resorted to highway robbery, this time in Yorkshire. Once more he was arrested and again released at the intercession of Williamson. In July 1667 he was placed in the company of the heavily guarded plotter Captain John Mason, who had escaped with him in 1664. Mason had been recaptured in June 1667 and under guard Leving was sent north with him, either to provide a witness against the prisoner at his trial at York or to try to inveigle more information out of Mason. In the event Thomas Blood and his friends, intent on freeing their colleague, ambushed the group in the town of Darrington on 25 July 1667. During the rather bloody action that followed Leving hid in a nearby house and observed from a safe distance, but he had finally been recognized as a spy. 
In August 1667 Leving lay dead in the cells of York Castle, poisoned by his enemies according to his former highway companion William Freer. He had offended his rebel friends and finally revealed his identity as a spy, and this makes them obvious suspects in his death, but he had also become involved in another scheme of note: the duke of Buckingham had been dabbling in connections with the rebel party and in 1667 Arlington, using his many informants, tried to use these activities to bring the duke down; Leving's part was apparently to act as a witness against Buckingham. As this scheme collapsed Leving was left in a dangerous situation. Although Buckingham later denied any hand in his death, the fact that he went on record to do so seems to point the finger in his general direction. 
Leving was fairly typical of the men that the regime of Charles II recruited for espionage. His background as a plotter gave him access to his former friends and as a spy he helped to scotch some of the many schemes bubbling under the surface of dissenting and rebel life in London, assisting the regime in maintaining its upper hand in the post-revolutionary situation. In the course of his work Leving himself undoubtedly suffered a degeneration of his character. He became motivated more by fear and greed than ideology after the collapse of the abortive rebellion of 1663 and spent his later years fearful of betrayal on both sides. In the end he was poorly rewarded for his efforts by his squalid death. He was buried in York. 


@@@@@


doc= 46405


Ward, Michael (1683-1759), judge, was the second but eldest surviving son of Bernard Ward (1654-1690), landowner, of Castle Ward, co. Down, and of Anne, daughter of Richard Ward of Newcastle under Lyme and sister of Michael Ward, bishop of Derry. A child when his father was killed in a duel at Downpatrick, Ward attended the school of a Mr Jones in Dublin before matriculation at Trinity College in 1699. Entered as a student in the Inner Temple the next year, he was called to the Irish bar in 1705. Four years later he married Anne Catherine (1690/91-1760), daughter and coheir of James Hamilton of Bangor, co. Down. While the match was initially opposed, seemingly by both families, it added considerably to Ward's wealth. Ward was returned as an MP for County Down in 1715 and again in 1727. During his parliamentary career he complained twice over intrusion of his proprietorial rights during 'a time of privilege': trespass at his manor in Bangor and interference with rights of tithe. Ward was named a judge of the Irish king's bench in October 1727, though his patent was not sealed until two years later. His long judicial tenure won Ward a reputation for probity and assiduity, but criticism was voiced too, over his conduct during the Munster assizes in 1733 and over his rebuke of counsel at Monaghan in 1740 when counsel opposed Ward's insistence that an Irish interpreter be present at the hearing of a malicious injuries claim. 
Ward also acquired a reputation as an agriculturist. The layout of the grounds at Castle Ward is his legacy. He oversaw the excavation of the ornamental lake (Temple water), and chose the various trees and shrubs for planting. His wife planned the walled garden. Marl was found on the estate in 1707 and was immediately put to use as a fertilizer. Crop rotation, too, was introduced, and Ward found an unusual source of power to drive his new corn-mill: 'On the bay that opens to the garden is a singular contrivance for supplying a mill with water. A dead wall is carried across the gut in which are two arches, and in them two flood-gates fixed, the one to admit the tide, and the other to keep it in or out, as occasion serves. (Harris, 'The Ancient and Present State', 41)' Ward supported the burgeoning linen trade and, to facilitate the export of grain, constructed a harbour at Killough. Killough was where Ward also started a charter school. Ward served on the committee assembling in Dublin in 1731 that led to the establishment of the Dublin society 'for improving husbandry, manufactures and other useful arts'. Ward can thus be counted among what H. F. Berry in his 'A History of the Royal Dublin Society' (1915) calls that 'small band of patriotic reformers, actuated by the purest and noblest motives' (p. 5). 
Ward and his wife had three children. Bernard, Ward's only son and heir, built the house that now stands at Castle Ward; he was subsequently created Viscount Bangor. Ward's correspondence provides great insight into the management of a large eighteenth-century estate; it also reveals the judge handling the problem of impecunious relatives and aligning himself with his tenants in disputes over tithe and 'trade money' with the established church. Illness prevented Ward travelling circuit in his last years. He died at Castle Ward on 19 February 1759. 


@@@@@


doc= 46407


Cox, Sir Richard, first baronet (1650-1733), lord chancellor of Ireland and author, was born at Bandon, co. Cork, on 25 March 1650, the only child of Captain Richard Cox (died 1651), an officer in the royalist army during the confederate wars, and his wife, Katherine (died 1652), daughter of the recorder of Clonakilty, Walter Bird, and formerly wife of Captain Thomas Batten. Although his grandfather Michael Cox (died 1659) had owned substantial property near Kilworth, co. Cork, the family estate was much reduced by the rebellion of 1641 and subsequent warfare. The younger Richard Cox inherited from his grandfather 'an interest' near Kilworth, which he sold for $150; following the Restoration he received land in Galway worth $26 per annum in settlement of his father's arrears of army pay. He was brought up by his grandfather Michael Cox, and later by his uncle John Bird, attending a school at Bandon and then that kept by Thomas Barry at Clonakilty. After leaving school at fifteen he 'spent three years idly' ('Autobiography', 9) before beginning to practise as an attorney in the manor courts of the earl of Burlington and Cork, where his uncle was a seneschal. In September 1671 he travelled to London with the earl of Burlington and Cork and entered Gray's Inn, where he was called to the bar on 9 August 1673. After returning to Ireland he spent seven years living quietly at Clonakilty before, by his own account, I 'roused myself from that lethargy' ('Autobiography', 11) and moved to Cork city to develop his legal practice. He was elected recorder of Kinsale in 1680, built up a profitable practice, and bought land. In 1685 he wrote an optimistic account of conditions in co. Cork for the proposed volume of topographical surveys organized by William Molyneux, celebrating the pacification of the region and its social and economic progress. 
In April 1687 Cox fled the Catholic dominated Ireland of Tyrconnell, where he claimed to be in danger on account of a charge he had given as chairman of the quarter sessions at Bandon in April 1679, upholding the claim of a popish plot. He settled at Bristol, where he practised law and completed his 'Hibernia Anglicana, or, The history of Ireland from the conquest thereof by the English to this present time'. This appeared in two parts, in 1689 and 1690, the first part dedicated to William and Mary, the second to William. He was the probable anonymous author of 'Aphorisms Relating to the Kingdom of Ireland' of January 1689, comprising twenty-eight propositions addressed to members of the convention in England and arguing the case for immediate and substantial military intervention. When Sir Robert Southwell, whom he had come to know at Bristol, was appointed King William's secretary of state, Cox accompanied him to Ireland as one of his secretaries. He was appointed recorder of Waterford and on 15 September 1690 was sworn in as second justice of the common pleas. On 1 May 1691 he was appointed governor of the county and city of Cork. In the months that followed he presided over a brutal local war, using a greatly expanded local militia to defend an 80 mile frontier and suppress Jacobite irregulars operating within his territory. By his own account his men 'killed and hanged not less than 3,000 of them' (TCD, MS 1180, p. 159, Cox to --, 8 Oct 1691). Following the end of the war Cox was admitted to the privy council on 13 April 1692 and knighted on 5 November. 
On 10 February 1694 Cox became one of the commissioners for the administration of forfeited lands. In June 1695 he was removed from the privy council, according to himself because of his anticipated opposition to the proposed enactment of a toleration bill for protestant dissenters. He became chief justice of the common pleas on 16 May 1701 and was restored to the privy council a few days later. In the intensifying party rivalry of Queen Anne's reign he emerged as a leading tory. Having initially sought the patronage of the Boyle family he now became closely associated with the second duke of Ormond, becoming one of the trustees for his estate. He travelled to London in April 1703 for consultations about the forthcoming meeting of parliament, returned to Ireland with Ormond, and was sworn in as lord chancellor on 6 August. He served as lord justice 1705-7 and was created a baronet on 21 November 1706. When the other lord justice, Baron Cutts, died in January 1707 Cox risked impeachment by refusing to issue writs for the election by the privy council of a new chief governor on the grounds that this would have conflicted with Ormond's patent as viceroy. 
When Ormond was replaced by the earl of Pembroke in June 1707 Cox was removed from the lord chancellorship as one of a series of dismissals intended to facilitate the admission to office of some of the former whig opposition. He returned to office under the next tory ministry, but in the lesser position of chief justice of the queen's bench (5 July 1711). Following the accession of George I he was again removed, in September 1714, and was subsequently censured by the House of Commons for his role in two political trials: the proceedings against Dudley Moore, who had defiantly delivered a suppressed eulogy of William III during a theatrical performance, and against the corporation of Dublin, which had refused to accept a tory mayor. He spent the rest of his life in retirement on his property at Dunmanway. 
Cox was an unwavering supporter of the revolution of 1688. 'Hibernia Anglicana' dismissed as groundless the distinction between 'de jure' and 'de facto' monarchy. Later he unhesitatingly supported the Hanoverian succession. However, he derided the notion of 'Revolution principles' and described himself as 'an anti-Whig. I hate their canting, lying and hypocrisy and I know too many of them aim at mutiny and schism' (Cox to Edward Southwell, 13 Aug 1714, BL, Add. MS 38157, fol. 108). In the same way he saw Catholics as irreconcilable opponents of the English and protestant interest in Ireland, while at the same time refusing to overstate the threat they posed. He believed that former Jacobites were entitled to the concessions agreed in the treaty of Limerick, and complained that the willingness of the forfeiture commissioners to do common justice was misrepresented as partiality. Later, in the tense summer of 1714, he refused to join in the general panic over the activities of French recruiting agents. He was also firmly hostile to dissent. In 1695 he opposed a toleration bill for protestant dissenters 'by saying I was content every man should have liberty 'of going to heaven', but I desired nobody might have liberty of coming into government, but those who would conform to it' ('Autobiography', 15). Later he condemned whig attempts to promote the repeal of the sacramental test by talking up the Catholic threat, where in fact 'five in six of the Irish are poor insignificant slaves, fit for nothing but to hew wood and draw water', insisting at the same time that dissenters could never be admitted to power, 'because assuredly if they were in, they would put us out' (Cox to Southwell, 24 Oct 1706, BL, Add. MS 38154, fol. 86). 
The other great tenet of Cox's political life was his commitment to the English interest in Ireland. His 'Some thoughts on the bill... for prohibiting the exportation of the woollen manufactures of Ireland to foreign parts' (1698), addressed to the House of Lords, argued that the proposed legislation would damage England itself, as well as Irish protestants, who were 'Englishmen sent over to conquer Ireland, your countrymen, your brothers, your sons, your relations, your acquaintance' (17). In 1714 he referred to plans, apparently never realized, to write a reply to William Molyneux's statement of Irish constitutional rights. He was also prepared to make some distinction between Catholics of English and of Irish descent. His contribution to Irish history, 'Hibernia Anglicana', is generally dismissed as a hasty compilation. It depicts pre-conquest Ireland as a violent and underdeveloped society, and traces the history of succeeding centuries in terms of the opposition between English government and Irish barbarism and treachery, complicated from the sixteenth century by the conflict between popery and protestantism. However he did not dismiss the native Irish as racially inferior. His 'An Essay for the Conversion of the Irish' (1698) argues that the Gaelic Irish were in fact of the same ethnic origin as the people of Great Britain, and offers an optimistic account of the virtues they might display once liberated from popery. The allegation that he had the Gaelic poet Hugh MacCurtin imprisoned for having criticized 'Hibernia Anglicana' appears to have originated, in 1749, with Charles Lucas, then engaged in controversy with Cox's grandson, and is most probably unfounded. 
Cox married Mary Bourne ('c'.1658-1715), the daughter of John Bourne, a minor landowner in co. Cork, on 26 February 1674. She died on 1 June 1715. Cox died at Dunmanway on 3 May 1733, following a fit of apoplexy some months earlier, and was buried there. In 1699 he had noted the birth of his twenty-first child. On his death, however, his successor was his grandson Sir Richard Cox, second baronet (1702-1766), born on 23 November 1702, the son of Cox's eldest son, Richard ('c'.1678-1725), MP for Tallow (1703-15) and Clonakilty (1717-25), and Susanna French (died 1716). Cox matriculated at Oxford on 4 May 1720. As MP for Clonakilty (1727-66) he opposed the government in 1737 but subsequently took a leading part in the proceedings against Charles Lucas, for which he was rewarded in 1750 with the collectorship of customs for Cork. He was one of Henry Boyle's strongest supporters during the money bill dispute of 1753-6, and one of the last of the party to be reconciled with the castle. However his appointment in 1758 to a seat on the Irish revenue board confirmed his return to full favour. 
Cox was an improving landlord, praised for promoting the manufacture of linen round Dunmanway. He published several works on economic development, including 'A letter from Sir Richard Cox to Thomas Prior, esquire, showing from experience a sure method to establish the linen manufacture' (1749). Using the pseudonym Anthony Litten he also wrote a series of pamphlets attacking Lucas under the title 'The Cork Surgeon's Antidote Against the Dublin Apothecary's Poison' (1749). Though mainly concerned to defend the existing Anglo-Irish connection as beneficial to both kingdoms, and to attack Lucas as an irresponsible rabble-rouser, these included an effective critique of Lucas's autodidactic obsession with ancient grants and charters, arguing that texts and precedents from the remote past must be read in their historical context. Cox married Catherine Evans, daughter of a co. Limerick landowner, on 13 September 1725, and died in February 1766. 


@@@@@


doc= 46408


Bindon, Francis (c.1690-1765), portrait painter and architect, was the fourth son of David Bindon (died 1733) of Cloony, co. Clare, and his wife, Dorothy Burton, the daughter of Samuel Burton of Buncraggy, co. Clare, Ireland. Bindon's father had been member of the Irish parliament for Ennis, co. Clare, a seat the family partially controlled, and he was a substantial land owner in co. Clare. In 1713 Bindon is recorded as studying at the academy in Great Queen Street, London, where Sir Godfrey Kneller was governor. He studied painting and architecture in Italy and on his return to Ireland worked as a portrait painter and architect. Bindon was a scholar, he owned a notable library, and counted among his friends Jonathan Swift, whose portrait he painted several times between 1735 and 1740 (National Gallery of Ireland and St Patrick's Cathedral, Dublin, and Howth Castle, co. Dublin). In connection with this portrait an epistle, in Latin verse, was addressed to Bindon by William Dunkin: 'Epistola ad Franciscum Bindonum'. Of this an English poetical version was published in 1740, 'An epistle to Mr. Bindon, occasioned by his painting a picture of the Rev. Dr. Swift, dean of St. Patrick's'. Through his social and scholarly connections he received commissions to paint Lionel, first duke of Dorset, lord lieutenant of Ireland (1734); Lord Clare (1740); Hugh Boulter, archbishop of Armagh (1742; TCD); Richard Baldwin, provost of Trinity College, Dublin (1747; TCD); Eaton Stannard, recorder of Dublin (1747); Dr Patrick Delany, dean of Down; and Charles Cobbe, archbishop of Dublin. Work by Bindon was frequently engraved by James McArdell (1728/9-1765), Andrew Miller ('fl'. 1737-1763), and John Brooks ('fl'. 1730-1756), and his portraits of Swift, Archbishop Boulter, Charles Cobbe, Brigadier-General Richard St George, Henry Singleton, chief justice of Ireland, and Hercules Rowley MP were all published in Dublin. Bindon executed small-scale portraits in oils on copper such as his portrait of Turlough O'Carolan, the composer and harpist (National Gallery of Ireland), and enamel miniature portraits. 
Bindon's portraits are stiff and awkwardly posed: his reputation as a painter was based on the lack of competition rather than on his skill. However he enjoyed the esteem of his fellow painters and in 1733 he was presented with the freedom of the Guild of St Luke the Evangelist, the Cutlers, Painter-Stainers and Stationery Company of Dublin. Bindon taught painting and he is known to have had the portrait painter Charles Exshaw ('fl'. 1749-1771) as a pupil. 
The attribution of much of Bindon's architectural work is problematical. His name has been linked with many buildings in Ireland, but the buildings firmly attributed to him are his country houses in co. Kilkenny. Bindon designed Bessborough ('c'.1744) for Brabazon Ponsonby, first earl of Bessborough; Woodstock ('c'.1745) for Sir Edward Fownes (now a ruin); and Castle Morres (dem.). Bindon's architectural style is related to the work of the German architect Richard Castle, who was the leading architect of his day in Ireland. Bindon collaborated with Castle during the 1740s and he probably completed Russborough, co. Wicklow, after Castle's death in 1751. As with his portrait painting, his buildings confirm Bindon's status as a gentleman-amateur rather than an innovative professional. He was listed as a subscriber to John Aheron's 'General Treatise on Architecture' published in Dublin in 1754. 
In 1750 Bindon had been granted an annual government pension of $100 which was a rare honour for a painter. By 1758 he had become slightly blind and he gave up painting. On the death of his elder brother David Bindon (c.1690-1761), writer on trade and commerce and author of two tracts on Wood's coinage, Bindon became member of parliament for Ennis, co. Clare, and inherited more of his family estates in co. Clare. In 1762 he was made a freeman of Limerick. Bindon died, unmarried, in Dublin, on 23 May 1765 'in his chariot, on his way to the country' ('Faulkner's Dublin Journal', 4-8 June 1765). He left most of his possessions to Francis Ryan ('fl'. 1756-1788), a Dublin portrait painter. 


@@@@@


doc= 46409


Coghill, Marmaduke (1673-1739), judge and politician, was born in co. Dublin on 28 December 1673, the eldest son of Sir John Coghill (died 1699?), formerly of Coghill Hall in Yorkshire, and of Hester Cramer, a descendant of Colonel Tobias von Cramer, of Swabian origin, who had settled in Ireland earlier in the century. Having entered Trinity College, Dublin, Coghill graduated BA and LLB in 1691 and was made LLD in 1695. Elected first, in 1692, to sit in the Irish House of Commons for co. Armagh he continued to sit in the house from 1713 onwards as a member for Trinity. In the Commons, following the accession of George I, Coghill was to align himself with like-minded individuals in Speaker Conolly's group. In 1699 Coghill succeeded his father as judge of the Irish prerogative court, an elevation that began his close involvement with the affairs of the established Church of Ireland. 
The post involved Coghill in deciding on grants of faculties but weightier business soon supervened. Under English legislation of 1701 Coghill was named one of six trustees for forfeited Irish impropriations, the income from which was to be used to build churches and to augment small vicarages. The restoration by Queen Anne's government in 1711 of the first fruits added to Coghill's administrative tasks. An original commissioner of the resultant board he was to earn plaudits as 'the great, and indeed principal cause of the numerous benefits' that accrued to the established church from the restoration (Taylor, 419). Coghill was also associated with the administration of the complementary augmentation scheme devised by Archbishop Hugh Boulter. 
At the outset, the relationship between Coghill and Boulter was prickly enough. Coghill made no secret of his disenchantment over the choice of Boulter for the prelacy in 1727 but a 'modus vivendi' soon emerged, despite Boulter's suspicion (which he never shrugged off) that Coghill was more sympathetic to the 'Irish interest' than was appropriate or the situation demanded. Boulter supported Coghill's appointment in 1729 as a commissioner of the revenue (which earned him a seat in the privy council), and six years later no objection was raised to his promotion to fill the largely honorific role of chancellor of the Irish exchequer. 
Coghill's correspondence with the two Edward Southwells, father and son, successive Irish secretaries of state, reveals considerable political acumen, and nowhere is this clearer than in his blow-by-blow account (which elements in the London administration must surely have welcomed) of the crisis that unfolded over the attempt, initiated in 1722, to foist Wood's halfpence on a recalcitrant country. 
As judge of the prerogative Coghill dealt with matters of testate and intestate succession, but questions of marriage law could equally come before him, and one celebrated decision of his in the latter area was destined to enter local folklore; it also explains why he never married. According to Deane Swift, Marmaduke: 'courted a lady, and was soon to have been married to her; but unfortunately a cause was brought to trial before him, wherein a man was sued for beating his wife. When the matter was agitated, the doctor gave his opinion, 'That, although a man had no right to beat his wife unmercifully, yet that with such a little cane or switch as he then held in his hand, a husband was at liberty, and was invested with a power to give his wife moderate correction'; which opinion determined the lady against the doctor. (Swift, 1.304)' Gravely ill from gout and attendant complications Coghill resigned his judgeship in January 1739. He proposed a kinsman, Nathaniel Bland, as his successor, but Boulter, who had control of the appointment, refused Bland a permanency. Coghill witnessed only the first instalment of the ensuing crisis (resolved finally by a chancery decree in 1741) for he died on 9 March 1739. He was buried in the family vault in St Andrew's Church, Dublin. A handsome marble monument to him, by Peter Scheemakers, was erected by his sister Mary in Drumcondra Church of Ireland church. A lengthy inscription pays tribute to his virtues, which were also recalled in an anonymous tribute, 'The Wonderful Man', penned in the 1720s: '
His Favours never yet were bought, 

And often come, tho' never sought. 

' A portrait of Coghill hangs in All Hallows College in Dublin, which incorporates Drumcondra House, the fine Georgian mansion Coghill built for himself about 1725. 


@@@@@


doc= 46411


Lewknor, Sir Lewes (c.1560-1627), courtier and translator, was the first surviving son of Thomas Lewknor ('c'.1538-1596), a politician, of Tangmere and Selsey, Sussex, and his first wife, Bridget, the daughter of John Lewes of Selsey. From Lyon's Inn, Lewknor entered the Middle Temple on 12 October 1579, bound with his uncle, Richard Lewknor (1542-1616), a distinguished lawyer. However, his Catholicism led him into voluntary exile in the Low Countries the following year. A captaincy in the Spanish service and marriage to Beatrice de Rota, the daughter of a Brabant merchant, soon followed, but a severe arm wound ended his military career. The loss of his pension, combined with litigation over his wife's dowry, brought severe financial difficulties, and in June 1590 Lewknor sought a safe conduct home through his relative Sir Robert Sidney. He reported in detail to Burghley on Englishmen in the Spanish service and was probably the anonymous author of 'A Discourse of the Usage of the English Fugitives, by the Spaniard', first published early in 1595; such co-operation gained protection from creditors. In 1591 Lewknor was in the suite of the embassy to France of his cousin Sir Henry Unton. His first acknowledged work, 'The Resolved Gentleman', an indirect translation (from Acuna's Spanish) of 'Le chevalier delibere' by Olivier de la Marche, appeared in 1594. It was dedicated to Anne, countess of Warwick, who was related to Lewknor through the Sidneys. 
Following his father's death in 1596, Lewknor took possession of Selsey Park and the adjacent grange. (These were leased from the crown and surrendered in 1612.) Lewknor was returned to parliament in October 1597 for Midhurst, his father's old seat, probably through the interest of his uncle Richard. 
In August 1598 Lewknor completed for Lady Warwick 'The Commonwealth and Government of Venice', largely a translation of Gasparo Contarini's 'De magistratibus et republica Venetorum'. Commendatory poems in this and 'The Resolved Gentleman' show him to have been an admired member of a literary circle that included John Harrington and, possibly, Edmund Spenser; and it has been argued that Lewknor provided source material for Shakespeare's 'Merchant of Venice' and Ben Jonson's 'Volpone'. 
Lewknor claimed 'The Commonwealth' was 'written at idle times when I had nothing els to doe, being at much more leysure then willingly I woulde bee' (sig. A3'v'), but its publication occurred as his various duties mounted. In 1599 he became a gentleman pensioner. The next year he was called on to supervise arrangements for hosting diplomats and other foreign dignitaries, his first recorded attendance on an ambassador being in February 1600. He also acted as an interpreter of Spanish. When still perfecting that language he had translated Antonio de Torquemada's 'Jardin de flores curiosas', and this was now brought into print by Ferdinando Walker as 'The Spanish Mandevile of Miracles, or, The Garden of Curious Flowers'. 
James I's succession in 1603 brought great benefits for Lewknor. On 22 April he was knighted; then on 21 May he was appointed master of the ceremonies, a newly created office that Sir Edmund Tilney had hoped for. This position formalized Lewknor's duties in respect of looking after diplomats and other important foreigners. Assisted by up to three deputies, he initiated the management of precedence and protocol that was so important in the seventeenth century and is still embodied in the office of marshal of the diplomatic corps. The following year he was again returned to parliament, this time for Bridgnorth (his uncle Richard being then justice of Chester). 
Beatrice Lewknor died on 11 March 1605 after a long illness. Lewknor then married a young widow called Argall, but she died that October of smallpox. Such personal sorrow contrasted with public achievement. On 7 November 1605 Lewknor was granted for life his office of master of the ceremonies. His assistant master of ceremonies from 1612 was John Finet. The two were often on bad terms, Finet being very solicitous in his duties and Lewknor apparently feeling that his junior was encroaching on his prerogatives. Many of Lewknor's activities after October 1612 were recorded in Finet's notes, published posthumously in 1656 as 'Finetti philoxenis: Som Choice Observations of Sir John Finet'. By 1613 Lewknor was a justice of the peace for Middlesex, and on 25 September 1614 he was appointed a commissioner for the musters in the same county. 
If Lewknor ever shed his Spanish sympathies, they soon returned. In Spanish pay since at least July 1603, he was seen as among those 'that have Englishe tongues and Spanishe harts' (William Trumbull to Ralph Winwood, 14/24 Feb 1617, 'Downshire MSS', 6.112, no. 258). In 1615 Lewknor sent his younger son William over to Antwerp to supervise the litigation surrounding the estate of his first wife, Beatrice. By the following year William was serving in the Spanish garrison there. On 17 April 1618 Lewknor himself wrote to Diego de la Fuente, confessor to the Spanish ambassador Gondomar: 'Todo el consuelo que tengo en este mundo esta puesto en el fauor del Senor Conde y vuestra Paternidad' ('All the consolation that I have in this world rests in the favour of his lordship the count [Gondomar] and your [Fuente's] paternity'; Loomie, 'Spain and the Jacobean Catholics', 2.104). In 1623 Finet suggested that Lewknor 'leaned overmuch' to achieve the 'particular satisfaction' of the Spanish ambassador, and the following year he recorded Conway's comment that Lewknor 'would rather attend the Spanish ambassadors than the Dutch' ('Finetti philoxenis', 118, 138). Such partiality had angered the less pecunious Venetian diplomats since 1606, and matters came to a head in 1625 when the Venetian ambassador Pesaro complained that Lewknor, whom he described as 'an utter Spaniard, and a pensioner' (Pesaro to doge and senate, 25 May 1625, 'CSP Venice', '1625-6', 55), had slighted him by favouring his Spanish counterpart. The privy council accepted Lewknor's plea that sickness, rather than disrespect, was the cause, but found it politic to suspend him from office and put him under house arrest from October until December. 
Lewknor died on 11 March 1627, survived by his third wife, Mary, the daughter of Richard Blount of Dedisham, Sussex, whom he had married some time after 1605, and by at least his first son, Thomas (1588-1645), a Jesuit who ministered in England from 1625 until his death. Lewknor was a man of varied talents and even Finet, his successor as master of the ceremonies, with whom he often quarrelled, could admit that, 'to say the truth, the gentleman him self for his many good partes deserve[s] respect, and should have more of me were he more patient and less jelous' (Finet to Trumbull, 12 Nov 1616, 'Downshire MSS', 6.43, no. 109). Lewknor's constituents in Bridgnorth bore witness to his 'honest and just dealing' with them (certain inhabitants of Bridgnorth to Salisbury, no date, 'Salisbury MSS', 24.197). Most tellingly, perhaps, the eulogies contained in his published works evince the esteem in which he was held by the literary coterie to which he belonged. 


@@@@@


doc= 46413


Moncrieff, Charles Kenneth Michael Scott (1889-1930), translator, was born on 25 September 1889 at Weedingshall, Polmont, near Falkirk, Stirlingshire, the third son of William George Scott Moncrieff (1846-1927), advocate and sheriff substitute for Stirlingshire, and his wife, Jessie Margaret (1858-1936), daughter of Robert Scott Moncrieff, merchant of Calcutta. The Moncrieffs (variously spelt) are an ancient Scottish family; Scott Moncrieff, a keen genealogist, traced their history in the introduction to his translation (1925) of 'The Adventures of Zeloide and Amanzarifdine' by an eighteenth-century French cousin, Paradis de Moncrif. He never used the form Scott-Moncrieff, by which he is often known. 
Scott Moncrieff's boyhood was spent in Scotland in a number of different places. His father was transferred successively to Inverness and Lanark, and he himself, who was proud of his Scottishness, wrote ruefully in 1929 that he had no place of his own: 'it is a grim thing to be homeless' (Scott Moncrieff, 189). 
Being considerably younger than his brothers, Scott Moncrieff had a somewhat solitary childhood, developing a taste for books and starting early to write poetry. He went to school in Inverness and Nairn, and in 1903 won a scholarship to Winchester College, from where in 1908 he went to Edinburgh University; he took a first degree in law, was awarded a bursary in Old English in 1913, and graduated with first-class honours in English language and literature in 1914. Among his teachers was Professor George Saintsbury, who was to become a valued friend. 
A keen officer cadet, Scott Moncrieff was commissioned second lieutenant in 1913; in August 1914 he joined the King's Own Scottish Borderers. He served in Flanders for more than two years, though with long periods of sick leave, and won the admiration and affection of his fellow soldiers through his concern for them and his bravery. In 1915 he was promoted captain. In April 1917 he was severely wounded in the leg while leading his battalion into an attack; the wound left him permanently lame. In May 1917 he was awarded the Military Cross for gallantry. After convalescing he served in the War Office until the end of the war. 
The experience of war left its mark on Scott Moncrieff, not only physically, but through the loss of many friends. His translation (1919) of the Old French 'Chanson de Roland' contains dedicatory poems to three of these, including Wilfred Owen, to whom he became deeply attached in 1918. The 'Song of Roland' was followed by a translation of another epic, 'Beowulf', in 1921. In the immediate post-war period he moved in London literary circles, reviewing regularly in G. K. Chesterton's 'New Witness', and publishing occasional stories and poems. He worked for a time as private secretary for Lord Northcliffe and as a journalist on 'The Times', but from 1923 lived entirely on his earnings as a translator. 
In 1919 Scott Moncrieff had discovered Marcel Proust's 'A la recherche du temps perdu' (rendered in his translation as 'Remembrance of Things Past'). Over the next ten years he published 'Swann's Way' (2 vols., 1922), 'Within a Budding Grove' (2 vols., 1924), 'The Guermantes Way' (2 vols., 1925), 'Cities of the Plain' (2 vols., 1927-9), 'The Captive' (1929), and 'The Sweet Cheat Gone' (1930). (The final volume of Proust's sequence, 'Time Regained', was done by his friend Sydney Schiff after his death.) Although Scott Moncrieff joked irreverently about Proust, he set great value on him and after Proust's death edited 'Marcel Proust: an English Tribute' (1923). 
Scott Moncrieff translated much else besides: four major works of fiction by Stendhal ('The Charterhouse of Parma', 2 vols., 1925; 'Scarlet and Black', 2 vols., 1926; 'The Abbess of Castro and other Tales', 1926; 'Armance', 1928); three volumes of Pirandello; the Latin letters of Abelard and Heloise; the memoirs of Lauzun; a frivolous tale by Paradis de Moncrif; a novel by Jean-Richard Bloch. He translated quickly, for modest financial rewards, and some of his authors (for example, Bloch and Abelard) he found less congenial than Proust. The bookseller Orioli described his way of working in these terms: 'He carried in his left hand the French volume he was translating, read a few lines of it, interrupted his reading in order to talk to me, and then took a notebook out of his pocket and wrote in English the few lines he had just read, leaning against a pine tree. (Orioli, 228)' From 1923 until his death Scott Moncrieff lived principally in Italy, first in Tuscany, mainly in Pisa, and from 1928 in Rome. His friend the German scholar E. R. Curtius wrote that 'he was a Roman body and soul', loving 'the everyday life of the city'. He returned to Britain from time to time, and cultivated a wide circle of friends. He loved conversation; according to Curtius, 'a dominating, brilliantly humorous mood was his usual attitude' (Scott Moncrieff, 179). His reviewing was combative and caustic, notably in a prolonged polemic with the Sitwell circle begun in 'New Witness' in 1919 and culminating in the pamphlet 'The Strange and Striking Adventures of Four Authors in Search of a Character', published under the name of P. G. Lear and L. O. in 1926. Some found him malicious, but the 'Times' obituarist insisted on the goodness and kindness beneath the surface. He remained close to his mother and supported the families of his brothers, giving as his recreation in 'Who's Who' 'nepotism'. 
Scott Moncrieff was a handsome, well-built man, with a fine head and a remarkable voice. Having converted to Roman Catholicism during the war, he practised assiduously and fervently. At the same time he had a marked taste for the scandalous, writing an enthusiastic preface for a reissue (1923) of the 'Satyricon' of Petronius, with whom he compares Proust for his frank description of unorthodox morals (Scott Moncrieff shared Proust's homosexual orientation). 
Vyvyan Holland, in his obituary, wrote that Scott Moncrieff did much to raise the profession of translator to an honourable position in the world of literature. He is, with Constance Garnett, the most celebrated of twentieth-century translators into English. He attempted in 'Beowulf' and in the assonant verse of the 'Song of Roland' to respect both form and meaning, bringing readers into contact with something foreign and archaic. These versions were much praised in his day, but it was in the translation of modern writing that he made his lasting contribution to English literature. His Stendhal, vigorous and witty though it is, was partly superseded by other versions, but his Proust, later revised to take account of new French editions, was the classic text which exerted an incalculable influence on readers and on literature in English in the twentieth century. There are errors and omissions in the translation, but it is generally scrupulous, rendering Proust's rhythms and images with remarkable flair. His English has acquired a not inappropriate period flavour; although some feel that his version prettifies Proust, he creates in language an attractive and witty narrator worthy of the original. 
In November 1929 Scott Moncrieff was admitted to hospital in Rome, suffering from terminal cancer. He suffered great pain and died there on 28 February 1930. His funeral service was held in the baptistery of the church of St John Lateran, and he was buried in the Verano cemetery on 2 March. His estate after death (almost entirely books and currency) was estimated at $418. 


@@@@@


doc= 46414


Elles, Gertrude Lilian (1872-1960), geologist and palaeontologist, was born on 8 October 1872 in Wimbledon, Surrey, one of six children of Jamison Elles, an importer of Chinese goods, and his wife, Mary Chesney. Her father was Scottish and, when she was a child, family holidays were often spent in the Scottish highlands. She was educated at Wimbledon high school and at Newnham College, Cambridge (1891-7), where she took the natural sciences tripos (second class in part one, 1894; first class in part two, geology, 1895). From 1895 to 1897 she was a Bathurst student of Newnham, and worked for part of the time in Lund, Sweden. 
The work for which Elles became known was the monumental monograph 'British Graptolites' (1901-18). Brought out jointly with her friend Ethel Wood (later Shakespear), under the general editorship of Charles Lapworth, it provided reliable and detailed descriptions of this huge fossil group, critical in zonal division and correlation of Lower Palaeozoic rocks. It was perhaps the single most notable early contribution by women to British stratigraphic geology and long remained the basis of research in the area. Elles wrote the text and Wood prepared the illustrations. Also notable was Elles's 1922 paper (one of many on Lower Palaeozoic palaeontology and stratigraphy) analysing graptolite evolutionary patterns. Latterly she switched her attention to the metamorphic rocks of the Scottish highlands, her favourite part of the country. 
Elles taught both men and women at Cambridge. Until 1926, when she was appointed university lecturer, she held an assistant demonstratorship in the Sedgwick Museum. In 1936 she became the university's first woman reader. At Newnham College she was successively lecturer, director of natural science, and vice-principal (1925-36). She was remembered by colleagues as an able administrator and an enthusiastic and inspiring teacher. 
In her youth Elles was a striking woman, with deep blue eyes and corn-coloured hair. As a student she played on the Newnham hockey team; later she was a favourite coach. During the First World War she was Red Cross commandant of a small hospital for soldiers in Cambridge, work for which she was appointed MBE in 1920. 
A fellow of the Geological Society (where she was the first woman council member, 1923-7), Elles was awarded the Murchison medal in 1919. She took a DSc at Trinity College, Dublin in 1907; in 1949, thirteen years after her retirement, Cambridge honoured her with an ScD. She moved to a nursing home in Helensburgh, Dunbartonshire, in 1960, and died there, unmarried, on 18 November of that year. Her remains were cremated at the crematorium in Cardcross, near Helensburgh, on 21 November. 


@@@@@


doc= 46415


Gordon, Dame Maria Matilda (1864-1939), geologist and women's activist, was born on 30 April 1864 in Monymusk, Aberdeenshire, elder daughter among seven children of Revd Alexander Ogilvie (1830/31-1904), schoolmaster, and his wife, Maria Matilda Nicol. The family moved to Aberdeen in 1872 when Alexander Ogilvie became headmaster of Robert Gordon's Hospital (later College). 
Following nine years at the Edinburgh Educational Institute for Girls (later the Edinburgh Ladies College which became, in 1944, the Mary Erskine School) and studies at the Royal Academy of Music, London, Ogilvie went to Heriot-Watt College, Edinburgh. In 1889 she entered University College, London, and concentrated on geology, botany, and zoology (BSc, 1890, with gold medal in zoology and comparative anatomy). Continuing her studies at the University of Munich, as a private student of palaeontologist Karl von Zittel and zoologist Richard Hertwig, she specialized in recent and fossil corals. Her London DSc (1893) was the first in geology given to a woman and her PhD (1900, with distinction in geology, palaeontology, and zoology) was the first conferred on a woman by the University of Munich. In 1895 she married John Gordon, an Aberdeen physician. She had three children, but nevertheless continued her fieldwork. 
All Maria Gordon's studies were done in the geologically very complex south Tyrol Dolomites, then a remote and isolated region. She published more than thirty original papers; especially notable was her early work on corals, and her theory of 'crust-torsion' (1899) to explain the peculiar forms of the region's typical landscape features. Expanding on relatively new tectonic theories, she demonstrated that the steep-walled, circular or elliptical limestone massifs, initially considered to be unchanged coral reefs, resulted from complex crustal movements. Her comprehensive monograph 'Das Grodener-, Fassa- und Enneberggebiet in den Sudtiroler Dolomiten' (1927) became the definitive reference for future work in the region; the portions dealing with tectonics and stratigraphy, illustrated with an outstanding collection of maps and sections, were the most notable, but the palaeontological discussions were also of considerable importance. 'Geologisches Wanderbuch der Westlichen Dolomiten' followed in 1928. Her translation of von Zittel's work, published as 'History of Geology and Palaeontology' (1901), was another major contribution. Slightly condensed at the author's request it appeared two years after the original German edition. These writings brought her wide professional recognition, first in Austria and Italy, then from the London Geological Society, from whom she received the Lyell medal in 1932. 
Maria Gordon was active in several prominent national women's action groups. She presided over the meeting of the National Council of Women in 1914 which led to the establishment of women's patrols, and the 1917 meeting of the Women's Citizens Association which decided to make the body a national organization. Service in these action groups and the International Council of Women brought a DBE in 1935 and an LLD from Edinburgh University. After the death of her husband in 1919 she moved to London and became active in the Liberal Party and civic affairs. She was the first woman to chair a London borough court. Strong, sympathetic, and dedicated to this social service, she nevertheless felt acutely the resulting loss of scientific worktime, her days in the field being, she later recalled, the happiest of her life. 
Probably the most productive woman field geologist of any country in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, Maria Gordon was remembered as a penetrating observer, and as having a quick, intuitive grasp of her subject and tremendous enthusiasm. She died at her home, 32 Hanover Gate Mansions, Regent's Park, London, on 24 June 1939. After cremation at Golders Green on 28 June, her ashes were interred on the 29th at Allenvale cemetery, Aberdeen. 


@@@@@


doc= 46416


Benson, Margaret Jane (1859-1936), botanist and palaeontologist, was born on 20 October 1859 in London, the sixth of the nine children of William Benson, architect and civil engineer, and his wife, Edmunda, daughter of landscape painter James Bourne. The family moved to Norton House, Hertford, in 1871. 
Margaret received her early education at home, where she was tutored by her older sister Henrietta until she was able to continue on her own. Her father, long interested in natural history, gave her a thorough introduction to field botany, and her mother, a successful flower painter, taught her how to paint. When she was nineteen she spent a year at Newnham College, Cambridge, studying classics. She also took the Cambridge higher local examination, but before continuing her studies earned some necessary money by teaching for seven years as assistant mistress in Exeter high school. 
Margaret entered University College, London, in 1887 and took a first-class BSc degree in botany in 1891. Supported by a Marion Kennedy research studentship (1892-3) she went on to postgraduate research under F. W. Oliver of University College. Her detailed investigation of the embryology of catkin-bearing plants, particularly birches, was carried out in part at Newnham College; the study was later considered a classic. She received a DSc (London) in 1894. 
In 1893 Margaret was appointed head of the newly founded department of botany at Royal Holloway College (then a wholly female establishment) where she had already held the post of senior lecturer in botany and zoology for four years. From then until her retirement in 1922 she worked with tremendous energy, enthusiasm, and what has been described as wonderful dogged determination to establish botanical studies at the college on a solid foundation. To investigate the best in laboratory equipment she took a term's leave of absence in 1897, and, with her friend, the botanist Ethel Sargant, visited several outstanding European botanical laboratories including that of Eduard Strasburger in Bonn. She also began planning and stocking what became an excellent botanical garden as well as a museum and herbarium. 
Margaret's research in palaeophytology, work involving the analysis and interpretation of complex sections of often tiny structural features, was inspired by the ongoing investigations of D. H. Scott of the Jodrell Laboratory. She began about 1902, when the technique of cutting fossil sections for microscopic examination was still in its infancy. Most of her slides she prepared herself, working at a small lapidary bench with a gas-powered cutting machine in a shed in the college grounds. Her detailed studies of spore-producing bodies and ovules in the seed ferns, among the earliest of the seed plants, were valued contributions to the understanding of the development of the seed habit, a key event in the evolution of plant life. Also especially notable were her investigations of early Palaeozoic herbaceous plants and some of the earliest of the true ferns. She was soon recognized as a very able palaeobotanist, and her findings, published in about twenty original papers, were quickly incorporated into the textbooks. 
An enthusiastic traveller and collector, Margaret brought back much botanical material from frequent visits to Europe and the Middle East. She also collected on a visit to Australia in 1905-6 and on a trip to Australia, Java, and India in 1914-15. In 1912 the University of London recognized her research and the overall standing of her department by conferring on her the title of university professor. She had been elected a fellow of University College in 1898. In 1904, when, after four years of stalling, the Linnean Society opened its fellowship to women, she was one of the first fifteen admitted. 
After retiring in 1922 to her family home in Hertford Margaret occupied herself with parish and domestic concerns, but also kept in touch with Royal Holloway College. Pleasant and genial, she was always a welcome visitor in the botany department. She returned briefly to technical work in 1932, urged by D. H. Scott to bring out some unpublished results. Her last contribution was made at the 1935 Botanical Congress in Amsterdam. She died at 32 Wood Lane, Highgate, Middlesex, on 20 June 1936 at the age of seventy-six. Funeral rites were at All Saints' Church, Hertford, on 23 June. 


@@@@@


doc= 46417


Lister, Gulielma (1860-1949), mycologist and naturalist, was born on 28 October 1860 at Sycamore House, 871 High Road, Leytonstone, Essex, one of seven children and the third of four daughters of Arthur Lister (1830-1908), a London wine merchant and naturalist, and his wife, Susanna, daughter of William Tindall of East Dulwich. The Listers were a Quaker family of distinction: one of Gulielma's uncles was the surgeon Lord Joseph Lister (1827-1912), and two of her brothers had outstanding careers in zoology and medicine respectively. Gulielma was educated at home except for a year spent at Bedford College for Women, about 1876, where she acquired a grounding in systematic and structural botany. 
Long her father's companion and helper in his natural history studies, in the late 1880s Gulielma joined him in investigations of the Myxomycetes, or slime moulds, a group whose classification was then somewhat confused. Together they worked over collections in the British Museum (Natural History), Kew Gardens, the Paris Natural History Museum, and De Bary's collection at the University of Strasbourg, Gulielma making notes and drawings. The result of their labours was Arthur Lister's 'Monograph of the Mycetozoa' (1894). A work of widespread interest, both in Britain and abroad, it brought a great influx of new material to the British Museum which in turn led to the recognition of new forms and extended knowledge of geographical distributions. After her father's death Gulielma brought out an expanded second edition (1911); a third, further enlarged and illustrated with coloured plates (an impressive collection of her own outstanding watercolours), followed in 1925. The latter remains a classic -- a key work on the taxonomy and nomenclature of the Myxomycetes. 
The Listers' investigations, pursued without interruption over a period of sixty years, over the last forty by Gulielma Lister alone, were recorded in a remarkable collection of seventy-four research notebooks bequeathed to the British Mycological Society, and later deposited in the British Museum (Natural History). They contain a wealth of material, including the results of the Listers' early classification studies of historical collections, accounts of their own collections and research (which included some early life history studies), notes on materials submitted to them from collectors worldwide, and many fine watercolour illustrations. A long succession of their papers published in the botanical journals includes a number of reports on Myxomycetes from Switzerland where Gulielma Lister and her father especially enjoyed collecting, although Gulielma's real hunting-grounds were Epping Forest and the region around Lyme Regis. Of special interest was her 1912 presidential address to the British Mycological Society, 'Past students of the Mycetozoa and their work'. Painstaking and accurate in her observations, free from bias and preconception, she kept abreast of studies by others in the field, even learning Polish to follow the work of Josef Rostafinsky. She was widely acknowledged as a world authority on the Myxomycetes. 
Gulielma Lister's close association with the British Museum lasted from the late 1880s until 1939, when wartime conditions prevented her travelling to London. For many years she was virtually honorary curator of the Myxomycetes, a collection she had helped to make the most important and complete then in existence, and greatly enriched with her watercolours giving magnified views. At the museum she and her close friend lichenologist Annie Lorrain Smith were remembered particularly for their interest and understanding patience in teaching younger workers. A gentle, kindly, generous woman of attractive personality, she had a wide circle of friends and numerous correspondents in many countries (including the emperor of Japan, in whose honour she named a specimen from the palace gardens and whose gift of a pair of porcelain vases she greatly cherished). 
A foundation member of the British Mycological Society, Gulielma Lister gave it considerable help in its early years; she was an influential council member and served twice as president (1912 and 1932). She became a member of the Essex Field Club in 1907, was its first woman president (1916), and thereafter a permanent vice-president. Long one of the club's leading spirits, participating regularly in its forays, she was especially active in the work of its Stratford museum, to which she donated both myxomycete and botanical collections. She was one of the first women fellows of the Linnean Society (elected 1904), served on the council (1915, 1927), and became a vice-president in 1929. 
A distinguished naturalist with detailed field knowledge of both plants and animals, Gulielma Lister had particularly strong interests in birds and conifers. For many years she worked with quiet enthusiasm with the London School Nature Study Union, providing sound advice and for a time serving as chair. Her artistic skills often brought requests for help; she prepared the illustrations for both her cousin F. J. Hanbury's 'Illustrated Monograph of British Hieracia' (1889) and Dallimore and Jackson's 'Handbook of Coniferae' (1923). 
Gulielma Lister died, unmarried, following a stroke, at her home, Sycamore House, 871 High Road, Leytonstone, Essex, on 18 May 1949. Her ashes were scattered over her mother's grave in Wanstead Friends' meeting-house burial-grounds. 


@@@@@


doc= 46419


Thomas, Ethel Nancy Miles (1876-1944), botanist, was born on 4 October 1876 at 18 Hartham Road, Islington, London, the daughter of David Miles Thomas, a tutor originally from Carmarthen, and his wife, Mary Emily Davies. She received her early education at home and at Mayo High School, London. In 1897 she became a student at University College, London, where she was prominent as president of the women students' union (and where later she was made a fellow). She also attended botany lectures at Imperial College. She began her research apprenticeship early as assistant (1897-1901) to botanist Ethel Sargant. This experience, and work with Arthur Tansley at University College, awakened her lifelong interest in seedling anatomy and plant evolution. Her first papers appeared in 1900, five years before she received her BSc. She was the first in Britain to publish on the phenomenon of double fertilization in angiosperms (1900). Her hypothesis of the double leaf-trace ('New Phytologist', 1907), a notable contribution to phylogenetic theory, was founded on investigations of vascular structures in a wide range of seedling types, angiospermous and gymnospermous. She continued to publish intermittently until the mid-1920s, bringing out some twelve reports in scientific periodicals as well as more general articles. Her later work was directed towards a broad interpretation of seedling anatomy, a goal never fully realized. 
Assistant lecturer at Bedford College from 1907, Thomas became head of the botany department in 1908 when it was established as a separate unit. She designed the botany garden at the Regent's Park site to which the college moved in 1913 and initiated planning for a plant physiology laboratory. Vigorous and enthusiastic about everything she undertook, she could occasionally arouse considerable antagonism. Hers was a complex personality; although ambitious, courageous, and warm-hearted, she was also impulsively outspoken and sometimes inflexible. As a teacher she set high standards and believed in letting students find their own feet. Growing antipathy between her and Bedford's principal, Margaret Tuke, led to her dismissal in 1916. The move upset the botany department, since she was by then a well-established scientist: a council member of the Linnean Society in 1910-15 (a fellow from 1908), she had taken her DSc in 1915 and had been appointed reader in the University of London in 1912 in recognition of her department development work. She was also an examiner for the University of London. 
During the First World War, Thomas carried out research for the War Office and the Medical Research Committee, while also serving as a Women's Land Army inspector. After a year (1918-19) as acting head of the botany department at University College of South Wales and subsequently two years as keeper of the botany department in the National Museum of Wales, she joined the staff of recently established University College, Leicester. There, almost alone, she developed a biological sciences programme; her botany laboratory was the college's first laboratory. She remained head of the biology department until she reluctantly accepted retirement in 1937 at the age of sixty. 
Life member of the British Association (vice president, section K (botany) 1933), Thomas attended meetings in Australia (1914), Canada (1924), and southern Africa (1929). She sat on the executive committee of the Imperial Botanical Conference (1924). A strong supporter of the women's movement, she took a particular interest in matters affecting professional status and especially women's research opportunities. For a time she was president of the Leicester branch of the British Federation of University Women. 
Handsome and vivacious with dark, lively eyes, Ethel Thomas stood out at social gatherings: a reporter at a British Association meeting, after identifying her as one of the country's leading women botanists, added, clearly impressed, 'she dances like a moonbeam' ('Leicester Evening Mail', 26 May 1933). In September 1933 she married Hugh Hyndman, a barrister, whose sudden death in 1934 was a severe blow. After retiring she continued professional activities from a research room in Westfield College (London). By 1940 she was in poor health and suffering from severe memory loss, but still lived alone, declining help. She died of heart failure at Brookwood Hospital, Knaphill, Woking, Surrey, on 28 August 1944, and was cremated at Woking four days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 46420


Smith, Annie Lorrain (1854-1937), mycologist and lichenologist, was born on 23 October 1854 in Everton, Liverpool, a younger daughter of the Revd Walter Smith, minister in the Free Church of Scotland, and his wife, Annie Lorrain, 'nee' Brown. The family was large and talented; three sons became university professors. 
Annie received her early schooling in Edinburgh and studied French in Orleans and German in Tubingen. For a time she worked as a governess, but about 1888 began to study botany, taking classes under D. H. Scott (1854-1934) at the Royal College of Science, London. She was introduced by Scott to the department of botany in the British Museum (Natural History), where she undertook the remounting of the recently purchased de Bary collection of microscopical slides of fungi; this began an association with the museum's cryptogamic herbarium that lasted for the rest of her life. As women were then ineligible for official staff positions, she was always an 'unofficial worker', paid from a special fund. 
Although Annie Smith did some early research on seaweeds, fungi were her special interest. Extensive work preparing exhibition stands of microfungi and three years assisting with seed testing, which included examining microfungi associated with germination, expanded her knowledge of the group. Within a short time she became responsible for identifying most of the fungi collections arriving at the museum, especially those from tropical east Africa, Angola, and the West Indies. Her studies on these and on new or rare British fungi were reported in numerous papers published between about 1895 and 1920. 
From 1906 Annie Smith also worked extensively in lichenology. Following the death that year of James Crombie, one of the leading British figures in the field, she undertook to complete the unfinished second volume of his 'Monograph of the British Lichens'. This appeared under her name in 1911, although it is now thought to have been almost all Crombie's work. However, she then thoroughly revised both volumes one and two for a second edition (1918, 1926). The 'Monograph', which is still an important reference work, quickly brought her wide recognition. Since it lacked workable keys she also published her well-illustrated 'Handbook of British Lichens' (1921), the only available set of keys to all known British lichens for almost three decades. 
Annie Smith was probably best known for her textbook 'Lichens' (1921; repr. 1975), outstanding for its breadth and detail and for more than half a century the standard work in English on the historical development of the field. A reviewer, describing it as 'practically the first modern scientific work devoted solely to Lichens' ('Journal of Botany, British and Foreign', 1921), rightly predicted it would long remain a classic. Her separate short history of British lichenology appeared in 1922, in the 'South Eastern Naturalist'. Also especially appreciated by her contemporaries were the reviews and abstracts of recent work on lichens she regularly contributed to botanical journals for more than thirty years. Her fieldwork in lichenology was limited mainly to the forays of the Essex Field Club and the British Mycological Society, but she took part as lichenologist in the 1909-11 Clare Island survey (co. Mayo, Ireland), one of the most successful large-scale field investigations of the time. 
A foundation member of the British Mycological Society, Annie Smith regularly attended annual meetings for thirty-five years and was twice president (1907, 1917). She became one of the first women fellows of the Linnean Society in 1904, and was a council member in 1918-21. In 1922 she was president of the South-East Union of Scientific Societies. At the British Museum, with the staff depletions of the First World War, she became acting assistant in the cryptogamic department with responsibility for fungi and lichens, but still as an 'unofficial worker'. 
Vigorous, warm-hearted, and always ready to assist students and younger colleagues, Annie Smith had wide interests and strong views, including a deep commitment to the social and political goals of the women's rights movement. She enjoyed travel and visited both Australia (with the British Association) and the United States. For fifty years she shared her home with an older sister, whose death in 1933 affected her severely. A civil service pension and an OBE, conferred when she retired in 1934, came as recognition of her contributions to cryptogamic botany. She died at her home, 44 Stanwick Mansions, in west London, on 7 September 1937, shortly before her eighty-third birthday, after three years of poor health. 


@@@@@


doc= 46421


Whiteley, Martha Annie (1866-1956), chemist, was born on 11 November 1866 at 7a Queens Road west, Chelsea, London, the second daughter of William Sedgewick Whiteley, house agent's clerk, and his wife, Hannah ('nee' Bargh). She was educated at Kensington Girls' School, then Royal Holloway College, Egham, gaining a University of London BSc in 1890. She passed the Oxford honours mathematical moderations in 1891, the year in which she became a teacher at Wimbledon high school. 
In 1900 Martha Whiteley became science lecturer at St Gabriel's Training College, Camberwell. In 1902 she obtained her London doctorate, for which she had been studying part-time at the Royal College of Science (RCS) since 1898. She was appointed lecturer on the physical chemistry honours course at Royal Holloway College in 1903, but after gaining her associateship of the Royal College of Science was invited to join the staff of the RCS (which from 1907 was part of Imperial College) as a teaching scholar in the chemistry department in 1904; she became an assistant in 1905, demonstrator in 1908, lecturer in 1914, and assistant professor (equivalent of reader) in 1920. Between 1912 and 1916 she held one of five fellowships awarded by the British Federation of University Women. She retired in 1934. During her career, she apparently refused to accept higher positions at Imperial, preferring to continue her chemical research work. (It was the consensus among her colleagues that she was capable of fulfilling duties at full professorial level.) It was typical of her, too, that she would not always allow her name to be added to collaborative published papers. 
In her research work Martha Whiteley worked with some of the great names in chemistry, including Sir Jocelyn Field Thorpe. Her doctoral studies had focused on the organic chemistry of barbituric compounds, and she continued working with this class of chemicals until 1914. Then, with the advent of the First World War, she and many other academic chemists became involved in the war effort -- work for which she was officially recorded as a volunteer. The college was involved in the synthesis of compounds for drugs and improved methods of producing them. These included hydrochloride and lactate for greekLetterbeta-eucaine, and diethylaminoethanol for novocaine, which were later put into commercial production. She was also involved in the production of sugars and allied substances. Whiteley developed the lachrymatory gas known as SK (ethyl odoacetate) and the incendiary mixture DW (Dr Whiteley). For these services she was appointed officer in the Order of the British Empire in 1920. Following the war she made contributions to the second and third editions of 'Thorpe's Dictionary of Applied Chemistry' and co-authored 'A Student's Manual of Organic Chemical Analysis' (1925). 
Martha Whiteley also played an important pastoral role in college, particularly towards women. She took an interest in all her students' academic work and in their recreation, instituting the Whiteley cup for squash. In 1913 Sir Alfred Keogh, then rector at Imperial, remarked: 'No one who knows her can doubt that she is one of the most remarkable personalities either amongst men or women in the country. She has an extraordinary power of expression which in some way enables her to obtain a very remarkable influence in the College, and a charm of manner particularly desirable in a teacher.... here you have no ordinary woman. I know of no one more likely to inspire women students to great things in science than Miss Whiteley.' There were few women students in the chemistry department at that time, and Whiteley's influence and 'power of engendering enthusiasm amongst the women students' (Whiteley MSS) extended to all college departments. 
Martha Whiteley deplored the fact that there were so few women science students, and also so few trained scientific women in the country able to fill positions vacated by men during the First World War. She was a member of the Chemical Society, and in 1904 she signed a petition with eighteen women chemists requesting the admittance of women to fellowship of the society. Although it was rejected, she continued in the battle, which was finally won in 1920, and was the first woman to be elected a member of the council of the Chemical Society, on which she served from 1928 to 1931. In 1918 she had been elected a fellow of the Royal Institute of Chemistry. 
On her retirement in 1934 Martha Whiteley was presented with a book in which was an illuminated address and signatures of those staff and students who had known her at the college. In the years that followed she continued her work on the 'Dictionary of Applied Chemistry' at Imperial College, and edited the fourth edition, published in 1941. During the Second World War, when she was bombed out of her London home, she was offered facilities at Cambridge University, and temporarily transferred her work there. Martha Whiteley died of heart failure, shortly before her ninetieth birthday, at her home, Flat 2, 4 Roland Gardens, South Kensington, on 24 May 1956. She had been associated with the RCS and Imperial College for more than fifty years, latterly through her honorary fellowship of Imperial, awarded in 1946, her work with the Imperial College Women's Association, which she founded in 1912, and her continuing friendships with devoted colleagues. Little is known of her private life other than that she was deeply religious; her funeral service was held at St Augustine's Church, Queen's Gate, on 29 May 1956. 


@@@@@


doc= 46422


Hoggan, Frances Elizabeth (1843-1927), physician and social reformer, was born on 20 December 1843 at the vicarage, Brecon, the eldest of the five children of Richard Morgan (died 1851) and his wife, Georgiana Catherina Philipps. Her early childhood was spent mainly in Aberafan, where her father was vicar from 1845 until his death in 1851. Thereafter her family home continued to be in Wales although she attended a girls' school in Windsor from the age of ten. She was then allowed to study in Paris in 1858 and in Dusseldorf in 1861, where she formed the ambition to become a doctor. 
By 1866 Morgan was receiving private medical tuition in London intending to follow the precedent set by Elizabeth Garrett (later Garrett Anderson), who in 1863 had obtained the licence of the Society of Apothecaries, so becoming the first woman trained in Britain to appear on the General Medical Council's register. Garrett provided clinical instruction for Morgan at the St Mary's Dispensary for Women and Children in Marylebone, London. Morgan passed the Society of Apothecaries' preliminary examination in arts with honours in January 1867. But soon afterwards the society revised its licence regulations so as to exclude would-be candidates who had had only private, rather than regular, medical school instruction. This effectively excluded women from the medical register as all British medical schools (and all other British medical qualifications) appeared firmly closed to them. 
In the autumn of 1867 Morgan went to Zurich University where the Russian Nadezhda Suslova was about to become the first female medical graduate. Morgan's academic achievements in Zurich were to become legendary. She completed the medical course in three years rather than the expected five. Staff and fellow students were impressed with the 'seriousness, the aristocratic calm and the royal superiority of this remarkable girl' (Bonner, 38). In March 1870, she was only the second woman to defend an MD thesis (on progressive muscular atrophy) before the entire medical faculty of Zurich University. More than 400 spectators watched her do so with consummate skill and become the first British woman to obtain a European MD degree. 
After graduating Morgan travelled to Vienna, Prague, and then Paris to further her clinical training and then set up in practice at 13 Granville Place, London, as a qualified but unregistered medical practitioner. In March 1871 she was appointed by Elizabeth Garrett as the first assistant physician to St Mary's Dispensary and then to its successor, the New Hospital for Women, when it opened in 1872. 
On 1 April 1874, Morgan married George Hoggan (1837-1891), a former engineer with the Indian navy, who had graduated in medicine from Edinburgh University in 1872. For the next decade Frances and George Hoggan practised together from different rooms in the same building and jointly published several scientific papers -- for example, 'Notes of a case of transfusion by Aveling's apparatus' ('British Medical Journal', 31 March 1877). They had no children. 
Frances Hoggan's irregular position as a practising but unregistered medical practitioner was resolved in 1877 when the King and Queen's College of Physicians in Ireland opened its licentiate examinations to women. In the meantime the British Medical Association had declared her election to the association as void on the grounds of her unregistered status when elected. In 1878 she resigned as assistant physician at the New Hospital for Women, apparently unhappy at the extent of high risk abdominal surgery, including ovariotomy, being undertaken by Garrett Anderson. A conservative stance towards abdominal surgery would have been in accord with Hoggan's active support for preventive health measures and moral and sanitary reform in preference to heroic curative interventions. In 1871 Hoggan, with her close friend Elizabeth Blackwell, the first woman on the medical register, was co-founder and also honorary secretary of the National Health Society, which aimed to promote sanitary education under the motto 'prevention is better than cure'. Between 1875 and 1885 Hoggan published pamphlets and read papers at many conferences on such topics as the physical education of girls and the benefits of swimming to women's health. Her 1883 pamphlet 'On the Advantages of a Vegetarian Diet in Workhouses and Prisons' advocated the withdrawal of meat from inmates' diets on grounds of economy and the moral benefits ensuing from restricting habitual criminals' and paupers' sensual gratification. 
In the mid-1870s Hoggan and her husband's championing of the anti-vivisectionist cause kept her name in the public eye. A letter from George Hoggan, published in the 'Morning Post' on 2 February 1875, described in emotive terms his experiences during four months working in Claude Bernard's Paris laboratories. The letter fuelled the developing campaign against animal experiments being orchestrated in particular by Frances Power Cobbe. The Hoggans were founder members of Cobbe's Victoria Street Society for the Protection of Animals Liable to Vivisection from 1875. As qualified doctors with some first-hand experience of animal experimentation their support was particularly valued by anti-vivisectionists. However, they resigned in 1878 when, under Cobbe's leadership, the Victoria Street Society adopted a policy committed to total abolition of all animal experiments whereas the Hoggans' opposition appears to have been only to painful experiments. 
Frances Hoggan was also publicly active in the women's movement. She promoted better education for girls, for example, in 'Education for Girls in Wales' (1882) and, particularly, the case for medical women. Here too she was not afraid to court public controversy. While at Edinburgh University, George Hoggan had been an ardent supporter of the rights of his fellow female medical students, the so-called 'Edinburgh Seven', to obtain a full medical education. But in an essay on 'Women in medicine' published in T. Stanton, ed., 'The Woman Question in Europe' (1884), Frances Hoggan and her husband were highly critical of Sophia Jex-Blake's confrontational tactics in the later stages of the Edinburgh campaign, alleging they had been counter-productive compared to the uneventful but real progress made by those such as Frances Hoggan herself, who had studied in London and abroad. 
Between 1881 and 1885 Hoggan campaigned actively for medical women in India, where religious proscriptions precluded many women from seeking medical advice from male doctors. Through articles in the 'Contemporary Review' (August 1881) and on 'Medical work for women in India' in the 'Englishwoman's Review' (15 April and 15 May 1885), and in many speeches, she argued that priority should be given to opening medical schools for Indian women rather than training British women to go to India. This position created some tension between her and medical women at the London School of Medicine for Women, who were actively raising funds for scholarships for women planning to work in India to train at the school. 
In 1885 George Hoggan's health broke down and the couple moved to the French riviera. Frances Hoggan returned to London after his death in May 1891. Although she did not resume medical practice she continued to take an active interest in a range of contemporary social issues including the women's suffrage campaign and racial inequalities in the United States and southern Africa. She spent her last years in Brighton, where she died in a nursing home at 13 Clarence Square, on 5 February 1927. Her body was cremated at Woking on 9 February. 


@@@@@


doc= 46424


Benett, Etheldred (1775-1845), fossil collector and geologist, was born on 22 July 1775 at Pyt House, Tisbury, Wiltshire, the eldest daughter of Thomas Benett ('c'.1729-1797) and Catherine Darell (died 1780). Her eldest surviving brother, John (1773-1852), was a deputy lieutenant and magistrate for Wiltshire and a whig MP for Wiltshire from 1819 to 1852. His wife's half-brother, Aylmer Bourke Lambert (1761-1842), an original fellow of the Linnean Society and well known as a botanist and geologist, encouraged Etheldred and her sister Anna Maria to study natural history. Etheldred took up the newly fashionable study of fossils, while her sister took up botany. Evidence of Etheldred's activity dates from July 1809, when William Cunnington (1754-1810), naturalist and antiquary of Heytesbury, saw 'Miss Bennett's collection' (Cunnington MSS). Etheldred visited Cunnington in November the same year, and by 1810 she was in contact with James Sowerby (1757-1822), artist and naturalist of London, then busy on his project to illustrate British fossils. From then on she acted as a clearing-house for palaeontological and geological investigations throughout Wiltshire, though these were sometimes interrupted by electioneering for her brother in the often sordid provincial politics before the 'Reform Act' of 1832. 
Benett started corresponding with G. B. Greenough (1778-1855), first president of the Geological Society, in 1813. In 1815 she sent the society a sketch of a measured section of the quarry at Chicksgrove, one of the first recorded in Britain. She had obtained the section from the quarry foreman. In 1816 she sent drawings of new fossil sponges from the Warminster Greensand. Sowerby soon reproduced her section (without permission) in 'Mineral Conchology'. By 1817 she was in correspondence with Gideon Mantell, the discoverer of ancient fossil reptiles in Sussex. She was also soon in correspondence with William Buckland at Oxford University and, from 1829, with Samuel Woodward in Norwich. 
Never having married, Benett was able, thanks to her financial independence, to gather high-quality specimens of fossils. She obtained these mostly through local collectors, from whom she purchased material from the many quarries then actively worked throughout Wiltshire. She also gathered fossil material on summer holidays to the Dorset coast. She distributed duplicate material to museums all over the country and further afield, making many donations to the Bristol Institution, the Geological Society of London, and the British Museum. Her fine personal collection became a first port of call for visiting geologists, who used it to study the strata exposed in her area, as did Charles Lyell in 1826. Inspired by this activity and by Mantell's publication of his 'Catalogue of the Organic Remains of Sussex' (1829), in 1831 Benett published her similarly unillustrated 'Catalogue of the organic remains of Wiltshire' in 'Ancient Wiltshire' by her friend Sir Richard Colt Hoare. This work also contained her sister's list of local plants. The same year she reissued the fossil catalogue as a separate publication, adding newly prepared plates for illustration. 'This little work... of mere local interest' she dedicated to Greenough. Her disclaimers reveal the difficulties she saw for any female geological author. These later gave some the false impression that her 'Catalogue' of 1831 had not been properly published, when in fact it was widely distributed. 
Benett's devotion to Wiltshire fossils, which had 'largely contributed' to Sowerby's 'text book', was feted by Murchison, the president of the Geological Society ('Address', 373). In her 'Catalogue' she gave names to a number of valid new species and genera, and illustrated others, like Richard Owen's 'Ichthyosaurus trigonus', named later by experts she had consulted. She published another book in 1833, on the genealogy of her ancestor William Wake, archbishop of Canterbury, from whose family she had acquired her unusual Christian name. In 1836, when she was made a member of the Imperial Natural History Society of Moscow, she angrily discovered that her diploma was for 'Dominum [Master] Etheldredus Benett'. The British Museum also had thanked 'Etheldred Benett Esq.' for her book on fossils, though she had presented it in person to one of the librarians, 'telling him it was written by myself'. Such episodes led her to believe that 'scientific people in general have a very low opinion of the abilities of my sex' (letter to Samuel Woodward, 12 April 1836, Castle Museum, Norwich). 
On 11 January 1845 Benett died at her home, Norton House, Norton Bavant, Wiltshire. She was buried at Bavant parish church on 18 January. Her wonderful collection of fossils, her best memorial, was sold. The best portions are now in the Academy of Natural Sciences, Philadelphia; a smaller portion remains in Leeds City Museum. The greatest treasures in her collection were specimens of 'Trigoniid' bivalves from the Portlandian of Tisbury. These showed that 'soft parts' could be petrified. This first demonstration that muscle and gill parts could be preserved in fossils caused a sensation when announced by Edward Charlesworth in 1848. Extant specimens of her collection held in Philadelphia also reveal that Benett was one of the first to sieve for microfossils. Barred from the Geological Society by her sex, she was one of the earliest to demonstrate why such discrimination was short-sighted. 


@@@@@


doc= 46425


Longstaff, (Mary) Jane (1855-1935), biologist, was born on 27 August 1855 at 16 Cavendish Place, Carlisle, Cumberland, the eldest of four children of Matthewman Hodgson Donald, manufacturer, and his wife, Henrietta Maria Roper, daughter of the Hon. J. H. Roper Curzon. She was educated at a private school in London before entering Carlisle School of Art. Interested in all aspects of natural history from an early age, Jane Donald became an authority on land and freshwater mollusca, her first paper on the mollusca of Cumberland being read to the Cumberland Association for the Advancement of Science in 1881. J. G. Goodchild of the Geological Survey, himself active in the Cumberland Association, encouraged her to study fossil shells, and her notes on Carboniferous gastropods from Penton and elsewhere, published in the 'Transactions of the Cumberland Association' (1885), constituted the first of twenty papers on the neglected subject of Palaeozoic gastropods; these she expanded into a systematic revision of fossil genera and families, which she published in the 'Quarterly Journal of the Geological Society' in the years up to 1933. She joined the Geologists' Association in 1883 and received its Murchison Fund award in 1889. Though never formally connected with any museum or institute, by visiting various museums, and with the help of private means, she produced some remarkable papers, with her own illustrations, most of which were published by the Geologists' Association. She was also a good botanist and was elected fellow of the Linnean Society in 1906. 
On 29 August 1906 Jane married a widower, George Blundell Longstaff (1848/9-1921), himself an entomologist; they travelled abroad together, visiting north Africa and South Africa, Australia, the West Indies, and South America. George Longstaff's interest lay in butterflies; Jane always brought back recent (not fossil) shells from these regions. Her most important paper was on the non-marine mollusca of southern Sudan, in 1914. For several years she undertook breeding experiments with the large South African land snail 'cochlitoma', the results of which she published in 1921. She also provided appendices to her husband's works, notably his 'Butterfly Hunting in many Lands' (1912). Jane Longstaff died at the Spa Hotel, Bath, on 19 January 1935. Her nephew inherited her collections, which he presented to the Natural History Museum. 


@@@@@


doc= 46427


Williamson, Henry William (1895-1977), writer, was born on 1 December 1895 at 66 Braxfield Road, Brockley, south-east London, the middle child (and only son) of William Leopold Williamson (1865-1946), bank clerk in the City of London, and his wife, Gertrude Eliza (1867-1936), daughter of Thomas and Henrietta Leaver. His paternal grandmother, born Adela Leopoldina Luhn, was German. In 1900 the family moved to 11 (now 21) Eastern Road, Brockley. This area and era feature in exact detail in early volumes of Williamson's epic novel 'A Chronicle of Ancient Sunlight' (15 vols., 1951-69). A sensitive, difficult child, the young Henry was constantly at odds with his father. In 1907 he obtained a scholarship to Colfe's Grammar School in nearby Lewisham. His great interest at this time was to roam the surrounding countryside making notes about nature. An account of his schooldays can be found in 'Dandelion Days' (1922) and also in the 'Chronicle'. 
On leaving school in the summer of 1913 Williamson became a clerk in a Sun Fire Insurance office in the City. Already a territorial soldier in the London rifle brigade, he was mobilized when war was declared and was catapulted into a frighteningly different world. His experiences of the First World War, particularly his participation in the Christmas truce of 1914, affected him deeply and became the pivot upon which the rest of his life turned. By the end of the war, Williamson had already determined to be a writer, a decision deepened by reading in June 1919 Richard Jefferies's visionary autobiography 'The Story of my Heart' (1883), which reinforced his own thinking. In due course Williamson wrote seven books directly about the war: 'The Wet Flanders Plain' (1929), 'The Patriot's Progress' (1930), and five volumes of the 'Chronicle' sequence. Many critics consider these to be the finest of the genre. 
Demobilized in September 1919, Williamson returned to the family home, where he found it difficult to adjust to post-war conditions. He worked briefly in Fleet Street while continuing to write his first novel. In March 1921 he went to live in the isolated village of Georgeham in north Devon, where he had spent an idyllic holiday in May 1914. 'The Beautiful Years' (vol. 1 of 'The Flax of Dream') was published that October. Other volumes of 'Flax' followed over the next few years, interspersed with books of nature writing. By the mid-1920s Williamson was an established author. While gaining material for a story about the life of an otter, he met Ida Loetitia (1901-1998), daughter of Charles Hibbert, an official of the Cheriton otter hunt. The Hibberts traced their ancestry in a direct line to Charles II and Nell Gwyn. They married on 6 May 1925 and had four sons and two daughters. 

'Tarka the Otter' was published in 1927 to much acclaim and was awarded the Hawthornden prize. In the novel Williamson brilliantly evoked life -- and eventual death -- as seen by a hunted otter in the countryside of the two rivers near Torrington and Barnstaple, Devon. With its vivid and sharply observed depiction of natural history, 'Tarka' has remained a popular classic and Williamson's best-selling work. Presenting the Hawthornden prize, John Galsworthy praised Williamson as 'the finest and most intimate living interpreter of the drama of wild life' (Williamson, 'Williamson', xiv). With the prize money Williamson built himself a writing hut in an isolated field above Georgeham. 'Tarka' attracted the attention of T. E. Lawrence, whose letter of praise started a correspondence and friendship between the two. Indeed, Lawrence's fatal motorcycle crash on 14 May 1935 occurred as he was returning from a trip to the post office to send a telegram to Williamson, who later wrote a memoir of his friendship with Lawrence, 'Genius of Friendship' (1941). 
In 1929 Williamson moved his family to Shallowford, a secluded cottage at Filleigh near South Molton, Devon. In 1931 he met Ann (Myfanwy) Thomas, daughter of the writer Edward Thomas, who became his secretary and with whom he had a daughter. In 1932 he was approached by the artist C. F. Tunnicliffe, whose subsequent illustration of Williamson's work was an inspired collaboration. During the Shallowford sojourn Williamson published ten more books including 'The Gold Falcon' (1933), arising from a visit to the USA, and 'Salar the Salmon' (1935). 
In September 1935 Williamson was invited by his great friend John Heygate, the writer, to visit him in Berlin; Heygate officially provided tickets for the Nuremberg rally. Williamson was extraordinarily impressed by all that he was shown by officials in Germany and did not hesitate to make his views known. He saw Hitler as a man achieving great good for his country, who as a former soldier would never contemplate another war. This naive attitude was misunderstood by the establishment, and Williamson was vilified for his opinions. 
In 1936 Williamson bought a rundown farm in north Norfolk, and in November 1937 he was introduced there to Sir Oswald Mosley, whose views on agricultural reform coincided with his own and whom he thought the only politician strong enough to prevent a repetition of war. He described Mosley as 'A fine fellow: strong, determined, integrated, [with] staying-power' (Williamson, 'Williamson', 222). Williamson wrote eight articles on the agricultural situation for Mosley's journal 'Action', and also joined the British Union of Fascists. He remained a member until the movement was banned at the outbreak of the Second World War. He was not, however, a political fascist; he was a Romantic with a mistaken concept of the situation. 
Williamson's Norfolk neighbours viewed this eccentric newcomer with great suspicion, their unfounded complaints that he was a spy leading to his arrest in June 1940 and a weekend in the local police station before he was released unconditionally. The difficult farm era is recorded in 'The Story of a Norfolk Farm' (1941) and two volumes of the 'Chronicle'. He was very proud when his farm achieved 'A' category. Exhausted at the end of the war, he sold the farm in October 1945. After settling the family in Suffolk he returned to Georgeham alone, and was divorced in 1947. In the summer of 1948 he met a young teacher, Christine Mary Duffield (1921-1990). They married on 13 April 1949, had one son, separated in December 1962, and were divorced in 1968. 
With the return to Devon, Williamson immersed himself in 'A Chronicle of Ancient Sunlight' (1951-1969), his fifteen-volume masterpiece encompassing a portrait of life in the first half of the twentieth century. This mammoth task exhausted him but he wrote one further book, 'The Scandaroon' (1972). 
Succumbing to senile dementia, Williamson was taken in 1976 into the care of Twyford Abbey Nursing Home in Ealing on the outskirts of London, where he died on 13 August 1977. He was buried on 18 August in the churchyard of St George's parish church, Georgeham. A memorial service with address by Ted Hughes (1930-1998, poet laureate) was held at St Martin-in-the-Fields, London, on 1 December 1977. 
Altogether Henry Williamson wrote over fifty books and innumerable articles (many of these now collected into books published by the Henry Williamson Society). His work falls within the Romantic genre. The critic George Painter stated: 'He stands at the end of the line of Blake, Shelley and Jefferies: he is the last classic and the last romantic.' 


@@@@@


doc= 46429


Brown, Elizabeth (1830-1899), astronomer and meteorologist, was born on 6 August 1830 at Further Barton, Hampton Road, Cirencester, Gloucestershire, the elder of the two daughters of Thomas Crowther Brown (1792-1883), a wine merchant and amateur meteorologist, and his wife, Jemimah. The family was comfortably off and Elizabeth was taught at home by a governess; later she studied extensively and persistently on her own, reading both science and literature. Her mother died when she was still a child and she was very close to her father, who taught her how to watch the sky for meteorological information and use a small hand telescope that allowed her to see Saturn's rings and Jupiter's satellites. From 1871 it was she who carried out the daily rainfall recording for the Royal Meteorological Society previously done for many years by her father. For a time she also recorded temperature, deep-well measurements, and thunderstorm activity. She was elected a fellow of the society in 1893, an honour few women had received and one she greatly prized. Beginning about 1881 a number of her meteorological notes appeared at intervals, often in 'Nature'. 
Shortly after the death of her father, whom she looked after in his last years, Brown began to take part publicly in astronomical work, and in 1883 presented a paper on sunspots to the then very active Liverpool Astronomical Society. Unlike the Royal Astronomical Society, this group accepted women members; Brown became director of its recently organized solar section, making observations herself and collecting and reporting data of others. Her own work was done in one of two observatories (the other housed meteorological instruments) built at Further Barton. She made two long, somewhat arduous, expeditions, with the charge of presenting reports to the Liverpool Society, to observe solar eclipses. The first was to Russia (1887) and the second to Trinidad (1889). Only the latter was successful scientifically, but Brown wrote lively accounts of both. 'In Pursuit of a Shadow' (1888) described her journey, with a woman friend, across northern Europe to Kineshma, some 200 miles north-east of Moscow, where she was a guest at the dacha ('a delightful, romantic house') of a Russian astronomer. 'Caught in the Tropics', describing her Trinidad trip, appeared in 1890. 
Following the decline of the Liverpool society, Brown became very active in a move to organize a metropolitan-based amateur group, which became the British Astronomical Association (BAA). On its founding in 1890 she accepted the directorship of its solar section, thus becoming, 'ex officio', a member of council. From then on she was increasingly absorbed in the work her post entailed, although she also helped in other sections and occasionally made observations of the moon and of variable and coloured stars. Her chief interest remained the daily registering of sunspots -- demanding work, requiring accuracy in observation and artistic skill. Her reports appeared in more than twenty papers in the BAA's 'Journal' throughout the 1890s and in seven lengthy annual reports of the solar section (BAA 'Memoirs', 1891-9). The latter were major contributions, widely recognized; each included a detailed pictorial calendar of sunspots and faculae and a life history 'ledger' for each spot. They earned her a distinguished place among amateur astronomers of her time. Brown held memberships in the Astronomical Society of the Pacific, the Astronomical Society of France, and the Astronomical Society of Wales. Although proposed (1892) for fellowship in the Royal Astronomical Society (whose meetings she frequently attended) she was not elected. 
Calm, gentle, and unassuming by nature, a member of the Society of Friends and a regular attender of meetings, Brown spent a quiet life in the country. She never married, and after the death of her father her only companion was her sister, Jemima. In general she avoided interruptions to her routine of observing, drawing, writing, and rainfall recording, but she had an active correspondence with astronomers and other friends in many countries. In addition to her eclipse expeditions (the third and last of which was to northern Norway in 1896), she went to the Montreal meeting of the British Association in 1884 and afterwards travelled in Canada and the United States. Shorter journeys took her to Scotland, Ireland, and Spain. She recorded landscapes and wild flowers, a special interest, in colour sketches, and described her experiences in vivid letters to her sister. 
Never very robust, Brown died suddenly, of cardiac thrombosis, at Further Barton, her lifelong home, on 5 March 1899, after a week of bronchial illness and in the midst of preparing for a fourth eclipse expedition. She was interred in the Friends' meeting-house burial-ground, Cirencester. She left her astronomical observatory, its contents, and $1000 to the British Astronomical Association. 


@@@@@


doc= 46430


Fountaine, Margaret Elizabeth (1862-1940), lepidopterist and diarist, was born on 16 May 1862 at South Acre, near Norwich, Norfolk, the second of eight children and eldest daughter of John Fountaine, rector of South Acre, and his wife, Mary Isabella (Isobel) Lee-Warner (died 1906). After his death in 1877, Isobel, with her six daughters and two sons, moved to Eaton Grange in Norwich. On 15 April 1878 Margaret, who was educated at home, began keeping a diary, which she continued from April to April of each year until a few months before her death. Although proud of ancestors who had come over with the Conqueror, she also brought to a strict Victorian family an unconventional spirit that often put her at odds with her relatives. As she observed in her diary on 15 April 1883, 'My ruling passion is the love of independence' (Fountaine, 'Love among the Butterflies', 28). Her unconventionality was manifested at the age of twenty-eight by her infatuation with an Irishman, Septimus Hewson, one of the paid choristers of Norwich Cathedral, though she deemed him her inferior. She followed him to Dublin, having imagined an engagement where none existed, and he remained the greatest disillusionment of her life. 
After Fountaine came out socially, she dabbled in art, for which she had shown some talent, and studied singing in a desultory way. But after her uncle Edward Fountaine left her a bequest in 1891 that allowed her to travel far beyond Dublin, she found her true vocation in collecting butterflies, to which she devoted the rest of her life. She pursued this vocation worldwide, first in Europe and after 1901 often in the Middle and Near East. She refused to ride side-saddle, and accompanied only by a guide or translator ventured intrepidly into remote areas where she felt protected by her own sense of rectitude -- for, in her own words, 'There is a direct and special protection over a pure and high-minded woman, which no man however base can break through' (Fountaine, 'Love among the Butterflies', 68) -- and perhaps by her size: she was unusually tall, standing 5 feet 9 inches. 
Fountaine claimed to find would-be admirers almost everywhere and turned down many proposals of marriage. One suitor, the British vice-consul at Broussa, threatened her with a breach-of-promise suit after she broke the engagement she had agreed to in 1905. Despite her pride in class, which was apparently always malleable, she had formed a liaison with her Syrian dragoman, Khalil Neimy (1877-1929), which from about 1903 became a marriage in all but name. Enduring for twenty-seven years, their relationship survived her shock at learning, in 1901 after she agreed to marry him (twenty-four to her thirty-nine), that he was already married. Their various later plans to marry also fell through. Accompanied by Neimy, she travelled in 1908-9 to South Africa and elsewhere in Africa; in 1910 she visited a brother in the United States; in 1911 she travelled in Costa Rica; in 1912 in India, Ceylon, and Tibet. 
From 1914 to 1917 Fountaine and Neimy made a disastrous attempt to settle in Australia as farmers, after which she went alone to the United States, until in 1919 she left for Fiji. In 1920 she rejoined Neimy in New Zealand briefly, before returning alone to the United States and then to England. In 1923 they travelled together to Burma, but since he insisted on returning to Damascus to care for his ailing mother (over Fountaine's jealous objections), she returned to England, where in 1925 she established a large studio at 100A Fellowes Road, Hampstead. For the rest of her life this was her home whenever she returned to England. Then she set off on her travels again, principally in Africa, until a commission to secure particular specimens sent her to the West Indies. After Neimy died in 1929, she went to South America, determined to bury her grief in work, and she continued her worldwide travelling, with intervals in England, until her death at Mount St Benedict, after suffering a stroke on 21 April 1940 while collecting on the island of Trinidad. 
The fruit of her travels was the Fountaine-Neimy collection of about 22,000 butterflies, bequeathed to the Castle Museum in Norwich, together with twelve volumes of her diaries (1878-1939), over 1 million words long and without margins. In addition, her carefully drawn sketchbooks of larvae and pupae, many previously undescribed, repose in the Natural History Museum, South Kensington. Although she began her diary as a serial record, she later kept notes drafted into a continuous narrative instead, usually during the following year. A year's record, copied into identically bound ledger-like leather books each about the size and thickness of a London telephone directory, also notes the time required to read it, and includes a studio portrait of Fountaine herself, typically standing straight with shoulders back, barely smiling or unsmiling, eyes focused fearlessly ahead. Variations in ink colour show that before Fountaine began recording a new year, she established the reading time for a previous year's account by rereading it. The diaries' readability is considerably enhanced by the two-stage compositional methods she developed. She was a talented writer and could build up a scene or a characterization through the accretion of details or a telling phrase or mood. She never, however, violated the serial nature of a diary, refusing both the novelist's foreshadowing and the autobiographer's retrospective reflection, and remaining faithful to the ongoing record of her adventurous life. 


@@@@@


doc= 46431


Hudson, Hilda Phoebe (1881-1965), mathematician, was born on 11 June 1881 in Cambridge, one of the four children of William Henry Hudson (1836-1916), fellow of St John's College, Cambridge, later professor of mathematics at King's College and Queen's College, Harley Street, London, and his wife, Mary (1843-1882), daughter of Robert Turnbull of Hackness, Yorkshire. Mary Hudson died when Hilda was still an infant, and her father had a strong influence on his children's early life; three of them became mathematicians. Indeed, Hudson's first publication, a simplified proof in Euclidian geometry, appeared in 'Nature' in 1891 when she was ten. 
Hudson entered Newnham College, Cambridge, from Clapham high school with a Gilchrist scholarship in 1900 and took both parts of the mathematical tripos (bracketed with the seventh wrangler, 1903; first class (division three) in part two, 1904). After a year at the University of Berlin she returned to Newnham as lecturer in mathematics (1905-10). A Newnham associate's research fellowship (1910-13) enabled her to spend a year at Bryn Mawr College, USA; she was also awarded MA, and in 1913 ScD, degrees by Trinity College, Dublin. She then became lecturer at West Ham Technical Institute where she prepared students for London University degrees. Although inspiring to the mathematically gifted, she was not an especially successful teacher. 
In 1917 Hudson took a wartime civil service post, heading an Air Ministry subdivision doing aeronautical engineering research. Her work on the application of mathematical modelling to aircraft design was pioneering, and a tribute to her versatility. She continued this line of research with Parnell & Co. of Bristol until 1921, and then retired from salaried work to write the treatise for which she is remembered, 'Cremona Transformations in Plane and Space' (1927). 
Although she published several papers in applied mathematics (1917-20) and a well-received monograph, 'Ruler and Compasses' (1916), most of Hudson's work was in the area of pure mathematics concerned with algebraic surfaces and plane curves. Cremona transformation, an analytical technique for studying the geometry of these, was her special interest. Though now displaced by powerful tools of abstract algebra, it was then a subject of considerable activity. Her exceptional geometrical intuition led her by basically elementary methods to solutions of quite difficult problems (reported in seventeen articles, 1911-29), and her much-quoted treatise, the culmination of nearly two decades of scholarly work, presented a unified account of the major elements of the field, supplemented with an extensive annotated bibliography. 
A small woman, light of step and bright-eyed behind thick-lensed glasses, Hilda Hudson enjoyed hockey and swimming when young. Her life was simple, almost austere, though she had many friends. She never married. Deeply religious, she sought to unite her intellectual with her spiritual concerns, and increasingly found in mathematics an unending revelation of the glory of God. She was long a supporter of the Student Christian Movement, and honorary finance secretary of its auxiliary movement in 1927-39. As a distinguished mathematician she was one of the few women of her time to serve on the council of the London Mathematical Society, and in 1919 she was appointed OBE for her war work. Early onset of severe arthritis left Hilda Hudson progressively more disabled; latterly she moved into the Anglican St Mary's Convent and Nursing Home in Chiswick, where she died on 26 November 1965, at the age of eighty-four. 


@@@@@


doc= 46432


Reid, Eleanor Mary (1860-1953), palaeobotanist, was born on 13 November 1860 in Denbigh, the daughter of John Copner Wynne Edwards, solicitor, and Maria Gitern. After attending Howells School, Denbigh, she enrolled at Westfield College, London University, in 1886. She took a BSc (third-class honours, experimental physics) in 1891 and then taught science and mathematics for four years at Cheltenham Ladies' College. 
On 21 April 1897 Wynne Edwards married Clement Reid (1852/3-1916), botanist and geologist with the Geological Survey and a pioneer in the study of fossil seeds and fruits. Almost immediately she began to collaborate in his research. Working backwards from Pleistocene assemblages, the Reids proved conclusively, in the face of some scepticism from the botanical world, that ancient floras could be reliably reconstructed from sources rich in fossil fruiting organs alone. Their thoroughness and persistence set new standards, Clement Reid's 'Origin of the British Flora' (1899) reporting record numbers of specimens in some deposits. Between 1907, when their first joint paper appeared, and 1915, they published about a dozen articles; several were of major importance, including their extensive monograph on Pliocene floras of the Dutch-Prussian border (1915). 
In 1913 Eleanor and Clement Reid moved to Milford-on-Sea, Hampshire, from where, after her husband died in 1916, Eleanor Reid continued palaeobotanical research. Publication of her analytical review of Pliocene floras (1920) brought her wide recognition. Her home became a centre for palaeobotanical work, housing an ever growing specimen collection, and she was frequently visited by leading botanists and geologists, British and European. Recipient of the Geological Society's Murchison fund in 1919, she was elected a fellow of the society in 1920. That year she was joined by Marjorie Chandler ['see below'], a young palaeobotanist from Newnham College, Cambridge, and the partnership they formed, one of the most remarkable in the annals of palaeobotany, resulted in the production of two monumental treatises on Cenozoic plants. 

'Bembridge Flora', volume 1 of their 'Catalogue of Cainozoic Plants', appeared in 1926. Based on collections in the British Museum (Natural History), it greatly increased knowledge of the Oligocene flora of the Isle of Wight. Reid and Chandler then studied the museum's extensive collection of fossil seeds and fruits from the Eocene London clay, an undertaking which, expanded to include analysis of their own collections, required seven years of intensive work. The resulting 'London Clay Flora' (1933) became a classic of palaeobotany, one of the most important accounts of any Tertiary flora ever published. Both monographs included lengthy introductions in which Reid presented a lucid account of the floral and climatic succession throughout the Tertiary period. The sequence demonstrated was one of gradual change from northern European flora back in time through temperate subtropical to the tropical rainforest of the Eocene London clay. Further, the detailed morphological and anatomical examinations of fossil seeds and fruits that the work involved threw considerable light on evolutionary changes within genera and families. An outstanding contribution towards making knowledge of the Tertiary floras of southern Britain the most complete for any region at the time, the study was recognized with the 1936 award to Eleanor Reid of the Geological Society's Lyell medal. 
Reid lived frugally, almost austerely. She worked with primitive, home-made equipment (which probably stimulated her notable development of new techniques); her attic library was said to be 'icy in winter and scorching in summer'. After publication of her second monograph she undertook no more major commitments. She continued to bring out short papers, however, and followed closely the continuing work on Tertiary floras of Marjorie Chandler, who remained with her as companion and ultimately nurse. 
Able, original, persevering and also critical, Reid had uncompromisingly high standards but was unfailingly dependable in helping colleagues. She served on local school, church, and women's committees, getting about until the age of eighty-eight by bicycle. Reading, especially travel books, was her relaxation. She died of cerebral thrombosis on 28 September 1953 at Wedgewood Nursing Home, Milford-on-Sea, and was buried on 2 October. 


From 1933, supported mainly by small annual grants from the British Museum (Natural History), she extended the classic Reid-Chandler investigations to other horizons of the Eocene and Oligocene. Her results, which brought her international recognition, are recorded in some twenty papers and in an impressive series of monographs, 'The Lower Tertiary Floras of Southern England' (1961-4). These include a 354-page supplement to the 'London Clay Flora', studies of the pipe-clay series of Dorset and the Bournemouth beds, and a general survey. After retiring she occupied herself with gardening and church work, although her contacts with palaeobotanists continued. She died in Swindon, Wiltshire, on 1 October 1983, and was buried on 6 October at Kempsford, Gloucester. 


@@@@@


doc= 46433


Onslow, Muriel Wheldale (1880-1932), plant biochemist, was born on 31 March 1880 at Round Hills, Aston Manor, Warwickshire, the only child of John Wheldale, solicitor, and his wife, Fannie ('nee' Hayward). From King Edward VI High School for Girls, Birmingham, she entered Newnham College, Cambridge, in 1900, and, exceptionally well prepared, took a first class in part one of the natural sciences tripos in 1902 and a first class in part two (botany) in 1904. 
Wheldale's early research was strongly influenced by the Cambridge geneticist William Bateson. Supported first by a Bathurst fellowship and then by a six-year Newnham College research fellowship (or 'N' fellowship), she investigated inheritance of flower colour in the snapdragon, 'Antirrhinum majus'; the work led her directly into the biochemistry (particularly the biosynthesis) of the pigments involved, the anthocyanins. Her isolation and chemical examination of these compounds about 1913-14 was pioneering and preceded the publication of the classic work in this area by German chemist Richard Willstatter. The application of chemical and physical methods to the unravelling of the complexities of biological systems was then in its infancy, and she was one of the first to offer an acceptable discussion of the factors of inheritance from a chemical point of view. Her monograph 'The Anthocyanin Pigments of Plants' (1916; rev. edn, 1925), an account of current research on these compounds, their distribution, and theories about their biological function, solidly established her reputation in the field. From about 1919 she concentrated on investigations of the nature of oxidizing enzymes present in higher plants, particularly oxidase, a catalyst involved in pigment production. In addition, she worked with the Food Investigation Board; from 1922 she supervised a team carrying out research on cold storage problems of apples at the Cambridge Low Temperature Research Station. 
From 1911 to 1914 Wheldale was a member of the Bateson genetics group at the John Innes Horticultural Institution in Merton, Surrey, but most of her career was spent at Cambridge, in the botany school and in the biochemical department, which, under the leadership of F. G. Hopkins, afforded opportunities for a remarkable number of women at a time when few positions permitting independent research in the chemical sciences were within their reach. She taught at Newnham in 1911-12 and held an assistantship in the university physiological (later biochemical) laboratory from 1918 to 1926. Among the most distinguished of early women biochemists, she was one of the first women appointed to a Cambridge University lectureship (in biochemistry, 1926). She was an inspiring teacher with a gift for clear exposition; her class in plant biochemistry was an important unit in the advanced botany curriculum. 
On 3 February 1919 she married a colleague, Victor Alexander Herbert Huia Onslow (1890-1922), second son of William Hillier Onslow, fourth earl of Onslow, governor of New Zealand; there were no children. Despite formidable physical disability, her husband was active in biochemical research, and she collaborated with him closely from about 1917 until his death, concentrating largely on the problem of colour and iridescence in insect scales. 
In addition to 'Anthocyanin Pigments' and about twenty original papers on plant pigments and oxidase systems, Wheldale Onslow wrote two textbooks, 'Practical Plant Biochemistry' (1920), a general survey of problems in the chemistry of plant life, solidly grounded in organic chemistry, and 'Principles of Plant Biochemistry' (1931), the first volume of a projected two-volume work whose second volume was not completed before her death. 
Though somewhat critical and self-contained by nature Wheldale Onslow was, to those who passed through her reserve, a pleasant and witty companion and a constant friend. She much enjoyed travel, and during her last years explored many of the more inaccessible parts of central Europe. Her Cambridge home was shared with her widowed mother, whose sole companion she was for a number of years. She died at the height of her professional success at her home, 1 Clare Road, Cambridge, on 19 May 1932. Her funeral service was held on the 23rd at Madingley church. A Newnham prize and research fellowship commemorate her name. 


@@@@@


doc= 46434


Stuart, James Gray, first Viscount Stuart of Findhorn (1897-1971), politician, was born at 2 Belford Park, Edinburgh, on 9 February 1897, the third son and third of the four children of Morton Gray Stuart, seventeenth earl of Moray (1855-1930), and his wife, Edith Douglas Palmer ('c'.1869-1945). He was educated at Eton College and intended for Cambridge but went from school to war in 1914. He was soldiering in France with the 1st battalion Royal Scots when only eighteen, after being commissioned into the 3rd battalion, and was invalided home in 1915. He returned to the front with the 2nd battalion in 1916 and by 1918 was brigade major (15th infantry brigade) with the Military Cross and bar. He was mentioned in dispatches. 
On demobilization Stuart spent a year studying law in Edinburgh for the Scottish bar but found this uncongenial. From 1920 to 1921 he was first equerry in waiting to Prince Albert, later George VI, and introduced the prince to his future queen, Lady Elizabeth Bowes-Lyon. She came from the same Scottish aristocratic background as Stuart and had previously seemed, though not necessarily to her, a possible bride for him. 
Stuart himself found a wife in the court circle -- Lady Rachel Cavendish (1902-1977), fourth daughter of Victor Christian William Cavendish, ninth duke of Devonshire. Stuart met her shortly after her return from Canada, where her father had been governor-general and her sister, Lady Dorothy, had settled on matrimony with Harold Macmillan, aide-de-camp and future prime minister. The Stuarts, who married on 4 August 1923, had two sons and a daughter. 
Stuart, made MVO for service as equerry, tentatively ventured into oil, learning the industry's ways in Oklahoma during 1922-3, but on returning to Scotland was invited to be parliamentary Conservative candidate for Moray and Nairn. It was no family seat, not even usually Unionist but Liberal, latterly held by a Lloyd Georgian with Conservative votes. His father, however, urged or instructed him to 'have a shot' (Stuart, 2). Stuart, whose turn of phrase was often more expressive and pungent than epigrammatic, despite the elegance and wit of his autobiography, reputedly reacted to winning the seat at the general election of 1923 by saying: 'This is bloody ridiculous'. But he held the seat for thirty-six years until 1959. 
Stuart's apprenticeship in parliament was undistinguished. It was twelve years, during which he also worked in stockbroking, before he became Scottish whip, although slowness of promotion was partly due to claims on office of the Conservatives' National Government allies. As whip, Stuart developed gifts for persuasion, polite intimidation, cajoling, and listening, and in 1937 became deputy chief Conservative whip. He also began, amid some turbulence, his dealings with Winston Churchill, who had by then moved from party rebellion on India towards opposition to appeasement. 
Stuart became Conservative chief whip at the beginning of 1941 (and joint chief government whip in the coalition, working alongside the chief Labour whip), his predecessor David Margesson having been posted by Churchill to the War Office in December 1940. Although he had enemies, notably Lord Beaverbrook, and Churchill may have required persuasion from Brendan Bracken to ratify the promotion, Stuart was more successful and popular than Margesson, 'his character perfectly suiting the job', according to Lord Home, his friend and later ministerial colleague ('DNB'). He did not fuss, assumed a casual air of indifference, showed the gregarious side of his nature, won a reputation for firmness and fairness, and was acknowledged to be a good parliamentary business manager. He also developed an important political and personal relationship with Churchill, although in the judgement of John Colville's Downing Street staff (Colville, 2.431), the wartime premier respected him rather than particularly liked him. However, Churchill 'always listened to his sound political advice', as both prime minister and party leader. 
During the wartime electoral truce, Stuart faced the difficulty of keeping Conservative MPs in line at a time when the leadership took little interest in party matters, and there was a resulting lack of a constructive Conservative policy. As sole chief whip during Churchill's brief caretaker government in 1945, he disagreed with Churchill's negative tactics during the general election campaign and shared in the shock of the party's landslide defeat. His complex relationship with Churchill was strained when, in July 1947, a cabal of senior Conservatives designated him as messenger to suggest that their leader might 'seek peace in retirement' (Stuart, 146). The interaction between the two men was nevertheless a constructive, productive one which Home in his foreword to Stuart's autobiography called 'an intimate relationship of mutual understanding and affection'. 
Stuart retired as chief whip in 1948, after antrum trouble required an operation, which was the official reason given for his departure, though it was probably brought about by his being named as co-respondent in a divorce case ('Headlam Diaries', 567, 571, 20 Jan 1949, 1 Feb 1949). When Churchill returned to power in 1951 their relationship gave Stuart an option on the Scottish Office, to the exclusion of Walter Elliot, a more articulate, popular, and urban politician and the most prominent Scot in shadow cabinet and Conservative campaigning. Stuart had already in 1950 been appointed by Churchill to the new post of Scottish party chairman, also chairing the Scottish Unionist MPs' committee. 
As secretary of state, Stuart had to cope with a legacy of Scottish discontents after Labour's hard line in face of demands for less centralization and some kind of Scottish self-government. Churchill's brief for Scottish ministers was: 'Go and quell those turbulent Scots and don't come back till you've done it' (Home, 105). Stuart's appointment, pressed on him by Churchill, aroused little enthusiasm and one of Attlee's Scottish team called him a 'bloody fool' for taking it (Stuart, 164). But despite his unspectacular style it was a spectacular success. 
In 1955 the Conservatives (still 'Unionist' in title) won a narrow absolute majority in Scotland in seats and popular vote, while the Scottish discontents and home-rule movement had subsided. Although this Scottish mood reflected short-term economic conditions, and was to change as heavy industries declined, Stuart had substantially contributed to it. He was a team leader who was also a team player, greatly helped by persuading Churchill to allow him Lord Home as vice-captain (minister of state working mainly and highly visibly in Scotland). The Scottish Office responded to someone with influence in the cabinet and strong on reaching decisions, for example on the go-ahead for the Forth road bridge. He was good at assessing options, respected civil-service briefs when well prepared, and did not intrude much ideology into administration. Even allowing for civil servants' inclination to classify as a 'good Secretary of State' someone who took advice well, he thrived in office and presided over an era of good feeling in Scottish life and politics, on relatively amiable terms not only with the opposition in parliament but with Labour-dominated local authorities. However, he confessed: 'I do not think I have ever suffered or enjoyed the friendship of a Liberal' (Stuart, 161). 
Stuart practised what his party had preached, though he also secured the backing of the royal commission on the government of Scotland which the Conservatives set up in 1951. This was that administrative devolution to Edinburgh (extended to roads and electricity), relaxation of wartime and post-war controls, and close contact between government and Scottish business, farming, local authorities, and interest groups would weaken the demand for major constitutional change. He was a pragmatic Conservative in social and economic matters who did not ask to see the distant scene, and underestimated the potential for Scottish nationalism, even eventually in his own constituency. 
Stuart did commit himself in 1950, writing to the home-rule leader John MacCormick on behalf of Scottish tory MPs, to accepting that 'if the Scottish people were ultimately to decide in favour of a Scottish Parliament nothing could gainsay them' (MacCormick, 139), but his policies and tactics were shaped to prevent the issue being pursued. This remained the Conservative line until electoral disaster in 1997, except for an interlude when Edward Heath and Home contemplated limited legislative devolution. But Stuart went with many trends which Thatcherite Conservatism later found abhorrent, such as the redevelopment of urban Scotland with limited scope for private house building, the creation of vast council housing estates, and an apparently irreversible move towards comprehensive education. However, it was after his retirement, under his brother-in-law Macmillan, that the Scottish Office became most firmly attached to regional economic incentives to encourage industrial developments unable to survive in a freer and globalizing market economy. Much was done under Stuart's regime, however, to encourage diversification of Scottish industry. 
Stuart remained at the Scottish Office, under Eden as well as Churchill, until 1957, though unhappy with Eden's leadership and the ignominious Suez climb-down. He retained good looks, trim appearance, and apparent vigour, but pleaded the need for a less arduous life, as well as the avoidance of even the appearance of nepotism, as reasons for retirement when his brother-in-law Macmillan formed a government. He remained as MP and Scottish party chairman, a post which he did not allow to tax his powers, until 1959. He then became, in November 1959, Viscount Stuart of Findhorn, the village where he had his constituency home. 
Stuart summed himself up as taking 'things as they came', with chance playing a large part in his life (Stuart, 1). Unlike many politicians he was honest in claiming that he was not driven by ambition. Home noted an inclination to vanity in personal matters, but also wrote: 'He was apparently detached, work-shy, and bored with life: nothing could have been more misleading' (Home, 103). Beneath 'the apparently lackadaisical veneer he had a strong will which it was unwise to test too often' ('DNB'). For much of his career Stuart divided his time among homes in Findhorn, London, and Salisbury, but in retirement lived mainly near Salisbury. He was made CH in 1957. He died in Salisbury Infirmary on 20 February 1971. 


@@@@@


doc= 46435


Syfret, Sir (Edward) Neville (1889-1972), naval officer, was born in Cape Town, Cape Colony, on 20 June 1889, the second child of five of Edward Ridge Syfret, a surgeon in Cape Town, and his wife, whose family name was Jones. His only brother was killed in the First World War. His early education was at the Diocesan College in South Africa and he passed into HMS 'Britannia' at Dartmouth in 1904, becoming a chief cadet captain during his final year. In 1909, as a lieutenant, he specialized in gunnery and during the First World War was gunnery officer of the battle cruisers 'Aurora', 'Centaur', and 'Curacao', all of which served for varying periods as flagship of Reginald Tyrwhitt commanding the Harwich force. 
In 1913 Syfret married Hildegarde (died 1976), daughter of Herbert Warner, of Hyeres, France; they had one son and one daughter. 
Syfret was promoted commander in 1922 and captain in 1929 and on the outbreak of the Second World War was commanding the 'Rodney' in the Home Fleet. Near the top of the captains' list and recognized in the navy as an 'intellectual', he was selected in November 1939 as naval secretary to the first lord, serving both Winston Churchill until he became prime minister in May 1940 and his successor, A. V. Alexander. He was promoted rear-admiral in 1940 and was appointed to command one of the Home Fleet cruiser squadrons, flying his flag in the 'Edinburgh'. His first chance of showing his quality in command came a month later when his squadron was ordered to the Mediterranean as a temporary reinforcement for force H, based on Gibraltar, for an operation to pass a convoy of reinforcements and stores to Malta. Syfret was in charge of the last stages of the operation after the heavy ships of force H had turned back on reaching the Sicilian narrows, and, by taking the bold course of steering directly towards the enemy bases in Sicily, the attacking Italian aircraft were thrown off the scent. The success of the operation was complete, the convoy reaching Malta without the loss of a single ship. Syfret was appointed CB (1941) for his skill and daring in getting the convoy through. 
In January 1942 Syfret succeeded Vice-Admiral Sir James Somerville in command of force H. His first major operation in this new command was the capture of Diego Suarez harbour in Madagascar to deny its use to Japanese naval forces in the Indian Ocean. With force H, temporarily renamed force F and reinforced with units of the Home Fleet, an amphibious assault was planned on the harbour defences resolutely held by pro-Vichy French troops. To avoid the inevitable difficulties and casualties of a frontal attack on the harbour installations, Syfret directed his attack across the narrow isthmus at the rear of the harbour in spite of the navigational difficulties of approaching a rock-bound coast at night through narrow channels which had been mined. Complete surprise was achieved and the harbour was captured intact after only a few hours of hard fighting. 
Syfret's next major operation was the passage of another convoy to Malta in August 1942. Known as operation Pedestal, it was probably the best-remembered and hardest fought of all the great convoy battles in the Mediterranean. For over two days the convoy and its escorting force were repeatedly attacked by day and night by heavy concentrations of German and Italian submarines and aircraft and by Italian motor-torpedo boats, and though several ships were sunk or damaged, five merchant ships were successfully brought to Malta with sufficient stores to maintain the island until its siege was lifted with the allied invasion of north Africa. Syfret was promoted KCB (1942) 'for bravery and dauntless resolution in fighting an important convoy through to Malta'. 
In November 1942 an enlarged force H played a crucial part in covering the allied landings in north Africa from possible attacks by the Italian fleet, and later dominated the central Mediterranean to enable convoys to resupply and reinforce Malta without loss in preparation for the next offensives against Sicily and Italy. A serious illness forced Syfret to relinquish his command of force H in January 1943 but he was sufficiently recovered by June of that year to be appointed vice-chief of naval staff (VCNS), having been promoted vice-admiral in the meantime. 
Syfret's undoubted qualities of quick decision making and intellectual approach to problems made him an ideal choice as VCNS and he proved an admirable partner for Admiral of the Fleet Sir Andrew Cunningham in the top direction of the war when Cunningham became first sea lord in October 1943. To Syfret as VCNS fell much of the overall direction of the allied landings in Normandy and the subsequent naval capture and clearance of French, Belgian, and Dutch ports as the armies advanced in Europe. To him also fell the organization and implementation of the British decision to send a major fleet into the Pacific to assist the United States in the naval war against Japan. At the end of his two years as VCNS in 1945 he was appointed KBE. He became admiral in 1946. 
Shortly after the end of the war Syfret received his last appointment as commander-in-chief of the Home Fleet, a post he held for three difficult years. The run-down of the navy from a war to a peace establishment, accompanied by the problems of the demobilization of personnel, presented considerable difficulties in the maintenance of efficiency in the fleet, but throughout his three years of command he kept the Home Fleet in a state of high morale and readiness for any duty with which it might be faced. He was promoted GCB (1948) at the end of his tenure of this command and was placed on the retired list. Syfret died at his home in Highgate, London, on 10 December 1972. 
Peter Kemp', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 46437


Beavan, Margaret (1875-1931), welfare worker and local politician, was born at 28 Bowring Street, Toxteth Park, Liverpool, Lancashire, on 1 August 1875, the eldest daughter of Jeffrey Beavan, bookkeeper and later fire insurance manager, and his wife, Ellen Catherine Williams. The Beavan children enjoyed a close family childhood in comfortable circumstances. Most of their time was spent at the family home in Liverpool, aside from an unsuccessful attempt to emigrate to the United States which failed when the climate proved unsuitable for the younger children. Margaret herself suffered from frequent bronchial attacks which appear to have kept her close to home, though she keenly involved herself in religious activities and was a regular attender at Sefton Park Presbyterian Church. The Beavans strongly believed in educating their daughters, and both Margaret and her younger sister Jessie attended Liverpool's progressive Belvedere School as day pupils. This school was a popular choice among the more progressively-minded local middle classes, and fellow pupils included Maude Royden. 
Although Margaret Beavan was never particularly academic she was a diligent and popular pupil, and ended her school career as head girl. She went on to Royal Holloway College at Egham, Surrey, where she studied mathematics, French, and English for three years (1894-7) but opted to sit no formal degree. She returned to the family home and took over responsibility for most of its running, caring for her recently widowed mother. However, despite her lack of formal qualifications she found that her college experience made her profoundly dissatisfied with a wholly domestic role and she began to look for something outside the family home. Religious work appealed, and she began voluntary teaching for the Earle Road Mission, a working-class Sunday school overseen by Sefton Park church. Here she discovered an aptitude for the work, and especially for coping with the more difficult adolescent boys. 
Through Belvedere Old Girls' Association, Margaret Beavan renewed an acquaintance with Edith Eskrigge who was now working at the Liverpool Victoria settlement. The settlement was looking for a teacher to run small classes for disabled children who had no formal educational provision in the city, and Margaret was persuaded to undertake this work. The move from Earle Road Mission to the Victoria settlement was a significant one, as it took her out of the realm of Christian voluntary work into secular philanthropy. There were many philanthropic networks in Liverpool before the First World War, and she quickly established herself at the centre of them as a worker with a special interest in invalid children, often referred to as the Little Mother of Liverpool. As well as the Victoria settlement school she became a visitor for the Kyrle Society, the favourite charity of Liverpool society, working with its invalid children's branch. In 1908 she took over as secretary to the newly founded Invalid Children's Association, a separate charity which united all her earlier work. This new group was tremendously successful in promoting child welfare. Its most famous success was the establishment of the Leasowe Open-Air Hospital for Children, on the Wirral peninsula, which pioneered treatment of paediatric tubercular cases. Equally remarkable was Margaret's attitude to philanthropy. There was little of the distant, middle-class visitor about her. Before Leasowe was completed most TB children were in non-specialized adult hospitals in Liverpool. They would attend Leasowe for short stays, and Margaret Beavan often transported them herself, treating them to cafe teas which formed a vital part of her holistic approach to patient care. She believed in helping mothers as well as children, and organized several holidays for 'tired mothers', which she always extended to unmarried women. 
Her dedication to children kept Margaret Beavan away from broader political concerns before the First World War. She was a passive advocate of constitutional suffrage campaigns, but never very involved in this work, although she occasionally appeared in support of her sister Jessie who held office in the local branch of the National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies. After the war she was quick to take advantage of the new political climate, seeing this as a way to advance her deep concern for children. In 1920 she became Liverpool's first woman magistrate, selected for her record of work with disadvantaged youngsters. Despite her privileged background she was sympathetic to many of the cases she encountered. She used her position on the probation committee and her philanthropic contacts to establish a working boys' home aimed at giving first offenders a new start in life. 
Increasingly Margaret Beavan felt that she needed a more official platform for effective public work. As a result she stood as a council candidate and was elected in 1923 as a Coalition Liberal, although she quickly switched to the Conservatives. Her high public profile and attachment to children's causes made her a popular figure in the council chamber, and in 1927 she was selected as Liverpool's first woman lord mayor. However, despite her personal following and her flair for philanthropy she made a poor politician. She had rejected the option taken by Eleanor Rathbone, Liverpool's first female councillor, to stand as an independent, but in council she continued to fight for single issues with little regard for party lines or her new position as a Conservative representative. Her lack of political astuteness was painfully obvious when she undertook a civic visit to Italy in May 1928. She was greatly impressed by what she perceived as advances in child welfare under Mussolini, and greeted him warmly in Rome. 
Such ill-considered actions undermined public confidence. In the May 1929 general election, Beavan stood as a Conservative parliamentary candidate for Everton but was defeated by her Labour opponent. This was the first time she had lost a campaign, and she took it very much to heart. More painfully, she found that her political errors were thrown up against her volunteer workers, damaging the reputation of her children's charities. Although opposition came from all quarters she increasingly blamed local socialists and this, combined with her actions in Italy, made her particularly unpopular among the very classes for whom she had worked so diligently. She died, unmarried, after an attack of influenza, with chest complications, on 22 February 1931 at the Hospital for Children at Leasowe, which she had helped to found, and was buried at Childwall parish church, Liverpool. Her death allowed for some rehabilitation of her reputation at a large civic memorial service. However, the achievements of her public life have never been fully separated from the mistakes of her final years, and she remains an obscure historical figure despite her prominence in Liverpool life. 


@@@@@


doc= 46438


Keeling, Dorothy Clarissa (1881-1967), social worker, was born at Grammar School House, Manor Row, Bradford, on 2 December 1881, the seventh of nine children of the Revd William Hulton Keeling (1840-1916), for many years headmaster of Bradford grammar school, and his wife, Henrietta Frances Gedge (died 1905). Keeling was educated at home and at a girls' grammar school, but physical weakness in childhood barred her from serious academic work and deterred her from following the family vocation of teaching. She had, however, 'an intense interest from childhood in people', and while she continued to live at home after leaving school at the age of eighteen, she overcame the reservations of her overprotective family and a severe stammer to become involved in voluntary social work. After some experience with workhouse visiting, in 1907 she joined the staff of the Bradford Guild of Help, which had been founded in 1905. Drawing on the model of the 'Elberfeld system' in Germany, the Edwardian Guilds of Help promoted a vision of social betterment that drew on ideals of cross-class 'friendship' and civic participation; Guild volunteers visited needy or distressed families, less to dispense relief than to help the family devise a strategy for rehabilitation. Keeling held the position of honorary assistant secretary for the Bradford Guild of Help for ten years, undertaking 'an immense amount' of visiting and supervising both the work of the Guild's district heads and the practical training of students from the Leeds University school of social work. 
After her father's death in 1916 Keeling became self-supporting, accepting first a salary for her work in Bradford and then the secretaryship of the National Association of Guilds of Help, headquartered in Manchester. It was with this background that she was hired in 1918 as the first secretary of the newly established personal services committee of the Liverpool Council of Voluntary Aid, a position she held until the Second World War. The Personal Services Society (PSS), as the committee was renamed in 1922, was set up by those Liverpool municipal reformers and social workers -- among them Eleanor Rathbone (1872-1946), Elizabeth Macadam (1871-1948), and F. G. D'Aeth (1875-1940) -- who saw the need for a new society to carry on the work of 'friendly visiting', which had been pioneered by the settlement houses and expanded during the First World War. The first years of the society were, however, rocky ones. Many of the established philanthropic societies in Liverpool saw no need for another organization, especially one determined to dispense advice but not material aid, while Keeling's weak health and subsequent leave delayed the society's effective operation for almost a year. 
Over time, however, the PSS did establish itself as the premier social work organization in Liverpool. Although Keeling herself seems to have been somewhat shy and personally timid (she admitted in her autobiography that she had never been 'quite brave enough' to live among the poor), she guided the society with some skill for almost two decades. Organized on a ward basis and enrolling voluntary workers responsible individually for only a small number of families, the society proved flexible enough to develop innovative responses to new social needs. Thus, while the society did establish clothing clubs, boot clubs, a loan fund, and other schemes intended to ease the effects of the chronic poverty and unemployment of the inter-war years, and from 1932 administered aid on behalf of the very philanthropic society (the Central Relief Society) which had initially opposed its creation, it also inaugurated many other services, establishing advice bureaux for tenants on new housing estates, pioneering a scheme of marriage counselling, offering legal advice in cases ranging from marital disputes to money claims, organizing holidays for 'tired mothers' and city children, and providing various forms of care and visiting to old, ill, and disabled people. This record of work and Keeling's officially non-partisan but generally progressive leadership strengthened the society's reputation as a leader in the development of family casework and as a reliable resource for those in need of advice and aid. Thus, while the society had initially dealt largely with referrals from other statutory or voluntary bodies, by 1935 about three-quarters of the year's caseload of 9000 families had come to the society of their own accord. By the outbreak of the war, the society was providing a wide array of services, had trained many dozens of students in the methods of social work, and drew on the services of some 560 voluntary workers. 
Keeling left Liverpool during the Second World War to work more closely with the London-based National Council of Social Service (NCSS), with which the PSS had close ties. Convinced that voluntary workers could help with many of the problems caused by the war, she expanded the number and scope of the Citizens' Advice Bureaux, which she had helped to organize under the aegis of the NCSS in 1938, and developed new council services for the elderly. Made an OBE in 1946 for her work with the Citizens' Advice Bureaux, Keeling returned to Liverpool at the end of the war, resuming both her central role in voluntary social work there and her domestic partnership with Ellinor Black, then senior lecturer in the department of social science at Liverpool University, with whom she had lived since 1926. In 1950 Black was appointed director of the Sheffield School of Social Work and Keeling left Liverpool with her, taking a position on the management committee of the Middlewood Mental Hospital and serving on the Sheffield Council of Social Service. Keeling returned to Liverpool after Black's death in 1956, and for several years remained active in social work with old and mentally handicapped people, and in the work of the Citizens' Advice Bureaux. She died on 27 March 1967 at 66 West Heath Road, Hendon, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 46439


Lefroy, George Alfred (1854-1919), bishop of Calcutta, was born on 11 August 1854 at Aghaderg, co. Down, Ireland, the fourth son of the Very Revd Jeffrey Lefroy (died 1885), dean of Dromore, and his wife, Helena, 'nee' Trench (1820-1908). There were nine children in the family, three girls and six boys. Lefroy was educated at Marlborough School (1865-74), and in 1874 entered Trinity College, Cambridge, where he also taught at the Jesus Lane Sunday school. At Cambridge he fell under the influence of the regius professor of divinity, B. F. Westcott, and Professor J. B. Lightfoot. These two members of the so-called 'Cambridge triumvirate' urged undergraduates to undertake a special mission to educated Hindus and Muslims in India on the model of the classical Alexandrian school, where Clement and Origen had used Greek thought to reinterpret Christianity to educated Romans. In 1877 Lefroy joined five other men to inaugurate a celibate high-church brotherhood, the Cambridge Mission to Delhi, affiliated with the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel (SPG). Lefroy took a first-class degree in the theological tripos in 1878, was ordained priest in 1879, and arrived in Delhi before the end of the year. He became head of the Cambridge brotherhood in 1881, and head of the SPG mission in Delhi (which included St Stephen's Community, an Anglican sisterhood), in 1891. 
Committed to an elitist model of clerical influence, Lefroy assumed pastoral responsibility in Delhi for a small Indian Christian community of poor leatherworkers whose piety he found suspect, and he reduced their numbers through the exercise of ecclesiastical discipline. Accomplished in Urdu, he conducted public disputations with learned Muslims which drew large crowds to Delhi's mosques but brought few converts to Christianity. His greatest long-term influence came through establishing prestigious Christian institutions, especially St Stephen's College and St Stephen's Hospital for Women. 
Lefroy's conflict between missionary ideals and imperial power deepened after his consecration in 1899 as bishop of Lahore, with episcopal responsibility for the Punjab's extensive military chaplaincies. Despite his association with the government, Lefroy became a favourite with the nationalist press for his statements expressing a generous attitude toward the new national movement. In the face of stubborn opposition he promoted Indian clergymen to positions of diocesan authority and encouraged an interracial, semi-monastic order -- the Brotherhood of the Imitation of Christ -- centred on the Christian 'sadhu' Sundar Singh. But these initiatives were overshadowed by Lefroy's public statements deploring the effects of Hinduism and Islam on the Indian moral character and by his opposition to the appointment of the first Indian head of St Stephen's College, S. K. Rudra. By the time of his consecration as bishop of Calcutta and metropolitan of India in 1913, it was clear to him that the Cambridge Mission's hopes of an Indian-Christian synthesis of East and West had not been fulfilled. 
Lefroy enjoyed sports and vigorous walks but after 1911 suffered from painful arthritis and recurrent malaria. His illnesses caused him to resign his bishopric, on Christmas day 1918. He died in Calcutta on 1 January 1919 and was buried in Calcutta Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 46440


MacCunn, John (1846-1929), philosopher, was born at Greenock on 23 September 1846, the third son of John MacCunn, shipowner, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Campbell. His schooling was at Greenock Academy. He proceeded to Glasgow University, where he studied under the professor of moral philosophy Edward Caird. In 1872 he went as a Snell exhibitioner to Balliol College, Oxford, where he was tutored by the moral philosopher T. H. Green. He was thus taught by the two chief exponents of the British neo-Hegelian school, whose influence on him, both personal and intellectual, was profound. After obtaining a first in 'literae humaniores' in 1876, he spent four years in Oxford working as a private philosophy coach. In 1877 he married Florence Anne, daughter of the classical scholar and former Snell exhibitioner William Young Sellar. The marriage produced two sons and one daughter. 
In 1881 MacCunn was appointed as the first professor of logic, mental and moral philosophy, and political economy at the new University College, Liverpool (which in 1903 became the University of Liverpool). The post subsequently became in 1884 the chair of philosophy and political economy, and in 1891 simply the chair of philosophy. His Liverpool colleagues included the fellow idealist philosopher and literary critic A. C. Bradley, the poet and literary scholar Walter Raleigh, the physicist Oliver Lodge, and the physiologist Charles Sherrington. 
MacCunn's work was saturated with the social idealism that dominated philosophical thought at the turn of the century. His earliest and chief book was 'Ethics of Citizenship' (1894), which aimed to defend an ideal of democratic society from the basis of pre-established ethical idealism. While it was not a work to shake theoretical foundations, what one reviewer dismissed as no more than 'platitudinous commonplace about democracy' (A. W. Small, 'Journal of Political Economy', vol. 3, no. 2, March 1895, 235), another welcomed as 'delightfully clean-cut analysis' of a 'sane theory of democratic politics' (W. A. Dunning, 'Political Science Quarterly', vol. 10, no. 1, March 1895, 162 and 163). 
MacCunn argued that, although not naturally equal in nature or talents, all men possessed equal spiritual worth, that is, worth of a species which distinguished them from animals or chattels. While this fact required that they be accorded the same civil rights, and also such equal political rights as were necessary to afford them a chance to realize their moral and practical worth, it involved no antagonism to inequality or difference 'per se'. But while mere possession of civil and political equality brought with it no guarantee of minimum sustenance or employment, and while the politically free may still be poor and starving, the development of spiritual worth and grinding poverty were uneasy bedfellows. Political rights meant nothing to those whose lives were absorbed in the mere struggle for survival. Whatever forces operated in the direction of individualism they must not obscure the undeniable facts of fraternity which existed first in family and friendship but then spread out to neighbourhood, nation, and even race. Such facts, he argued, were rooted in more than just sentiment or pragmatic dependence; they stemmed from a recognition of common spiritual worth and shared membership of an organic social whole. 
MacCunn described democratic society as founded on rights, but he rejected as dogmatic and mysterious any notion of natural rights. He adopted the mid-course of an idealist understanding of rights, as those advantageous conditions of well-being which were indispensable for the true development of the citizen, enjoyable by all members of the community, and which that same society collectively believed ought to be guaranteed and protected. With this notion of rights came a similarly ideal notion of the duties of citizens, for rights in themselves had no intrinsic worth; they merely provided the opportunity to participate in society, and their real value rose or fell with the use to which they were put. Against the possibility of a tyranical majority, he stressed both the need of any majority never to ignore honest criticism or opposition, and the need of every individual to take seriously his democratic duty, mindful of the great danger of reckless voting multiplied and prepared to stand up against majority opinion if his conscience so dictates. 
MacCunn's next most important work was 'The Making of Character: Some Educational Aspects of Ethics' (1900). Published in the 'Cambridge Series for Schools and Training Colleges' as a manual for educationalists, the book enjoyed many years of success and was regularly reprinted up to the 1930s. Maintaining that the formation of sound moral character was the chief aim of education, he considered the various factors that contributed to the formation of moral character, looking first at congenital factors (such as heredity) and then at the variety of educational influences, such as environment, family, social institutions, political society, and religious organizations. Little attention was given to formal educational structures but MacCunn's idealism shaped for him a broader vision in which individual development was a lifelong process that occurred through the whole range of an individual's relations to their environment as a whole. The second half of the book considered the formation of individual judgement, which MacCunn described as a matter of having clearly grasped some moral ideal of self-control which, while its apotheosis lay in the philosophic detachment of Spinoza, might also be encouraged through a variety of more practical techniques. While full of sound general insight into the structure and development of the moral outlook, 'The Making of Character' was light on contemporary educational or psychological theory and on concrete guidance for potential teachers. 
Other significant publications by MacCunn included 'Six Radical Thinkers: Bentham, J. S. Mill, Cobden, Carlyle, Mazzini, T. H. Green' (1907), 'Liverpool Addresses on the Ethics of Social Work' (1911), and 'The Political Philosophy of Burke' (1913). MacCunn retired from his Liverpool chair in 1910 and was given the title of emeritus professor in 1911. Honoured LLD (Glasgow, 1897) and LittD (Liverpool, 1913), he died at his home, Bencruach Lodge, near Tarbet, Loch Lomond, on 24 March 1929. 
If the only noteworthy form of philosophy lies in breaking new ground then MacCunn's importance must be judged slight. But if the contribution of those who take ideas and apply them to concrete life is to be acknowledged then it would be hard to find a better example of the British idealist outlook that shaped an entire generation of philosophical teachers and students. 


@@@@@


doc= 46441


Hayday, Arthur (1869-1956), trade unionist and politician, was born at 36 Roscoe Street, Plaistow, West Ham, London, in 1869, the son of Thomas Bloomfield Hayday, a labourer at a manure works, and his wife, Sarah Susannah Glander. His date of birth was registered as 27 October, although in his 'Who's Who' entry he gave it as 24 October. He attended St Luke's national school in Tidal Basin, and left school at the age of nine to work in market gardening. His subsequent employments included work as a kitchen boy, chemical worker, and trimmer and stoker in the merchant navy. West Ham was the birthplace of Will Thorne's National Union of Gasworkers and General Labourers, and Hayday became an early member. His workplace activism led to victimization by his employers in 1893; the following year he joined the Marxist Social Democratic Federation (SDF), the dominant independent labour organization in West Ham. 
The weakness of local Liberalism and the enthusiasm of Thorne and his lieutenants with their combination of trade union activism and socialism transformed the character of West Ham's municipal politics. Hayday was elected to the borough council on the SDF ticket in 1896. Two years later West Ham produced Britain's first Labour municipal majority, a coalition of SDF and Independent Labour Party, trades council, and Progressive members. Hayday was the only socialist alderman. The majority embarked on a programme of municipal improvements and increased expenditure. Labour lost its majority in 1900, but Hayday remained on the council until he left West Ham at the beginning of 1909. 
Hayday's status in West Ham politics was enhanced by his union base. In 1898 he became a full-time official of the National Union of Gasworkers and General Labourers responsible for organization of what was rather misleadingly entitled the London district. This extended as far north as Nottingham and Derby, and as far west as Plymouth. The optimism of the union's early days had long vanished, and Hayday and his colleagues battled to maintain the union's viability. They depended very much on the organization of municipal employees, and therefore had a keen interest in political representation. Hayday was present at the foundation conference of the Labour Representation Committee (LRC) in February 1900 and his union was one of the first affiliates to the new organization. This connection allowed him, like Thorne, to combine membership of the SDF with involvement in the politics of the LRC (subsequently the Labour Party). 
During 1908 members of the Gasworkers' and General Labourers' union in the midlands requested their own district organizer. Hayday was appointed to the new post and moved to Nottingham. The city's politics contrasted with those of West Ham. The Nottingham Trades Council still contained Liberal sympathizers, and working-class Liberalism was strong, not least among the local miners. Tariff reform, promoted by some Conservatives, appealed to many workers within the lace industry. No Labour candidate stood for a Nottingham parliamentary seat before 1914, and Labour's municipal representation was meagre. Hayday's robust style could grate on the respectable both within and beyond the local trade union movement. In May 1910 he created a stir when he characterized the recently deceased King Edward VII as a 'parasite'. Along with other social democrats he joined the British Socialist Party (BSP) in 1912, but was thoroughly pragmatic in his trade union, and in most of his political, activities. 
Hayday took a strongly patriotic line in August 1914. He spoke on recruiting platforms and later served on the tribunals set up under the 'Military Service Act'. As a local Conservative newspaper acknowledged, his involvement was robust: 'no one was more prompt in unmasking any shirker who masqueraded as a 'conshie'' ('Nottingham Guardian', 14 Dec 1918). When the BSP split into pro- and anti-war factions in April 1916, he went with the former, which seceded to form the National Socialist Party. His patriotism played well with many members of the Nottingham Trades Council and wartime conditions facilitated his work as a trade union organizer within what had become the National Union of General Workers. 
In the general election of December 1918 Hayday fought Nottingham West as the official Labour candidate. His only opponent was a Liberal who had been regarded favourably by the pre-war trades council. Hayday's victory, based on a blend of patriotic and class sentiments, marked a decisive change in the political credibility of the local labour movement. He retained the seat at every inter-war election with the exception of 1931. 
Hayday combined his parliamentary duties with a growing status within the trade union movement. He was a member of the general council of the Trades Union Congress from 1922 to 1936; his union was the largest constituent of the 1924 amalgamation that produced the National Union of General and Municipal Workers. His own politics were reflected in those of the new union. It stood unreservedly on the right of the labour movement and took a tough line against communist influence in the recriminations that followed the 1926 general strike. 
Within the House of Commons Hayday emerged as one of the most influential Labour back-benchers. In part this reflected his expertise in the fine print of the complex unemployment insurance regulations. An observer noted that he was 'not an expert of the study, trained on scientific lines, and possessed of an abundance of theories, but an expert of experience' ('Yorkshire Post', 30 June 1930). He also saw himself as representing the trade union interest within the Parliamentary Labour Party (PLP). Early contacts between the TUC and the 1929 Labour government indicated tensions. Hayday was clear about his primary loyalty: 'He was an industrialist before he was a politician. Were they going to leave it to the political intriguers who knew nothing about their movement? It was the industrial side that would have to bear the brunt of the storm. (TUC general council, 26 June 1929, University of Warwick, TUC Archive, MS 292 75 1/14)' In the second half of 1929 the two themes coalesced. Hayday was appointed by the government to the Morris committee, set up to consider conditions of eligibility for unemployment benefit. The existing 'not genuinely seeking work' disqualification was regarded within the labour movement as both insulting, and, in areas of high unemployment, inoperable. The TUC position presented to the Morris committee was that disqualification should depend on a claimant's definite refusal of a suitable job offer. This became known as the Hayday formula. The Morris committee's recommendations did not unambiguously endorse the Hayday formula, and this ambiguity was reflected in government legislation introduced in November 1929. After much private pressure and some open criticism including a Commons speech from Hayday, the government accepted the formula. 
This was the first round in a series of engagements between the TUC general council, influential Labour back-benchers, and Labour ministers that culminated in the crisis of August 1931. Hayday was regularly involved in exchanges between general council members and ministers, particularly once he became TUC chairman for the twelve months from September 1930. Although these critics always distinguished themselves sharply from the small band of left-wing rebels in the parliamentary party, their unhappiness with ministerial style and policies was made evident in private meetings. The bargaining was complex because the principal figures had a range of identities. As a trade unionist Hayday was critical of key government policies; as a party loyalist and member of the PLP consultative committee he took a tough line against open dissent. His adversary on unemployment insurance -- the minister of labour, Margaret Bondfield -- was also an official in his union, but in these critical encounters collegiality was limited. 
Hayday pronounced the authorized requiem on the second Labour government from the chair at the Trades Union Congress held at Bristol in early September 1931: 'courageous and determined action by the national bodies invested with authority in the Labour and Trade Union Movement has saved the working class from destruction' ('TUC Report 1931', 67). As fraternal delegate at the subsequent Labour Party conference he pronounced an anathema on the Labour ministers who had joined the National Government. They were 'political blacklegs' ('Labour Party Conference Report 1931', 201). He insisted that future unity must involve a recognition that the Labour government had treated the unions badly. 
These sentiments shaped Labour politics for several years; Hayday however was subsequently a marginal figure. He lost his Nottingham seat at the general election held in October 1931, and although he regained it in November 1935 his final period in the Commons, until his retirement in June 1945, was much less active. He died at his home, 28 Stamford Road, West Bridgford, Nottinghamshire, on 28 February 1956. He married twice, the second time in 1910, and according to several accounts fathered eighteen children (his 'Who's Who' entry claimed twelve). One son, Frederick, became an official in his father's union and chaired the TUC in 1962-3. 
Hayday's robust politics were typically directed to immediate objectives. In this combination he reflected the culture of West Ham Labour, and especially of its dominant figure, Will Thorne. His actions in the critical years of 1929-31 showed an acute sense of the complex relationship between the Labour government, the Labour Party, and the TUC. He articulated a political identity that was loyalist, and yet licensed distance from the actions and styles of Labour ministers. This was a crucial ingredient in the trade union and Labour Party response to the crisis of 1931. 


@@@@@


doc= 46442


Borsselaer, Pieter (fl. 1664-1687), portrait painter, was most likely of a Dutch burger family of that name long established in Zeeland, the Netherlands. From the fifteenth century onwards members of the family are recorded serving as regents, sheriffs, burgermasters, and taxation clerks in the towns of Middelburg and Goes. Two possible identifications of the artist have been suggested: the Pieter Borsselaer, dissenter, who married Maria Bijsterman in Goes town hall on 24 May 1644; or the Pieter Borsselaer, painter, presumably of a younger generation than the above, who in 1717 recorded his coat of arms, among others, in the privilege book of the Guild of St Luke at Middelburg (until 1940 in the Stedelijke Oudheidkamer of the town hall), of which he was a member from 1716 to 1731. 
Borsselaer pursued his early career in England. Nothing is known about his training, or when he arrived in England. Buckeridge, who calls him Bustler and whose information is repeated by Walpole, calls him a history and face painter and refers to a picture of three boors, owned by Mr Elsum of the Temple, a collaborative work by Borsselaer (the figures), Prosper Henry Lankrink (the landscape background), and Abraham Hondius (a 'little Dog to one side'; Buckeridge, 405). Only portraits are known to survive from his English period; these are painted in a distinctive manner closest to that of Gilbert Soest but sometimes employing weak perspective. Characteristic of his work is a direct, uncompromising treatment of appearance and character, and the use of particular shades, notably a leaf brown, plum red, and silvery grey. His 'Portrait of a Widow' (Rijksmuseum, Amsterdam), signed and dated 1664, is his earliest dated portrait. Bought on the London art market in 1909, it most likely represents Mary Pakington, Lady Yate, related to the staunchly Roman Catholic Throckmorton family of Coughton Court, Warwickshire. A version of the portrait is at Coughton. In 1665 he signed and dated a portrait of the eminent antiquarian and herald Sir William Dugdale (priv. coll.), a powerful and expressive image of the ageing scholar, which has as its pendant a portrait of Lady Dugdale. Possibly dateable to around these years is his portrait (now lost) of the Dutch naval hero Cornelis Evertsen the elder (Evertsen was in England in 1664-5), known through an engraving by Arnold de Jode. Staring suggests an acquaintance between Borsselaer and the Evertsen family, further borne out by a portrait of Evertsen the younger, attributed to Borsselaer, formerly at Middelburg town hall (no longer extant). A significant group of portraits, of members of the Hoby family and other figures, was until recently at Bisham Abbey, Berkshire, but is now partially dispersed. Two of the best, old 'Sir Peregrine Hoby' and his wife, 'Catherine Dodington', were sold at Christies on 20 April 1990, while 'Catherine of Braganza' and the less good 'Charles II', both inscribed on the reverse 'Peter Burlser, f.', are among those by him remaining at Bisham. It was Borsselaer's practice to make numerous copies of his portraits, especially of well-known sitters, which vary in quality. Several versions of his 'Sir Orlando Bridgeman' (created lord keeper in 1667) are known, the earliest probably that formerly at Bisham; others are at Chirk Castle and Weston Park. The attribution to him of the posthumous 'Chesterfield' portrait of Shakespeare (Shakespeare's Birthplace Trust, Stratford upon Avon) is probably correct, as is his authorship of 'Samuel Butler' (NPG). One of his latest English portraits is 'Admiral Cornelis Van Tromp' (Antony, Cornwall), commissioned by Ambrose Elton in 1675, 'whoe was with him [van Tromp] all the time it was doinge' (these details inscribed on the portrait). Elton's own portrait, by Borsselaer, is at Clevedon Court, Somerset. 
So far as Borsselaer's 'oeuvre' can be reconstructed, his patrons seem for the most part to have been either staunch royalists or Roman Catholics. Borsselaer was probably a Roman Catholic too, and identifiable as the 'Petrus Bustler, Lymnr', of St Peter-le-Poer, Broad Street, in London, indicted for recusancy in 1673, and again in 1678 and 1679, but on the latter two occasions styled 'generosus' of St Gregory's (Bowler, 221, 238). The difficult political and religious climate probably impelled him to leave the country in 1679, or soon after. He is possibly the 'Monsr van Borssele' living in The Hague, at Kleinen Blaesbalch, in 1681, who in October of that year is recorded, with the portrait painter Isaac Paling, paying his membership of the Confrerie Pictura there. His 'Five Regents of the Middelburg House of Correction' (Rijksmuseum, Amsterdam; on loan to the Rijksdienst Beeldende Kunst, The Hague) is signed and dated 1683 (the '8' slightly indistinct); and in 1684 and 1687 payments to him are recorded in the Middelburg town archives for two allegorical chimney-pieces for the treasury chamber of Middelburg town hall (des. 1940). Painted on plaster, they celebrated the town's international trade with representations of the Four Continents, Religion, Freedom, and Justice. 


@@@@@


doc= 46443


Huggins, Margaret Lindsay, Lady Huggins (1848-1915), astronomical spectroscopist and photographer, was born on 14 August 1848 at 23 Longford Terrace, Monkstown, co. Dublin, the second of the three children of John Majoribanks Murray (1822-1893), a solicitor, and his first wife, Helen Lindsay (1826-1857), the daughter of Robert Lindsay of Tiree, Scotland. Though John Murray had lived in Ireland since early childhood, he was of Scottish ancestry and received his education at Edinburgh Academy. Anecdotal sources credit Margaret's paternal grandfather, Robert Murray, chief officer of the Provincial Bank of Ireland in Dublin, with inspiring her interest in the stars during their many evening walks following the untimely death of her mother. She reportedly attended a private boarding-school in Brighton. As a young woman she developed considerable skill both as an illustrator and a photographer, which she ably employed in artistic and scientific projects throughout her life. In 'A Sketch of the Life of Sir William Huggins' (1936), C. E. Mills and C. F. Brooke recount that she was first introduced to her future husband, the amateur astronomer and pioneer spectroscopist William Huggins (1824-1910), in London by mutual friends. Thanks to the mediation of the instrument maker Howard Grubb (1844-1931), the two met again in Dublin during Huggins's visits to inspect Grubb's progress on the construction of a new telescope for the former's observatory located in his residence at 90 Upper Tulse Hill Road, Lambeth, London. The couple were married on 8 September 1875, in the parish church at Monkstown. 
Acquaintances have suggested that Lady Huggins, as she became in 1897 when her husband was created KCB, had, from an early age, developed an interest in spectroscopy, even constructing her own spectroscope guided by an anonymous article in a popular periodical. Some have romantically, but erroneously, claimed that Sir William was the author of the article in question. However she came by her interest and knowledge of spectroscopy, following her marriage Margaret Huggins became involved in the work of the observatory. Her presence changed both the kind of work done at Tulse Hill and its organization. In particular, photography appeared as a new method of recording what had previously been purely visual spectroscopic observations. Although published articles about the early photographic accomplishments at Tulse Hill make no mention of her, evidence gleaned from the observatory's notebook entries, for which she assumed responsibility in March 1876, points to Margaret Huggins as a major impetus behind the establishment of her husband's successful programme of astronomical photography. 
From the start Margaret Huggins exhibited a strong interest in experimental design -- improving and adapting both instruments and methods used at Tulse Hill to the new photographic tasks at hand. In June 1876 she described and illustrated her plan for a camera to convert the telescope previously dedicated to visual observation into one suitable for photography. She devoted months to experimentation with different types of photographic plates and designed a sighting-tube to ensure the alignment of the spectroscope with the telescope. Working as a team, the Hugginses moved quickly to the forefront of spectroscopic astrophotography, learning photography's limitations and moulding its capabilities to their agenda, which included photographing the spectra of stars, comets, and nebulae, and perfecting a method of photographing the solar corona without an eclipse. 
Margaret Huggins appreciated the importance of spectroscopic information to the diligent observer. Photographs of a celestial object may expose the body's outward form to scientific scrutiny, but, 'if we can get good spectra', she wrote, 'we should have the soul' (M. L. Huggins, notebook 2, 4 Dec 1888, Margaret Clapp Library, Wellesley College). In 1888 the Hugginses focused their attention on the spectrum of the Orion nebula (M42) to determine the nature of the so-called chief nebular line, a green emission line that William had been the first to observe some years earlier in the spectra of several nebulae. His claim that it represented a new element was disputed, and it was with the hope of resolving this controversy in their favour that the Hugginses observed and photographed M42's spectrum between October 1888 and April 1889. These difficult observations, which required repeated direct comparison of the spectrum generated by burning magnesium against that produced by the faint nebula, formed the basis of the first of William's scientific papers on which Margaret Huggins appeared as co-author and serve as a benchmark in their relationship (W. Huggins and M. L. Huggins, 'On the spectrum'). Their course of investigation, with Margaret Huggins and her husband alternating as observer and apparatus tender, confirmed their belief that the nebular line, though near that of magnesium, was nevertheless distinct from it. At the outset of the research effort Margaret Huggins noted the need for ''photographs' of the complete neb[ular] spectrum and... the [magnesium] lines... on the same plates' in order 'not to have to depend on 'eye' observations in anything so difficult and important' (M. L. Huggins, notebook 2, 24 Oct 1888, Margaret Clapp Library, Wellesley College). One week after their only satisfactory photograph had been obtained Margaret Huggins made the alarming discovery that their specially calibrated comparison apparatus was slightly misaligned, but their anxiety subsided as continued investigation lent welcome support to their preliminary findings. 
Margaret Huggins was co-author and illustrator of most of her husband's later published scientific papers. Her many and varied interests are evident in her own publications, which included a monograph on the master violin maker Giovanni Paulo Maggini (1892), articles on the armillary sphere and the astrolabe in the eleventh edition of 'Encyclopaedia Britannica', and articles in 'Astronomy and Astrophysics', 'Astrophysical Journal', and 'Popular Astronomy', among others. She assisted her husband in the editing and illustration of both 'An Atlas of Representative Stellar Spectra from greekLetterlambda4870 to greekLetterlambda3300' (1899) and 'The Scientific Papers of Sir William Huggins' (1909). 
Margaret Huggins was active in the British Astronomical Association from its inception in 1890. In 1903 she was elected to honorary fellowship in the Royal Astronomical Society. In that same year, immediately following the visit of Pierre and Marie Curie to London, the Hugginses instigated an entirely new line of research, namely photographing the spectrum of radium. 
Following the death of her husband on 12 May 1910, Lady Huggins began work on a personal memoir of their life and work together. Although she was unable to see this project to completion, she was untiring in her efforts to ensure the accuracy of such accounts written by others in his memory. In 1913 she moved to 8 More's Garden, Cheyne Walk, Chelsea, where she died on 24 March 1915 after a long illness. Her ashes were laid beside those of her husband in Golders Green crematorium, Middlesex. The couple had no children. Lady Huggins bequeathed a number of scientific instruments and personal effects to Wellesley College, Wellesley, Massachusetts. This bequest included the six bound observatory notebooks she and her husband kept throughout their long observing careers. 


@@@@@


doc= 46444


Evershed, Mary Acworth (1867-1949), astronomer and literary scholar, was born on 1 January 1867 at Plymouth Hoe, the fifth child and third daughter of Andrew Orr (died 1870), an officer in the Royal Artillery, and his wife, Lucy Acworth. Her father died when she was only three years old and the family went to live with their maternal grandfather, a priest in the Church of England, first at Wimborne and then at South Stoke near Bath. Mary and her youngest sister, Lucy, the close companion of her childhood, were educated entirely at home. When Mary was twenty the two sisters travelled abroad to study languages and the arts. They spent the years 1888-90 in Florence where they began studying the work of Dante and where Mary, who from an early age had an interest in astronomy, became fascinated by the astronomical references in Dante's poetry. Following this, their mother and all four daughters lived for five years in Australia, near Sydney in New South Wales, where Mary got to know the astronomer John Tebbutt at his observatory at Windsor. Finding that there existed no simple star charts of the southern sky she produced 'An Easy Guide to the Southern Stars' (1897) with a foreword by Tebbutt. 
The Orr family returned to England in 1895. Mary, already since 1891 a member of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific, joined the British Astronomical Association in London and strove to become a serious amateur observer. From 1900 onwards at her home in Frimley, Surrey, she used a 3 in. refractor to make observations of variable stars; she appeared in Stroobant's list of the world's astronomers compiled for the year 1902. 
In 1906 plans were afoot for Miss Orr to work with E. T. Whitaker, whose wife was a cousin of hers, at Dunsink observatory, Dublin, presumably on a voluntary basis. These came to nothing with her marriage to John Evershed (1864-1956), whom she had first met in 1896 on the British Astronomical Association's clouded-out eclipse expedition to Norway. She moved with him to India on his appointment as assistant director of the Kodaikanal observatory. 
The Eversheds spent the years 1906-23 in Kodaikanal, Evershed being promoted to director of the observatory in 1911. The observatory was entirely devoted to solar work in which Mrs Evershed, though not a formal member of staff, took a keen interest. She published in 1913 an important paper on active solar prominences, illustrated with a number of fine spectroheliograms. She also acted as her husband's assistant on an expedition to observe the total solar eclipse of 1922 in Australia, and on his expeditions to Kashmir and to New Zealand to test astronomical observing sites. 
Mrs Evershed's early years in India were largely taken up with her study of the astronomy of Dante, published in her book 'Dante and the Early Astronomers' (1913). Much of the research had been done before her marriage, and as author she adopted the style 'M. A. Orr (Mrs John Evershed)'. The book, comprising the history of astronomy until the age of Dante and an elucidation of the numerous astronomical allusions in Dante's writings, has been described by Dorothy Sayers, a translator of the first two books of the 'Divina commedia', as 'quite the best guide available to Ptolemaic astronomy and to Dante's handling of celestial phenomena' (Sayers, bibliography). 'Dante and the Early Astronomers', published by a firm of scientific publishers, did not reach a wide public. A second edition, prepared by Barbara Reynolds, who came across a copy of the book by chance some thirty years after its first appearance, was published in 1956 after Mrs Evershed's death; this remains a standard work of reference in Dante bibliographies. 
On their return from India the Eversheds settled in Ewhurst, Sussex, where Evershed remounted his solar apparatus. His wife took part with him in two further eclipse expeditions, but her own interests were now principally in the history of astronomy about which she published a number of articles in the 'Journal of the British Astronomical Association'. In 1930 she founded the association's highly successful historical section. She organized an international team to assemble and publish 'Who's Who on the Moon' (1938), an index of all named lunar formations including more than 600 personal names complete with miniature biographies. 
The Eversheds had no children, but their nephew, Andrew David Thackeray (son of Mrs Evershed's sister Lucy) became a distinguished astronomer and director of the Radcliffe Observatory, Pretoria, South Africa. Mary Evershed died at her home, Highbroom, Ewhurst, Surrey, after some years of failing health, on 25 October 1949. 


@@@@@


doc= 46448


Gooch, Edwin George (1889-1964), politician and trade unionist, was born in Fairland Street, Wymondham, Norfolk, on 15 January 1889, the youngest son in the family of at least five sons and three daughters of Simon Gooch (1843-1912), a master blacksmith and 'an ardent Liberal' in politics, and his wife, Ellen Hannah, 'nee' Stackard (or Stackyard) (1846-1917), who had been a dressmaker before her marriage in 1864. Edwin's father was able in 1881 to employ one man and have a 'living-in' apprentice. In 1904 his business was described as 'Gooch and Son, Shoeing Smiths, Machinists & Agricultural Engineers'. The son was Albert, Edwin's elder brother. 
Edwin Gooch was well educated for a tradesman's son. Having attended the board school at Browick Road, Wymondham, he went in 1900 to Duke Street Higher Grade School in Norwich. On leaving school, and after a brief period at his father's forge, he went to work for the 'Norwich Mercury' as a printer. In 1911, still living with his parents in Wymondham, he was described as a 'printer and reporter' (census returns, 1911). He remained as a journalist at the 'Norwich Mercury' until he was elected to parliament in 1945, by which time he had become chief sub-editor. He married on 26 December 1914, at the Primitive Methodist chapel, Wymondham, Ethel Banham (1888-1953), a schoolteacher; she was the daughter of Charles Dawson Banham, a gasworks manager. They had one son. 
In common with many Norfolk men and women of his generation, Primitive Methodism was central to Gooch's life and to his subsequent political career. His beliefs came, in part at least, from his parents, who were active Primitive Methodists. The 'Prims', although well established by Gooch's day, still had at their core a belief in the social gospel which, combined with a numerous lay ministry, encouraged self-education and above all a deeply held political radicalism. It was this which probably led Gooch into Labour Party politics. In August 1918 he was a key figure in founding the South Norfolk Labour Party in Church Street, Wymondham, and he was its first secretary. 
Although there were some industrial workers, especially in Wymondham and to a lesser extent Diss, the vast majority of voters in south Norfolk in the period after the First World War were agricultural workers. It was to them that the new South Norfolk Labour Party had to appeal. This linked Gooch, an urban journalist, to the cause of the rural worker for the rest of his life. In 1918 the Labour candidate was George Edwards, the veteran farm workers' union leader, who despite local support, lost against a 'National Liberal'. However, in a by-election in 1920 Edwards was elected by a narrow majority. He lost the seat in 1922 but regained it in 1923-4. 
These successes owed much to Gooch, who marshalled the farm workers' vote, a large but politically disorganized majority of the electorate. Gooch was also building for himself a considerable reputation both in Norfolk and in national politics. His election to Norfolk county council in 1922 followed on from election to the rural district council, the poor law guardians, and Wymondham parish council, as well as appointment to the magistrates' bench. In 1935, when Wymondham became an urban district council, he was elected its first chairman. 
Gooch's association with the National Union of Agricultural Workers moved him firmly into the sphere of national politics. In common with many officials of the union, the fact that Gooch was not a farm worker was a real strength in that it gave him protection from victimization, an ever-present threat for rural trade unionists. In 1923 during the Norfolk strike he became treasurer of the strike fund, and in 1926 he was elected to the union's national executive. More significantly, in 1928 he was made temporary chairman and in 1930 was elected president of the union. 
Gooch's presidency marked an important change in the direction of the union and its policy, which was aided by the resignation in 1928 of Robert Walker as secretary. Walker represented an older, more radical, and avowedly socialist position, which was increasingly undermined by declining union membership, widespread and growing unemployment, and what was seen by many on the executive as the failure of the 'militant' policy of 1923 and afterwards. Against this Gooch proposed a policy of moderation, based on a belief that agriculture as a sector of the economy should be united, with farm workers, farmers, and landowners working together. In Gooch's view a successful and prosperous agriculture would automatically lead to prosperity for the farm worker. This meant an end to the 'class war in the countryside' which many wrote about in the 1920s, and its replacement with a policy of co-operation within the industry, with wages and conditions mediated through the peaceful means of the government-run wages boards. It was a view which dominated the union's national policy until long after Gooch's death. 
In 1931 and again in 1935 Gooch stood as Labour parliamentary candidate for South Norfolk, Edwards's old seat. He was defeated on both occasions. In 1944 he was selected to stand for North Norfolk. Like South Norfolk this had a long Lib-Lab tradition, and at the 1945 general election Gooch won with a substantial majority. He held the seat until his death. In national politics he was a loyal member of the Parliamentary Labour Party, always a man of the centre rather than the left, but also seen as a reliable pair of hands. He was elected to the national executive of the party from 1945 to 1961 and party chairman from 1955 to 1956. He also served on the Agricultural Wages Board and a number of Ministry of Agriculture committees, as well as the International Labour Organization and the Food and Agriculture Conference of the United Nations. His wartime work led to the award of the CBE in 1944 for services to agriculture. 
Edwin Gooch was in many ways a Labour politician of the old school, shaped by religious radicalism and the trade union movement, and firmly based in the politics of his locality. Yet in other respects he was a modernizer. He guided the National Union of Agricultural Workers through the difficult years of the 1930s with studied moderation, and he consolidated many of the gains made by the union in the years between 1939 and 1951. In the context of the Labour Party he was a Gaitskellite, seeking ways to accommodate with capitalism to earn working people, and especially the farm worker, 'a place in the sun', as he himself put it. 
Despite his national importance Gooch continued to direct much of his energy to Norfolk affairs. He retained a strong Norfolk accent, and he never left Wymondham. He was made an alderman of the county in 1932 and it was as Alderman Gooch that he was remembered. Even in his seventies he remained a JP, a county alderman, vice-chairman of Norfolk county council, and chair of its education and agricultural education committees. 
His first wife, Ethel Gooch, was herself a formidable and important figure in the history of Norfolk Labour politics. She was elected a councillor in Wymondham and was the first woman to chair the town's urban district council. Her nephew was Peter Reyner Banham, the architectural critic. Following her death Gooch married, on 7 April 1960, Mary Agatha (Mollie) Curl (1911-1996), a bakery supervisor, of Norwich; she was the daughter of William Curl, hotel keeper. Edwin Gooch died of kidney failure on 2 August 1964 at his home, Rydal Mount, 76 Norwich Road, Wymondham, and was buried in Wymondham next to his first wife after a funeral in the Methodist church and a memorial service in Wymondham Abbey. 


@@@@@


doc= 46449


Leighton, Clara Ellaline Hope (1898-1989), engraver, was born on 12 April 1898 at 40 Abbey Road, St John's Wood, London, the second of the three children of Robert Leighton (1858-1934), a writer and journalist, and his wife, Marie (1865/6-1941), a writer of romantic fiction who was the daughter of Captain James Connor. 
Clare Leighton, whose education was largely private, began painting as a child under the guidance of her father and his brother Jack, a professional artist. After the family's move to Keymer, Sussex, in 1915, she attended classes at Brighton College of Art, and between 1922 and 1923 studied painting under Sir Henry Tonks at the Slade School of Fine Art, and wood-engraving under Noel Rooke at the Central School of Arts and Crafts, London. Attracted by the medium's wide range of effects, she thereafter practised mainly as a wood-engraver, supporting herself by teaching art in schools until she could earn a living as an illustrator. Her first subjects were farmers and bargees at Bishop's Stortford, Hertfordshire, the market town to which the Leightons moved in the early 1920s, and working-class people remained a preferred theme after she left home for Bloomsbury, London, around 1923 -- the year in which her work was first seen at the annual exhibition of the Society of Wood Engravers. 
In 1924 Leighton showed her prints to the radical journalist Henry Noel Brailsford (1873-1958), who published examples in the 'New Leader' in April of that year. Further engravings appeared in the 'London Mercury' and 'The Forum' between 1925 and 1926. Leighton's technique was refined in sketches of landscapes and peasants made on trips to France, Italy, and the Balkans between 1923 and 1927, and she returned from America in 1925 with enough illustrating contracts to occupy her for several years. Independent prints (always signed 'Clare Leighton') and illustrations for Thornton Wilder (in 'Bridge of San Luis Rey', 1929) and Thomas Hardy, an author for whom she felt a special affinity (in 'The Return of the Native', 1929), earned her a reputation on both sides of the Atlantic, and by 1930, the year in which she gained first prize at the International Engravers Exhibition at the Art Institute of Chicago, she was an associate member of both the Society of Wood Engravers and the Royal Society of Painter-Etchers. A selection of her work, 'Woodcuts', introduced by Hilaire Belloc, was published in 1930. 
In 1927 Clare Leighton moved to accommodation near Brailsford's Hampstead flat. Brailsford, separated from his alcoholic wife, was twenty-five years her senior, but Leighton shared the left-wing politics of his circle and found intellectual stimulus and fulfilment in the relationship. Her oil portrait of Mohandas Gandhi (1931) marks one of the points at which their paths crossed. At their joint home, Four Hedges, near Monks Risborough, Buckinghamshire, to which they moved in 1931, Leighton engraved her 'Lumber Camp' series (1931), the well-known 'Bread Line, New York' (an example of social realism, 1932), and several single engravings for American print clubs. But the major projects from the 1930s are three books she wrote as well as illustrated: 'The Farmer's Year' (1933), a sombre vision of life on the land at a time of agricultural depression; the phenomenally successful 'Four Hedges' (1935), a personal chronicle of a year in her Chiltern garden; and 'Country Matters' (1937), a nostalgic celebration of English rural life on the eve of the Second World War. 
In 1939 Leighton left Brailsford to begin a new life in the United States, where she became a citizen in 1945. She travelled widely in her adopted country, observing the American way of life at first hand, and finally settled at Chapel Hill, North Carolina, in 1943. In the English edition of her 'Southern Harvest' (1943) she declared that 'the true character of a people is to be found in its workers' (p. 6), an idea also explored in engravings for 'North Carolina Folklore' (1952-64), a survey published by Duke University, Durham, North Carolina, where she was visiting lecturer from 1943 to 1945. The many commissions postdating her 1951 move to Woodbury, Connecticut, include engravings for 'The Book of Psalms' (1952); 'Where Land Meets Sea' (1954), a tribute to the Cape Cod tideline she loved; and an illustrated edition of the works of Henry David Thoreau (1961). In her later years she turned from wood-engraving, which makes exacting demands on the eyes, to stained-glass (notably in the transept windows for St Paul's Cathedral, Worcester, installed 1962) and mosaic ('Christ Rising from the Earth', for the chapel of the Holy Family of Nazareth Community, Monroe, Connecticut, 1966-7). In 1988, on account of failing health, Leighton moved into a nursing home. She died, unmarried, on 4 November 1989, and her ashes were buried at Waterbury cemetery, Connecticut. 
Convinced that wood-engraving was an art for the masses rather than for an elite, Clare Leighton worked independently of the private presses. Her popular success was founded on a disciplined technique, powerful compositions, and a gravity of content and sincerity of feeling that derives from artists such as Samuel Palmer. 'No one in our time', wrote Eric Gill in Gollancz's publicity leaflet for 'The Farmer's Year', 'has succeeded better in presenting the nobility of massiveness and breadth of life of the earth on a scale so grand.' The artist herself, who possessed a gift for friendship with people of all races and classes, was influential as a teacher, lecturer, and author of two respected texts: 'Wood-Engravings and Woodcuts' (1932) and 'Wood-Engravings of the 1930s' (1936). 


@@@@@


doc= 46452


Rosenthal, Joseph (1864-1946), cameraman and film director, was born on 7 April 1864 in the Jewish East End of London, the son of Davis Rosenthal, a shoe salesman, and his wife, Mary Lippmann. Joseph began his career as a pharmaceutical chemist at St George's Hospital, before joining in 1896 the early film company Maguire and Baucus, for whom his sister Alice already worked. The company was managed by Charles Urban, an American-born entrepreneur who was to become one of the leading producers in the early British film industry. When Urban formed the Warwick Trading Company two years later, Rosenthal was given filming assignments first in Britain and Europe, and then as far afield as South Africa. 
In 1899 Rosenthal was sent to South Africa again to cover the South African War, which broke out in October, an assignment that was to make his reputation. On arriving in January 1900, he initially went to the Natal front, before joining the rising star of General Roberts's column, pushing north from the Cape. Travelling with two mules and a cape cart, he could move relatively fast, and sometimes even went ahead of the troops. He filmed several scenes around Bloemfontein, though these and other films were lost when the ship carrying them back to Britain sank. However, several other films he had shot arrived safely. These showed such scenes as British troops on the march and escorting Boer prisoners, and they were of great interest to audiences throughout the empire and elsewhere. Camerawork could be a risky business: in filming the Vet River crossing, Rosenthal recalled that 'a shell exploded right in front of me, and it was very lucky indeed that I was not hit' ('Peace in war', 292). He was present at the various British victories that came in the second quarter of 1900, and managed to film the surrender at Kroonstad in May, and the raising of the British flag over Pretoria the following month. To most people this seemed to be the end of the war, and Rosenthal departed. 
Rosenthal's next assignment that year took him to the Far East: having left London in August, he arrived too late to film any action in the Boxer uprising, but managed to record some incidents in the Philippine-American War. From 1901 he was in safer surroundings: first he filmed the opening of the Australian parliament by the duke and duchess of Cornwall and York in May, and then in 1902 made a variety of films for the Canadian Pacific Railway, and what may have been his first venture into drama with a version of 'Hiawatha' enacted by the Ojibwa people. But Rosenthal returned to the battlefield in 1904, when he was sent to cover the Russo-Japanese War, some of which he had to film from behind the protection of a special camera shield. His films of the gruelling siege of Port Arthur were shown throughout the world. 
After the war ended Rosenthal stayed in the Far East and Borneo for some time, before proceeding to India to film the tour of the prince and princess of Wales at the end of 1905. But at this point in his career he was dismissed by Charles Urban, and in 1908 set up his own company, Rosie Films, based in Croydon. He tried his hand at comedy directing at this time, but it was no great success. 'Father Buys an Armchair' (1909), for example, was a cinematically uninspired short, acted in exaggerated style. Rosenthal continued shooting documentary films for the rest of a career which lasted through the First World War. He later fell on hard times, and died (of bronchitis) on 5 March 1946, at 7 Lyndhurst Road, Peckham, London, at the age of eighty-one. 
Rosenthal, known to his friends as Joe or Rosie, was a popular and colourful character, with an eye for the ladies and a tendency to swear like a trooper. In contrast to many of the amateur film camera operators who surfaced briefly at the turn of the century -- assorted anthropologists, missionaries, and war correspondents -- Joseph Rosenthal was one of the first truly professional cameramen, and made a whole career of it. This kind of professionalism would be much valued in the film industry in the years ahead. 


@@@@@


doc= 46453


Dickson, William Kennedy Laurie (1860-1935), electrical engineer and film-maker, was born on 3 August 1860 at Chateau St Buc, Le Minihic-sur-Rance, Brittany, France, the second of three children of James Waite Dickson (died 1870s), an artist, and his second wife, Elizabeth Kennedy-Laurie (1823?-1879). His father had three daughters by his previous marriage. Dickson apparently spent much of his youth in Brittany, except for a short stay in Germany while his older sister, Antonia, a child-prodigy pianist, studied in conservatories in Leipzig and Stuttgart. He may have been able to claim US citizenship since there was an unverified report that his mother was born in Virginia. His multinational background, combined with an education based on the arts and classics and a strong interest in science, provided Dickson with unusual resources for his future career as an inventor and as the producer of some of the first motion pictures exhibited to audiences throughout the world. 
In 1879 Dickson, his mother, and two sisters moved from Britain to Virginia in the United States. His mother died very shortly after they arrived. In 1883 he moved to New York city, where he was employed in the testing-room of the Edison Electric Light Co., Thomas Edison's prototype for urban electrification. By 1884 Dickson was designated as Edison's photographer and in 1887, when Edison opened a state-of-the-art laboratory in Orange, New Jersey, he was on the staff as an experimenter and photographer. In 1888 Edison designated Dickson as leading experimenter for the Kinetoscope, 'an instrument to do for the Eye what the phonograph does for the Ear' (Dickson and Dickson, 'Century Magazine', May 1894). Simultaneously, Dickson was also a principal experimenter on Edison's favourite project, a costly and ultimately unsuccessful experiment to separate low-grade ores magnetically -- a project that took priority over the effort to make images move. Dickson was co-patentee with Edison on the ore separation process. 
Experimental work on the Kinetoscope (a peep-show viewing device) and Kinetograph (camera) was completed late in 1893 and the Kinetoscope, showing a small image which ran for about thirty seconds, was introduced on 14 April 1894 and was a short-lived sensation. There were immediate demands for projection but Edison was sceptical about the future of moving pictures and reluctant to develop a 'screen machine'. Within two years a number of rival 'scope' and 'graph' projection machines appeared, stimulated by a worldwide demand for new, novel film subjects. Although many of these machines were directly influenced by the Kinetoscope, the rapid acceptance of projection pushed Edison's innovative peep-show machine aside and Dickson's contribution to the development of the newly popular form of communication was obscured. 
Most of the parts used in the Kinetoscope had been used in earlier inventions. Edison's and Dickson's achievement was the innovative assembly of these components and Edison, whose name alone was marketable, was the first successfully to commercialize a cinema device. Although he had solved a number of design problems, Dickson's most tangible and enduring contribution was the creation of the standard film gauge known today as 35 mm film. At the end of 1891 he increased the size of his image to a width of one inch and placed four rectangular sprocket holes, slightly rounded at the corners, on either side of the image or frame. His film was designed to record a sequence of successive images on a single strip which moved perpendicularly through the camera and the viewing device. Following the introduction of the Kinetoscope, Robert Paul, Birt Acres, C. Francis Jenkins, and Thomas Armat each produced machines designed to use 'Edison standard film' and the format gained immediate international acceptance. Although the size of the sprocket holes and the frame ratio have altered slightly, the film used today is essentially identical with the film Dickson began using in 1892. Dickson's 35 mm 'standard' was the common substructure that made it possible for films to be produced and shown throughout the world -- the common denominator that sustained the rapid spread of one of the earliest, most pervasive, and most popular forms of international communication. 
Dickson also pioneered the production of movies and during his career, from 1891 through to 1903, he produced more than 500 films. In 1893 he designed the first operational motion picture studio, Edison's 'Black Maria', and a laboratory to develop and copy the films shot in the studio. He trained camera operators and initiated the first regular production of motion pictures. During 1894 and 1895 he produced about 125 films which were exhibited before any competing films were produced. He is one of the few film-makers who also designed cameras, production facilities, and viewing machines. 
In April 1895 Dickson resigned from Edison's laboratory. Edison's manager, William Gilmore, learned that Dickson was visiting the Lathams, who were making a rival camera and projector, and he accused Dickson of disloyalty. The exact nature of Dickson's relations with the Lathams was, and still is, controversial. Some historians assumed that Dickson designed the Lathams' Eidoloscope, but the Lathams denied this and Dickson never claimed that he invented their machines, even though he considered joining their company. Instead, Dickson and three long-time friends -- Elias B. Koopman, Henry Marvin, and Herman Casler -- formed the KMCD syndicate to market the Mutoscope, a flip-card peep-show machine built by Casler with unspecified help from Dickson. At the beginning of 1896, after making a camera and projector, the syndicate established the American Mutoscope Company (later the American Mutoscope and Biograph Co., then Biograph Co.), a well-financed challenge to Edison's domination of the American motion picture business. After designing some equipment for the company, Dickson organized film production. He designed a roof-top studio in New York city, a laboratory to develop and print film, and he trained several projectionists and camera operators, among them G. W. 'Billy' Bitzer, later famous as D. W. Griffith's cameraman. Regular production began in the summer of 1896 and the Biograph projector, showing film about the size of today's Imax, premiered in New York in October 1896. 
In May 1897, after the American operation was established, Dickson and Koopman moved to London to create a multinational production-exhibition company. A semi-autonomous British company was established, distribution offices for Belgium, Italy, South Africa, and India were set up, and production branches were created in France, the Netherlands, and Germany. Once again Dickson designed studios and technical facilities, and trained camera operators. He travelled throughout England and Europe making films that were popular features on the programmes of the most important variety theatres in several countries. During the last years of the Victorian era the Biograph was a prominent and regular feature on the programs of Keith's Union Square in New York, the Palace in London, the 'Folies Bergere' in Paris, and the Winter Garden in Berlin. 
Although often thought of as a cameraman, Dickson actually functioned as a producer-director and rarely operated the bulky Biograph camera. He chose subjects, negotiated the arrangements for filming, planned and timed the shots, and supervised the set-up of the camera. His films were carefully composed, with the subjects clearly defined in the frame. Since most of the films were less than one minute long, the camera was placed to make maximum use of the short lengths of film, and subjects were chosen to appeal to the varied tastes of a multinational audience. He developed or improved a number of film genres which sustained the popularity of the Biograph: 'phantom' train rides, spectacular military manoeuvres, and vividly pictured scenes of newsworthy current events and prominent world figures. Several topical films, including one of the return of the sirdar from the Sudan, were premiered on the day they were filmed. In May and June 1898, after several weeks of negotiations, Dickson made news by filming Pope Leo XIII, one of the most sensational and longest-running spectacles of the early cinema. His pioneering films of troop movements and some actual combat during the South African War were a remarkable accomplishment, considering that the immense Biograph camera weighed more than 1000 lb. On his return to Britain he published his diary notes of the campaign as 'The Biograph in Battle: its Story in the South African War Related with Personal Experiences' (1901). 
While Dickson was still experimenting on the Kinetoscope, he began selling still photographs made from his films to newspapers and the illustrated press, a practice he continued throughout his career. These photographs were used both as publicity for the films and as illustrations for newsworthy stories. Beginning in 1892, and with Edison's permission, Dickson's photographs of Edison, the laboratory, and projects at the laboratory were offered for sale by 'The Phonogram' magazine and he continued the practice when he began producing films. The half-tone process that made the publication of photographs possible was a recent development, and Dickson's practice created an early link between motion pictures and the emerging illustrated press at a time when the public was still curious about distant lands and anxious to learn what public figures really looked like. It also established precedence for publicity photographs of film productions. 
In 1893, independent of his work for Edison, Dickson and his friend Herman Casler designed the Photoret, a 'detective' camera the size and shape of a pocket watch. It was one of the smallest cameras ever made and it attracted international attention. Dickson also patented a lamp for bicycles and another for use by miners. He had brown, wavy hair and frequently had a moustache and/or a short goatee beard. Slender until late in life, he was a stylish dresser. He was a skilled rifle marksman, a talented amateur musician, and was made a fellow of the Royal Geographical Society for the discovery of three caves in Virginia. Although he had no professional degree, he was made an associate of the Institution of Electrical Engineers in 1909 and an honorary member of the Society of Motion Picture Engineers in 1933. Dickson was twice married. He married Lucie Agnes, daughter of Allen L. Archer, of Petersburg, Virginia, on 21 April 1886. She died early in 1908. There were no children. He secondly married Margaret Helen Gordon (died 1938), daughter of James Urquhart Mosse, in 1913. It was her second marriage, and they had one son. 
In addition to his remembrances of the South African War, Dickson and his sister Antonia Dickson wrote a series of articles, 'The Life and Inventions of Thomas A. Edison', which appeared in 'Cassier's Magazine' (November 1892-December 1893). These articles, supplemented by two articles they wrote about the Kinetoscope, were compiled in book form as 'The Life and Inventions of Thomas A. Edison' (1894). The Kinetoscope articles were also adapted by the two Dicksons as 'History of the Kinetograph, Kinetoscope and Kineto-Phonograph' (1895), a publicity brochure distributed to Kinetoscope dealers by Raff and Gammon's Kinetoscope Co. All of these publications had photographs taken by Dickson as well as some original decoration created by him. In 1933, at the request of the Society of Motion Picture Engineers, he described his experiences in an article for their journal: 'A Brief History of the Kinetograph, the Kinetoscope and the Kineto-Phonograph'. 
Shortly after returning from South Africa Dickson retired from motion picture work and opened a testing and experimental laboratory and machine works at 64 Strand, London. Modelled on Edison's laboratory, but on a more modest scale, Dickson worked on a variety of projects, a number of them related to the amusement industry. Among these were an automatic piano, an amusement park ride, and a portable dining facility for carnivals. He was joined in the laboratory by his friend Eugene Lauste, whose pioneering experiments to record sound on film were begun in Dickson's laboratory. Dickson operated this laboratory until about 1920, when he retired. During his retirement Dickson lived in Richmond upon Thames, Twickenham, and Jersey. He died of carcinoma of the prostate at Montpelier House, 29 Montpelier Row, Twickenham, on 28 September 1935, and was buried in Twickenham cemetery on 2 October. 


@@@@@


doc= 46454


Urban, Charles (1867-1942), film producer, was born on 15 April 1867 in Cincinnati, Ohio, the second eldest of the ten children of Joseph Urban, a sign painter, and his wife, Anna Sophie (1846-1887), daughter of Heinrich Glatz of Konigsberg and his wife, Pauline. His parents were part of the German community in Cincinnati. There he went to school until fifteen (by which time he had Anglicized his first name, Carl), after which he worked in stationery shops, before graduating to successful book agent. In 1889 he moved to Detroit, where he opened a stationery shop, and became interested in Edison phonographs. In 1895 he became manager of a phonograph and Kinetoscope parlour, the Kinetoscope being the Edison peepshow device that introduced motion picture films. In 1896 Urban acquired the agency rights to the Edison Vitascope film projector for Michigan, and soon joined Edison film agents Maguire and Baucus of New York. By August 1897 he was in London as manager of Maguire and Baucus in Britain, controlling Edison's European interests. 
Urban flourished in his new country. He brought with him a highly reliable projector, the Bioscope, which proved to be the cornerstone of his fortune. Maguire and Baucus moved to Warwick Court, London, and renamed itself the Warwick Trading Company, a name that became renowned for its reliable product and emphasis on actuality, news, and travel film. Warwick cameramen were soon travelling the globe to bring moving images to audiences new to this world of wonders. The pioneer band included John Avery (Urban's brother-in-law), F. Ormiston-Smith, and, most celebrated among them, Joseph Rosenthal, who filmed scenes from the South African War. The ebullient but pushy Urban outstripped his steadier colleagues, and broke away in 1903 to form the Charles Urban Trading Company. 
Urban continued to build a reputation, always boasting the educational benefits of his product. He became a figurehead for the British film industry, famed for his bold promotions, sure sense of style, and his trademark cigars (his alarming habit of dropping ash while editing inflammable film became legendary). He was proudest of his achievements in colour cinematography. In 1901 inventor Edward Turner interested him in a potential three-colour cinematography system. Initial results were unsatisfactory, and shortly afterwards Turner died, but Urban acquired the patent rights and set his associate George Albert Smith (1864-1959) to work on the project. After futile experiments with three colour filters, in 1906 Smith discovered that a two-colour system would reproduce most of the spectrum adequately, and Kinemacolor was invented, the first natural colour film process. 
Urban moved to Urbanora House, Wardour Street (the first film business in what has remained the heart of the British film industry), where he gave the first demonstration of Kinemacolor in May 1908. Kinemacolor, brilliantly and exclusively marketed via the Natural Color Kinematograph Company, became Urban's greatest triumph, and in particular the extensive colour film record of the Delhi durbar, held in 1911 to celebrate the coronation of George V, was the sensation of London. But the downturn in Urban's fortunes had begun. In December 1913 a legal challenge to the Kinemacolor patent was launched by William Friese-Greene, anxious to promote his own Biocolour system. The petition was dismissed, but reversed on appeal in March 1914, a decision upheld when taken to the House of Lords in March 1915. Urban had lost his precious, and ultimately indefensible, monopoly on colour films. 
Urban became a naturalized British citizen in 1907. He was married twice, first to Julia Lamereux Avery on 20 December 1888; the marriage ended in divorce in 1908. On 22 February 1910 he married Ada Aline Jones, 'nee' Gorecki (1868-1937), whose money supported much of the Kinemacolor venture. Urban adopted her daughter from her previous marriage, Anna Marguerite. He had no children of his own. 
With the outbreak of war, Urban used his persuasive powers to interest British officialdom in the propagandist power of the cinema, and in late 1915 produced 'Britain Prepared', a documentary feature on Britain's military strength, made for the Wellington House cinema committee. Urban was then sent to the USA to promote this and other British war films. After returning briefly to Britain in the summer of 1916 to edit the masterly documentary feature 'The Battle of the Somme', Urban moved his business interests to the USA, where he worked with an engineer called Henry Joy on an improved colour system, to be called Kinekrom, and continued to promote British propaganda films in the USA. This latter activity yielded mixed results, causing some embarrassment to his British masters when Urban made an ill-judged approach to the Hearst press (which was widely seen to support the German cause), but he continued to handle British war films in the USA to the end of the war, and edited a propaganda newsreel, 'Official War Review'. 
Urban sought to expand his activities in the USA after the war, and conceived of a hugely ambitious scheme to bring all his various activities and huge film library together under one roof at Stanford White's imposing Cosmopolitan Magazine Building in Irvington-on-Hudson, New York, which he renamed the Urban Institute. While enthusiastically launching his plan in 1922 for a kind of audio-visual encyclopaedia, Urban was blind to the fact that a library of largely outdated short interest films would never find the necessary bookings to support such an ambitious venture, and it all collapsed into bankruptcy in 1924. 
Around 1930 Urban returned to Britain. He continued for a while to pursue chimerical further fortunes, but in 1937 he donated all of his papers to the Science Museum, and the following year retired to Brighton. There he befriended once more G. A. Smith, the Kinemacolor inventor from whom he had become estranged in 1910. He died on 29 August 1942, in a nursing home at 12 Dyke Road, Brighton. He was cremated at Brighton crematorium on 1 September. 
Charles Urban was a dangerous man to know. He was a financial liability to many, was quick to find fault and slow to take blame, and possessed all the abrasive qualities of the get-rich-quick businessmen of his era. But he inspired as much loyalty and friendship as he did enmity, and was genuine in his belief in the importance and educational value of films. He put money behind this belief, and was admirably generous in supporting experimentation. If film has any lasting value, it will arguably be as a medium of record, and Charles Urban's central role as an enthusiastic producer of actuality film in the first years of the twentieth century makes him a truly noteworthy cinema pioneer. 


@@@@@


doc= 46455


Dwelly, Frederick William (1881-1957), Church of England clergyman, was born at East Street, Chard, Somerset, on 9 April 1881, the tenth child of Robert Dwelly (1842-1927), carriage builder and local councillor, and his wife, Caroline, 'nee' Cooper (1837/8-1928). They were a deeply Christian family. After Chard endowed grammar school, he went to London and worked in an Oxford Street store. His weekends were spent in social and religious work in the East End. Through the influence of an unknown businessman and the Revd F. S. Webster of All Souls, Langham Place, he proceeded to Queens' College, Cambridge, in 1903, where his examination results did not suggest that he was in any way outstanding academically. Dissatisfaction with what he felt as unreality and artificiality in college religious services turned his mind away from ordination until he attended a series of lectures entitled 'Truth and Falsehood in Religion', delivered by the Revd William Ralph Inge in Lent term 1906. The artistic, modernist, and mystical elements of Inge's teaching had a profound influence on him. 
Dwelly was ordained deacon in Carlisle Cathedral in 1906, to serve his title at St Mary's, Windermere, and in June 1907 he married Mary Bradshaw Darwin (1880-1950), daughter of George Henry Darwin, medical practitioner. They had no children. He became immensely popular at Windermere and later as a result of the ill health of the vicar he undertook the leadership of the parish. In 1911 the parishioners' warden judged him to be a priest of power and ability. He combined organizational abilities, whether as active chaplain to boy scouts or running parish finances, with those of an eloquent preacher able to present Christian truths as 'a living reality'. In 1911 he was appointed senior curate at St Mary's Church, Cheltenham, where Canon L'Estrange Fawcett charged him with the spiritual renewal of the old parish church. Again he proved popular and successful. 
In February 1916 Dwelly was made vicar of Emmanuel Church, Southport. His influence spread through the National Mission of Repentance and Hope in which he was a bishop's messenger. He also became involved in the Life and Liberty Movement under William Temple and Dick Sheppard. He had an acknowledged flare for liturgy and played a positive role in prayer book revision. His hand is clear in 'A New Prayer Book', known as the 'Grey Book' (1923), with a foreword by William Temple. The compilers (Percy Dearmer, Dwelly, R. G. Evans, F. R. Barry, Leslie Hunter, and Mervyn Haigh) believed 'that there is need for more experiment and freedom in worship in the church, with special services for those who do not come to the usual offices'. 
When Liverpool Cathedral was consecrated on 19 July 1924, no other cathedral had been consecrated on an unconsecrated site since Salisbury in 1225. On the advice of Charles Raven, Albert Augustus David, bishop of Liverpool, appointed Dwelly 'ceremoniarius' with responsibility for researching, writing, rehearsing, and participating in the consecration service. The special service book is sixty-four pages long, the first of many Dwelly service papers unique to Liverpool Cathedral. He had researched past precedents but did so with the vision, imagination, originality and freshness of an artist. The immense success of the service made Dwelly widely known. 
In May 1925 Dwelly was installed as a residentiary canon of Liverpool and began a fruitful ministry alongside Charles Raven. An 8.30 p.m. preaching service became popular across the diocese. Liverpool was the first diocese to establish formal continuing education for young priests and the weekly lectures were led by Dwelly and Raven. Dwelly was in demand nationally to assist in designing special services and was largely responsible for the enthronement service of Archbishop Cosmo Lang at Canterbury in 1928. Later in his career he devised the consecration services for Derby and Cairo cathedrals. He co-operated with his friend Percy Dearmer over the compilation of 'Songs of Praise', the cathedral's hymn book, and he commissioned new work for Liverpool Cathedral from Vaughan Williams, Gustav Holst, Martin Shaw, and John Masefield. He also established a faithful team to support his work, which included the Cross Guild, a team of former choristers essential for the effectiveness of choreography and processions. 
Dwelly was appointed vice-dean in 1928 and at the foundation of the dean and chapter in 1931 he became the first dean of Liverpool, a position he held until 1955. He created special services of freshness, relevance, and originality which placed Liverpool in the vanguard of developments in cathedral worship across the country, as William Temple acknowledged in 1931 when he paid tribute to the distinctive place which Liverpool Cathedral had come to hold in the life of the church. Preaching at Liverpool in June 1945, Cyril Garbett declared, 'your public worship has been made beautiful with music and symbolism. In the richness and colour and pageantry as well as variety and originality, your services hold a special place in the Anglican Communion' (Kennerley, 'Dwelly', 211). The citation for his award of an honorary LLD from Liverpool University in 1954 declared, 'He makes art the manifestation of religion not religion the manifestation of art' (ibid., 217). Clifford Martin, David's successor as bishop of Liverpool, wrote: 'You have to go to Liverpool Cathedral if you want to walk to the glory of God. Every procession is an act of worship' (ibid., 270). 
There was conflict during Dwelly's years as dean of Liverpool, including a breakdown of relations with the bishop, David. There was also national notoriety arising from his invitations to two Unitarian ministers, L. P. Jacks and Lawrence Redfern, to preach in the cathedral in 1933. Some thought him stern, autocratic, and unco-operative, but most appreciated his warmth and humanity, his brilliance with children, his ability to draw people 'more than any person I have ever known' (W. E. Harston Morris, quoted in Kennerley, 'Dwelly', 268), and his 'genius for friendship' (Charles Raven, ibid., 272). He was dedicated to his cathedral, taking up residence during the blitz. In 1947 he delivered a series of lectures on pastoral theology in Cambridge and preached the annual Hulsean sermon. There was a breakdown in his marriage and his wife died in 1950. His own physical and mental health began to deteriorate and, following his resignation as dean in 1955, he died at his home, 6 Grove Park, Liverpool, on 9 May 1957. He was cremated and his ashes placed temporarily in the sanctuary at Liverpool Cathedral until a memorial to him was unveiled in December 1960. His influence remains strong in the pattern and style of cathedral worship. 


@@@@@


doc= 46456


McVittie, George Cunliffe (1904-1988), astronomer and cryptanalyst, was born on 5 June 1904 in Smyrna, Turkey, the eldest of three children (two sons and a daughter) of Francis Skinner McVittie (1872-1950), businessman, and his wife, Emily Caroline (1877-1942), daughter of George Weber from Alsace. McVittie was educated privately by tutors, notably the Revd Lucius Fry, under whose gifted teaching he covered most of a normal secondary education in two years. The family were on holiday in England when the Turks sacked Smyrna in 1922. The McVitties lost everything and never returned to Turkey. Help from a group of largely anonymous businessmen enabled McVittie, after a year's delay, to read mathematics and natural philosophy (physics) at Edinburgh University, where he studied under Sir Edmund Whittaker and Sir Charles Galton Darwin. After obtaining an MA with first-class honours in 1927, he moved to Cambridge to research unified field theories of gravitation and electromagnetism under Sir Arthur Eddington, whose remoteness he found a sharp contrast to the warmth of Whittaker and Darwin. His PhD dissertation solved the Maxwell-Einstein equations of general relativity for a specific case, and found corresponding solutions for three unified field theories (one being Einstein's), but with unfavourable results for them. On 3 September 1934 he married Mildred Bond ('b'. 1906), daughter of John Strong, professor of education at Leeds University. They had no children. After spells as a lecturer at Leeds and Liverpool universities, McVittie was appointed reader in mathematics at King's College, London, in 1936. His first book, 'Cosmological Theory', appeared in 1937. 
In November 1939, following a short self-organized course in meteorology, McVittie joined the Government Code and Cypher School at Bletchley Park. After training briefly under Colonel J. H. Tiltman and J. E. S. Cooper he formed a meteorological subsection, as part of the air section in Hut 10, to attack the weather codes of Germany and her allies. The subsection also broke Soviet meteorological codes even after the Soviet Union entered the war in June 1941, so as to keep Winston Churchill informed about developments on the Eastern Front, and to help in solving German weather codes. 
Although initially understaffed, McVittie's group comprised sixty people at its height in November 1943. McVittie was an excellent organizer, who also solved countless ciphers himself. Under his inspired leadership the group produced invaluable results. Solved keys were sent to a Meteorological Office group, IDA, at Dunstable, to decipher messages intercepted there. By February 1944 about 15,000 enciphered weather reports were being intercepted daily. IDA transmitted the deciphered texts to various allied commands to provide weather forecasts for operations, especially against German-held territory, and for intelligence generally. 
The group's solution of a 'Kriegsmarine' meteorological cipher, combined with a codebook captured from 'U 559' in late October 1942, enabled Hugh Alexander and his team in Hut 8 to end a ten-month blackout on Shark, the Atlantic U-boats' four-rotor Enigma cipher, in mid-December 1942, despite only having three-rotor bombes (high-speed key finding aids). The blackout had almost blinded naval intelligence in the Atlantic; the solution helped to provide the indispensable cribs (probable plain text) required by the bombes. Bletchley's head, Edward Travis, later told Cooper that reading Shark had cut shipping losses in the Atlantic in December 1942 and January 1943 from an expected 1.2 million tons to about 450,000 tons. 
McVittie returned to King's College in 1945, mentally and physically exhausted by the constant strain of codebreaking for almost five years: he did not recover until late in 1947. He was appointed professor of mathematics at Queen Mary College, London, in 1948, but the post did not offer him enough scope. He therefore accepted the chair of astronomy at the University of Illinois in 1952, although the department had no staff, students, or modern instruments. He transformed it into a major centre which, when he left, had world-class radio and optical telescopes, and a considerable research reputation. McVittie believed that an extensive catalogue of cosmic radio sources would help to distinguish between different cosmological theories. From 1958 to 1969 his department's new 400 foot radio telescope mapped major portions of the Milky Way, found many new sources and catalogued about a thousand sources. He retired to Canterbury in 1972, where, as honorary professor of theoretical astronomy in the University of Kent, he taught astronomy and mathematics. A gifted lecturer, he was still teaching in 1987. He also continued his research, publishing an impressive paper on perfect fluid configurations when he was eighty. 
McVittie's contributions to astronomy lie principally in theoretical astrophysics. Although his papers were mathematically based he described himself as an 'uncompromising empiricist'; they therefore also stressed the importance of observation. As a cosmologist he was celebrated for his penetrating comparisons of observational data with model universes. His 'General Relativity and Cosmology' (1956, 1964) is a superb example of such an approach, while his 'Fact and Theory in Cosmology' (1961) made cosmology understandable by a wider readership. 
A major part of his research concerned spherically symmetric solutions of the equations of general relativity (corresponding to spherical distributions of fluid). His wartime meteorological work led him to research hydrodynamics and gas dynamics in the light of relativity. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Astronomical Society in 1931, of the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1943, and was appointed OBE in 1946 for his outstanding wartime service. In 1984 the International Astronomical Union recognized his many achievements by naming minor planet 2417 'McVittie'. McVittie died in the Chaucer Hospital, Canterbury, on 8 March 1988. 


@@@@@


doc= 46458


Gisleham, Sir William of (c.1230-1293), justice, was probably born 'c'.1230 in the village of Gisleham in north-east Suffolk. He was the son of a minor landowner, Richard son of Moses of Gisleham, and his first known appearance in surviving records is an appointment in 1259 to act as his father's attorney. The pattern of his appointments to act as an attorney for other litigants suggests that he may have become a professional lawyer by 1260. He had almost certainly entered the small elite of professional serjeants by 1271. During the 1270s he may have been a serjeant in the common bench and may also have regularly appeared for litigants at local assize sessions. 
There was a major reorganization of the general eyre in the summer of 1278. This established what were intended to be two permanent eyre circuits, and added to their jurisdiction the receipt of claims to franchises in each of the counties they visited, and the determination of royal challenges to such claims. There is no evidence that Gisleham attended the first eyre on the 'southern' eyre circuit held in Hertfordshire in the autumn of 1278, but he did act as the king's serjeant on the circuit's second eyre, which opened in Kent in January 1279. Thereafter he acted either on his own or sometimes with a junior colleague in each eyre of the 'southern' circuit before the Wiltshire eyre of 1289, aggressively challenging claims to franchises on behalf of the king, and also making property claims on the king's behalf. During the same decade he seems also to have regularly acted for private clients on the same eyres, and to have managed to fit in a number of appearances in the common bench, on behalf both of private clients and of the crown. He was appointed one of the justices of the common bench in mid-January 1290, as one of the replacements for the justices who had been disgraced during the 'state trials' which began in 1289. From the summer of 1290 he also served as a regular assize justice in East Anglia. A number of surviving law reports of the period show him at work in the common bench, most often by himself but sometimes with his senior colleague, John of Mettingham (died 1301), and less commonly with his fellow justice, Robert of Hartforth. Knighted by January 1292, Gisleham served as a royal justice for just three years before dying suddenly in a boat, perhaps one carrying him from Westminster to his home in London, in mid-February 1293. 
Gisleham's first wife, Agnes, was the daughter and one of the heirs of the London merchant and alderman, Walter of Winchester, and the widow of Adrian Eswy, who had also belonged to London's mercantile elite. They were married by 1260, and she brought him property in London and a claim to dower lands in Surrey and Middlesex. By 1285 he was married to a second wife, Alice, who may have brought him property at Barking and Dagenham in Essex. Gisleham left no sons and the manor he had reassembled in Kessingland, the next village to Gisleham, and a second major holding at Ilketshall and three other Suffolk villages, passed to his heirs. They were his daughter Clemencia and another Clemencia, the daughter of Agnes, probably his granddaughter, who later married William Tivetshall. 


