@@@@@


doc= 46461


Seaton, Roger of (c.1230-c.1280), justice, belonged to a family that took its name from Seaton in Rutland. The fact that he is first recorded as an attorney 'c'.1253 suggests that he was born about 1230, possibly at Seaton. Later evidence suggests that he may have studied canon law at Oxford; by 1258 he was styled 'magister'. By 1260 he was utilizing his knowledge of canon law in service as the official and commissary-general of Walter of Kirkham, bishop of Durham (died 1260), in all matters delegated to the bishop by the Holy See. He was also in the service of Kirkham's successor, Robert of Stichill (died 1274). He may have been his chancellor, and was later one of his executors. 
In 1268, in what looks like a major change of career, Seaton switched from a world where his training in canon law was of immediate practical use to one where it was only of limited relevance, by entering the king's service as one of the justices of the common-law courts. His first period as a justice of the common bench started in Hilary term 1268. He left the court after Hilary term 1271 to lead an eyre circuit that visited the counties of south-eastern and eastern England. Although the circuit was brought to a premature end in mid-November 1272, with the death of Henry III, Seaton was immediately reappointed to the common bench, and on the death of Gilbert of Preston became the court's chief justice as from the beginning of Hilary term 1274. He served as chief justice of the court until the end of Trinity term 1278. The few surviving law reports from this period indicate that what he said was thought worth recording, but provide too little material to allow any real estimate of his professional abilities. During this period Seaton also acted as the justice of an assize circuit in 1273-4 and headed the eyres held in Middlesex in 1274 and in London and in Bedfordshire in 1276. He was also nominal sheriff of Northamptonshire from late 1272 to October 1274, and gave a speech on the king's behalf to the autumn parliament of 1275, explaining the king's need for money. 
It was probably soon after his retirement from the common bench that Seaton suffered a stroke. He entered the Augustinian house at Thornton in Lincolnshire in 1279, having already appointed executors who were allowed to collect his debts and pay his debtors as though he were dead. They included Master Oliver Sutton, later bishop of Lincoln, who is known to have studied canon and civil law at Oxford, and Master Nicholas of Higham who may also have studied at Oxford. Seaton probably died not long after his entry into Thornton; his brother, Richard of Seaton, was his heir. 
Roger of Seaton held a number of valuable ecclesiastical livings, many of which he seems to have held simultaneously. One of his earliest livings was at Wicken in Northamptonshire to which he was presented by John Fitzalan of Wolverton, who seems to have been an early patron. He also held the living of Seaton and the Northamptonshire churches of Maidwell and Earls Barton, the Yorkshire church of Rowley, the Durham church of Egglescliffe, the Cambridgeshire church of Over, and the Sussex church of Broadwater. In addition he had prebends in York Minster and Lincoln Cathedral, and was master of the hospital of Sherburn, co. Durham. 


@@@@@


doc= 46463


Nairne, David (1655-1740), Jacobite courtier, was born in August 1655 at Sandford, Fife, and baptized on 7 September 1655 at St Phillins Church in St Andrews. He was the second of the four sons of Thomas Nairne (died before 1672), laird of Sandford, and Margaret (died 1716), daughter of Sir David Barclay of Collarnie. After graduating from St Andrews University in 1673 he studied law at the universities of Leiden, Franeker, and Utrecht from 1674 to 1676. He visited Paris at the end of 1676 to learn French and decided to settle there permanently. He was converted to Catholicism in 1680. 
It is not known how Nairne occupied himself during his early years in France, as he failed to secure any permanent employment. In March 1686 he obtained a small annual pension from Louis XIV, and on 17 September of that year he married Marie-Elisabeth de Compigny (1659/60-1715). He was still unemployed in the winter of 1688-9, when James II was forced into exile at St Germain by William of Orange. On the recommendation of Lewis Innes, the principal of the College des Ecossais in Paris, Nairne was recruited by James II's secretary of state, Lord Melfort, to be his under-secretary, and he accompanied Melfort to Ireland in 1689 and then on his Rome embassy from 1689 to 1691. 
At the end of 1691 Melfort returned to St Germain and for the next year and a half Nairne was kept very busy there as his under-secretary, but the arrival of Lord Middleton as joint secretary of state in 1693, with his own under-secretary, greatly reduced the correspondence which passed through Nairne's hands. He had, however, established a reputation for efficiency and honesty, so when Melfort was forced to resign in 1694 Nairne was retained as under-secretary by his successor, John Caryll. 
By 1696 Nairne had succeeded in winning the complete confidence of James II and Mary of Modena, who entrusted to him their most secret correspondence. In February of that year the queen appointed Nairne to be clerk of her council, and in March and April he spent nine weeks with the king at Calais while James was preparing to invade England. The two men were drawn together by their strong religious faith, and when James II established the Confraternity for a Happy Death (Bona Morte) in the chapel at St Germain Nairne joined it in April 1698. Two days later Nairne was confirmed at Notre Dame de Paris. About the same time James II gave Nairne a secret additional pension. 
The treaty of Ryswick greatly reduced the political work of the secretariat at St Germain, and from 1697 to 1703 Nairne was largely employed in helping Caryll translate parts of the 'Bible' into English for use at the Jacobite court. In 1697 they translated the book of 'Psalms' and from 1697 to 1702 the entire 'New Testament', but only the psalms were ever published (under Caryll's name in 1700) and their other translations have not survived. From 1699 to 1701 Nairne and Caryll also wrote 'The Life of James II' up to the year 1677 (published in 1816), and when the king died in 1701 Nairne arranged and copied his papers and helped supervise the writing and publication of Pere Bretonneau's 'Abrege de la vie de Jacques II' in 1703. 
These literary activities came to an end in June 1703 when Lord Middleton's under-secretary returned to Scotland and Nairne was entrusted with his duties. He played an increasingly important role in advising Lord Middleton, and thus Mary of Modena and the young James III (James Francis Edward Stuart). He was appointed clerk of the king's council in June 1706 and accompanied James during his attempted invasion of Scotland in 1708 and then during his campaigns in Flanders in 1708 and 1709. 
Nairne continued to work for Caryll until the latter's death in 1711, after which Lord Middleton took over all the Jacobite political correspondence. When James III left St Germain in 1712 to take up residence in Lorraine he was accompanied by both Middleton and Nairne, but the former increasingly delegated his work to Nairne, who mainly corresponded with the Jacobites in Great Britain before and after the treaty of Utrecht. When Middleton resigned in December 1713 Nairne began to work directly for James III rather than the new secretary of state. He was given the title of secretary of the closet for the king's private letters and dispatches, and was entrusted with the correspondence with the court of Rome. He also continued to handle the most secret correspondence with the Jacobites in England, and played an important role in advising James III during the negotiations for a possible restoration in 1714. 
Nairne remained James III's most trusted adviser for the next four years and accompanied him to Scotland at the end of 1715. After the failure of the Scottish rising, when James was obliged to live at Avignon (1716-17) and then in the Papal States, Nairne's responsibility for all the Jacobite correspondence with the court of Rome gave him a particularly important role. He worked successfully with Gualterio, the cardinal protector of England, and this greatly helped the Jacobites, most of them protestant, when they first took refuge in papal territory. 
Nairne was with James III when he visited Rome from May to July 1717 and he then accompanied him to Urbino, where the Jacobite court was established from July 1717 until the end of 1718. While he was at Urbino Nairne's position was weakened, as James III came completely under the influence of his new secretary of state (the Jacobite duke of Mar) and his relations and friends. They turned James against his old advisers and persuaded him to reject his entire St Germain background. As a result the other old servants gradually left the court and Nairne became an isolated figure, but he remained indispensable because he was the only Jacobite who could correspond and negotiate in both Italian and French. 
In the autumn of 1718, when Maria Clementina Sobieska, princess of Poland, was arrested by the emperor to stop her marrying James, Nairne was sent to Rome, where he obtained the diplomatic support of the pope. He also negotiated the transfer of the Jacobite court from Urbino to the papal capital, which resulted in the acquisition for the Stuarts of the Palazzo Muti. 
In February 1719 James III left Rome secretly to join the planned Spanish invasion of England. Nairne was created a baronet by James and left behind to break the news to the pope and look after Jacobite interests at Rome, in conjunction with Cardinal Gualterio. But Nairne lost his independence when he was placed under the authority of James III's new favourite, James Murray, a much younger man with whom his relations were already strained. By the time James III returned from Spain Nairne was very discontented and keen to retire to France. He was not invited to James's wedding with Maria Clementina Sobieska at Montefiascone in August, and when he joined them shortly afterwards he was informed that thenceforth Murray would replace him as the liaison with Cardinal Gualterio. He was retained as secretary of the closet because he was still the only Jacobite who was fluent in French and Italian, and partly also because, as a Catholic, he was trusted at the papal court. 
For the next few years Nairne continued to carry out general secretarial duties for James III, but he no longer dealt with political questions. Although he repeatedly asked to retire, he was not allowed to do so, and he accompanied James to Bologna in 1726 following the separation from Maria Clementina. He remained there until James's return to Rome in 1729, when he finally retired, but was not allowed to return to Paris until the end of 1733. 
Nairne and his wife had nine children, of whom only one son and two daughters survived. His wife had died in March 1715, while he was in Lorraine, and his son had joined the Spanish army. His elder daughter became a Benedictine nun in Paris in 1731 and his younger married in June 1735 the chevalier Andrew Ramsay, who was created a baronet by James III at Nairne's request. Nairne and Ramsay were in very close contact and perhaps even lodging together when the latter wrote his celebrated masonic 'Discours' in 1737. It is probable that Nairne was one of the first freemasons at St Germain and that he had introduced Ramsay to freemasonry when they had first met at Rome in 1724. 
Nairne was of small stature and had a scar on the left side of his chin, the result of a student duel in 1675. He was modest and unassuming to a fault and would have had and retained much more influence with James III if he had been a better courtier. He was a man of wide culture and a talented musician. Nairne is best known because he assembled an important collection of papers and brought them with him when he returned to Paris. After his death there in January 1740 they were left in the College des Ecossais, whence they were stolen by Thomas Carte in 1742, published in Macpherson's 'Original Papers' in 1775, and given to the Bodleian Library in 1778. As the archives of the Stuart court at St Germain were virtually all destroyed during the French Revolution, historians of the politics of that court are still obliged to rely heavily on Nairne's papers. 


@@@@@


doc= 46464


Gennari, Benedetto (bap. 1633, d. 1715), painter, was baptized in the parish of S. Biagio, at Cento in Emilia-Romagna, Papal States, on 19 October 1633. His father, Ercole Gennari (1597-1658), and grandfather were also painters, and his mother, Lucia Barbieri, was a sister of Guercino. In 1643 the family moved to Bologna, where Guercino was already established and where Gennari received his early training from his father and his uncle; his early paintings clearly show the latter's influence. He remained in Bologna until the age of thirty-eight, producing portraits for some of the noble families and religious works for the local churches and convents. 
From April 1672 to September 1674 Gennari lived in Paris where his connection with Guercino secured him a favourable reception. (During this time he began to keep a complete list of all his pictures.) He then moved to England, where James, duke of York, had recently married an Italian princess, Mary of Modena. The duchess and her husband became Gennari's most important patrons, but his first important commission was from Catherine of Braganza, who asked him to produce new paintings for the Queen's Chapel at St James's Palace in 1675. 
Gennari lived in England for over fourteen years and produced a total of 138 pictures, divided roughly equally between portraits, religious works, and profane subjects. Most of his pictures were commissioned by members of the royal family, though he was also employed by various Portuguese and Italian courtiers and a small group of ministers and household officials. His most important commissions were from Charles II, for whom he provided mythologies for the new apartments at Windsor Castle, and James II, for whom he decorated the new Catholic chapel at Whitehall in 1686-7. Gennari never held an official court appointment, but he seems to have been informally given the position of first painter by the duke of York, an arrangement that continued when the duke succeeded as James II in February 1685. 
The revolution of 1688 brought an end to Gennari's career in England. His position was perhaps eased during the crisis itself because, exceptionally, he was working at the time on two pictures for a leading whig, the earl of Devonshire. Once they had been finished, he left the country on 28 January 1689 and never returned. This was not the end of his connection with England, however, because he joined the Jacobite court in exile at St Germain-en-Laye in February 1689, and continued to enjoy the protection of Mary of Modena for a further three years, employed almost exclusively on portraits, which comprise twenty-six of the thirty-two pictures included in his list. Gennari is the only artist to have left us with a visual record of the Stuart court both at Whitehall and in exile. 
Gennari returned to Italy in the spring of 1692, when James II was preparing to invade England. He probably had no desire to resume his work in London in the event of a restoration and saw little prospect of obtaining commissions in France outside the Jacobite court. Before he left, he was finally granted a formal warrant by James II acknowledging him as his first painter; the warrant was renewed by his son James Stuart in December 1701. Gennari remained in Bologna for the rest of his life. He continued to be prolific and finally stopped painting at the age of seventy-six in 1709. The following year he became a founding member of the Accademia Clementina and devoted himself to teaching, being nominated direttore della scuola de nudo. He died at home in the via S. Alo, Bologna, on 19 December 1715 and was buried in the church of S. Nicolo degli Albari, Bologna. 
Gennari was content to work within the tradition established by Guercino, of whose drawings he possessed over two and a half thousand. His style is easily recognizable, in part because of the monumentalism of his figures. But he was also influenced by the paintings of Pierre Mignard and incorporated some of the latter's grace and softness into his works. About a quarter of the pictures that he produced in London and St Germain have survived, most notably in the Royal Collection at Hampton Court. Gennari worked for a restricted number of patrons and was overshadowed as a court portraitist by Godfrey Kneller, but he was a more versatile painter. It is unfortunate that the fall of James II not only abruptly terminated his career in England but also led to the destruction of the Catholic chapels in London that he had decorated. 


@@@@@


doc= 46465


Fede, Innocenzo (1661?-1732), composer, was born in Rome, probably in 1661, the son of Antonio Maria Fede. Originally from Pistoia, his family had moved in the 1650s to Rome, where two of his uncles were castrati of the papal choir. Having failed to obtain a place as a tenor in the choir in 1683, he became the 'maestro di cappella' at the Spanish church in Rome (1684-5). 
In 1685 or 1686 Fede was invited to England to become the master of the music of James II's new Catholic chapel at Whitehall. He was presumably accompanied by his wife, Caterina Bertolini (died before 1717). It opened on Christmas day 1686 and for the next two years Fede played an important role in the musical life of the English court. He accompanied the king and queen to Windsor in the summers of 1687 and 1688, and composed the music for the celebrations to mark the birth of the prince of Wales in June 1688. He helped to introduce the latest Roman musical styles to England, particularly the sonatas of Corelli, but none of his own compositions from this period seem to have survived. He would have had more influence if his career at Whitehall had not been abruptly ended by the revolution of 1688. 
Following his wife, who left in November 1688, Fede left England at the end of February 1689 and joined the court of James II and Mary of Modena in exile at St Germain-en-Laye, where he was appointed master of the music of both the Chapel Royal and his majesty's private musick. He remained there for more than twenty years and directed a small group of mainly Italian musicians, most of whom had previously been employed at Whitehall. He made the English court at St Germain an important centre of Italian music and thus played a major role in introducing Italian styles to France during the 1690s. He also taught music and the Italian language to the prince of Wales and his sister Princess Louise-Marie. 
Fede was active in organizing secular concerts for the Jacobite court, particularly in the ten years following the death of James II in 1701. He continued to serve Mary of Modena in the Chapel Royal until her death in 1718. At the end of the following year he left France to return to Rome, where he was given a monthly pension by his former pupil, the Jacobite James VIII and III. 
Innocenzo Fede was soon forgotten and has been completely neglected by posterity, partly because the archives of both the Catholic chapel at Whitehall and the Stuart court at St Germain were destroyed. It is only recently that his importance in the introduction of Italian music to both England and France has begun to be appreciated. Manuscripts containing some of his instrumental and vocal music have survived, but no copies have yet emerged of his only known publication (some flute sonatas, Etienne Roger, Amsterdam, 1703). Nothing is known about Fede's life after he returned to Rome in 1720. He died, presumably in Rome, on Christmas day 1732. 


@@@@@


doc= 46466


Belle, Alexis-Simon (1674-1734), portrait painter, was born on 12 January 1674, in the rue du Bac, Paris, and baptized on 17 January at St Sulpice, Paris, the second child but only son of Jean Belle (1636/1641-1703), portrait painter, and Anne Malguy (died 1705). He trained initially with his father, then became a pupil in the early 1690s of Francois de Troy, one of the painters at the exiled court of James II at St Germain-en-Laye. 
Belle's career at St Germain started about 1698-1701, a period of peace between France and England, when it was easy for British travellers to cross the channel carrying with them small portraits of the prince of Wales (James Edward Stuart, Stuart claimant to the British throne), and his sister Princess Louise Marie. Troy, by then the only painter still working for James II, was commissioned to produce more portraits than he could manage and invited Belle, his most able pupil, to collaborate. During these three years they produced many copies of Troy's portraits of which over twenty-five are now known, mainly of the prince of Wales. Belle became so busy that when he won the prix de Rome in August 1700 he preferred to continue his Jacobite commissions than to travel to Italy. 
Belle also produced some original compositions, the earliest of which seem to date from 1698, when the prince of Wales was ten and Princess Louise Marie was six (priv. colls.). In 1699 he produced a large allegorical portrait showing the former as a guardian angel, leading his sister under the protection of cherubim (Royal Collection). At about the same time he also painted 'Mary of Modena' (Sizergh Castle, Cumbria). On 12 November 1701, when he married the miniature painter Anne Cheron ('c'.1663-1718), he described himself as 'peintre ordinaire du Roy d'Angleterre'. James II had died in September of that year, but Belle continued to work for his son. 
War was renewed between France and England in 1702, and in the years that followed Belle replaced Troy as the official painter of the Jacobite court, where he and his wife quickly became integrated into the British community and where he settled permanently. Chiefly he concentrated on producing portraits of James Stuart and his sister, some of them copied as miniatures by his wife, to be smuggled into Britain. Belle also worked for various Jacobite courtiers and the nuns of the English Augustinian convent in Paris. By 1705 he was doing so well that he was able to invest annually in the government 'rentes'. 
Belle was elected to the Academie Royale de Peinture et Sculpture in August 1703 when he submitted a number of portraits including a three-quarter-length portrait of his former master, 'Francois de Troy' (Chateau de Versailles); he exhibited nine portraits in the Salon the following year. Three portraits showed members of the court at St Germain and two showed James Stuart and his sister. The demand for portraits of James Stuart was so great that by 1706 he was employing a small atelier to help him. One of these portraits, engraved by Le Roi, first brought the painter's name to the attention of the British public. 
Belle's most significant composition from this period is a whole-length portrait of James Stuart, dated 1703 (College des Ecossais, Paris). It shows him in armour standing beside the channel, on which several warships can be seen. He is pointing towards the cliffs and castle of Dover and is accompanied by a page in Polish costume. A similar three-quarter-length painting was produced by Troy in 1704 (Parham House, Sussex), without either the page or the view of Dover. These two portraits were frequently copied and it seems that Belle continued to copy Troy's portrait as well as his own until approximately 1707. Belle also made several copies (examples are in the Scottish National Portrait Gallery, Edinburgh, and priv. coll.) of a small portrait of Princess Louise Marie by Troy (National Portrait Gallery, London) which dates from these years. 
Belle's most famous portrait of James Stuart was painted in 1712 during the negotiations for the treaty of Utrecht, just before James was obliged to leave St Germain for Lorraine. He is portrayed in military costume inside a tent (Gov. Art Coll.). This portrait quickly became the standard image of the exiled Jacobite claimant to the throne and was copied many times. In an engraving of the portrait by Francois Chereau that was widely circulated in England and Scotland Belle was described as 'peintre de S. M. Brit'. This portrait was paired with Belle's portrait of Princess Louise Marie ('c'.1710, Sizergh Castle) which was engraved posthumously by Chereau in 1713. 
Belle remained at St Germain after the departure of James Stuart and produced portraits of some of the diplomats associated with the treaty of Utrecht. In 1714 he was invited by James Stuart to join his court at Bar-le-Duc, where he continued to produce portraits of the Jacobite exiles. He also painted James Stuart in profile (Gov. Art Coll.) and in the robes of a knight of the Garter (lost), a work known through an engraving by Marie-Nicolle Horthemels and which resulted in commissions for similar portraits from the other Jacobite Garter knights. 
By this time Belle's reputation as a portraitist was assured in Great Britain and in the years 1716-19 he received many commissions from English and Scottish Jacobites in exile after the rising of 1715. By then James Stuart lived in Italy, but in the winter of 1717/18 he employed Belle to make copies of the first portrait of him to be painted in Rome, by Antonio David. 
During the 1720s Belle worked increasingly for French patrons. His numerous portraits of the French court and nobility included 'Louis XV' (Chateau de Versailles). The many contemporary engravings after his work give some indication of his status in France. He continued also to receive commissions from Jacobites in Paris; in 1724 he signed himself 'pictor regis Britann' on a portrait of James Stuart's sister-in-law, Marie-Charlotte Sobieska (Walters Art Gallery, Baltimore). A project for Belle to make copies in 1727 of a portrait by David of James Stuart's wife, Maria-Clementina Sobieska, seems to have come to nothing, but in 1731 Belle did make two copies of each of David's portraits of James Stuart's two sons. 
As a court portraitist Belle worked in the style developed in France by Troy, Hyacinthe Rigaud, and Nicolas de Largilliere, though his greatest debt was to Troy, his former master. His portrait of James Stuart as a Garter knight was influenced by Benedetto Gennari's portrait of James II. Belle might not have been very original in his compositions, but he was praised for his exceptional skill in accurately reproducing a likeness of his subject. About twenty-five of his Jacobite portraits are known to have survived, in addition to the much larger number that show the exiled Stuart family. 
Belle's first wife died in April 1718 and on 12 January 1722 he married the engraver Marie-Nicolle Horthemels (1689-1745); they had two sons (1722, 1726) and a daughter (1730). His elder son was the history painter Clement-Louis Belle. Belle continued to live with the Jacobite community at St Germain, where he owned two properties, until his death at his home in the rue du Four, Paris, on 21 November 1734. He was buried on 22 November in St Sulpice, Paris. 


@@@@@


doc= 46468


Richardson, Elizabeth, 'suo jure' baroness of Cramond (1576/7-1651), writer, was the eldest of the ten children of Sir Thomas Beaumont (d. 1614) ['see under 'Beaumont, Huntingdon] of Stoughton, Leicestershire, and St Botolph, Aldersgate, London, and his wife, Catherine (died 1621), daughter and heir of Sir Thomas Farnham of Stoughton and his wife, Helen. On 27 November 1594 she married, as her first husband, John Ashburnham ('c'.1571-1620) of Ashburnham, Sussex, who was knighted in 1604. They had ten children, six of whom lived to adulthood, including John (1603-1671) and William (died 1679). Elizabeth's husband's death on 29 June 1620 left the family in financial straits, but his widow was able to exercise considerable influence at court since Mary, countess of Buckingham, mother of the favourite, was a cousin. Elizabeth's attempts to gain advancement for her son-in-law Sir Edward Dering ended eventually in a baronetcy on 1 February 1627. A letter to the duke of Buckingham of the same year indicates that she enjoyed the society of his wife, of Lady Carlisle, and of the queen ('CSP dom.', '1627-8', 326); in 1627 she also waited on the queen of Bohemia in The Hague. 
On 14 December 1626 Elizabeth married, as his second wife, Sir Thomas Richardson (bap. 1569, d. 1635), later lord chief justice, and through his influence was created baroness of Cramond on 29 February 1628, an occurrence which apparently elicited 'many gibes and pasquinades... for the amusement of Westminster Hall' (Campbell, 2.15). On 9 September 1629 she was granted an annual pension of $300 for the duration of her life. In 1645 her collection of prayers, 'A Ladies Legacie to her Daughters', was printed. The text was in three parts; the first had been written in 1625 and the second in 1635. Richardson gave a manuscript copy of her prayers to her eldest daughter, Elizabeth Cornwallis, in 1635 (E. Sussex RO, ASH 3501), but a Folger Shakespeare Library manuscript (MS V.a.511), headed 'Instructions for my children or any other Christian', is dated 1606, indicating that she began her writing of mother's advice many years earlier. She died, in her seventy-fifth year, at Covent Garden, London, and was buried next to her first husband on 3 April 1651 at St Andrew's, Holborn. 


@@@@@


doc= 46469


Barrington, Judith, Lady Barrington (d. 1657), gentlewoman, was the daughter of the MP Sir Rowland Lytton (died 1615) of Knebworth, Hertfordshire. Her family had puritan sympathies and was one in which daughters were encouraged to read. In 1612 she married Sir George Smith (died 1620) of Annables, Harpenden, Hertfordshire; the couple had two sons, Rowland (1614-1639), and George (1619-1634). 
Judith's interest in estate management is evident in her careful notes of purchases, rents, leases, details of acreage, farming practice, and tithes. When Sir George died in 1620 leaving debts on a mortgaged property, Judith obtained the wardship of her sons and secured the administration of the estate herself. Within two years she had cleared the debts and proved herself a knowledgeable and competent administrator. As a widow she made an impression in her neighbourhood and was considered a good match. Sir Thomas Barrington (c.1585-1644), MP, a widower with five children who became her second husband in 1624, remarked that she had turned down other more eminent suitors than himself and that he thought himself very fortunate. He was obviously deeply smitten and wrote several times to his mother praising Judith; admitting 'I thinke tis a greate advantage to be a successor to a husband not superlatively good' (BL, Egerton MS 2644, fol. 209). The marriage appears to have provided both parties with happiness, although there were no children. Their letters show their mutual commitment to religious reform: both Sir Thomas and Judith supported puritan preachers and Benjamin King dedicated 'The Marriage of the Lambe' to them in 1640. 
After her marriage to Sir Thomas, which took her to Hatfield Broad Oak, Essex, Judith continued with the management of her jointure lands from her former marriage, mainly in Hertfordshire. When Sir Thomas inherited in 1628 the Barrington estates in Lincolnshire, Essex, and the Isle of Wight, she became closely involved in the management of these too. From 1629 her main residence would appear to have been Hatfield Priory. As well as documenting the family's domestic arrangements, extensive notes in her hand surviving for the period 1614 to the 1640s indicate a detailed understanding of different aspects of estate management. She commented knowledgeably on a number of topics including legal matters, forestry, and gardening. She understood, for example, the practical importance of different types of wood to an estate and the management of an effective programme for timber felling; she appreciated the properties of different varieties of fruit trees. She was not just concerned to maximize profits; she displayed a concern for poor tenants unable to pay rents and attempted to mitigate their financial problems. She explained her understanding of the nature of her role in management: 'I being the manager of all things and usually what he [the steward] did was by my command, as from my husband' (Essex RO, D/DBa L35). A closely written memorandum to the steward, John Kendall, in 1632 where she gave extensive instructions and advice confirms her interpretation of this relationship. 
Once Sir Thomas became more frequently absent in London with the opening of the Long Parliament and subsequently with his attendance at the Westminster assembly, Lady Barrington sent him news about events in Essex. With the outbreak of civil war she purveyed military as well as other news, on several occasions offering Sir Thomas advice on matters such as selecting an assistant and calling out the trained bands in time to meet the royalist challenge. 
On the death of Sir Thomas in 1644, Lady Barrington was left once more to manage her jointure lands. Almost immediately relations deteriorated between Lady Barrington and her stepson Sir John Barrington, who seems to have been determined to be precise about the exact entitlements of his stepmother. The dispute worsened until finally Sir John petitioned parliament, accusing her of denuding the estate of timber to her own advantage and to the long-term detriment of his heirs. Lady Barrington countered the accusations vigorously, refusing to give in to her litigious stepson. The very large number of his lawsuits and the evidence of her former competence lends support to her side of the argument. 
Lady Barrington's relations with the rest of the family, moreover, had been and continued to be cordial and based on mutual affection. Judith had been a frequent and lively correspondent with her mother-in-law, Joan, Lady Barrington, passing on news and gossip on a wide range of topics both domestic and foreign. She acted as a link in the extended family, placing some members in households, looking after their future, acting as an intermediary with holders of public office, and, for example, writing in 1631 to Viscount Dorchester to seek his help in preventing Sir Thomas's appointment to the unpopular position of sheriff. Later, in her will, codicils distributed bequests of silver and money to affectionately named relatives and servants. 
Judith Barrington's extensive papers reveal a depth of knowledge of estate management unusual in the period among women. Her wide-ranging concerns show an understanding of planning for the long-term future of a family, without losing sight of obligations to tenants in difficulties. Her personal letters reveal a woman with real affection for her immediate family and concern for the welfare of the wider family kinship network. Although a few contemporaries and some historians concluded she was bossy and overbearing, the question needs to be raised as to whether this may owe more to her departure from the more acceptable feminine characteristics considered desirable by the contemporary writers, than to a fair analysis of her true character. When she died in 1657 Thomas Goodwin commented in his funeral sermon on her 'Affability mixt with much Gravity; Humility with great Eminency; Temperance and Moderation in midst of great abundance' (Goodwin, 63). She was buried at Knebworth. 


@@@@@


doc= 46470


Wadham, Dorothy (1534/5-1618), founder of Wadham College, Oxford, was the second and eldest surviving child of Sir William Petre (1505/6-1572), then a civil and canon lawyer in the service of the crown, and of his wife, Gertrude (died 1541), daughter of Sir John Tyrrell; a portrait of her at Wadham College gives her age as sixty in 1595. Her mother died on 28 May 1541, and Dorothy was thereafter brought up by Petre's second wife, Anne, also a Tyrrell by her first marriage. Petre was to be a principal secretary to Henry VIII, Edward VI, and Queen Mary from 1544 to 1557. Dorothy was presumably educated at home at Ingatestone Hall, Essex. A younger sister was sent away to service in a great lady's household, but if this was also Dorothy's experience, there is no record of it. In her old age she wrote a firm English hand, and apparently understood Latin. On 3 September 1555 she married Nicholas Wadham (1531/2-1609), gentleman, at St Botolph, Aldersgate, London; the wedding was a sumptuous one, with a good deal spent on clothes and jewellery. 
Little is known of the next fifty years of Dorothy Wadham's life. The Wadhams lived at the family seat at Merrifield, near Ilton, Somerset. They had no children. The Petre connection probably strengthened their inclination to Catholicism. In 1612-13 Dorothy, then a widow, suffered the confiscation of her armoury as a suspected recusant, but in 1615 she was granted a formal pardon for offences under the 1593 act 'against Popish recusants'. Yet there is no hint of Catholic sympathies in Dorothy's will, or in her letters to her brother, John, Lord Petre, whom she habitually commends 'to the protection of the Almighty'. Nor did any such leanings prevent friendly relations with protestant gentry and clergy. 
Dorothy's father had virtually refounded Exeter College in Oxford, and it is possible that the idea of founding an Oxford college came from Dorothy. However, she always professed to be acting solely to fulfil her husband's intention, 'for it would greatly offend my conscience to violate any jot of my husband's will' (Briggs, 64). Nicholas Wadham, however, left a confused situation following his death on 20 October 1609. Dorothy was his sole executor, charged with using the money he had put aside 'for such uses and purposes' as he had 'requested her and she hath assented to' (Wadham College muniments, 10/1/1). On the other hand, on his deathbed he had summoned the sometime surveyor of the ordnance and Essex conspirator, Sir John Davis, to confer about his plans with Dorothy and the Wadhams' two men of business; Davis induced Nicholas to sign an 'instrument' naming him as jointly responsible with Dorothy for carrying out the design. Davis's involvement threatened the whole scheme. He was a convicted traitor because of his role in the Essex conspiracy, and a recusant. Discussion on a bill for his restitution in blood in the 1610 parliament revealed that he still refused the Church of England sacrament. He may also have wished to subsume the Wadham foundation in his 'alma mater', Gloucester Hall, rather than, as Nicholas Wadham probably intended, taking over the assets of Gloucester Hall for the new college. 
A month after Wadham's death Dorothy was writing to Lord Treasurer Salisbury angrily denying Davis's accusation that she had no intention of proceeding with her husband's project. An offer was made to Gloucester Hall but, probably to Dorothy's relief, was turned down by the principal unless he became head of the new college. There is no record of any offer, as Wadham had indicated, for an arrangement with Jesus College. Dorothy's agents identified a site for the college in February 1610, and an architect, William Arnold, was appointed. A letter from the king induced Oxford city council to lower its asking price. A collusive suit in chancery resulted in July 1610 in the establishment of a trust which excluded Davis. Dorothy's brother Lord Petre was important in mobilizing this support at Westminster, but Dorothy firmly rejected Petre's offer to take over the responsibility 'which my dear husband so solely and absolutely trusted me with' (Briggs, 62). On 20 December 1610 Wadham College received its royal letter patent. Statutes were drafted and approved by Dorothy in 1612, and the building was opened and the college formally instituted in April the next year. Dorothy had carried through a formidable task quickly and completely. She also added some $7270 of her own to her husband's contribution of $19,200. 
The appointment of warden, fellows, and scholars, and even on occasion of the college cook, remained in Dorothy's hands, conveyed in a series of letters to 'my college' from Edge Manor, the Wadham dower house in Branscombe, Devon. They were written by John Arnold, her man of business, but signed by her, as were successive drafts of the statutes. She was anxious that these should be amended in the light of experience before she died, confessing that 'my experience in such matters is but small', and sending some drafts in English for translation into Latin ('Letters of Dorothy Wadham', letters 18, 19). She never visited the college, whether from infirmity, or because of the travel restrictions imposed on recusants, and depended a good deal on Arnold. However, she retained a clear view of her mission in carrying out what she claimed, perhaps too modestly, to be her husband's design. She died on 16 May 1618, at Edge and was taken to Merrifield to be buried on 16 June with her husband in St Mary's Church, Ilminster. 


@@@@@


doc= 46471


Hartnell, William Henry (1908-1975), actor, was born at 24 Regent Square, St Pancras, London, on 8 January 1908, the son of Lucy Hartnell of that address, a commercial clerk, and an unnamed father. He was enrolled at the Italia Conti Stage School with the assistance of his unofficial guardian, Hugh Blaker. Conti herself had been a member of the repertory company of actor-manager Sir Frank Benson and Hartnell followed in her footsteps, joining in 1924. Billy Hartnell, as he was known at this time, could often appear in eight plays in a single week, especially those of Shakespeare, for the production of which the Benson company was well known. He was also keen to be offered comedy roles so he could try to emulate his hero, Charlie Chaplin. 
In 1928 Hartnell appeared in a romantic comedy by R. N. Stephens and E. Lyall Swete, 'Miss Elizabeth's Prisoner', with an actress called Heather McIntyre (died 1984) of Chelsea. She was born Amy Heather Miriam Armstrong McIntyre in 1906 or 1907, the daughter of Thomas McIntyre, a company director, and was later a playwright. They married on 9 May 1929 at the Chelsea register office; they had one daughter. 
Hartnell made his first appearance on the London stage in 1932 but his first feature film, 'School for Scandal', was in 1930. Still appearing as Billy Hartnell (until the mid-1940s), he was the star of a handful of films in the 1930s ('Follow the Lady' and 'I'm an Explosive', 1933; 'Seeing is Believing' and 'Swinging the Lead', 1934; 'Nothing Like Publicity', 1936). Such films, though, were often made very quickly and with cheap production values. After the outbreak of war Hartnell was drafted into the tank corps. He was invalided out after eighteen months after suffering a nervous breakdown. Returning to acting he had his first major success as Sergeant Fletcher in Carol Reed's film tribute to the British army, 'The Way Ahead' (1944); the role made him a leading actor. In 1940 he had toured, and appeared in the West End, with Richard Attenborough in the play of Graham Greene's novel 'Brighton Rock'. In 1947 they were reunited in John Boulting's screen version, Hartnell playing Dallow. His theatrical appearances became much less frequent after the war, but he did star in the West End again in 1950 in Hugh Hastings's long-running comedy-drama, 'Seagulls over Sorrento'. 
In films Hartnell alternated starring roles in lesser films ('Murder in Reverse', 1945; 'Appointment with Crime', 1946; 'Temptation Harbour', 1947; 'Date with Disaster', 1957; 'On the Run', 1958) with leading roles in better films ('Odd Man Out', 1947; 'Now Barabbas was a Robber', 1949; 'The Dark Man', 1951; 'Yangtse Incident', 1957; 'The Mouse that Roared', 1959) and featured roles in major films ('The Magic Box', 1951; 'The Pickwick Papers', 1952; 'Private's Progress', 1956; 'Hell Drivers', 1957; 'Shake Hands with the Devil', 1959; 'Heavens Above', 1963). In 1957-8 he appeared on television as Sergeant-Major Bullimore, an unpopular, aggressive character, in the series 'The Army Game'. He left the series to make perhaps his best-known film, 'Carry on Sergeant', the first in the famed series of British comedies. In perhaps a third of his films Hartnell played figures of authority, often in the police force or the services, but here, as Sergeant Grimshawe, he was able also to display a softer side to his usual harsher character. Despite beginning to feel typecast in what he referred to as 'bastard roles', he returned to 'The Army Game' for a further season in 1960-61. 
One of Hartnell's best film roles was one of his last, as the old rugby league talent scout, Johnson, in Lindsay Anderson's 'This Sporting Life' (1963), written by David Storey. As a result of this role in the same year he was offered the lead in 'Doctor Who', a new BBC television series. His Doctor was a quirky, even irascible, time-traveller, with long white hair and eccentric clothes, who travelled the universe in a time machine which was not only bigger inside than out but took the form of an everyday blue police telephone box. Although the series included the head of drama at BBC television, Sydney Newman, as one of its devisers, some other BBC executives had little confidence in its future, but Hartnell was convinced it would be hugely successful and, thanks largely to him, it was. He played the part for three years (1963-6) in 134 episodes; at one point the viewing audience numbered over twelve million. Seeing the role as 'manna from heaven' after playing so many tough army types, he sought to bring out the element of magic in the Doctor. In so doing he became a national celebrity and a hero to thousands of children, and attracted a huge personal fan mail, not just from them but from adults too. It was a great disappointment for him to have to leave the series owing to a combination of poor health (he suffered from arteriosclerosis) and disputes with the new producer. That he went straight into touring with the pantomine 'Puss in Boots' suggests that the latter reason was predominant. 
Despite continuing ill health, occasional television appearances punctuated the next few years for Hartnell. He even returned to the stage in 1968 (in 'Brother and Sister'); but the roles he could now manage were few and he made his last major television appearance in 1970. Since leaving 'Doctor Who' he had become known for playing that one role, despite his theatre background and over sixty film appearances, so it was perhaps fitting that he reprised it in his final appearance when he managed to record a few scenes for a tenth anniversary episode featuring the other two Doctors to that date. He had retired to Marden in Kent but his health was now in serious decline and his wife became his full-time nurse. He was admitted to Linton Hospital, Coxheath, near Maidstone, for a short time in August 1974 and in December was admitted permanently. Following a series of strokes he died there on 23 April 1975. He was survived by his wife, who died in December 1984, and his daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 46472


Merlin, John Joseph (1735-1803), inventor, was born or baptized, or possibly both born and baptized, on 17 September 1735 at Huy, Southern Netherlands, into a family who were probably inventors. He was the third child of Maximilien Joseph Merlin (born at Cambrai, 8 January 1710) and Marie-Anne Levasseur. 
By about 1754 he was working in Paris, gaining for himself a reputation for mechanical ability. In 1760 he came to England in the suite of the Spanish ambassador, the conde de Fuentes, and lived in Soho Square, London. 
By 1763 Merlin had left the service of Fuentes and was living, and most probably working (for a goldsmith named Sutton), in New Street, Covent Garden. Shortly afterwards he moved to work at Cox's Museum in Spring Gardens, becoming 'the first or principal mechanic' ('Kirby's... Museum', 274). The museum housed a collection of large automata which had a profound influence on Merlin, but realizing that the museum was financially unstable, Merlin decided in 1773 to set up on his own as a maker of mathematical instruments. In the same year Merlin designed and patented a dutch oven (not unlike a present-day rotisserie) and in the following year he patented a down-striking piano action which could be fitted to a harpsichord, enabling the player, by the operation of a foot pedal, to use the instrument as either a piano or a harpsichord. A second pedal allowed the player to produce a crescendo or decrescendo when using the harpsichord alone by slowly bringing on the unison and octave registers, or on release of the pedal, removing first the octave register and then the two unisons. In 1780 Merlin built a single-manual harpsichord to which his down-striking piano action was fitted, thereby making it a compound instrument. It has the unusual specification of one 16 ft register, two 8 ft registers, and one 4 ft register. It also incorporates an ingenious recording device: as the performance proceeds, pencils attached to trackers make marks on a roll of paper attached to a clockwork rotating drum. Though innovative, the system was never likely to succeed because the marks on the paper had subsequently to be deciphered and converted to standard musical notation. 
Merlin's other inventions included extending the compass of the piano (at the suggestion of his friend Dr Charles Burney) and combining the square piano with an organ (making the square claviorganum). He popularized roller skates (most probably invented in Holland about 1700), and is immortalized in a passage in Busby's 'Concert Room and Orchestra Anecdotes': 'One of his ingenious novelties was a pair of skaites... Supplied with a pair of these and a violin he mixed in the motley group of one of the celebrated Mrs. Corneily's masquerades at Carlisle House, Soho Square; when, not having provided the means of retarding his velocity, or commanding its direction, he impelled himself against a mirror of more than five hundred pounds value, dashed it to atoms, broke his instrument to pieces and wounded himself most severely. (Busby, 2.137)' He also invented the forerunner of the present-day wheelchair, a form of scales for weighing human beings, a number of specialized watches and clocks, and a small portable scale for weighing gold coinage. Among his more bizarre inventions were a rotating table which enabled a hostess to fill up to twelve cups of tea without leaving her place, and a device to enable blind persons to play cards. All of these were to be seen at Merlin's Mechanical Museum, near Hanover Square, a popular place of entertainment for London society, with whom, despite his incomplete Anglicization, Merlin was much in demand. He never married, but was highly thought of, as witnesses his obituary in the 'Gentleman's Magazine', which reported that 'he hardly ever let a moment slip by unemployed' ('GM', 1st ser., 73/1, 1803, 485). He died in London on 4 May 1803, and left his property to his two brothers and a sister, all of whom lived abroad. 


@@@@@


doc= 46473


Kirkman, Abraham (1737-1794), harpsichord maker, was born on 2 June 1737 at Bischweiler, near Strasbourg, the second of numerous children born to his father, Abraham Kirchmann (1704-1792), of Bischweiler, and Suzanna Saucourt (formerly Omphalius). His paternal grandparents were Abraham Kirchmann (1673-1754), of Bischweiler, and his second wife, Margaret Prevot (died 1706). In the same year as his wife's death, that Abraham married Suzanna M. Burckhard, his third wife; their eldest child being the celebrated Jacob Kirkman, founder of the Kirkman firm of harpsichord builders. 
The young Abraham Kirkman had moved to London by 13 August 1758, when he married Charlotte Neubauer (died 1798), second daughter of a London harpsichord maker, Frederic Neubauer, at St James's, Westminster. It may have been as early as 1771 that Jacob Kirkman took his nephew Abraham into partnership with him, for a harpsichord is noted in the workbooks of Thomas Green of Hertford ('fl'. 1718-1791), as belonging to Sir Abraham and Lady Hume, of Wormley, Bury, and signed 'Jacobus and Abraham Kirckman 1771 fecit'. The atypical use of the English word 'and' plus the singular verb 'fecit' must give rise to caution when considering the accuracy of Green's reportage. What is certain is that in 1772 several Kirkman harpsichords were signed by the partners 'Jacobus et Abraham Kirckman Londini Fecerunt 1772'. It seems that the harpsichord making business was highly successful, and both partners used their money wisely, particularly investing it in property. Unlike his uncle, Abraham appears not to have become a moneylender and, as Jacob grew older and more interested in his other financial activities, Abraham probably became the effective 'director' of the firm. By 1790 Jacob had retired to Greenwich, and Abraham most probably took his own son, Joseph, into the firm. A very few harpsichords are signed by Abraham and Joseph, the latest known being dated 1791. 
By 1772 Abraham Kirkman had moved, with his family, into 18 Broad Street, Soho, where he was close to his uncle Jacob, who from 1750 had lived at no. 19, while his kinsman, the organist and composer Jacob Kirkman (d. 1812?), lived at no. 20 from 1780. This row of typical London upper working-class houses still exists, though there has been much reparation of bomb damage caused in the Second World War. 
Abraham Kirkman died in 1794 at one of his properties at Hammersmith, though probably because he owned a substantial house (called the White House) at Greenwich he was buried at St Alfege, Greenwich, like his uncle Jacob. The church registers record the event simply as '16 April 1794, Abraham Kirkman a Gent'. 
The rise of piano making among all the London harpsichord makers in the last quarter of the eighteenth century saw harpsichord building in sharp decline; nevertheless, two harpsichords signed by Abraham's son Joseph dated 1798 and one dated 1800 still exist. 
An examination of the 1792 will of Abraham Kirkman shows that at his death his wife was still alive. Three sons are mentioned: Jacob, Joseph, and George Frederick; and five daughters: Charlotte Susannah, who was married to William Wheatley, organist at Greenwich, Harriet, Frances, Ann, and Maria -- the last four were under twenty-one at that date. He also owned a copyhold house at Hammersmith (presumably the house where he died), which had outhouses, buildings, a garden, and land near the River Thames. This is probably the building now called Kent House which still stands, and two more houses near to it. His Greenwich property in Crooms Hill (probably the White House) was leased to a Mrs Farr for $150 per annum. In addition there was a further house at Crooms Hill, a leasehold house in Upper Brook Street, another in Compton Street, two in Kennington, Vauxhall, one in King's Row, Grosvenor Street, and others in John Street, Tottenham Court Road, and Peter Street, and an estate in Carmarthen. Despite the amount of property owned by Abraham at his death, it was probably less than half that of his uncle Jacob. 
Abraham's wife, Charlotte, died intestate in 1798 at Upper Berkeley Street. The administration of her goods, credits, and chattels was granted to her two sons, named as Joseph and Abraham, on 16 November 1798, by which time the effects were valued at less than $1000. 


@@@@@


doc= 46474


Shudi, Burkat (1702-1773), harpsichord maker, was born at Schwanden in the canton of Glarus, Switzerland, on 13 March 1702, the second son of Joshua (or Josua) Tschudi, wool merchant, surgeon, and councillor of Schwanden. His mother's maiden name was Elmer. The Tschudi family believed it could trace its origins back to a Johann Tschudi who in 870 had supposedly been mayor of Glarus, while another ancestor, Heinrich (1074-1149), had been appointed landholding tenant of the Glarus region in 1128. 
Because of the local abundance of wood, the main trade in Glarus was the making of wooden frames for school slates and various articles of furniture. A shortage of wood supplies in the early eighteenth century, however, the result of deforestation, led several woodworkers to become wood merchants. Many families were put out of business when the local parliament decreed that for ten years no wood might be sold outside the country. Despite the flexibility shown by some in becoming cotton weavers, the young Shudi could see little future in remaining at Glarus, and at the age of sixteen, having been taught joinery and cabinet-making by his uncle, he emigrated to London. There at some time in the 1720s he was apprenticed to Hermann Tabel, the Flemish-born harpsichord maker whose apprentices also included Jacob Kirkman. 
Shudi's earliest surviving instrument, closely based on Tabel's only extant one of 1721, is a two-manual harpsichord of 1729, which carries on the reverse of the nameboard the inscription: 'QUESTO CIMBALO E DELa SIGra ANNA STRADA 1731, LONDON'. It is believed that the instrument was given to Anna Strada, a celebrated singer, by Handel, with whom Shudi was friendly. Since Tabel had been trained in the workshop of the Couchets in Antwerp, the 1729 Shudi harpsichord is a direct link with those of the Flemish tradition. Shudi must have been free of Tabel by 1729, and it was at about this time that he married Catherine Wild (1704- 'c'.1758), daughter of Hans Jakob and Salome Wild ('nee' Kubli), natives of Schwanden by then resident in London. Following his first wife's death he married Elizabeth Meier. 
Shudi's business was at first conducted from his house at what is now 1 Meards Street, off Dean Street. Later, in 1742, he moved to 33 Great Pulteney Street, where his sign displayed the plume of feathers, a reflection of the patronage of Frederick, prince of Wales, which he enjoyed. The two-manual harpsichord he made in 1740 for the prince has been on view at Kew Palace. It was probably in 1745 that the German painter Marcus Tuscher executed the charming and well-known portrait of the Shudi family. Shudi made a total of five harpsichords for Frederick the Great of Prussia, and it is thought that the first, of about 1745, is the one illustrated in the Tuscher painting. In 1761 a young Scottish cabinet-maker, John Broadwood, was apprenticed to Shudi; he married Shudi's daughter, Barbara, in 1769 and later in the same year was taken into partnership by Shudi. Thereafter the harpsichords made by the firm were signed 'Burkat Shudi et Johannes Broadwood' and continued to be signed thus even after Shudi's retirement in 1771 to a house in Charlotte Street and his death at the same house on 19 August 1773. 
Shudi made instruments similar to those of Kirkman, usually in traditional English cases with exteriors of panels of walnut or mahogany, surrounded with ornamental stringing and cross-banding. The majority of the surviving harpsichords have two manuals with the specification of two 8 foot registers and one 4 foot, and a lute register available on the upper manual. Single-manual instruments were also made with two 8 foot and one 4 foot or simply two 8 foot registers. Machine stops and buff (or harp) stops are to be found, and some of the more elaborate harpsichords have the Venetian swell (patented by Shudi on 18 December 1769). It seems that Shudi also collaborated with Samuel Green and John Snetzler in the making of claviorgana. By good fortune a sizeable amount of archival material concerning the production of the Shudi and later the Shudi and Broadwood workshops survives, from which it is clear that instruments were made for a number of famous people in eighteenth-century England and were also exported to many parts of Europe and beyond. 


@@@@@


doc= 46476


Huddleston, Robert (1814-1887), poet, was born at Moneyreagh, co. Down, the son of a small farmer. Few details can be ascertained concerning his upbringing and early life. His marital status is uncertain: though he frequently adopts the persona of the young (or not so young) suitor, at least one semi-autobiographical poem, 'Epistle to Mr John Pettigrew', mentions an 'auld guid dame' ('Poems and Songs on Different Subjects', 51). He had little formal schooling, having attended a local school in Moneyreagh for only a few years, and is at pains to point out that he is no scholar and that standard literary English is not his natural medium: 'I can neither read Hebrew, Greek, Latin, or French. Thank my stars, I can read English a kind of a way, but to write it correctly, I fear, I would blunder' (ibid., x). Far from this proving an impediment, he professes to prefer 'the common-place illiterate school learning of a mere homely peasant' to the attainments of 'highly educated gentlemen' ('Poems and Songs on Rural Subjects', iv). Thus his work possesses the eccentricity characteristic of the autodidact. 
From the early 1840s Huddleston began to contribute poems to local newspapers and periodicals. In 1843 he issued a florid prospectus and began to solicit subscriptions. His first volume, 'A Collection of Poems and Songs on Rural Subjects', appeared the following year, but a disagreement with his publisher over the printing costs followed, when some subscribers defaulted. Undaunted, he saw a second volume through the press in 1846, 'A Collection of Poems and Songs on Different Subjects'. This too met with a lukewarm reception. Disillusioned by the fact that his poetic genius had not been recognized, he turned his attentions to prose, planning to rival William Carleton as a great Ulster novelist. He was following the example of the Larne poet James McHenry (1785-1845), who had published successful novels in Philadelphia before returning to Belfast. In 1860 Huddleston issued a prospectus for a work entitled 'The Adventures of Hughey Funny, or, The many Tales of Love', but once again quarrelled with his publisher. He turned again to poetry and contributed a few poems in the 'Ulster Magazine' (1860-63), but much of his work after 1846 remains unpublished. 
According to J. Hewitt, Huddleston was one of the last folk-bards of Ulster (Hewitt, 54). He was a strong defender of the use of vernacular Ulster Scots, which he termed 'Ulster Irish' ('Poems and Songs on Rural Subjects', ix). He was equally vehement in his rejection of the charge of imitating Robert Burns. Never one to exercise false modesty, he believed that Burns was overestimated to the same degree that Huddleston was underestimated. 'Though I may not be a Robert Burns to the lowland Scottish peasantry, let me hope, at least, that I shall one day be a Robert Huddleston to the Ulster Irish' ('Poems and Songs on Different Subjects', xi). His uncompromising use of Ulster Scots, together with an equally uncompromising political radicalism, made it difficult for him to publish his work. Nevertheless, he was acclaimed by David Herbison and his local fellow bards as the 'Bard of Moneyrea', in which place he died on 15 February 1887, still lamenting his literary obscurity. 


@@@@@


doc= 46477


McKenzie, Andrew (1780-1839), poet, was born at Dunover, co. Down, the second son of a small farmer. One of a family of six, his parents struggled to raise and educate him. He attended a local school for a brief period, and at the age of fourteen he began an apprenticeship as a linen weaver. He developed a passion for books, not only reading poetry but also composing verses at the loom. At the age of twenty he began to publish his verses in the 'Belfast News-Letter', under the pseudonym Gaelus. His contributions were well received: he began to establish a reputation in Belfast literary circles and was acclaimed by his fellow weaver poets as 'the Bard of Dunover'. 
McKenzie exchanged poetic epistles with Robert Anderson, the Cumberland Bard (1770-1833), who was employed as a calico print designer in Doagh and Carnmoney, co. Antrim, between 1808 and 1818. Anderson, who had himself published 'Ballads in the Cumberland Dialect' in 1805, encouraged McKenzie to write in Ulster Scots. In 1810 McKenzie published his first collection, 'Poems and Songs, on Different Subjects', which attracted more than 2000 subscribers, and was favourably reviewed. It earned him over $200. 
McKenzie bought a fishing boat and built a cottage at Dunover, which he called Mount Gaelus. Yet catastrophe followed: the fishing boat was wrecked, and he narrowly escaped drowning; and he was evicted from his cottage, because he had failed to secure a lease. He, his wife, and six children found themselves homeless and destitute. He eventually found employment in Belfast as a seller of religious tracts, but never again enjoyed financial security. Despite his poverty, McKenzie published a second collection in 1832, 'The Masonic Chaplet', largely through the support of several lodges of freemasons, of which society he was an enthusiastic member. However, both his health and his fortunes continued to decline. He died in Belfast in extreme poverty on 10 May 1839, and was buried in the Shankill graveyard on 13 May. 
McKenzie belongs to the group of Ulster poets known as the rhyming weavers, who wrote in both standard English and vernacular Ulster Scots. His work reveals a tension between his desire for wider literary recognition and his position as a local folk-poet, articulating the hardships, fears, and aspirations of the rural working class. In 'Gannaway Burn' ('Masonic Chaplet', 34-5) he succeeds in combining pastoral idyll with the use of Ulster Scots to evoke the lost rural landscape of his youth. 


@@@@@


doc= 46480


Sturgis, Sir Mark Beresford Russell Grant- (1884-1949), civil servant in Ireland, was born at 17 Carlton House Terrace, London, on 10 July 1884, the son of Julian Russell Sturgis (1848-1904), barrister and novelist, and his wife, Mary Maud, daughter of Colonel Marcus de la Poer Beresford. Educated at Eton College, he came from a landed and literary background. He was assistant private secretary to Herbert Asquith when chancellor of the exchequer (1906-8), and private secretary to him as prime minister (1908-10). He served as a special commissioner of income tax in 1910. On 9 July 1914 he married Lady Rachel Montagu Stuart-Wortley (1894-1968), daughter of the second Earl Wharncliffe of Wortley, Yorkshire. They had two sons (one of whom was killed on active service in 1944) and one daughter. 
Sturgis was chairman of the treasury selection board (1919-20). Early in 1920 -- during the Anglo-Irish War (1919-21) -- he was appointed to the British administration in Dublin Castle as part of a new team installed by Lloyd George's government, with Sir Hamar Greenwood as chief secretary. He was listed as private secretary to the under-secretary (Sir John Anderson), though he was originally selected as joint assistant under-secretary with his colleague Alfred 'Andy' Cope. As Anderson's principal assistant he was his point of liaison with the viceroy's aide, Richard Wyndham-Quin (later Viscount Dunraven). More important he became the chronicler of events from the vantage point of the castle through his five volumes of diaries, kept from July 1920 to January 1922. A selection from these was published as 'The Last Days of Dublin Castle' (1999), edited by Michael Hopkinson. This 'vivid and breezy' account is informed throughout by 'an appealingly cynical view of humanity in general and those he describes as 'bigwigs' in particular' (Hopkinson, introduction, Sturgis, 'Last Days', 9). He was, according to one historian, 'an amiable man and dashing huntsman, who brought a rare quality of gaiety to the dismal surroundings of the Castle' (Townshend, 80). 
Although a supporter of the union Sturgis was against force being used to maintain it, and believed that the prime minister should make a generous offer of self-government. 'The Irish aren't fit to govern themselves', he once declared, adding the crucial rider 'but I'll be damned if the English aren't either -- or even the Welsh' (Sturgis, diary, 20 Aug 1920; Sturgis, 'Last Days', 17). He was critical of reprisals by crown forces and found fault with the cabinet for turning a blind eye. He saw correctly that these merely diminished support for government policy, and feared that agents of the crown would prove impossible to control, deploring the prevalence of 'so much talk as if we had nothing to do but beat an enemy' (Sturgis, 'Last Days', 100). Yet he was in no way sympathetic to Sinn Fein or to Irish nationalism in general, though he did differentiate between its shades: concerning the Irish self-government bill of 1920, he noted the hostility of 'the whole of Irish public opinion, reasonable or unreasonable' (ibid., 2). His own preferred solution was twofold: an offer of dominion status and the placement of British police and army under the same command. He advised Lloyd George that martial law would succeed in Ireland only if a 'take it or leave it' settlement was offered first, to put the onus of war onto Sinn Fein if it was refused. 
When the truce was arranged on 11 July 1921, for which he gave the primary credit to his colleague Cope, Sturgis observed that the Irish had weakened their bargaining position by agreeing to meet on British turf in London. With respect to the partition of Ireland he recorded that Sir James Craig, the leader of the northern unionists, had told him that he was going to sit on Ulster 'like a rock' and let the prime minister and Sinn Fein arrive at a settlement for the south. For Sturgis, as for many of his colleagues in the administration, northern unionism was a closed book, and he contrived never to visit Belfast. He played no part in the negotiations preceding the Anglo-Irish treaty, the successful conclusion of which he ascribed to the leadership skills of Lloyd George. This was 'another milestone', he wrote, 'but if Ireland -- or England -- expects that the golden age is dawning I hope they won't be too roughly disillusioned. It is a huge gamble and we are groping in the dark' (Sturgis, 'Last Days', 227). His diary ends shortly afterwards, on 20 January 1922, with a reference to the discovery of a cupboard full of valuable documents on British-Irish relations 'and few later than 1870' (Sturgis, 'Last Days', 228); many of these have since been damaged or lost. 
From March 1922 Sturgis was assistant under-secretary of state for Irish services, effectively succeeding both his former superiors Sir Hamar Greenwood and Sir John Anderson, under the aegis of the Colonial Office in London. He had previously contemplated a return to the capital with some distaste: 'here one is up the neck in intrigue plot and counterplot with a small spice of danger, all mixed up with the life of something like the big country house in the old days' (6 November 1920: Sturgis, 'Last Days', 68). Refusing to 'live like moles' in the castle, he and his wife had continued to enjoy visits to the theatre, horse-racing, and polo during their time in Dublin, (Sturgis, 'Last Days', 20). He was awarded a KCB in 1923 and left his post the following year, finishing his career at the treasury, latterly as presiding special commissioner of income tax. He took the additional surname of Grant in 1935 on inheriting the Hillersdon estate near Cullompton, Devon, and died on 29 April 1949 at 99 Cromwell Road, South Kensington, London. 
Sturgis's diary remains an invaluable inside source on the Dublin Castle administration, filling many gaps in official records by revealing informal relationships and the influences of ministers and civil servants upon one another. They give some support to the notion that the vacillation of Greenwood's administration left many important decisions to civil servants. His commentary on the most important participants in this climactic episode is witty and wry, and reveals much of the character of Sturgis, a man whose 'insouciant air', according to Warren Fisher, hid 'a shrewd judgement' (Sturgis, 'Last Days', 7). 


@@@@@


doc= 46486


Buckland, Mary (1797-1857), geological artist and curator, was born on 20 November 1797 in St Helen's parish, Abingdon, Berkshire, the eldest daughter of Benjamin Morland (1768-1833), solicitor (and a member of the West Ilsley brewing family), and his wife, Harriet Baster (1777-1799). Benjamin Morland was much involved in local politics and had made money during the Napoleonic wars. He was also involved in both canal promotions and Forest of Dean coalmines. 
Mary Morland's mother died just over a year after her birth and it was her father who first aroused in her an interest in geology. She was educated in Southampton but also developed a close relationship with the childless regius professor of anatomy at Oxford, Sir Christopher Pegge (1764/5-1822), and spent some of her childhood with him and his wife in Oxford. Pegge had been an early advocate of the importance of teaching geology at Oxford, and had given a number of private lectures in mineralogy. His admiration of Mary Morland culminated in his bequest to her in 1822 of 'his mineral cabinets and all the minerals and fossils contained in them at the time of my decease and all my books of natural history and comparative anatomy as a mark of my esteem and regard for her' (will of Christopher Pegge). 
On 31 December 1825, at Marcham, Berkshire, Mary Morland married William Buckland (1784-1856), professor of geology and mineralogy at Oxford University, who was thirteen years her senior. She clearly brought her own geological interests to this marriage, so the famous 1839 anecdote of their introduction -- in a Dorset coach discovering a mutual admiration for Georges Cuvier -- may have had some truth to it. Mary was certainly involved in independent geological investigations by 1819, when Buckland first mentions his extensive obligations to her and had been sending Georges Cuvier drawings of 'Megalosaurus' (later published by William Buckland) from 1822. 
Mary Buckland played a vital, if now forgotten, role in her husband's meteoric rise as geologist and founder of the Oxford school of geology. She accompanied him on a year-long wedding tour of the continent, and on their return she created a home for him in which the 'dust and rubbish [were] held sacred to geology' (Fox, 1.83). She corrected Buckland's fine prose and wrote much of it at his dictation. Her skill as an artist was also put to use in Buckland's wonderfully illustrated 'Reliquiae diluvianae' (1823) and his 'Bridgewater Treatise', 'Geology and Mineralogy' (1836). She was 'neat and clever in mending fossils' with specially developed cements, in making models of them, and in assisting Buckland's experiments to reproduce fossil tracks -- all vital evidence for Buckland's science. She was Buckland's curator, and 'hardly a fossil or bone in the Oxford Museum... [had] not her handwriting upon it' (Kolbl-Ebert, 33). 
Mary Buckland also played a vital role in the education of the five of her nine children who survived childhood; the eldest, Francis (Frank) Buckland (1826-1880), became a renowned naturalist. Worn out with caring for her husband, who had slipped into mental decline from about 1842 and had been placed in John Bush's Mental Asylum at Clapham in London in 1850, Mary Buckland died on 30 November 1857 at St Leonards, Sussex. She was buried at Islip, Oxfordshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 46493


Anderson, Arthur (1792-1868), shipowner, was born at Grimista, near Lerwick, Shetland Islands, on 19 February 1792, the eldest son of Robert Anderson. After a brief education from a local minister, his earliest employment was as a 'beach boy', preparing dried fish. In 1808 he joined the Royal Navy as a volunteer and in 1810 he became a midshipman, serving as a captain's clerk. In 1815 he was discharged from the navy and went to London. He was taken on as a clerk by Brodie McGhie Willcox, a shipbroker and commission agent, and the two men became partners in 1822. In the same year Anderson married Mary Ann Hill, daughter of Christopher Hill, a Scarborough shipowner. In 1825 the firm of Willcox and Anderson first went into shipowning and traded to the Iberian peninsula, first with sailing ships, then chartered steamers. 
Between 1826 and 1834 Portuguese trade was disrupted by a struggle for the Portuguese throne between liberals and conservatives. Combining their political beliefs with their business interests, Willcox and Anderson supplied arms to the liberals and assisted with their final successful campaign in 1832-4. A similar conflict between liberals and conservatives then flared up in Spain. In the First Carlist War (1833-9) Willcox and Anderson backed the liberals and provided the ships which carried the British Legion to Spain in 1835 to fight the Carlists. The liberal victories in Portugal and Spain ensured that Willcox and Anderson had strong local support for their business activities. 
Willcox and Anderson decided to establish a regular steamship line between Britain and the Iberian peninsula. They would manage steamers chartered from Captain Richard Bourne of the Dublin and London Steam Packet Company. The British government supported the service by giving a mail contract to the new firm, the Peninsular Steam Navigation Company. The service began in September 1837. It was then proposed that the service should be extended to Alexandria. Passengers and mail could then cross Egypt and link up with a steamer service from the Red Sea to India. In 1839 the firm obtained a government mail contract to India and in 1840 it changed its name to the Peninsular and Oriental Steam Navigation Company (P. & O.). In the same year the firm obtained a royal charter and increased its authorized capital to $1 million. Willcox and Anderson were managing directors, with Anderson, known for his forceful character and strong opinions, as the more active of the two men. 
Despite the fact that his company relied heavily on government subsidies through mail contracts, Anderson was a free-trader and a member of the Anti-Corn Law League. In September 1847 he was elected as a radical Liberal MP for Orkney and Shetland, whose representation had earlier been controlled by the earl of Zetland; he held the seat until July 1852. He supported the abolition of the 'Navigation Acts' in 1849 and fiercely resisted parliamentary criticism that P. & O. had received too many government mail contracts. By 1845 the company was carrying mails beyond India to Singapore and Hong Kong, and in 1852 P. & O. was given the mail contract to Australia as well. 
In 1853 problems with the supply of coal to P. & O.'s home port of Southampton led Anderson to establish a steam colliery company, but its ships were requisitioned by the government during the Crimean War. On their return the coal problem did not seem so urgent and Anderson sought to find them work elsewhere. The steam colliery company was renamed the Union Steam Ship Company and in 1857 it secured the mail contract from Britain to Cape Colony and Natal. Anderson remained chairman of Union until his death and its operations had links with those of P. & O. in the Indian Ocean. The Union Line was linked in 1900 with Donald Currie's Castle Line to form the Union Castle Line, the principal shipping line to South Africa. 
Between 1835 and the time of his death Anderson was an important link between his home islands and developments in the wider world. He set up the Shetland Fishery Company in 1837 and used his Spanish connections to revive the market for Shetland dried fish in that country. Anderson encouraged the hosiery industry in the islands and successfully agitated for mail to be carried to the Shetlands by steamship. He also set up a newspaper, a school, and a home for the widows of fishermen in the Shetlands. 
Between 1840 and 1855 the P. & O. fleet grew from seven to forty-two steamships, but such expansion led to financial problems. Willcox and Anderson agreed to repay a substantial part of their income to assist the company. Willcox withdrew from active management during the 1850s, but Anderson remained at the forefront, even after he became chairman in 1862 on the death of Willcox. In 1858 P. & O. regained the Australian mail contract lost shortly after the Crimean War, and in 1864 the first P. & O. steamer reached Japan. By the time of Anderson's death in 1868 the P. & O. had the largest commercial fleet of steamships in the world and provided the main link between Britain and its imperial possessions in India, the Far East, and Australia. 
Anderson, who was chairman of the General Association of Steamship Owners, wrote a number of pamphlets on general questions of policy, including steam communication with the Orient (1843) and the importance of steamships for Britain's national defences (1852). He had a series of steam yachts for relaxation and was active as a philanthropist. He set up a retirement fund for P. & O. employees and established a school in Southampton for the children of the staff. At his home, The Grove, Norwood, south of London, he endowed a working men's institute. Anderson died of bronchitis at 18 Park Lane, London, on 27 February 1868. 


@@@@@


doc= 46494


Maunder, Annie Scott Dill (1868-1947), astronomer, was born on 14 April 1868 in Strabane, co. Tyrone, the second of three children and the younger daughter of William Andrew Russell (1824-1899), minister of the Presbyterian church in that town, and his wife, Hester (Hessy) Nesbitt Russell, 'nee' Dill, who belonged to a prominent Ulster family. She was educated at home and at the Ladies' Collegiate School (later Victoria College), Belfast. She entered Girton College, Cambridge, at the age of eighteen on an open scholarship and took part one of the mathematical tripos in 1889 with second-class honours. After a year as a mathematics mistress at the ladies' high school in Jersey she obtained a post at the Royal Greenwich Observatory in September 1891 as a 'lady computer', and was assigned to the solar department under Edward Walter Maunder (1851-1928). She also had to take her place with other computers on the observing rota for the transit circle, which meant regular night duty. Annie spent four years on the Greenwich staff, and resigned on 31 October 1895 before her marriage to Maunder on 28 December. 
Annie Maunder continued with determination to pursue practical astronomy within the limitations of her new circumstances. She accompanied her husband on eclipse expeditions, three of which were favoured by good weather. With a modest grant from Girton in 1897 she acquired a short-focus camera, which she used with great success to photograph the outer solar corona in India in 1898, capturing a coronal streamer extending to fourteen solar radii, the longest ever recorded up to that time. This, and her other photographs of the corona and of the Milky Way, were included in 'The Heavens and their Story' (1910), published under the Maunders' joint names but in fact principally her work. 
Annie Maunder collaborated with her husband in his well-known work on the periodicity of sunspots. She also produced independently a catalogue of some 600 recurrent sunspot groups recorded at Greenwich (1907). Another, less fortunate, analysis (1907), showing an apparent east-west imbalance in the visibility of spots on the sun's surface during the previous sunspot cycle, caused some discussion among solar observers, but this was undoubtedly a spurious effect. 
Mrs Maunder returned to her former duties at the Greenwich observatory as a wartime volunteer from 1915 to 1920. In 1916 she became a fellow of the Royal Astronomical Society, following the admission of women to membership. She had joined the British Astronomical Association as early as 1892 and served it assiduously in various capacities, including fifteen years as editor of its journal. In her later years she acquired an interest in ancient astronomies and came to be regarded as an authority in this field. Her very last paper (1936) was a revised estimate of the date for the origin of the constellations, which she placed at 2900 BC. 
Annie Maunder survived her husband by almost twenty years, and died at her home, 52 Elms Crescent, Wandsworth, London, on 15 September 1947, in her eightieth year. She had no children. 


@@@@@


doc= 46505


Merry, James (1805-1877), ironmaster and coalmaster, was born at Nettleholes Farm in the parish of New Monkland, Lanarkshire, the son of James Merry, coalmaster, and Janet Creelman. His father was already in business in a small way as a colliery proprietor, supplying the Glasgow market along the recently opened Monkland Canal. Merry's early education was at the local parish schools in Langloan and Airdrie, followed from 1815 by attendance at Glasgow grammar school after his parents moved to Glasgow to control their mining concerns from an office opened at the canal basin at Port Dundas. He afterwards attended classes at Glasgow University, where he probably first met his future partner, Alexander Cunninghame, whose family already operated mines on the family lands of Craigends in Renfrewshire. 
Merry began his business training as assistant to his father, learning from him in the 1820s all the practical aspects of mining, and details of accounts and leases. He was taken into partnership in 1831, and when his father retired in 1835 Merry was sole proprietor of the firm of James Merry Junior, coalmaster. During the next twenty years he built a large business empire, in partnership with Cunninghame. The opportunity came with the spectacular growth of the Scottish pig-iron trade following J. B. Neilson's innovation, in 1828, of the hot blast in the manufacture of iron. The Monklands area, where Merry held his mineral leases at the eastern end of the Monkland Canal, was rich in coal and iron seams and was also being opened up by Scotland's first railways. Seven new ironworks had opened in the area between 1828 and 1838, and Merry joined in partnership with Cunninghame and a Leith merchant, Alexander Allison, to raise the capital to open the Carnbroe Iron Works, operated by the new partnership of Allison & Co. The opening of the Glasgow, Paisley, Kilmarnock, and Ayr Railway in 1840 carried the new iron industry into Ayrshire, where in 1842 Allison & Co. bought out the leases from an insolvent partnership which had partly erected blast furnaces at Glengarnock. Merry, Allison, and Cunninghame operated this venture as the Glengarnock Iron Company, and when Allison retired in 1845, the controlling firm became that of Merry and Cunninghame, which soon added a third ironworks at Ardeer in 1854. By then the firm operated three ironworks, twelve collieries, and numerous iron mines and was the second-largest producer of pig iron, and third in rank as colliery operators, in Scotland. 
During this rapid expansion Merry was the dominant partner, daily in the offices of the works, and controlling every aspect of operations. He combined technical expertise with a detailed knowledge of local mineral leases, systematically negotiating a mineral bank of leasehold agreements with landowners in Ayrshire and Lanarkshire. He was forceful, even ruthless in business, and had a reputation for aggressiveness in management, regularly breaking strikes at his works by importing highland and Irish labour. His companies were the most notorious operators of truck shops in the mining districts, controlling one-third of those operating in Scotland. 
By the early 1860s daily management was in the hands of Cunninghame and his cousin, John, for from 1855 Merry had used his industrial wealth to develop other interests; indeed from 1866, when Alexander Cunninghame died, John Cunninghame was in partnership with Merry and ran the business. In 1847, aged forty-two, Merry had married Anne McHardie, whose father, James McHardie, was sheriff-clerk of Glasgow and owner of the Cleddens estate near Glenboig, Lanarkshire, another rich coal and iron area; they had two sons. The marriage was his entree into Glasgow society, as his wife was a noted beauty and socialite. The following year Alexander Cunninghame married Anne's sister, binding the families in ties that were more than commercial. 
Merry's ambitions, however, were wider still and developed in parallel with his consuming passion for horse-racing. He had been a figure on the Scottish racing circuits from the 1830s, but in 1855, the year he opened Ardeer, he also purchased the famous yellow and black racing colours left free on the death of the marquess of Westminster. That year he won the Two Thousand Guineas for the first time with Lord of the Isles, his first son was born, and he and his family moved from their house in Athole Place, Glasgow, to their new residence, Culdees Castle, at Auchterarder in Perthshire. About 1857 they moved again, to their estate of Belladrum at Beauly, Inverness-shire. 
From this platform Merry contested Glasgow as a Liberal in 1857 and lost. Later that year he fought and won the Falkirk burghs, defeating George Baird of Gartsherrie in a contest that was the subject of a petition to the House of Commons on grounds of corrupt practices during the election. Merry was unseated, but in 1859 he regained the house and served continuously as MP for the Falkirk burghs until his retiral at the general election of 1874, when he was already in ill health. London society was opened up to him through his Westminster seat, and during the period from 1859 to 1875 he developed a highly successful stable, winning virtually every major race, including twice taking the St Leger and Two Thousand Guineas, and the Derby; he also won the Oaks. In London he based himself at his residence in Eaton Square, and enjoyed membership of Brooks's and the Reform Club. 
In ill health in 1874, Merry attempted to take advantage of the new joint stock legislation to convert the partnership to a public company with $1.5 million capital to purchase the partners' shares. The flotation collapsed with the ending of the mid-Victorian boom in 1873-4, and Merry was obliged to repurchase the issued shares at par, the company reverting to co-partnery. This coincided with his sale of his stables, which realized 21,650 guineas. With this reverse he retired from the partnership, which had received less and less of his attention in the twenty years since he had taken to country living and enjoying his life as an MP and a horse-racing patron. In Inverness-shire he was a deputy lieutenant of the county and also a justice of the peace. 
The dominant partner in Merry and Cunninghame, Merry created a business empire which ranked second only to the Bairds of Gartsherrie among the coal and iron dynasties of mid-nineteenth-century Scotland. Nevertheless, when he died on 3 February 1877, it was at his London home, 68 Eaton Square, far from the grime of the coal and iron districts of the west of Scotland. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 46510


Mure, David, Lord Mure (1810-1891), judge and politician, was born on 21 November 1810, the fourth of the ten children of Colonel William Mure of Caldwell, vice-lieutenant of Renfrewshire and rector of Glasgow University, and his wife, Anne, daughter of Sir James Hunter Blair, baronet, of Dunskey in Wigtownshire. He had two brothers and seven sisters of whom the most prominent besides himself was his eldest brother, William Mure (1799-1860), historian and Peelite MP. Mure was educated at Westminster School and then at the University of Edinburgh, where he was a member and president of the Speculative Society, and was called to the Scottish bar in 1831. He specialized in conveyancing and succession law in a modest practice which benefited from his brother's west of Scotland connections. In 1841 he married Helen Tod (died 1849); they had one son and three daughters. 
Like his eldest brother, Mure was a conservative, but he cannot be counted as a Peelite. From 1843 to 1846, during Peel's second administration, he was one of the junior counsels for the crown in Scotland and was appointed to the same office under the Derby administration in 1852, thus showing his allegiance to the rump of the Conservative Party in the years after the split over corn-law repeal. From 1853 to 1858, however, Mure was sheriff of Perthshire, an appointment made under the Aberdeen coalition indicating that despite taking office under Derby he remained at least part-way acceptable to the Peelites and their whig allies in Scotland. He again accepted office in Derby's second administration, first as solicitor-general for Scotland from the summer of 1858, and then in the spring of 1859 as lord advocate for Scotland in succession to Charles Baillie, who became a court of session judge as Lord Jerviswoode. Mure's career is often compared with Baillie's: both came from well-established Conservative families; both became sheriffs in 1853; both were lord advocate for a short period in 1858-9; and both eventually served as court of session judges. 
Mure succeeded in narrowly winning Buteshire -- thanks largely to the exercise of the duke of Hamilton's influence on the Isle of Arran -- at the general election of 1859, and thus for the first time had a parliamentary seat to go with his new office. This, however, marked the high point of his political career. The fall of the Derby ministry in June of that year meant that he left political office for the last time after only a few weeks as lord advocate. In 1865 he accepted the office of lord ordinary in the outer house of the court of session from the whig lord advocate, James Moncreiff, with the courtesy title of Lord Mure. He thus again showed his cross-party acceptability. As a judge of 'first instance' he was apparently successful (few of his judgments were reversed), and popular. In 1874 he was made a lord of justiciary. In the inner house of the court of session he made his mark in the period following the failure of the City of Glasgow Bank in the 1880s. He resigned from the bench in 1889. 
Mure was a strong supporter of the established Church of Scotland, defending its control over educational provision, and was for many years an elder at St Stephen's Church in Edinburgh. He died at Bournemouth on 11 April 1891, and was buried at the Dean cemetery in Edinburgh. 


@@@@@


doc= 46514


Dacre, William, third Baron Dacre of Gilsland and seventh Baron Greystoke (1500-1563), magnate, was the eldest son and heir of Elizabeth Greystoke, Baroness Greystoke (1471-1516), and Thomas Dacre, second Baron Dacre of Gilsland (1467-1525), her husband. Born on 29 April 1500, he succeeded to the barony of Greystoke on his mother's death in August 1516, and to the barony of Gilsland on his father's death in October 1525. He married Elizabeth Talbot (died 'c'.1559), the fourth earl of Shrewsbury's daughter, probably about 1520. Towards the end of his father's long rule of the borders, Lord Greystoke served successively as his captain of Norham and Carlisle and deputy warden of the west marches. Yet the king's decision in mid-1525 to promote as earl of Cumberland a relative outsider to the county, Lord Clifford, and then to appoint the new earl as deputy warden, was hardly likely to commend him to the Dacres. Trouble ensued after Lord William refused to surrender Carlisle Castle or to relinquish farms of land traditionally associated with the wardenry. Cumberland found it impossible to rule without Dacre's co-operation: in 1527 the king finally agreed to appoint Dacre as warden, but further trouble followed over custody of Carlisle, which Cumberland retained until 1529. And whereas the earl of Northumberland, as incoming warden across the Pennines, received an enhanced salary and fee'd retainers to help him restore order, Dacre's salary remained the now traditional early Tudor $153 6's'. 8died a year, far less than fifteenth-century wardens. 
Anglo-Scottish hostilities recommenced in 1532-3, but the English military effort was concentrated on the opposite march -- even though the 'casus belli' was possession of the 'debateable land', north of Carlisle -- so leaving Dacre to shift for himself. When peace was finally concluded in May 1534, Dacre was suddenly arrested while in London to attend parliament. Concurrently, royal commissioners seized his property and vainly searched his residences for incriminating papers. None the less, Dacre was charged with treason for holding secret meetings and making private treaties with Scottish enemies in wartime for mutual indemnity from raids and invasions. These charges reflected the world of cross-border connections in which a conscientious warden necessarily moved so as to discharge his office. Dacre, for instance, generally enjoyed good relations with his Scottish counterpart and distant kinsman, Lord Maxwell. Yet in the process he risked accusations of getting too close to the king's enemies. Lady Dacre, who had come to London to plead for her husband, was ordered by the king to cease her intercessions until after his trial, on 9 July. There Dacre defended himself for seven hours and was eventually found not guilty. A great cheer went up in Westminster Hall when the verdict was announced. Apparently, the lords triers dismissed as proceeding from malice the evidence of the chief witness, Sir William Musgrave, formerly Dacre's household servant. Dacre was the only nobleman to be so acquitted during Henry VIII's reign, but the king none the less tried to cripple his influence in the west march. Dacre's subsequent pardon for misprision of treason cost $10,000: he paid 7000 marks of it within three months (the plate and ready money seized by the commissioners), the rest in instalments by 1541. He had also to surrender all letters patent and leases and live near London (later at Henderskelf, near the northern council's seat at Sheriff Hutton). Cumberland replaced him as warden, thereby further exacerbating the tensions between them arising out of the circumstances of Dacre's arrest, and Dacre was left to try to rebuild his credit by studious loyalty for the remainder of the reign. 
After recovering most of his property -- disputes with Cumberland, Musgrave, and Sir Thomas Wharton dragged on into the 1550s -- Dacre instituted a survey in 1536 of his Cumberland estates. Despite his pressing need for money, military service remained a priority: he ordered his officials not to take more than three years' rent for gressum (entry fine), and to let any vacant tenement to 'a good archer... and rather to him for lesse gryssome then to ane oder being none archer' (University of Durham, Howard of Naworth MS C/201/5, fols. 4'r'-4'v'). When the Pilgrimage of Grace began in October 1536, the rebels approached Dacre to lead them, but he rode instead to Naworth to stay the country. Only after his departure in early November did his Cumberland tenants join the pilgrimage. Finally, the following February, he hurried northwards again upon news of the siege of Carlisle, but his uncle, Sir Christopher, had already dispersed the rebels before his arrival. 
Dacre's loyalty was rewarded by appointment to the king's council in the north, but the king ignored the duke of Norfolk's recommendation concerning the wardenries, noting that Dacre's reappointment would stoke the feud with Cumberland. Instead, he appointed Wharton as deputy warden, supported by crown pensioners. Unsurprisingly, Dacre declined the lesser post as keeper of turbulent Tynedale: 'he had rather loose one fynger of every hande then to medle therwith' ('State Papers, Henry VIII', 5.108). The king also pointedly withheld Lanercost Priory, the traditional Dacre burial place, after its dissolution, granting it in 1542 to Dacre's illegitimate half-brother, Sir Thomas Dacre, a crown pensioner and follower of Wharton in the Dacre heartland and later a staunch protestant. The quarrelsome Wharton soon realized the difficulties of ruling without Dacre's co-operation. Even after Wharton's extensive landed acquisitions, Dacre's Cumberland estates (worth approximately $750 annually 'c'.1537-47 in a total rental of about $2500 per annum) were still worth more than Wharton's entire holdings, and Wharton's modest Cumberland possessions (former Percy estates around Cockermouth) were also in the strategically less important west of the county. Effectively, therefore, Wharton's suggestion in 1543 that the king exchange Dacre's three baronies of Burgh, Gilsland, and Greystoke for lands elsewhere was an admission of failure; but it was only after the old king's death that Protector Somerset had Dacre reappointed warden, on 17 April 1549. 
Dacre had commanded the rearguard in Somerset's Scottish expedition of 1547, but Somerset's Scottish adventures held fewer attractions for the succeeding Dudley regime, which distrusted both Dacre's regional dominance and also his religious conservatism. Dacre was ousted again in February 1551 and imprisoned in London for his feud with the Musgraves. He was finally reconciled with the Cliffords through the mediation of his brother-in-law, Shrewsbury: in 1554 Dacre's daughter Anne married Henry Clifford, second earl of Cumberland. Queen Mary reappointed him on 2 January 1554 (also briefly, as warden of the middle marches to May 1555), a reward for loyalty against Lady Jane Grey. Thereafter he served continuously, despite increasing age, infirmity, and complaints of misrule by local rivals, until April 1563. Elizabeth's distrust of Catholic nobles in sensitive posts was probably the main reason for his removal and replacement by the protestant Lord Scrope. His religious conservatism was well known: he had denounced the 'Book of Common Prayer' in the Lords during Edward VI's reign. In November he fell ill just before Sunday dinner at Kirkoswald and retired to the great chamber, saying: 'Thomas [his heir], take my place, for I am sick.' After lingering for three days he died about 4 or 5 a.m. on Thursday 18 November 1563, and following procession and funeral -- kept as traditional as possible -- he was buried in Carlisle Cathedral on 14 December. He had four sons, as well as his daughters, Anne and Magdalen ['see 'Browne, Magdalen, Viscountess Montagu]: Thomas, fourth Baron Dacre, whom Dacre matched with the earl of Westmorland's daughter; and Edward, Francis, and Leonard Dacre. 
Dacre's chequered career epitomized the difficulty encountered by Tudor marcher lords in trying both to meet the crown's increased expectations about what constituted acceptable conduct, and concurrently to preserve their estates and regional connection at a time when Tudor policy and economic pressures were steadily undermining traditional methods of border defence. In the face of Tudor notions of an ordered society, a more traditional aristocratic concept of order, focused on loyalty to the family lineage, pervaded the Dacre household. Dacre's son noted his father's concern 'for the continuance of his house in honour' and also 'his great foresight of the stay of his name' on the borders (Summerson, 2.519). Yet, without the steady royal backing his father had enjoyed as warden, Dacre's rule of the borders was undistinguished. His lifestyle was appropriately lavish: Naworth Castle was sumptuously furnished with large quantities of gold and silver plate, numerous carpets, cushions, and hangings, including eight 'large peaces of hanginges of the story of Julius Caesar', and others in red 'set with my lordes armes and cognysaunce' (TNA: PRO, SP 1/84, p. 6). In 1541/2 Dacre bought 104 yards of 'London tawny' red cloth for the livery of his servants. His table was similarly supplied with all manner of fish, meat, and wine: in 1529/30 Dacre purchased pepper, sugar, currants, green ginger, 'suketts', biscuits, 'marmulet', comfits, and nutmegs in London, and his household accounts for 1541/2 also list prunes, almonds, cinnamon, and liquorice. No wonder, then, that Bishop Best of Carlisle could describe him as 'something too mighty in this country and as it were a prince' (Bouch, 200-01). 


@@@@@


doc= 46515


Vernon, Henry, styled Baron Powys (1548-1606), landowner and peerage claimant, was born on Christmas day 1548, the elder son of Thomas Vernon (died 1557), of Stokesay, Shropshire, and his wife, Dorothy Lovel. His grandfather Thomas's marriage to Anne Ludlow, a coheir to the estate founded in the late thirteenth century by the famous wool merchant Lawrence of Ludlow, led to Henry's inheriting substantial Shropshire properties, and also a claim to greater eminence in the barony of Powys, founded on the belief that his maternal great-grandmother Elizabeth, wife of John Ludlow, was the daughter of Richard Grey, first Baron Grey of Powys. The death of Edward Grey, the fourth baron, without a legitimate heir in 1551 had led to Henry Vernon's father and uncle suing in chancery for the Powys lands and title; Henry himself devoted most of his adult life to the same cause. The records of this extended lawsuit, along with the survival of personal papers, help to make him one of the best-documented men of his rank from the Elizabethan age. 
Aged nine when his father died in 1557, Henry Vernon was probably given into the custody of his grandfather, who died in 1562. On 15 November 1564 his wardship and marriage were granted to the countess of Rutland. He entered the Middle Temple on 31 October 1568, and came of age on 25 December 1569. No later than September 1571 he had relaunched his father's bid to secure the barony of Powys. As far as the lands were concerned he faced the problem that the fourth baron had made a series of settlements entailing most of his estates on his illegitimate son Edward Grey. Vernon's response was undeniably imaginative, a bizarre story (which became ever more elaborate as time passed) that the last document had been quite literally signed and sealed posthumously, when conspirators acting for Grey had opened his father's coffin as it lay at Buildwas and manipulated the dead man's hand so as to obtain a signature and a seal on a blank sheet of parchment, on which a conveyance had then been drawn up. As well as discrediting Grey's claim Vernon also had to prove his own, by providing satisfactory evidence that his ancestor Elizabeth Ludlow had indeed been Richard Grey's daughter. His attempts to do so provoked counter-allegations of forgery, possibly justified -- he was said to have tried to strengthen his case by adding inscriptions to family tombs. 
Vernon enjoyed an early success about 1574 when he secured the manor of Pontesbury in the bench; but thereafter constant litigation, both at county assizes and in the Westminster courts, though it aroused strong feelings in the west midlands, and provoked two successive days of rioting at Bridgnorth in 1577, brought him little but frustration. Baron Burghley referred Vernon's claim to the heralds, who found nothing to support it. In 1578 the issue was farcically complicated when it transpired that important documents in the keeping of Sir John Throckmorton had been nibbled by mice and the missing words later written in, enabling Vernon to make further allegations of forgery on Grey's behalf. But though his negligence cost Throckmorton 1000 marks and led to one of his subordinates losing his post, their offence hardly affected the issue. Vernon persevered, however, and made his greatest effort in 1590 when he appealed directly to the queen for recognition of his title. Elizabeth referred the case to the justices while Vernon, hopeful of success, on 22 October 1590 signed a deed styling himself cousin and heir of the late Lord Powys. But the justices sent the case to Star Chamber, where it had already been heard several times, and Vernon's hopes faded. 
Possibly to build up an estate appropriate to a peerage title, Vernon bought four Herefordshire manors, paying $5500 for them between 1578 and 1581. The move proved unfortunate, for the vendors were in debt to the crown and by 1582 the manors had been taken into the queen's hands, reducing Vernon to trying to lease them from the crown. The costs of litigation were substantial, as were those of a lavish lifestyle. His account books show that he expected to dress well, purchasing such finery as a damask cloak with a velvet collar and 'a new taffeta hat with a bugle band and a black sprig in it' as well as a brush for his beard (TNA: PRO, SP 46/59, fol. 262). He usually travelled with a page and a handful of liveried attendants, but on 24 September 1583 he had a retinue of twenty-four men as he waited at Bewdley for the earl of Leicester (who did not come). He spent money on jewellery, gifts to musicians and paupers, books (in 1576 he bought Richard Edwards's 'Paradise of Dainty Devices' and an account of the Spanish destruction of Antwerp), and food, some of it exotic -- on 15 February 1583 he spent 2died on 'potata roots' (ibid., fol. 321). Inevitably he borrowed frequently, and was several times rumoured to be financially stretched. In 1584 it was claimed that he was 'greatly in debt bothe by statute and otherwise and had solde much of his lande', an allegation Vernon angrily denied, asserting that his estate was worth at least $100 'more than discended to him from his father or grandfather' (TNA: PRO, REQ 2/136/34). 
Disaster struck just when Vernon made his greatest effort. By Michaelmas 1591 he was in the Fleet, having backed a bond of $2000 for his cousin Francis Curzon of Kedleston. Curzon failed to pay and his creditors descended on his surety. While in prison Vernon received visits from a woman named Ursula Tey who claimed to be his wife. She was rumoured to be married to another man, and the warden of the Fleet was ordered to ensure 'that she slypp not to him in the house at any tyme disguised in man's apparell, as yt is likely she will, being the woman she is suspected to be' ('APC', '1591', 468-9). Late in 1592 Vernon obtained his release and subsequently married Ursula, but his fortunes never recovered. Overwhelmed by debts, in December 1596 he mortgaged Stokesay, subsequently obtaining the money to redeem the mortgage and pay his other debts by undertaking to sell the manor to Sir George Mainwaring. Vernon later tried to renege on the deal but on 11 July 1598 the sale went ahead, for $6000. In February 1597 he had sold Pontesbury for $1600 and a few days later conveyed Westbury, part of his inheritance, to his cousin Robert Vernon of Hodnet. 
By March 1599 Vernon was living in the Savoy, London, whence he claimed that Mainwaring owed him $3000; perhaps it was to settle this claim that on 4 March 1600 Mainwaring agreed to pay Vernon and his wife an annuity of $240. It was not much on which to keep up appearances (Vernon pertinaciously styled himself Lord Powys) and fend off creditors, and in Trinity term following he was outlawed for a debt of $400. Ursula seems to have died at the end of 1605, and by the following summer Vernon was living in Stoke Newington. He died there on 28 July 1606, having made a nuncupative will a few hours earlier, leaving all his worldly goods to one Peter Brambile, possibly his landlord; with perhaps characteristic panache he had declared that 'if they were a kingdom they were too little' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/110, no. 69). Litigation against Brambile by Vernon's next-of-kin John Curzon followed, unsuccessfully. In 1609 Robert Vernon allowed Edward Grey, son of Henry Vernon's opponent, to buy him out of his claim to the Powys lands; claims to the barony resurfaced at intervals for centuries. 


@@@@@


doc= 46516


Bevan, Silvanus (1691-1765), apothecary, was born in Swansea on 28 October 1691, the second son of Silvanus Bevan (1661-1727) and his wife, Jane, 'nee' Phillips. The descendant of influential and prosperous Welsh Quakers (his grandfather had been a Swansea alderman and a merchant), Silvanus moved to London as a young man and was apprenticed as an apothecary to a Mr Mayleigh. In July 1715, after serving his seven years' apprenticeship, Bevan gained his freedom of the Society of Apothecaries, and in December of the same year set up his own apothecary's shop at Plough Court, a cul-de-sac off Lombard Street. Bevan made the most of the Quaker reputation for honest dealing, which was an important consideration for purchasers of medicines at that time. His Quaker linkages were strengthened when he married Elizabeth Quare, daughter of the royal clockmaker Daniel Quare, at a Friends' meeting-house in the City on 9 November 1715. 
Bevan had a laboratory, with a still for preparing his medicines, which were usually compounded according to recipes in the various published pharmacopoeias. Bevan's catalogues listed such exotic remedies as 'mumia' (or Egyptian mummy), human skull, and a Venice treacle, which contained vipers. The business was well situated and Bevan -- joined in partnership by his younger brother, Timothy Bevan (1704-1786) -- prospered. Bevan increasingly practised medicine as well as pharmacy and became known as Dr Bevan. His interest in medicine is shown by a letter he sent in 1743 to the Royal Society (of which he had been elected a fellow in 1725), entitled 'An account of the extraordinary case of the bones of a woman growing soft and flexible'. He also took a keen interest in smallpox inoculation, corresponding on the subject with James Jurin, a well-known physician, who supported the practice of inoculation. 
Silvanus Bevan became a rich man and later lived in some style in Hackney. When he was seventy in 1761, a visitor described him in his retirement as 'living well on good food and drinks... [surrounded by a ]... variety of curious paintings and rich old china, and a large library containing books on most subjects'. He was described as 'one of the principal leading men among the Quakers' (Davies, 2.336-7). By then Bevan had relinquished his Plough Court partnership to his brother, Timothy, who continued the business (which in the nineteenth century, under William Allen and the Hanburys, became one of the leading chemists and druggists in London). 
Bevan's first marriage produced a son, but both mother and infant did not long survive. He later married Martha, daughter of Gilbert Heathcote of Derbyshire, but they had no children. Bevan died at Hackney on 8 June 1765 and was buried at the Bunhill Fields burial-ground. 


@@@@@


doc= 46517


Jack, Richard (d. 1759), mathematician and military engineer, was born in Scotland, and was living at Broad Garth, Newcastle upon Tyne, in 1737 and in Edinburgh in 1739. In the 'Caledonian Mercury' for 6 November 1739 and 26 September 1743 he advertised himself as giving a course on natural philosophy as well as a complete system of astronomy and geography, in which he would 'demonstrate both in Mathematics and Experiments'. During the Jacobite rising of 1745 Jack was engaged in protecting Edinburgh. In September 1746 he is known to have been in London, helping Henry Baker with astronomical work. 
Jack gained a certain notoriety in 1746 as the only witness among forty persons who gave evidence against General Sir John Cope concerning his conduct and behaviour at the battle of Prestonpans during the Jacobite rising. Sir John's army was defeated after only a very short engagement against a gathering of poorly armed Scottish highlanders, and he had rapidly retired from the battlefield to Berwick Castle with a few hundred men. He was examined by a military court in 1746, the British public at large seeing him to have grossly mismanaged his command, if not reacted with cowardice. The court of inquiry found no one ready to give evidence against Sir John, save Richard Jack. He had been serving with the king's troop as a fortifications engineer and was able to give a clear account of the battle, the nature of which was quite contrary to that of Sir John and his witnesses. Benjamin Robins was put up to write a lengthy introduction to the report of the court members, though he was not named as its author. When the report was laid before the king it resulted in Sir John's being totally exonerated. The report, if not the whole court martial, seems to have been a whitewash. 
Jack again advertised his lectures on natural and experimental philosophy in the 'Daily Advertiser' in 1751 and 1754. He advertised his gunnery (with board and lodging) for young men, and on 1 December 1757 his teaching of fortification. He also announced courses in which he used a 'large model of a 'regular' fortress' to 'discuss matters of outworks'. He served as an assistant engineer with the British expedition to Guadeloupe, which fell in May 1759, shortly before his death. Jack was noted for his co-operation with George Adams (1704-1773) in constructing a new type of refracting telescope. He was also mentioned in connection with the design of a sea quadrant made and sold by Adams: patent no. 656, 1750, was signed and sealed between them. 
Jack published at least three books: the first was 'The Elements of Conic Sections in Three Books' (1742). The subject of this work was frequently and profoundly addressed by the well-known contemporary Scot Robert Simson, and by Jack himself in a substantial article that appeared in the first edition of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' (1771). Jack's book demonstrated the principal properties of the parabola, the ellipse, and the hyperbola. On this and his other title-pages he asserted himself to be a teacher of mathematics. His second book, entitled 'The mathematical principles of the theory of the existence of God, geometrically demonstrated in three books' (1747), was dedicated to Hugh, third earl of Marchmont. In the course of the dedication Jack referred to his gaining the protection of the earl from his native countrymen, by whom he was driven out of Scotland after the rebellion. Jack's third work was 'Euclid's Data Restored to their True and Genuine Order... Agreeable to Pappus Alexandrinus' (1756); it was dedicated to James Dawkins of Laverstoke in recognition of Dawkins's then widely acclaimed 'Ruins of Palmyra and Balbec' (1753). In his advertisement in the 'Caledonian Mercury' in 1743 Jack stated his intention to publish his 'Elements of Arithmetic', in which 'will be laid down the Doctrine of Proportion', adding 'This Scheme is quite new, having no Precedent that he knows of', but the book does not appear to have been published. 
Jack died in Castle Street, Oxford Market, London, on 8 May 1759, leaving a widow, Elizabeth, and a son, also called Richard. A sale of his goods and books by auction took place in February the following year. 


@@@@@


doc= 46519


Huish, Mark (1808-1867), railway manager, was born on 9 March 1808 at Nottingham, the elder son of Mark Huish, a hosier, and Eliza, the daughter of John Gainsford of Worksop. His father was for many years deputy lieutenant of Nottinghamshire, and a staunch member of the congregation of the Church of Protestant Dissenters in High Pavement, Nottingham. Mark was educated in the classical tradition at Mr Taylor's school in Castle Gate. 
In 1823 Huish became a cadet in the East India Company army, and in the following year ensign with the 67th regiment, Bengal native infantry in Calcutta. Promoted to lieutenant with the newly created 6th extra regiment (later known as the 74th) in 1825, he was personal escort to Lord Amherst, the governor-general of Bengal from 1826 to 1830, and then spent five years at Chittagong as quartermaster and acting interpreter for the regiment. All this provided an invaluable, if somewhat arduous, training in administrative management, at a time when there were few training grounds for managers. In 1834 he returned to England on leave, and although promoted to captain in his absence he showed no inclination to return to India. Finding himself in Liverpool at the time of the 'railway mania' he looked for work in the industry, and in 1837 he was appointed to the post of secretary of the Glasgow, Paisley and Greenock Railway, with a salary of $200 p.a. 
Within a decade Huish progressed from modest official of a minor railway in Scotland to the highly paid chief executive of the largest company in the world in 1846. This astonishing rise demonstrated the opportunities which the railways in their pioneering stage provided for ambitious, energetic, and charismatic figures. Four years in Scotland gave him a thorough grounding in railway management at a formative stage; then in 1841 he was approached by the Grand Junction Railway, which was dissatisfied with its existing managers and was looking for both a competent administrator, and a skilful negotiator with other companies. On returning to Liverpool, Huish became secretary and general manager, and was plunged into, and clearly relished the cut and thrust of, English railway politics. He engineered the merger with the Liverpool and Manchester Railway in 1845, and also that with the London and Birmingham in the following year which created the London and North Western Railway (LNWR), a giant company, which formed a continuous route from London (Euston) to Birmingham, Liverpool, and Manchester. Huish was a natural choice to lead its executive as general manager. His salary of $2000 p.a. made him the supreme railway manager of his day. In the late 1840s and 1850s he was the lion of railway diplomacy. 
Huish's managerial abilities were notable, making him one of the leading railway executives of the nineteenth century. Known for his interest in rail safety, cost accounting, and financial management, he contributed to key debates about freight traffic management, permanent way costing, and telegraphic communication. He was, above all, a highly skilled traffic manager, who established the early railway cartels, dominated by LNWR. A master strategist of 'railway diplomacy' he found it difficult to delegate and became the scapegoat for the collapse of his cartel agreements in 1857. His Achilles' heel was undoubtedly an unscrupulous and often crude, bullying approach to business dealings. However, his manoeuvring and tendency to ride roughshod over officials of minor companies, and directors of major ones, finally caught up with him. He was forced to resign in November 1858 after a directorial coup led by Richard Moon, Edward Tootal, and George Carr Glyn. He then retired to the Isle of Wight, where he acted as a director of the Isle of Wight Railway, and chairman of two non-railway concerns, the Clifton Suspension Bridge Company and the Electric and International Telegraph Company. A somewhat disgraced figure in the 1860s, he nevertheless acted as arbitrator in a number of inter-railway disputes, and gave evidence to the royal commission on railways in 1867. He died on 18 January 1867 at his home, Combe Wood, Bonchurch, Isle of Wight, and was buried in St Boniface's graveyard there. He was survived by his wife, Margaret, but nothing else is known about his family life. 
While recent scholarship has placed Huish in his context -- that of traffic manager in the pioneering stage of railway development -- closer inspection reveals a thoughtful executive who contributed much to a broader understanding of the challenges of railway management. He was the general manager 'par excellence' of the early railway age, who demonstrated managerial capitalism at the proto-corporate stage of Britain's history. 


@@@@@


doc= 46523


Ingrams, (William) Harold (1897-1973), colonial official, was born on 3 February 1897, at The Schools, Kingsland, Shrewsbury, the son of the Revd William Smith Ingrams (1853-1939), an assistant master at Shrewsbury School (1883-1921), and his wife, Gertrude Mary Payne (1870/71-1947). Ingrams was educated at Shrewsbury School (1910-14) and in the First World War served as a subaltern in the King's Shropshire light infantry on the western front. In Belgium in 1916 he was wounded, and subsequently worked as a temporary civil servant at the Ministry of National Service. His wound left him permanently lame, though he made light of it and led an active life. He married, on 10 April 1918, Phyllis (1898-1982), daughter of Frederick Lofthouse Mulgrave, merchant. 
In 1919 Ingrams entered the colonial service and was appointed assistant district commissioner in Zanzibar: in 1925 he was promoted second assistant secretary. His varied tasks included organizing for the sultan a picnic for British naval officers and in 1924 accompanying the sultan to the British Empire Exhibition at Wembley. In 1927 he was awarded fourth class of the order of the Brilliant Star, Zanzibar. He enjoyed friendly relations with local Arabs and acquired a lasting interest in the Arab world. 
From 1927 to 1933 Ingrams was assistant colonial secretary in Mauritius, where white ants ate his pictures, books, and furniture. His first marriage ended in divorce. On 3 June 1930 he married at the Savoy Chapel, London, Doreen Constance Shortt (1906-1997) ['see 'Ingrams, Doreen Constance], an actress, the youngest daughter of Edward Shortt (1862-1935), a lawyer and politician; they had one daughter and one adopted Arab daughter. 
In 1934 Ingrams went to Aden as political officer. From 1934 he journeyed, partly by camel and donkey, in the Hadhramaut, the hinterland of Aden -- then little known to Europeans, and backward with slavery, armed feuding, and stinking insanitary villages -- and reported on conditions there. From 1937 to 1940 he was British resident adviser at Mukalla, capital of the Qa'iti sultanate, in the eastern Aden protectorate. Later described by James Lunt as 'a strong man, with a deep understanding of the Arab psychology' (Lunt, 103), he negotiated a truce, known as the Ingrams peace, by which the tribes agreed to end their internecine warfare. He became known as Al Muslahi, 'the settler [of disputes]', and numerous fathers offered him their daughters in marriage. He encouraged the sultan to modernize his state by road building among other measures, and the sultan bestowed on him the title Friend of Hadhramaut and made him a pasha. According to his wife, he had 'quite uncolonial ideas' (D. Ingrams, 69) on how the Hadhramaut should be developed, with minimal British personnel and intervention, and he wrote: 'It is an Arab country and Arab it must remain' (H. Ingrams, 'Arabia and the Isles', 354). In 1938 he visited Major Glubb's desert patrol of the Arab Legion in Transjordan, and modelled on it the Hadhrami Bedouin legion, with former Arab Legion NCOs and the red-and-white shamagh of the Arab Legion. 
Ingrams wore quasi-Arab dress -- which he claimed was more comfortable and practical and was considered a compliment by the local people -- and insisted his British staff did likewise. This was a debatable practice, criticized by the Dutch traveller Colonel van der Meulen, who visited them, as 'disguised Englishmen... a masquerade' (van der Meulen, 239-40), false to oneself and one's origins. 'The Times' later commented that 'nothing could in fact have been more English than the burly figure and the quizzical blue eyes under a shock of white hair' (12 Dec 1973, 19). Ingrams was awarded an OBE in 1933 and a CMG in 1939. In 1939 he made a tour of Malaya to study the adviser system, and visited Hadhrami immigrants there and in Java and Hyderabad. He was acting governor of Aden in 1940, and continued to serve in various senior posts in Aden and the protectorate until 1945. In 1939 he and his wife were jointly awarded the Lawrence memorial medal of the Royal Central Asian Society, and in 1940 the founder's medal of the Royal Geographical Society. In 1942 he published his account of his life in Zanzibar, Mauritius, and south Arabia, 'Arabia and the Isles'. 
From 1945 to 1947 Ingrams was seconded as assistant secretary to the Allied Control Commission for Germany (British element). It was not untypical of the Colonial Office for Ingrams, an Arab expert with minimal African experience, to be transferred in 1947 from Arabia to sub-Saharan Africa, as chief commissioner of the northern territories of the Gold Coast. He drove there with his family and others, across the Sahara, and described their journey in 'Seven across the Sahara' (1949), an unexciting travelogue praising French colonial officials and calling for Anglo-French co-operation in Africa. He was not entirely happy in his new post, and he retired from the colonial service in 1948. However, he continued to work for the Colonial Office in various advisory roles, finally retiring in 1968. He was a prolific writer, and his publications included a history of Zanzibar, official reports, textbooks, and pamphlets; he also broadcast. His second marriage was dissolved, and on 3 September 1960 he married Henrietta Kathleen (1904-1983), whose marriage to William Box had been dissolved; she was the daughter of William Wise, analytical chemist. 
Charming, genial, humorous, and a slightly eccentric 'character', Ingrams lived latterly at Uphousden, near Ash next Sandwich, Canterbury, Kent, and died on 9 December 1973 at the South Western Hospital, Stockwell, Lambeth. 


@@@@@


doc= 46525


Jones, Sir Pendrill Charles Varrier- (1883-1941), physician and founder of Papworth village settlement, was born at Glyn Taff House, Troedyrhiw, Glamorgan, on 24 February 1883, the only son of Charles Morgan Jones, surgeon, and Margaret Varrier, daughter of William Jenkins. He had one sister. He was educated at Epsom College, and at St John's College, Cambridge, where he was a foundation scholar and prizewinner in 1905 and 1906. He attended medical school at St Bartholomew's Hospital, and qualified MRCS, LRCP in 1910, becoming house surgeon at St Bartholomew's in 1911. In 1912 he returned to Cambridge to undertake research on the significance of temperature variation in tuberculosis, under the guidance of Sir German Sims Woodhead and Sir Clifford Allbutt. On the outbreak of war in 1914 he was appointed temporary tuberculosis officer for Cambridgeshire and there became aware of the psychological, social, and economic consequences of loss of employment resulting from tuberculosis. Supported by Allbutt and Sims Woodhead, he formulated the idea of setting up an industrial colony where people with arrested tuberculosis could work under medical supervision. In 1915 Allbutt set up the Cambridge Tuberculosis After-Care Association to raise funds for the project. In a manner which was to typify his later business dealings, Varrier-Jones bypassed the committee and 'begged, bullied and cajoled $603 out of local worthies' (Parker, 138). In February 1916 the Cambridgeshire Tuberculosis Colony was set up, with one patient, in an open-air shelter at Bourne. 
In 1918 the colony, with 25 patients, moved to the newly purchased Papworth Hall at Papworth Everard, Cambridgeshire. Varrier-Jones was to remain medical director of Papworth village settlement until his death in 1941, by which time the settlement had 500 patients in the hospital and a further 700 in hostels or cottages. The complex included 500 acres of land, with administration and hospital blocks, a sanatorium, laboratories and research institute, a home for tuberculosis nursing staff, a village settlement of more than a hundred cottages and hostels, and workshops. Papworth Industries (which included carpentry, cabinetmaking, leather goods, printing, upholstery, and building concerns) employed ex-patients at trade union rates and under medical supervision, and showed annual sales amounting to over $88,000 per annum by 1941. Papworth village settlement and Varrier-Jones became world famous. One history of the institution claimed that the list of visitors read like 'Who's Who' (Ives and Ives). Papworth's annual magazine in 1942 boasted that well over 5000 visitors had come from overseas ('Papworth Annual', 7). Varrier-Jones himself was a great publicist for Papworth, lecturing and publishing widely throughout his career. His contributions included 'Industrial Colonies and Village Settlements for the Consumptive', published jointly with Sims Woodhead in 1920 (with a preface by Allbutt), on tuberculosis village settlements. In 1927 he delivered the Mitchell lecture to the Royal College of Physicians, in London, and in 1937 he addressed the first Empire Conference in London, on the care and aftercare of the tuberculous. Varrier-Jones was knighted in 1931 for his contributions to tuberculosis. In 1934 he was appointed fellow of the Royal College of Physicians, and in 1939 he was awarded the Weber-Parkes prize for tuberculosis. Sir Humphry Rolleston noted that his 'great assets were his organizing ability and his exceptional capacity as a good man of business' (Rolleston, 9). Not only was Varrier-Jones responsible for turning Papworth into a large and successful institution, he also helped to build up two other village settlements for tuberculosis patients: Preston Hall, in 1919, at the request of the British Legion; and Peamount, near Dublin, in 1930, at the request of Lady Aberdeen. In 1919 he also helped Sir Frederick Milner to re-establish an industrial village in Hampshire -- Enham Village Centre -- for ex-servicemen with nervous diseases. 
Varrier-Jones never married. However, he reigned over Papworth village settlement as a paternal figure. The patients affectionately called him the Old Man or Father, and one described him as a benevolent autocrat: 'when you saw him you had to tug your forelock' ('Papworth Village Settlement Archives', G2.16). According to another patient, he had an uncanny knack of sizing up a man's personality and character simply by his answers to searching questions. One patient considered that 'his word was law; no red tape and no other channels to go through' (ibid., G1.6). As leader of the settlement, Varrier-Jones enjoyed the loyal support of his staff, including that of Miss K. L. Borne, matron from 1915 to 1943, who was appointed OBE for her work at Papworth in 1942. She retired two years after Varrier-Jones's death. 
Varrier-Jones died at Papworth of heart disease on 30 January 1941. His obituary in 'The Lancet' described him as a Celt with all the Celt's fire and imagination, and with the long black hair and gestures of an impresario. He was also commonly known as the Pendragon, which later became the trademark of Papworth goods. Not only did his 'family' mourn his death, but tributes were paid to his vision in the care of tuberculosis patients and in particular to his belief in holistic medicine. The idea of placing the victims of the disease in isolated colonies such as Papworth was neither financially nor socially viable on a large scale, but the experiment was regarded as important, for Varrier-Jones's conception of illness as not only a medical but also a social problem. 


@@@@@


doc= 46527


Ramkins, Alexander (supp. b. 1671/2, d. in or after 1719), supposed Jacobite author, was once thought to have written 'The Memoirs of Majr. Alexander Ramkins, a Highland-Officer, now in Prison at Avignon' (1719; reissued, 1720), an anti-Jacobite polemic attributed to Daniel Defoe, from which the 'Dictionary of National Biography' article was solely derived. In the 'Memoirs' Ramkins, a world-weary soldier, remembers when he, then an ardent young Scots-Catholic Jacobite, followed James II into exile in France; how he painfully became convinced that his host country was merely playing politics with the Stuarts; and how, despairing of the Stuarts ever regaining the monarchy, he has become so disillusioned with the Jacobite movement that, reconciled to the protestant succession, he is ready to return to his native land and accept Hanoverian rule. 
Ramkins describes his participation in most of the contemporary Jacobite campaigns following the highlanders' victory at the battle of Killiecrankie, in July 1689, that inspired his abrupt departure from Aberdeen University and pointed him toward a military career in the Jacobite forces. He observed the French ['sic'] siege of Mainz, in September 1689, and after military college in Strasbourg and a brief Rhineland tour of duty with the grand musqueteers, fought in Ireland at the battle of the Boyne and in the first siege of Limerick in July and August 1690. Having been wounded at the battle of Aughrim he returned to France with the Irish troops under the articles of Limerick, late in 1691. 
Ramkins chose not to join the projected Jacobite descent in the spring of 1692, but fought in the Piedmont campaign that summer. He participated in the battle of Landen, where he was severely wounded, in September 1693. He spent the winter of 1695-6 in St Germain, where he heard rumours of another proposed descent, and he agonized over his decision not to join it. He speaks critically of the treaty of Ryswick (September 1697), but warmly of the prolonged visit to England it sanctioned. When Ramkins returned, he married. But having made what seemed an extraordinarily prudent choice, ironically he was ruined by her extravagance, and thus writes his putative memoirs from prison. 
Apart from these 'Memoirs', no solid evidence exists attesting to Ramkins having actually lived. Except for those biographical dictionaries for which the 'Dictionary of National Biography' is the source (his article was by Norman Moore), his name does not appear in any of the contemporary or later lists of eighteenth-century Scots, Roman Catholics, Jacobites, distinguished citizens, or even general obituaries. No Alexander Ramkins (or Rankine, unlike Ramkins an authentic Scottish, though lowland, name) appears among the admittedly scant list of 1688-9 students of King's or Marischal colleges, Aberdeen; nor is it likely that Roman Catholic Ramkins could have been enrolled there at that time because Principal John Row's regulations prohibiting the matriculation of Roman Catholics were still strictly enforced. 
More significantly, neither Ramkins nor his brother can be traced through their military records, though Ramkins was purportedly on active or inactive duty with an Irish regiment of the French army for almost twenty-eight years, and his brother 'belong[ed] to the Guards of King James II.... and was kill'd in 'Ireland'' ('Memoirs', 10). Neither is listed in the Public Record Office, in Charles Dalton's 'English Army Lists and Commission Registers, 1661-1714', in the regimental Stuart papers at Windsor Castle, in the comprehensive regimental catalogue 'Jacobite army in Ireland, 1689', or in the National Military History Society of Largs (Ayrshire); nor is Ramkins's brother listed among the 1688 muster rolls for James's Scottish foot or life guards. 
Ramkins's fictionality is confirmed by a number of mistakes in the 'Memoirs' chronology that an actual participant simply could not have made; among them, the treaty of Ryswick is described as preceding the battle of Landen, the emperor's besiegers are confused with the French besieged at Mainz in 1689, and, especially, there is the chronological impossibility, given the details of the text, of Ramkins arriving in time to witness the Mainz siege. 


@@@@@


doc= 46528


Lombe, Edward (1798/9-1852), landowner and philanthropist, was the son of Edward Beevor, a barrister. He succeeded his father in 1847 as tenant for life to the Lombe estate of Melton Hall, Wymondham, Norfolk, both having taken, by act of parliament, the name of Lombe to comply with the conditions of the will of Sir John Lombe (died 27 May 1817). 
Lombe's father, on inheriting the life interest in the Lombe estate, proved to be a resolute, if contrary, individual. Sir John Lombe left a large sum held in trust specifically for the building of 'a mansion house' at Bylaugh in Norfolk as the seat of the Lombe estate; Edward Lombe senior resisted the trustees for thirty years. The building fund accumulated inexorably: by 1839 it stood at over $63,000. It was not until Edward Lombe the younger succeeded to the estate that the trustees were able to build Bylaugh Hall. It is ironic that the younger Lombe never saw the long-awaited mansion, for he lived abroad from the late 1820s until his death at Florence in 1852, and after 1830 never returned to England. 
In 1826 Lombe was returned as MP for Arundel, a constituency in the gift of the duke of Norfolk. He received the duke's patronage on the understanding that he would vote for Catholic emancipation. Never in robust health, Lombe retired from politics in 1830. In the 1820s, when he had a leg amputated, he was nursed by a Mrs Lydia Emily Howis to whom he subsequently paid an allowance of $200 a year for over twenty years. She claimed that he had promised to provide for her after his death, and in support produced to Lombe's executors an 1828 will of Lombe's. She alleged also that he had driven one of her daughters to the grave through 'inconsistent waverings' and broken promises. To her anguish and grief, Lydia Howis was left nothing in Lombe's final will, executed in Florence in October 1851. 
It was from Florence that Lombe ran his Norfolk estate on enlightened principles and also contributed to liberal causes in the United Kingdom. He described himself as 'ultra-liberal' in all matters of politics, philosophy, and religion. He gave financial support to W. E. Hickson, editor of the 'Westminster Review', by paying handsomely for articles commissioned on topics he himself suggested. Lombe's continuing support for the 'Review' was a crucial factor in John Chapman's acquiring it from Hickson in 1851. George Eliot was Chapman's assistant editor and she attempted to incorporate Lombe's somewhat opaque notion of 'organic growth' into the prospectus for the 'Review'. Lombe was a generous, but sometimes exacting, patron: it was Robert Browning, whom he knew in Florence, who identified the symptoms of 'Lombago'. But there were also unconditional offers of help, such as to Thomas Carlyle (via Browning) of $200 a year 'without strings'. On hearing that Harriet Martineau hoped to translate Auguste Comte's 'Cours de philosophie positive', he immediately arranged for $500 to be forwarded to her. 
Lombe financed certain educational projects aimed at improving the economic prospects of the working classes. A firm believer in secular education, he gave financial support to George Combe (1788-1858) and others who were particularly active in promoting this cause. Lombe founded a college in Sheffield, and expended $1000 on the People's College in Norwich. 
Lombe married a Frenchwoman, Maria Royer de St Julien. They had no children. He died unexpectedly in Florence on 1 March 1852, aged 53, and was buried in the English cemetery at Florence. His personal property was left to University College Hospital, London, with a life interest to his wife. It is poignant that he may never have met any of the individual beneficiaries of his gifts, nor witnessed the operation of the good causes he supported. 


@@@@@


doc= 46535


Denny, Lady Arbella (1707-1792), philanthropist, was the second daughter of Thomas Fitzmaurice (died 1741), twenty-first lord of Kerry, and his wife, Anne (died 1737), the daughter of Sir William Petty. She grew up at Lixnaw Castle, Tralee, becoming Lady Arbella on her father's creation as first earl of Kerry on 17 January 1722. On 26 August 1727 she married Colonel Arthur Denny, MP for County Kerry; they had no children and she was widowed on 8 August 1742. In 1748 she settled in Blackrock, co. Dublin, in a house leased from Lord Fitzwilliam. In 1751 she made a continental tour and returned to Dublin some time in the following year. 
Denny began to visit the Dublin Foundling Hospital with other women in November 1759. The hospital was part of the Dublin workhouse, and the mortality rates among the infants and children abandoned there were extremely high. Denny hired the wet-nurses for the institution and paid a bounty from her own funds to nurses in the country who provided good care. In addition, she spent over $4000 enlarging and improving the hospital buildings. The changes she instituted went some way to reducing the mortality rate, and in 1761 a committee of the Irish House of Commons recognized the success of her work. A contemporary noted that she 'had put a stop to barbarity and murder and saved the lives of thousands' (Robins, 25). In recognition of her work she was awarded the freedom of the city of Dublin in 1765. She remained a visitor at the hospital until 1778. 
Denny's work in the foundling hospital also brought to her attention the plight of young women who were at risk of becoming prostitutes. In consequence she opened the first Magdalen asylum, a rescue home for such women, in Dublin in 1767. A chapel attached to the asylum was opened in 1768 and served to raise funds for the institution. Denny was also a member of the ladies' committee of the Rotunda Lying-In Hospital, and used her social standing and family connections to promote her charitable schemes. Some of her activities caused controversy. During the 1770s she exerted her influence by having the archbishop of Dublin silence Lady Huntingdon's chaplain, Henry Peckwell, for views she considered subversive to the church establishment. This was to cause some division between herself and Lady Moira, Peckwell's influential patron and the daughter of Lady Huntingdon. 
In 1765 Denny was appointed a patroness of the silk warehouse of the Royal Dublin Society, and in the following year was the first woman to be elected a member (honorary) of the society. She took a keen interest in damask manufacture and gave advice about damask patterns through the society. She was also attributed with introducing carpet weaving into Ireland and bred silkworms at her Blackrock home. Described by her cousin William, first marquess of Lansdowne, as 'the only example I had before me of the two qualities of mind which most adorn and dignify life -- amiability and independence'. She was thanked by the society in 1770 'for her humane and constant attention to the welfare of this Kingdom' (Butler, 1.15). Denny died on 18 March 1792 at her home, Peafield Cliff, Blackrock, and was buried in the family vault beneath the chancel of the church at Tralee. 


@@@@@


doc= 46536


Holland, Samuel (1803-1892), slate industrialist and railway promoter, was born on 17 October 1803 in Duke Street, Liverpool, the youngest son and fifth child of Samuel Holland (1768-1851), merchant, and his wife, Katherine Menzies (died 1847). He had two brothers and three sisters and was educated at the Revd William Lamport's school in Lancaster and then in Hanau, Germany ('c'.1815-1817). He was twice married: in 1850 he married Ann Robbins (died 1877), and his second wife was Caroline Jane Burt (died 1924). There were no children by either marriage. 
In 1820 the elder Samuel Holland leased a slate quarry at Rhiwbryfdir, in the parish of Ffestiniog, from W. G. Oakeley of Tan-y-Bwlch, Maentwrog, and in 1821 his son was put in charge of this quarry. He built a cart road down to his quay on the River Dwyryd, from which the slate was boated to the new harbour at Porthmadog. The quarry was sold in 1825 for $28,000 to what became known as the Welsh Slate Company. Another quarry above Rhiwbryfdir was taken over by the younger Samuel Holland in 1828, and was worked by him until 1877. In 1882 it became part of the complex of quarries called the Oakeley Quarry. 
Holland played a crucial part in the rise and fall of the Ffestiniog Railway, designed for the carriage of slates from Blaenau Ffestiniog to Porthmadog. By chance, in 1829, he encountered Henry Archer (1799-1863), a Dubliner, who was interested in railways. Holland persuaded James Spooner (1789-1856) to survey the line with Thomas Pritchard, and Archer raised most of the capital in Dublin. Local opposition had defeated schemes in the 1820s and it took three attempts to get Archer's parliamentary bill through the House of Commons; it was finally approved on 25 May 1832. Archer became managing director of the railway. The gauge was 1 foot 111/2 inches, and the line was 14 miles long. Opening day was 20 April 1836 and Holland was the first quarry owner to use the horse-drawn railway. By 1860 all the large quarries near Blaenau Ffestiniog were connected to it. In 1863 two steam locomotives, designed by Holland's nephew, Charles Menzies Holland, were in use and in 1869 R. F. Fairlie produced the 'Little Wonder' with its double engine. In 1865 passenger trains were introduced; and from 1867 there was also a quarrymen's train, which ran twice weekly at first and then daily from 1881. 
The Ffestiniog Railway brought prosperity, but Holland and other industrialists began to look for other outlets for their slate at lower rates. Holland was the chief promoter of the Ffestiniog and Blaenau Railway, which was opened in 1868 and went from the terminus of the Ffestiniog Railway to the village of Ffestiniog, a distance of 31/2 miles. It was converted to standard gauge in 1883, and thereafter was worked by the Great Western Railway (GWR). Holland was also one of the directors of the Bala and Ffestiniog Railway, which was formed in 1873. This came to a working agreement with the GWR in 1879, and took over the Ffestiniog and Blaenau Railway in 1883. 
Holland helped to get the tax on slate carried coastwise repealed in 1831, and, with other quarry owners, he persuaded the Board of Trade to include slate in the Anglo-French commercial treaty, which was negotiated by Cobden in 1860. Agreements with Norway, Sweden, and Denmark followed. In 1862 Holland was high sheriff of Merioneth. He was also deputy lieutenant for Merioneth and Caernarvonshire. He was a popular Liberal MP for Merioneth from 1870 to 1885 and was a JP and chairman of the board of guardians. He was opposed to trade unions and believed in a divide between employer and employee, but he had no confrontations with his quarrymen. In the 1850s he introduced gas lighting in his quarry, which, from 1840, had surface and underground workings. In 1873, a peak year, he employed about 500 men and 18,494 tons of slate were produced. Holland also invented a slate-dressing machine and he sent examples of his slate to the Paris Exhibition of 1854, gaining an honourable mention. 
In partnership with John Whitehead Greaves, Holland founded the Porthmadog Mutual Ship Insurance Company, and in 1845 he promoted the Porthmadog Savings Bank, declaring it would instil habits of economy, industry, and self-dependence into the 'labouring classes'. He subscribed to the Oakeley hospital and built cottages at Tanygrisiau. In 1835 he founded a school at Penrhyndeudraeth, which was organized on the model of the British and Foreign Society schools. He also promoted Dr Williams's School for Girls, a fee-paying school and a nonconformist establishment which opened in Dolgellau in 1878. Holland's cousin Mrs Elizabeth Gaskell was staying with him in 1848 when 'Mary Barton' was published. Photographs of him in maturity show a man of shrewd expression with imposing side-whiskers. Holland was resident at Cae'rdeon, Llanaber, near Barmouth, from the 1870s, and he died there on 27 December 1892. He was buried at Cae'rdeon church, and was survived by his second wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 46537


Cousins, James Henry Sproull (1873-1956), writer and educationist, was born on 22 July 1873 at 29 Cavour Street, Belfast, the son of James Cousins (died 1920), a sailor, and his wife, Susan Davis (died 1915). His parents were both Wesleyan Methodists; his father retired from a sailing career to work for the Belfast harbour commission, while his mother managed the home and family. Having finished his formal schooling at the age of twelve Cousins studied shorthand and typing in the Belfast Mercantile Academy and later became private secretary and speech-writer for the mayor of Belfast. 
Inspired by the fiction of Samuel Ferguson, Cousins joined the Gaelic League in Belfast and began to write romantic Celtic poetry, publishing his first poem, 'Ben Madighan', in 1894. Attracted by the literary revival, Cousins moved in 1897 to Dublin, where he worked first as a clerk in a coal and shipping company and then as a teacher at the high school on Harcourt Street. On 9 April 1903 he married Margaret Elizabeth Gillespie (1878-1954) ['see 'Cousins, Margaret Elizabeth] of Boyle, co. Roscommon. Raised in the Church of Ireland, Margaret Gillespie was a music student. Their marriage began a co-operative venture in a range of social reform activities such as vegetarianism, cycling, feminism, religious ecumenism, and the revival of folk art and music. 
From 1901 to 1905 James Cousins was a catalyst to the formation of the Abbey Theatre and of the Irish National Theatre, formed in April 1902, which he provided with its first two plays, 'The Sleep of the King' and 'The Racing Lug'. Although Yeats initially encouraged him to contribute plays, by October of 1902 he had notoriously 'snuffed out' Cousins, calling his work 'vulgar rubbish'. It is not clear why Yeats manifested such a sudden aversion to Cousins's plays, although critics have both noted the similarity of Yeats's ideas to those of Cousins and speculated on the likelihood of a clash of egos. 
Instead Cousins became increasingly immersed in the occult. A friend of the poet-artist-occultist George Russell (AE), he attended seances with AE and W. B. Yeats while Margaret Cousins became a medium with the dead. In July 1907 the Cousinses attended the convention of the Theosophical Society in London, at which the president, Annie Besant, instructed Margaret Cousins to form a theosophical lodge in Dublin. The theosophical belief in an ancient wisdom which embraced all knowledge, science, magic, and religion framed the Cousinses' romantic universalism. Theosophy's theoretical inclusiveness and celebration of feminine intuition afforded platforms of cultural authority to intellectual women excluded from mainstream churches, and to the men who supported them. Much of James Cousins's energy from 1908 to 1913 was taken up as a stalwart suffragist supporter of the Irish Women's Franchise League (IWFL), co-founded in 1908 by his wife. James Cousins co-edited the weekly newspaper of the IWFL, the 'Irish Citizen'. 
When an effort to direct a co-operative bank resulted in James Cousins's bankruptcy, the Cousinses decided to take up another position, marketing vegetarian foods for a British company. After two years near Liverpool, disillusioned by industrial English culture and the outbreak of the war, James Cousins wrote to Annie Besant at the international headquarters of the Theosophical Society in Madras to offer his editorial services to her nationalist newspaper 'New India'. 
On 11 November 1915 the Cousinses arrived in Madras. Although they had their differences with Besant over the place of feminism in the national movement, they spent the next forty years working in theosophical schools. For the most part they were stationed in the inland town of Madanapalle. While Margaret Cousins became a nationally known figure for her leadership of the women's movement, James Cousins became known for his promotion of both folk and classical arts, crafts, literature, and music. In 1922 he established a school for the arts in Madras which would become the renowned Kalakeshetra and from 1934 was art adviser to the government of Travancore. In India he continued to publish poetry and politically engaged literary treatises critical of western cultural imperialism. Altogether he published more than fifty books and countless articles. Both of the Cousinses were prominent activists throughout the Indian freedom movement. 
From 1943 until her death in 1954 James Cousins nursed his wife through a series of strokes. He died on 20 February 1956 in Madanapalle, where his body was cremated the following day. 


@@@@@


doc= 46538


Parry, William John (1842-1927), labour leader and businessman, was born on 28 September 1842 at 58 High Street, Bethesda, Caernarvonshire, the only child of John Parry (1803-1850), quarryman and deacon, and his second wife, Elizabeth (1804-1864), daughter of John Jones, joiner. From 1854 to 1856 he attended Llanrwst grammar school, where he acquired fluency in English, which enabled him to act as interpreter and letter writer for the Welsh-speaking quarrymen. Influenced by the Revd Rowland Williams (Hwfa Mon), Parry developed literary and musical interests and became deacon of Bethesda Chapel. A bearded, stocky figure in adulthood, in 1864 he set up a business as accountant, general merchant, and dealer in explosives, and became a chartered accountant in 1880. Parry was married three times: in 1864 to Jane Roberts, in 1878 to Mary Pugh, and in 1902 to Mary Guy. There were four sons (one died young, in 1867), and a daughter. One son committed suicide in 1898, another was a financial liability, and Parry's need for money drove him into a wide range of businesses. By 1895 he was not only a chartered accountant, but also the land agent for the Cefnfaes estate, Bethesda; a merchant of brick, cement, timber, iron, fuse, and oil; the agent for two shipping lines; and an insurance agent. By 1901 he was also a registered moneylender in the Gwynedd Loan and Discount Company, based in Bethesda. 
From 1863 to 1879 Parry was Liberal agent for Bethesda, taking part in the campaign for the election in 1868, when George S. G. Douglas-Pennant lost his seat to T. Love D. Jones-Parry, the Liberal candidate. In 1874 Douglas-Pennant regained his seat, and Parry, depressed by the 'servility' of the quarrymen, took no part in the 1880 election when the Liberal C. J. Watkin Williams won the seat. Parry moved into Coetmor Hall, Bethesda, in 1884, and became a shareholder and director of the company which took over a group of radical Welsh newspapers. In 1888 he was editor of 'Y Genedl Gymreig' and of 'Y Werin', giving up the post in 1892, when the Welsh National Press Company, of which he was a director, took over. 
In 1888 Parry gave evidence to the select committee on town holdings; in 1892 he gave evidence before the royal commission on labour; and in 1893 he gave evidence before the royal commission on land in Wales and Monmouth. He advocated the disestablishment of the Anglican Church in Wales and supported home rule for Wales. When the University College of North Wales was established in Bangor in 1884, he laid the foundations of its Welsh library by appealing for books and manuscripts, donating over 1500 books himself. He was the author of books and pamphlets in English and in Welsh, and wrote in a powerful style. His ambition to become an MP was never achieved; but he travelled to the USA and Canada to research better conditions for quarrymen. He went to Patagonia in 1893 and again in 1894 in a vain search for gold and personal wealth, as he was involved in the Welsh Patagonian Gold Fields Syndicate (1892), which was dissolved in 1907. 
Parry's most controversial role was as 'quarryman's champion'. In 1865 he helped to negotiate the end of a strike at Penrhyn quarry, causing Lord Penrhyn to describe him, in 1870, as a 'troublesome fellow... a thoroughly bad one' (University of Wales, Bangor, Archives of trade unions at Penrhyn quarry). In 1874 Parry took the lead in the formation of the North Wales Quarrymen's Union; he served as its secretary from 1874 to 1876. He organized an appeal in 1874 for the Penrhyn quarrymen on strike, describing the struggle as 'right against might'. In November 1874 the quarrymen gained the Pennant Lloyd agreement, which gave them higher wages, a committee to be appointed by the employees to hear grievances, and a reorganization of the Penrhyn Quarry Benefit Club, of which Parry became secretary at $80 per annum. Arthur Wyatt, the chief manager, gave him the monopoly of supplying explosives to the quarry, said to be worth $2000 per annum. 
In 1885 Lord Penrhyn's son, George Douglas-Pennant, took over the quarry and in 1886, when his father died, George, now Lord Penrhyn, appointed E. A. Young (1860-1910), a London chartered accountant, as chief manager. Wyatt was dismissed and the Pennant Lloyd agreement was ended. Parry's contract was not renewed. Lord Penrhyn made it clear that he would not tolerate interference by union members between employer and employed. Parry was president of the union from 1877 to 1879 and was re-elected annually as president from 1884 to 1889. In 1893 the union gave him an illuminated address and a cheque for $440 for his services to the 'sons of toil' (minute book, Gwynedd Archives Service, PQ Add. MS). In 1893 Parry failed to get a post in the new labour department of the Board of Trade and on 14 October 1896 his warehouse was destroyed by fire, causing him financial hardship. In 1896-7 he emerged to play the part of peacemaker in the negotiations at the end of the ten-month strike at Penrhyn quarry, but the employees gained no concessions. Parry failed to get back his contract for explosives, and he severed relations with the union in 1898, declaring himself 'nearly broken by disappointment and hopes blasted' (University of Wales, Bangor, Coetmor MS 66, 16 July 1898). 
By 1900 the slate industry was depressed and labour relations at Penrhyn quarry were deteriorating. The Penrhyn dispute (1900-03) began in October 1900, with outbreaks of violence by the quarrymen against two contractors in the quarry. The men were locked out until 11 June 1901, when 'loyal' quarrymen were taken back. Parry became secretary of the relief committee, which raised $46,763 for dependants of those not eligible for union pay. He saw the struggle not as a national one, but as 'one Tyrannical Feudal Lord' against himself and the men ('Daily News', 1 July 1901). In 1901 he called Lord Penrhyn 'the greatest enemy I have on earth' ('Penrhyn v. Parry', Gwynedd Archives Service, PQ Add. MS). He won over the 'Daily News' to the strikers' cause. In 1901 he became manager of Pantddreiniog quarry, run on co-operative lines, but it failed and was closed by 1911. In March 1903 Lord Penrhyn won a libel action against Parry for his false statements printed in 'The Clarion' on 22 June 1901. Parry was ordered to pay $500 damages and costs amounting to $2508, and was saved from bankruptcy only by the Parry Defence Fund, which paid the sum. The quarrymen, without funds, surrendered on 14 November 1903; few of them were re-employed and Bethesda remained divided and impoverished. 
Parry continued to sit on public bodies and was made a CBE in 1920. He died at Coetmor Hall, Bethesda, on 1 September 1927, a fallen idol, lonely and embittered. He was buried in Maes-y-groes churchyard near Penrhyn Castle. 


@@@@@


doc= 46539


Skeffington, Francis Sheehy- (1878-1916), women's rights activist and pacifist, was born on 23 December 1878 in Bailieborough, co. Cavan, and christened Francis Joseph Christopher Skeffington, the only child of Joseph Bartholomew (J. B.) Skeffington (1847-1919), scholar and teacher, and his wife, Rose Magorian (1829-1909), daughter of a farmer in the co. Down village of Ballykinlar. His parents were married in the Roman Catholic chapel in Ballykinlar on 30 September 1869 when his father was twenty-two and his mother forty. Francis Skeffington grew up in Downpatrick, co. Down, where his father, as an official in the national education system, was a district supervisor of education. J. B. Skeffington was opinionated, arrogant, tyrannical, and punctilious. He was also extremely honest, had a great respect for ideas, and a strong sense of order, virtue, morality, and kindliness toward others: these latter qualities his son inherited. 
The dominant culture in Downpatrick was protestant, pro-British, anti-Catholic. The Skeffingtons -- being devout Catholics -- lived in an all-Catholic ghetto. Francis learned early to reject the bigotry of the protestants while, at the same time, viewing with some clarity and scepticism the errors of his own group. Until he entered university, Francis's only teacher was his father. He was well taught and when he entered University College, Dublin, in 1896, his major lifelong goals were fixed. He wanted to improve the world, crusade for political and economic freedom for women, and free Ireland from British rule. In 1909 he joined the Socialist Party, convinced that socialism was the only remedy for the evils of society. Also fixed was his attire: rough, grey tweed suit and knickerbockers, with long stockings -- in imitation of George Bernard Shaw. Known to his fellow students as Frank, Skeff, or Skeffy, he was slightly over 5 feet 5 inches, deceptively frail appearing, with a soft, fair, badly trimmed beard. His voice was somewhat high-pitched, his accent that of an Ulsterman. He had a brisk handshake and the humourless habit of concentrating on points made casually. At the university, his closest companions were the writer James Joyce (with whom, in 1901, he privately printed 'Two Essays') and Thomas Kettle, who would become known as politician, essayist, and poet. Francis is portrayed as McCann in Joyce's 'Stephen Hero', and Joyce draws him as well in 'A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man'. 
On 27 June 1903 Francis Skeffington and Hanna Sheehy ['see 'Skeffington, Johanna Mary Sheehy-], scholar and teacher and the daughter of David Sheehy, a mill owner and nationalist MP, were married. In order to demonstrate their belief in equality for women, he and Hanna took each other's surname. He thus became Francis Sheehy-Skeffington. Their only child was the politician and university teacher Owen Lancelot Sheehy-Skeffington. That year also he was appointed the first lay registrar at University College, Dublin. The Women Graduates Association was fighting then for admission of women to the university on an equal basis with men and Francis helped to write and circulate their petitions. Since as an officer of the college he had no right to advocate opposition policy, he was asked to resign. 
In 1908 the Irish Women's Franchise League (IWFL), militant wing of the Irish suffrage movement, was formed in the Sheehy-Skeffingtons' home. Men were accepted as associate members and Francis promptly joined. The IWFL was attacked by the Irish press for its insistence that any home rule bill must include a plank for women's suffrage, and Francis felt that only a rival paper would serve to counteract the attacks. The first edition of his new paper, the 'Irish Citizen', appeared on 25 May 1912. It proved to be his most ambitious venture and also the longest lasting, most time-consuming, and most rewarding. Its lead editorial stated its aim: 'to win for men and women equally the rights of citizenship and to claim from men and women equally the duties of citizenship'. 
When the United Kingdom declared war in August 1914, Francis Sheehy-Skeffington defined war in the 'Irish Citizen' of 22 August 1914 as 'one of the social evils, like drink and prostitution that arise from neglect of the feminine point of view and based on a theory of society one-sidedly and arrogantly male', and on 15 August an 'Irish Citizen' poster read 'Votes for Women Now! Damn Your War!' 
Every Sunday at Beresford Place in Dublin, Sheehy-Skeffington spoke out against the war and urged Irishmen not to enlist to 'fight England's battles for naval supremacy', nor to become part of the English garrison in Ireland. After forty such speeches, he was arrested on 29 May 1915, sent to Mountjoy prison, and sentenced to six months' hard labour and an additional six months in default of bail. When, on 9 June, sentence was imposed, Francis stood and said: 'I will eat no food from this moment, and long before the expiration of the sentence I shall be out of prison alive or dead' (Sheehy-Skeffington, 'Speech from the Dock', 11). For seven days he was on hunger strike, and then released because of his health, under the ''Cat and Mouse Act''. He was using a strategy common to women suffragists in both Britain and Ireland: in 1912 two British women, Mary Leigh and Gladys Evans, who had been demonstrating in Ireland, had received a sentence of five years' penal servitude. They had gone on hunger strike and had been forcibly fed. Four Irish women, among them Hanna Sheehy-Skeffington, who were then serving a month's sentence for vandalizing government property, went on hunger strike for one week to protest against the severity of the British women's sentence. And in 1913 in Dublin, Hanna Sheehy-Skeffington, who had been sentenced to seven days in the Mountjoy prison for assaulting a police officer, went on hunger strike and was released after five days because of her physical condition. 
The nationalist James Connolly and Sheehy-Skeffington had become fast friends: their goals for socialism, feminism, and against the war were identical. But Sheehy-Skeffington was absolutely opposed to an armed uprising and never varied in his opinion. 'I would rather be shot than shoot anyone' (Byrne, 122) he told his friend Byrne, and he spoke out at every opportunity for peace and pacifism. 
On Tuesday 25 April 1916, the second day of the Easter rising led by Connolly, Sheehy-Skeffington, after witnessing considerable looting on the previous day, tried to recruit volunteers to stop the looting. That evening, walking home over the Portobello Bridge and with bystanders calling out to him by name, he was placed under arrest and taken to nearby Portobello barracks. Reason given: it seemed advisable to arrest pedestrians who were attracting attention in order to avoid altercations. He was detained that night and the next morning, shortly before ten, was taken from his cell by Captain J. C. Bowen-Colthurst of the Royal Irish Rifles. With two other prisoners, Sheehy-Skeffington was taken into the barracks yard and summarily executed. It was Wednesday morning, 26 April 1916. 
Every attempt was made to cover up the executions and the events surrounding them. Hanna Sheehy-Skeffington received no notification of her husband's death and was refused any information by the military. Not until Friday, two days later, did she learn the facts. After repeated requests on her part for a public inquiry, a court martial -- with attendance by invitation only -- was held in Richmond barracks, Dublin, on 6 and 7 June 1916. The court found Captain Bowen-Colthurst guilty but insane at the time of the murders. He was sentenced to detention in an asylum for the criminally insane at Broadmoor in England, the length of time to be at his majesty's discretion. After twenty months he was released and emigrated to Vancouver, British Columbia. Still dissatisfied, Hanna Sheehy-Skeffington pressed for an open inquiry, and on 17 August 1916 a royal commission was convened and a report covering every aspect of the case issued on 29 September. Late in 1916 Hanna Sheehy-Skeffington published her husband's novel, 'In Dark and Evil Days', with a biographical memoir. 
On 8 May 1916 Francis Sheehy-Skeffington's body, which had been buried in the mortuary at Portobello barracks, was exhumed and reburied in Glasnevin cemetery in Dublin. This man who had implored Irishmen not to fight England's battles had met his death at the hands of an Irish recruit to the British army, and this man who believed that all problems could be settled without violence had met his death as the victim of violence. 


@@@@@


doc= 46542


West, John (1839-1922), gas engineer, was born at Northampton on 10 August 1839, the eldest son of Joseph West, a gardener, and his wife, Ann, 'nee' Perkins. He was taken on at an early age as an articled pupil by the manager of the local Northampton gasworks and worked his way up to become a departmental manager. After fourteen years he left Northampton and within two years had become manager and engineer of the Maidstone gasworks. It was while at Maidstone, in 1873, that he took out the first of his many patents -- for a machine for stoking gas retorts. He set up a company to manufacture the machines, though sales remained limited. 
In 1880 West's growing reputation won him the prestigious job as chief engineer of the Manchester corporation gas department, and while there he set about widening the appeal of his stoking machines by applying power to their operation in the form of compressed air, an idea he first patented in the same year. At first his success was limited because the machines kept breaking down; none the less, in 1884 he felt confident enough to give up his salaried post and devote himself full-time to his business, West's Gas Improvement Co. Ltd. Yet business remained slow until in 1893 he finally perfected the compressed-air machinery which soon became widely adopted in Britain and abroad. These machines, together with those of his great rival, William Foulis, gave Britain a world lead in the field, and West's company began to prosper as it also began the manufacture of coal- and coke-handling equipment. In 1898 the capacity of his works at Miles Platting, Manchester, was doubled and a year later the workforce numbered 300. 
In 1905 West joined forces with Samuel Glover to manufacture a vertical retort which charged and discharged coal and coke by gravity in a continuous gas-making process. These Glover-West retorts were widely adopted in Britain and overseas, and when West also set up a company to manufacture refractory materials for gasworks he was in a position to contract for the building of entire gasworks anywhere in the world. Despite his advancing years he maintained a close interest in the firm. He took out a patent in 1920, at the age of eighty, and in the same year made a trip to the United States and opened an office in New York. The company continued to grow, so that by the time of his death in 1922 it employed 1100 workers. 
West, whom the 'Gas Journal' described on his death as 'an outstanding figure in the gas profession, exceeding the memory of any practising gas engineer', was energetic and inventive but practical. Typical of his generation of engineers in Britain, he had no formal theoretical training but this did not seem to be a barrier to world leadership in his chosen field. He was a strong-minded man, emphatic in his judgements. As an employer he was paternalistic; he treated his workforce to an excursion to Blackpool each year and entertained them to dinner. He led by example. When one of his machines was being installed in London in 1890 the union men refused to work it without higher pay. He replaced them with non-union labour and this provoked a violent confrontation. But he won through and the editor of the 'Gas Journal' remembered him 'with his shirt sleeves rolled up and overalls on... with dark faces about him, teaching men how to operate his machine' (ibid.). 
West was an active member the Gas Institute (the gas engineers' society); he was its president in 1893-4 and was awarded their highest honour, the Birmingham medal, in 1918. He was also an active freemason and a magistrate in Manchester from 1904; a staunch Anglican and a sidesman in his parish church where he lived in Southport, he was also at one time the Church of England representative on the Manchester school board. 
West was married twice but nothing is known of his wives or the dates of his marriages. He and his second wife had two daughters and five sons, three of whom were active in his company. The eldest, Frederick, succeeded as chairman in 1922, built up the firm into an international concern, and was knighted in 1936. John West died at his home, Alton Lodge, 39 Park Crescent, Southport, on 12 January 1922. 


@@@@@


doc= 46544


Allcroft, John Derby (1822-1893), glove manufacturer and entrepreneur, was born in Worcester on 19 July 1822, only son and elder child of Jeremiah Macklin Allcroft (1791-1867), who was a partner in the glove manufacturing firm of J. and W. Dent & Co. His mother, Hannah (1801-1836), was the daughter of Thomas Derby of Birmingham, and niece of the artist William Derby. In 1854 Allcroft married Mary Annette, daughter of the Revd Thomas Martin, but she died childless in 1857. His second wife was Mary Ann Jewell (1833-1895), daughter of John Blundell of Timsbury Manor, Hampshire. The couple were married in August 1864; they had four sons and two daughters. 
After completing his education, Allcroft joined his father's firm, building up the London end of the business with such diligence and success that, when the partners retired in 1846, he and three other employees bought the company. With the name changed to Dent, Allcroft & Co., the metropolitan end was further expanded, moving from small premises in Friday Street to a new warehouse and headquarters in Wood Street, Cheapside. Under Allcroft's direction the organization flourished and, anticipating the growing demand for gloves, he centralized and streamlined the three Worcester factories to concentrate on the efficient production of quality goods. The advent of the railway to the town in the 1850s aided the growth of the business, and Allcroft eventually became a shareholder in seven different railway companies. By the 1870s his British employees numbered over 1000, and more factories had been opened. With new outlets and factories in New York and continental cities, the company became the pre-eminent glove manufacturers in the world. Allcroft ran the business until his retirement in 1873 when, as sole partner, his capital holding was $500,000. 
As a devout evangelical Christian, Allcroft's religious faith was central to his life. He built and endowed three churches in London: St Martin's, Gospel Oak (1865), St Jude's, South Kensington (1870), and St Matthew's, Bayswater (1881), together with mission rooms in Worcester and Stokesay village. He donated funds for the founding and repair of several other churches, including Onibury church on his Shropshire estate. On his retirement from business he became the treasurer of Christ's Hospital, of which he had been a governor since 1849. He was chairman of the Church Pastoral Aid Society, vice-president of the Church Association, and was instrumental in the founding of the YMCA. 
Allcroft's London home was in Lancaster Gate, but in 1869 he acquired the estate of Stokesay Castle, Shropshire. After the subsequent purchase of two neighbouring estates, Allcroft commissioned Thomas Harris in 1887 to design a great Jacobean-style mansion. Furnished and fitted by well-known, mainly metropolitan companies, and including such innovative features as integral electric light, the mansion cost a total of about $500,000. The family moved into the new Stokesay Court in 1892, but Allcroft himself died before the interior was properly completed. 
Allcroft regularly bought paintings at the Royal Academy summer exhibition. He chose works by established contemporary painters, such as T. S. Cooper, from whom he purchased and commissioned nine major works. He was known as a benevolent patron of artists he particularly admired. 
Allcroft was Conservative MP for Worcester from 1878 to 1880, and served as lieutenant for the City of London from 1879 to his death. He was a JP for Shropshire and its sheriff in 1893, and was elected a fellow of the Royal Geographical and Royal Astronomical societies. Initiated into freemasonry in 1846, he belonged to four lodges. In 1883 he was elected to the office of grand treasurer and became chairman for the anniversary festival of the Royal Masonic Benevolent Institution. He helped found the Derby Allcroft Lodge, Worcester, becoming worshipful master in 1886. 
Allcroft died at 108 Lancaster Gate, London, on 29 July 1893. A preliminary funeral service was held at St Matthew's Church, Bayswater; following a second service he was buried at St Michael's Church, Onibury. He was survived by his second wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 46546


Freeman, (Thomas) Walter (1908-1988), geographer, was born on 27 December 1908 in Congleton, Cheshire, the eldest of the three children of Thomas Ernest Freeman (1872-1957), a Methodist minister, and his wife, Mary Gibson ('c'.1875-1960). The family moved frequently, and lived variously in Colwyn Bay (1909-12), Great Yarmouth (1912-15), Creswell, Derbyshire (1915-19), Nantwich, Cheshire (1919-22), and Bridgend in south Wales. Between 1922 and 1926 Freeman attended grammar schools in Nantwich and Bridgend. The variety of south Wales landscapes evoked a lifelong enthusiasm for field research, regional geography, and the history of civilization. 
In 1927 Freeman entered the University of Leeds and in 1930 graduated with a first-class honours degree in geography, followed in 1931 by a diploma of education. His undergraduate dissertation was on pre-Norman Glamorgan. During his student years he developed a strong interest in the League of Nations and international peace: 'In those days we thought in terms of the world, its major areas and problems, and international affairs were constantly discussed' (Freeman, 'A geographer's way', 92) -- hence the broad-ranging theme of his MA thesis (Leeds, 1932) on modern migrations from Asia. In 1931, at the School of International Studies in Geneva, he witnessed growing 'tensions between French and Germans, forebodings of an imminent civil war in Spain, the deep regret of many Americans that they were outside the League of Nations, even the aggression of a picked group of Fascist Italian students' (ibid.). 
'The shadow of the First World War hung over our childhood', Freeman recalled, 'and by the mid-1930s few doubted that another war must follow, sparked off by some real or manufactured crisis' (Freeman, 'A geographer's way', 93), but he never became cynical; 'the earlier teaching in geography combined with the evolutionary approach of geology gave a vision of one human world that could lapse into barbarism or advance towards universal peace' (ibid.). A devout Christian, he contemplated entering the ministry, but realized by the early 1930s that he could no longer be a Methodist. In July 1932 he was received into the Church of England, a move which caused substantial difficulties in the family, but one which he never regretted. Throughout his life he contributed to local church life. 
Freeman's first appointment was to an assistantship in the department of geography at Edinburgh University (1933-6), where he met scholars such as Alan Ogilvie and Arthur Geddes, who became lifelong friends. In 1934 he assumed some editorial responsibilities for the 'Scottish Geographical Magazine'. In January 1936 he moved to Trinity College, Dublin, where he initiated an honours course in geography and began research on Ireland, particularly on nineteenth-century population patterns. On 9 December 1941 he married Olive Elizabeth Aykroyd (1913-1991), a colleague at Trinity College and the youngest daughter of a well-established Dublin wool merchant and Methodist family. She was a devoted wife, keenly interested in painting and the natural world. She returned to work as a cytologist when their three children, Michael ('b'. 1943), John ('b'. 1945), and Mary ('b'. 1948), had grown up. 
Freeman's fourteen years in Ireland were challenging and productive: 'I walked, cycled, joined any possible student tour, used holidays to acquire some understanding of a country that seemed to me different from Scotland, Wales or England. There was a heavy teaching programme... but there were some responsive students. And life in Dublin was very entertaining and enjoyable. (Freeman, 'Some personal recollections')' 'I am sure that I learned more about geography when accompanying him on his excursions', his pupil Joe Haughton wrote, 'than from any textbook' (Haughton, 117). His research spanned historical and contemporary subjects. He discovered a wealth of archival material on nineteenth-century Ireland and began work on 'Pre-Famine Ireland', a work which was completed only in 1957. 'Writing 'Pre-Famine Ireland' was pure joy. I never enjoyed anything more' (Freeman, 'Some personal recollections'). At the same time he initiated a comprehensive land-use survey of the Dublin region. During the war (1941-5) he worked part-time at the Scott Polar Research Institute in Cambridge as assistant to P. M. Roxby, who was preparing Admiralty handbooks on China. Having received the sad news in 1942 that the ship on which his sister Margaret was travelling had been torpedoed off the African coast, he threw himself into writing his famous book 'Ireland: a Regional Geography' (1950, repr. 1965, 1969, and 1971), which was dedicated to her. He was active in the Geographical Society of Ireland and edited the 'Bulletin of the Geographical Society of Ireland' (later 'Irish Geography'). It was to this society, and to the department of geography at Trinity College, that Freeman left the collection of books and papers now known as the Freeman library at Trinity College, Dublin. 
In 1950 Freeman became reader in geography at Manchester University, where he remained until his retirement in 1976, and where he wholeheartedly engaged with applied geography or planning. The need for such work had been impressed on him during his student years at Leeds: 'I walked for miles through the poorest areas of the town, through quarters inhabited by poor Irish, Jews and others and saw the tentative moves to make a more humane environment through building new estates' (letter to author, 4 Nov 1980). From this period came three important works, 'Geography and Planning' (1958), 'The Conurbations of Great Britain' (1959), and 'Geography and Regional Administration' (1968), in which he argued that the geographer could 'induce people to see the life of people in terms of environment, in terms of home and workplace and the journey between them, in terms of recreation, land conservation, and those amenities providing adequate living conditions for an increasing population' (Freeman, 'A geographer's way', 97). Later, however, he was critical of planning in Britain. 'Can it be that as a reaction to the baleful congestion of people and workplace central city areas are becoming human deserts?' he asked. 'Each solution to a problem appears to raise new difficulties unforeseen in the earlier flush of hope' (ibid.). 'Slum clearance has been followed by some disastrous experiments in re-housing; in the 1950s the status symbol of an enterprising municipal authority was the multistorey block of flats, but how many people want them now?' (ibid., 100). 
The Manchester years were not altogether happy. Freeman found there 'nine people doing less work than Joe Haughton and I were doing in Dublin' (letter to author, 9 July 1980). He was promoted to professor only in 1974, but on his retirement in 1976 the senate and council of Manchester University applauded his 'sustained literary output' and noted his 'strong sense of social responsibility outside the University' (University of Manchester, 1976). 
Soon after his retirement Freeman and his wife moved to Abingdon, near Oxford. Now most of his time and energy was devoted to his long-standing interest in the history of geographical thought. The British Association committee established in 1947 to study the growth of modern British geography had invited him to write 'A Hundred Years of Geography' (1961). This was followed by 'The Geographer's Craft' (1968), 'The Writing of Geography' (1971), and 'A History of Modern British Geography' (1980). From 1968 to 1988 he was secretary and treasurer of the newly formed Commission on the History of Geographical Thought, and editor of its series 'Geographers: Biobibliographical Studies', twelve volumes of which he saw through the press. 
Throughout his life Freeman loved to travel, preferably on foot or by bicycle. He recalled vividly his first international geographical congress in Amsterdam in 1938: 'It was good to realize that there were interested colleagues all over the world, and to get to know some of them as friends.... One had no illusions about the near future of Europe and it was perhaps the last chance to travel before the lights went out. (Freeman, 'A geographer's way', 94)' Conference-going, however, lost its lustre in post-war days: 'in the end scholarship depends on isolation, on contemplation, on silence as well as on debate and discussion' (ibid.). 
Freeman identified field work as the single most influential factor in his work. He was also impressed by mentors who projected visions of a better world, including Roxby, Arthur Geddes, Halford Mackinder, and Dudley Stamp. His hope was to inspire students to take up research where he had left off or to channel their reforming zeal 'into practical activity through some profession helpful to society' (Freeman, 'A geographer's way', 98). 
Freeman died of cancer of the liver on 11 March 1988, and his remains were cremated on 17 March at the Oxford crematorium. He was survived by his wife and their three children. A tireless researcher, a generous correspondent, and an eager traveller, Freeman was the embodiment of the liberal and compassionate scholar. He was outspoken, frank, and at times quite formidably critical. Geography was his vocation, music, religion, and long country walks his inspiration, and writing his favourite activity: 'Geography... recognizes the changes made currently as well as in past time on the face of the earth and studies the physical mechanisms as well as the human decisions through which they occur. And if such a study leads at least some geographers to hope that they may in some small way contribute to the making of a better world, at least through giving others a better understanding of it, their work will be more than a dream and a shadow. (Freeman, 'A geographer's way', 101)' 



@@@@@


doc= 46547


MacLeod, Malcolm Neynoe (1882-1969), surveyor, was born on 23 May 1882, probably in Rajpur Chumparan, Bihar, India, the eldest son of Malcolm Neynoe MacLeod, who was in charge of an indigo factory in Bihar, and his wife, Eliza Agnes. He attended Aird House School, Edinburgh (1887-95), and then Rugby School (1896-8). At the age of sixteen he passed into the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich. Although he was the youngest cadet in his term, he passed out first in 1900, gaining the Pollock and Queen Victoria gold medals and prizes for military topography and geometrical drawing. He was commissioned in the Royal Engineers on 2 May 1900. 
MacLeod was posted to India in May 1902 and spent three years at the military works services at Jubbulpore and in the office of the director-general military works at Simla before in 1905 he joined the survey of India. While there he suffered an onslaught of enteric fever from which he never fully recovered. After the first of three periods of six months' sick leave he returned to India to work on the surveys of the Khyber and Malakand passes, and in the Central Provinces and the Punjab. He was promoted captain in May 1910 and then transferred to the headquarters of the survey of India in Calcutta. Following another bout of fever he was sent to the healthier climate of the trans-frontier mapping office at Simla. 
In 1914 MacLeod returned to England on a year's leave to improve his health. At the beginning of 1915 he was ordered to Buxton to raise and train the 145 army troops company of the Royal Engineers. He took this company, now part of the 11th corps, to France in September 1915. In 1916 he raised the 4th field survey company for the newly formed Fourth Army, which was to deliver the great Somme offensive. MacLeod's survey company was to develop new survey methods, of which the most important was 'predicted artillery fire', the technique of firing at pre-selected, accurately surveyed targets without making preliminary range-finding shots, which at once destroyed all element of surprise and revealed the allied gun positions. MacLeod considered this technique to have been decisive in the victories of Cambrai in 1916 and after. Predicted artillery bombardment came to constitute the real attack, while the infantry advance became the supporting operation, a reversal of the traditional roles of the two arms. MacLeod was promoted major in 1916, and acting lieutenant-colonel in 1918, was twice mentioned in dispatches, and was awarded the DSO and MC. In 1919 he formed and commanded the 1st survey company of the Royal Artillery. He then went as chief instructor (survey) to the School of Artillery, Larkhill, where he initiated the technical side of artillery survey. 
In early 1923 MacLeod joined the Ordnance Survey at Southampton. On 9 January 1924 he married Elsie May ('b'. 1892/3, died after 1978), the daughter of William Edward Gould of Wootton, New Milton. They had no children. He remained at the Ordnance Survey for six years. In 1929 he became general staff officer in 1 MI4, the geographical section of the general staff (GSGS), whose main duties were the provision of maps for war, the collection of geographical and topographical information of the empire and foreign countries, and the co-ordination of all survey organizations in the empire. MacLeod considered that survey allied to artillery fire would be critical in any future conflict. He therefore proposed a programme to provide maps at scales of 1:250,000 for strategic moves, 1:50,000 for mobile phases, and 1:25,000 for set-piece battles. MacLeod's view that artillery was the key to future warfare was publicly contested by proponents of tank theories such as J. F. C. Fuller and Basil Liddell Hart. MacLeod promoted his ideas by writing papers in the 'Royal Engineers Journal' and the 'Journal of the Royal United Services Institution', and authority was eventually given for the formation of the 19th field survey company of the Royal Engineers to produce MacLeod's maps in war. 
In February 1935 MacLeod was appointed director-general of the Ordnance Survey, with the rank of brigadier. The war, post-war urban expansion and road building, and financial retrenchment had brought the Ordnance Survey to its knees, and, just as the government was passing legislation such as the 'Town and Country Planning Act' (1932) which could not be put into effect without up-to-date plans, the survey lacked the manpower to meet numerous demands made upon it. A departmental committee was appointed in 1935 to address the national mapping crisis. MacLeod had already initiated the retriangulation of Great Britain, and now he seized the opportunity to transform the large-scale Ordnance Survey plans from their nineteenth-century format of county maps, many based on different meridians, into a homogeneous national series. It was with difficulty that his strong views on the necessity of a metric grid, the kilometre-square 1:2500 format, the survey of urban areas at the scale of 1:1250, continuous revision, and the introduction of the 1:25,000 map prevailed. However, he can be considered the architect of the structure of post-war Ordnance Survey cartography, and it was with justification that he claimed that the final report of the committee, published in 1938, amounted to a new charter for the Ordnance Survey. 
More staff were recruited to implement MacLeod's proposals, and the increased responsibilities borne by the director-general led to the position's being upgraded from brigadier to major-general, to which rank MacLeod was promoted in March 1939 (he was later created CB). Civilian mapping, however, took second place to military mapping during the Second World War. As director-general MacLeod was responsible for the training and mobilization of the field survey units of the field army. On mobilization he was created inspector of survey units. 
When MacLeod retired on 1 June 1943 the Ordnance Survey had printed 100 million maps for military use. He had also recast the mapping of Great Britain on new sheet lines and introduced enamelled metal plates in place of paper as the original drawing support for the large-scale plans and the systematic use of air photography for the revision of the 1:2500 plans. In retirement MacLeod became second in command of the 12th battalion Hampshire Home Guard. After the war he undertook several unpaid and semi-public duties, including the chairmanship of the Ministry of Labour's Disablement Advisory Committee. In 1946 he advised the Iraqi government on their surveys. He had been aide-de-camp to Edward VIII and George VI from 1936 to 1939, and was colonel commandant from 1941 to 1950. 
MacLeod was a tall man of strong character, with great kindness and charm. The junior civilian staff at the Ordnance Survey remembered him affectionately for his approachability and willingness to stop and talk. When young he was an accomplished athlete. He served on the council of the Royal Geographical Society three times in the 1930s, and was vice-president from 1939 to 1941. In retirement he continued to interest himself in professional and scientific matters. He was an honorary member of the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors and chairman of the Field Survey Association. 
MacLeod died on 1 August 1969 of heart failure at his home, Littlehaven, Beaulieu Road, Dibden Purlieu, Hampshire, survived by his widow. 


@@@@@


doc= 46548


Freer, Ada Goodrich (1857-1931), folklorist and psychical researcher, was born at Uppingham on 15 May 1857, the daughter of George Freer, a veterinary surgeon, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Adcock. Throughout her life she concealed her origin, giving the impression of coming from Yorkshire with connections to the landed gentry and the Scottish highlands. Under the patronage of F. W. H. Myers she became active in the Society for Psychical Research. She wrote papers on her psychical experience under the pseudonym of Miss X which Myers read to the society (collected in 'Essays in Psychical Research', 1899). From 1893 to 1897 she was assistant editor (to W. T. Stead) of 'Borderland', again writing as Miss X. In 1894 she was, on Myers's recommendation, given charge of the society's inquiry into second sight in the highlands and islands. On her second visit to the Hebrides, in 1895, she met Father Allan McDonald and gained access to his extensive and important collection of Hebridean folklore. From 1897 she published a substantial part of it under her own name, initially in articles in 'Folklore', acknowledging McDonald's help but falsifying the character of her own work (she did not speak Gaelic in 1895 and her knowledge of the language was never more than rudimentary). 
Miss Freer became involved in the contentious cases of the Clandon House haunting (1895), the Burton letters (1895-7), and the ghost hunt at Ballechin House, Perthshire (1897). She was severely criticized by J. Callendar Ross in 'The Times' (8 June 1897) and was subsequently disowned by the society. With Lord Bute, who had paid for the Scottish 'second sight' inquiry, she wrote 'The Alleged Haunting of B[allechin] House' (1899), defending the ghost hunt. She abandoned psychical research and focused on folklore. In December 1901 she went to Jerusalem, where she finished 'Outer Isles' (1902; her chief work and most substantial plagiarism of McDonald), wrote 'Inner Jerusalem' (1905), and married an American, the Revd Hans Henry Spoer, in 1905. Her husband believed her to be almost twenty years younger than her age. She subsequently published other works on the Near East, accompanied her husband to Britain in 1909-11, and lived in Cairo from 1911. She moved to Detroit in 1923, to Sycamore, Illinois, in 1926, and to New York in 1927, where her husband was chaplain to the New York Mission Society. She died at St Luke's Hospital, New York, on 24 February 1931 (her death certificate giving her name as Adela Monica Spoer), survived by her husband. Her laudatory obituary in 'Folklore' (vol. 41, 1931) made no mention of Father McDonald. 


@@@@@


doc= 46549


Colenso, Harriette Emily (1847-1932), missionary and political activist, was born on 30 June 1847 at Tharston, Norfolk, the eldest daughter of John William Colenso (1814-1883), first bishop of Natal, and his wife, (Sarah) Frances Bunyon (1816-1893). She had two sisters and two brothers. Her sister 
Harriette Colenso's appearance was pleasing, and she could be charming and humorous as well as strident and cutting. Her youth was spent at Forncett and Bishopstowe (Ekukanyeni), the estate granted to her father about 5 miles outside Pietermaritzburg, Natal. She became a fluent Zulu linguist. With her sisters, she was a pupil at Winnington Hall, Cheshire, during the early 1860s, when Bishop Colenso -- then at the centre of theological controversy -- returned with his family to Britain. 
Frances Ellen Colenso probably responded more warmly than her sisters to the literary and cultural impulses that the young Colensos experienced in these years. She also attended Winnington Hall ('c'.1862-1864) and subsequently studied at the Slade School of Art in London. She enjoyed the friendship of Georgiana Burne-Jones, wife of the painter. Although an aspiring artist, she was also the author of works of fiction and literary sketches. Her best-known works, however, were 'My Chief and I' (published in 1880, but -- apart from a sequel -- written earlier) and the 'History of the Zulu Wars' (1880), which were intended to support her father's criticism of official policy and to defend the reputation of Colonel Anthony Durnford, the man whom she could not marry because he was already caught in an unhappy marriage. Durnford was blamed by Natal colonists for the death of colonial volunteers in the skirmish at the Bushman's River pass in 1873; later, Chelmsford made him the scapegoat for the British disaster at Isandlwana. 
Harriette Colenso remained uninterruptedly in Natal between 1864 and 1890, although all her siblings either visited Britain again or were educated there. In addition to her responsibilities on the mission station, she accompanied her father on his diocesan visits in Natal and when he went to Grahamstown and Cape Town in 1880. She served a vigorous apprenticeship in political controversy when she assisted her father over the Langalibalele affair. 
On the death of Bishop Colenso in June 1883, Harriette Colenso became the acknowledged family leader: when fire destroyed their home in September 1884, it was she who decided the Colenso women would remain at Bishopstowe, living in a farm cottage. She also took over her father's role of advising Frances Ellen in her political writings, helping in the production of the massive and ill-digested two volumes of 'The Ruin of Zululand' (1884-5), and supervising the family collaboration with 'Sir' George Cox over the 'Life of Bishop Colenso' (1888-9). Neither work was well received. After suffering for several years from consumption, Frances Ellen died on 28 April 1887 in lodgings at Ventnor in the Isle of Wight, perhaps of a heart attack. The family grieved, but emphasized the causes she had championed. 
Like her father after 1873, Harriette Colenso was bitterly opposed to arbitrary white authority over the black population of Natal, and she undertook decades of controversy on behalf of the Zulu people. During this period Zulu land was partitioned (1886), and part was annexed to Britain as a crown colony. In 1897 the white-dominated colony of Natal incorporated this previously separate colony of Zululand. 
Harriette Colenso condemned policies hostile to Zulu cohesion. She supported Dinizulu ka Cetshwayo, as the son of the man her father befriended, and hoped that Britain (later Natal) would acknowledge and guide his leadership of a cohesive Zulu nation. During many Zulu crises, Harriette's voluminous letters, 'inter alia' to the Aborigines Protection Society, her use of the Bishopstowe press, and her political pamphlets (some far from models of clarity) were evidence of her commitment. She twice visited Britain in the 1890s to appeal to the Colonial Office, address varied audiences, and lobby parliamentarians. She later gave evidence to important government commissions of inquiry and was well known to some of the early leaders of the African National Congress. She was the lifelong friend of Alice Werner, whose interest in African languages Harriette confirmed. 
Nevertheless, the Zulu people lost more and more land. Dinizulu was twice arraigned before special -- and suspect -- courts in 1888-9 and 1908-9. After conviction at Eshowe in 1889, Dinizulu and two uncles were sent to St Helena, where Harriette Colenso twice visited them. When they were repatriated in 1898, she accompanied them. Dinizulu was arrested again in 1907 after the Bambatha uprising and sentenced to imprisonment for harbouring dependants of a rebel leader. At both trials Harriette devoted money, energy, intellect, and legal acumen to the defence, attended the court proceedings assiduously, and encouraged appeals to Britain. In 1910 Louis Botha, first prime minister of the Union of South Africa, freed Dinizulu shortly after the Union of South Africa was constituted. Dinizulu was not allowed to return to Zululand but located near Middelburg in the Transvaal, where Harriette Colenso visited him. 
Harriette Colenso believed she had the support of the 'better part' of the Natal colonists. Influenced by Harry Escombe, future prime minister of Natal, she supported responsible government for Natal and in January 1895 she telegraphed to London her view that the annexation of Zululand to Natal should precede the exiles' return. Harriette was later disappointed by Escombe but did not quarrel with him. When he died in 1899, she sought the goodwill of other Natal politicians. In 1908 a white audience in Pietermaritzburg listened to her ideas on 'native policy' with respect, but most white Natalians were hostile and contemptuous. 
For most of their lives Harriette and Agnes Colenso lived at Bishopstowe, where they continued the mission. They held services, conducted a school, and republished some of their father's works of special value to missions. In 1899 they rebuilt a house (now a national monument) on the ruins of the old home and were living there when their brother Frank visited them in 1900. 
Through decades of bitter ecclesiastical controversy between rival Anglican groups, Harriette Colenso fought hard to secure the survival of the Church of England in Natal. In 1886 she persuaded leading laymen to select 'Sir' George Cox as Colenso's successor, but Cox was denied consecration. William Ayerst was then chosen, but he, too, was not consecrated. Harriette Colenso had nothing to do with the selection of Ayerst, but she had much to do with the opposition to Arthur Hamilton Baynes, chosen by the archbishop of Canterbury to reconcile the divided Anglicans of Natal. Harriette argued that, because Baynes had signed the constitution of the Church of the Province of South Africa, he should not be accepted as bishop of the Church of England. The church council of the Church of England agreed with her, but Baynes and his successor won over the separate vestries of individual congregations. In October 1897 even St Peter's, Colenso's own cathedral, reached an agreement with the Church of the Province of South Africa. Harriette subsequently interrupted a service to make a public protest and then withdrew. 
Until 1910 judicial decisions of the 1880s denied the Church of the Province control of church property. Legislation was necessary, but attempts to have laws enacted failed in 1898 and -- after vigorous contention -- in 1903. When, in 1909, yet another bill was brought before the Natal parliament, Harriette Colenso urged and organized resistance. She attended the sessions of the Natal parliament and would have addressed the upper house if given timely opportunity. Nevertheless, the bill was passed in Natal and accepted by the British government as the 'Church Properties Act' of 1910. In terms of this law each Colenso sister was allowed an annual pension of $150. Harriette thought this a politically motivated sop to conscience. She applied unsuccessfully to the courts to compel the Church of the Province of South Africa to pay a pension to Moses Sibisi, the catechist of St Mary's, the 'native' church in Pietermaritzburg where the Colensos worshipped. When the Colenso women and the Bishopstowe tenants were evicted, the Church of the Province sold off the land in individual plots to German settlers. 
Harriette Colenso thought of moving near the exiled Dinizulu but instead lived first in central Pietermaritzburg and then at Sweetwaters. Dinizulu died in 1913. Harriette attended the obsequies and helped influence the choice of his heir. Though disquieted by the possible direction of Union policy, she realized that she could no longer undertake what she might previously have attempted. The Colensos' own household of retainers and black children absorbed much attention. Harriette and Agnes Colenso occasionally visited Durban to keep in touch with Christ Church, Addington, which had not joined the Church of the Province of South Africa. Harriette was always concerned for the black congregations that maintained the Colenso connection and was in touch with other black pastors. When the prince of Wales visited Pietermaritzburg in 1925, the sisters attended the racecourse gathering of black people. The only whites present, they were greeted affectionately by sons of men they had befriended. As they grew older and more frail, they withdrew more and more from white society. They both died in 1932 at Sweetwaters, Harriette on 2 June and Agnes a few weeks later on 23 July. They were buried alongside their mother in the cemetery in Pietermaritzburg. 
There are many difficulties in assessing the role of the Colenso sisters. Radical historians are impatient of white missionaries, and it is disconcerting for the Church of the Province of South Africa, so vigorously critical of twentieth-century apartheid, to recall what was shabby in the way the Colensos were treated earlier. In addition, current political perspectives blur the image of the Colensos, especially Harriette: Zulu loyalists appear reluctant to recognize the role of a white woman in fostering Zulu nationality. On the other hand, opponents of political movements based on ethnicity are uneasy about the way the Colensos praised Zulu national identity. In their own view the Colensos were simply loyal to their father's memory and his commitment 'to love righteousness and deal justly'. Harriette's best-known Zulu name, uDhledhlwe ('walking stick'), marked her devoted support of all her father stood for. 


@@@@@


doc= 46550


Thomas, Sir Daniel Lleufer (1863-1940), stipendiary magistrate, was born Daniel Thomas at Llethr Enoch, Cwm-du, Llandeilo Fawr, Carmarthenshire, on 29 August 1863, the second son and third child of William Thomas, a tenant farmer, and his wife Esther, 'nee' Evans. He attended the preparatory school at Llansawel run by the Congregational minister Jonah Evans, and worked for a time on his father's farm. Aged seventeen he entered Llandovery College, where the headmaster, A. G. Edwards, encouraged him to study at Oxford University, which he entered as a non-collegiate student in 1883, having adopted the additional name Lleufer. In May 1886 he was among the seven founders, including Owen M. Edwards and John Morris-Jones, of the Dafydd ap Gwilym Society of Welsh-speaking undergraduates. He read jurisprudence at Oxford, taking third-class honours in 1887, and gained a Tancred studentship at Lincoln's Inn, where he was called to the bar in 1889. In London he was involved with Tom Ellis in establishing the Cymru Fydd society in support of Welsh self-government. On 18 June 1892 he married Mary Jane Margaret Gethin or Gething ('b'. 1862), daughter of Thomas Gething, mechanical engineer, of the Aber-nant ironworks, Aberdar. They had no surviving children, but adopted a daughter. 
In March 1892 Lleufer Thomas was appointed an assistant commissioner to the royal commission on labour, and undertook detailed enquiries into the working conditions of agricultural labourers in seven poor-law unions in north and south Wales. His report represents a major survey of rural life in late nineteenth-century Wales. He retired from the commission in April 1893 to take up the position of secretary to the royal commission on land in Wales and Monmouthshire, appointed by Gladstone's Liberal government to investigate the grievances of Welsh tenant farmers during the agricultural depression. The commissioners toured Wales hearing testimony from farmers (including Lleufer Thomas's elder brother, John), landlords, and a few labourers, accumulating five volumes of evidence, representing the contending positions, including the nonconformist tenants' complaints of discrimination at the hands of Anglican landlords. He suffered a breakdown during the commission's proceedings, and recuperated in South Africa, from where he returned to draft the commission's majority report, which recommended concession of the tenants' principal demands for security of tenure, compensation for improvements, and land courts to fix rents. By the time of the report's publication, in 1896, a Unionist government was in power, and the commission's proposals had no chance of being implemented. The evidence, with important bibliographical, legal, and historical appendices compiled by Lleufer Thomas, remained as a quarry of data. 
During the decade of Unionist political dominance from 1895 to 1905 Lleufer Thomas's opportunities for public employment were reduced, and he returned to legal practice. His wider activities turned to promoting Welsh cultural and higher-education institutions, and to promoting progressive ideas of co-partnership and social service. He was a founding member of the National Library of Wales and the National Museum, and in 1905 was influential in the decision to site the library at Aberystwyth, in securing funding from the south Wales miners, and in obtaining for the library the right to receive books under the 'Copyright Act'. He was a member of the court of the University of Wales, where he was involved in establishing legal education, and sat on the councils of the university colleges of Cardiff and Aberystwyth. From 1906 he was vice-president of the Labour Co-partnership Association, which favoured co-partnership as a solution to labour conflict, and as a means of tackling the problems of urban housing. He helped establish the Cardiff Workers' Co-operative Garden Village Society, which built the Rhiwbina suburb in Cardiff. In 1907 he held a watching brief for the Welsh Nonconformist Central Evidence Committee during the hearings of the royal commission on the church in Wales. 
In 1909 Lleufer Thomas was appointed stipendiary magistrate for the Rhondda and Pontypridd, where his own measured handling of the Tonypandy riots in November 1910 earned the approval of General Nevil Macready, if not local property owners. He witnessed at first hand the deteriorating industrial relations of the south Wales coalfield, and in 1917 was appointed chairman of the Welsh panel of the commission of inquiry into industrial unrest, whose other members were Thomas Evans and Vernon Hartshorn. His appointment was an acknowledgement of his bipartisan standing, and was also shrewd politics on the part of Lloyd George. The report, signed in July 1917, recommended the creation of Whitley councils to reduce industrial conflict. From 1915 to 1919 he was chairman of the School of Social Service for Wales, and during the same period was president of the Workers' Educational Association in Wales. He collaborated with the sociologist Edgar Chappell, who had been secretary to the industrial unrest inquiry, in founding the Welsh Housing and Development Association, which urged government grants for working-class housing as an element of post-war reconstruction. 
Lleufer Thomas's increasing preoccupation with social and industrial conditions reflected a concern that industrial and political unrest within the coalfield had undermined the cultural and 'national' values that had underpinned the success and stability of the Welsh liberal order. Few were better placed or connected to the social and cultural milieu of early twentieth-century Wales. Much of his social work was concerned with inculcating an 'enlightened' and 'responsible' social leadership within increasingly heterogeneous and democratizing societies that were believed to be cut off from traditional national sources of authority and leadership. As deputy chancellor of the University of Wales from 1915 to 1917 he argued that university extramural tutorial classes and Workers' Educational Association classes should provide the education and breadth of outlook that were thought lacking in the coalfields, to counter the 'sectionalism' and militancy of the South Wales Miners' Federation's labour classes. Housing reform and town planning were to provide the sense of community and rationality required in the Welsh coalfields. His writings on this subject melded early sociological thought, the ideas of Ebenezer Howard and Patrick Geddes, and the social geography of H. J. Fleure, professor of geography and anthropology at Aberystwyth, to provide a distinctive analysis of the housing problem and its solution in south Wales. He argued the need for a regional strategy for the planned urban development of garden cities beyond the restrictive and intellectually confining coalfield valleys of Glamorgan, and even on the flatter mountain tops. 
Lleufer Thomas was close to several miners' leaders of the old school, such as William Brace and Thomas Richards, some of whom were active within the Labour Co-partnership Association and organizations like the Welsh Housing Development Association. Through these and other connections he was more aware than many of his contemporaries of the realities and concerns of organized labour. He shared aspects of the miners' criticism of the 'slash and burn' capitalism of the majority of the coalowners in the post-war years, favouring some form of state ownership of the mining industry with workers' involvement in management. Yet in his official capacity as a magistrate he was equally concerned to restrict the activities of militants during the 1921 coal dispute. He worked with Lionel Lindsay, chief constable of the Glamorgan constabulary, and his interpretation of the law severely limited the right to picket. A. J. Cook, Rhondda miner's agent, and several other militant leaders, were imprisoned in 1921 for intimidation when trying to picket the collieries. 
Lleufer Thomas was a member of the Board of Celtic Studies of the University of Wales from its foundation in 1919. The university awarded him the honorary degree of LLD in 1921. In 1925 he was a member of the department of education's committee on the position of Welsh language and literature in Welsh schools. He was vice-president of the Cambrian Archaeological Association and of the Honourable Society of Cymmrodorion. He was a contributor of articles on Welsh subjects to the 'Dictionary of National Biography' and to the eleventh edition of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' (1910-11). 
In 1931 Lleufer Thomas was knighted for his public services. After a period of illness and an accident in 1932 he retired as a stipendiary magistrate in 1933. He died at home in Rhiwbina, Cardiff, on 8 August 1940, and was buried at Oystermouth cemetery, near Swansea. His wife and their adopted daughter survived him. Like his contemporary David Lloyd George, he was a beneficiary of social mobility in the late Victorian period, and became a key figure in the development of Welsh public life. 


@@@@@


doc= 46551


Bedford, Jessie (1852/3-1918), novelist and historian, was born in Twyford, Hampshire, the younger of the two daughters of the Revd James Gover Bedford (1785-1871), a clergyman without parochial responsibilities, and his second wife, Emma, 'nee' Poulden (1818/19-1919). She had at least two elder stepsisters and one stepbrother from her father's previous marriage. She contributed short pieces to 'Temple Bar' (January 1890) and 'Macmillan's Magazine' (September 1893) before publishing her first book, 'Cornish Diamonds' (1895), a novel about a talented violinist who rejects an independent career in favour of a conventional marriage. (For this and all her subsequent work she used the pseudonym Elizabeth Godfrey.) She followed it with 'A Stolen Idea' (1899), a novel about a female writer who steals the idea for a successful book from the man whom she eventually marries, and 'Poor Human Nature' (1898). 'The Winding Road' (1903) is the tragic tale of a woman from a farming community who marries a wandering fiddle player; as in 'Cornish Diamonds', the influence of Hardy's Wessex novels was apparent. Still very readable, if often sensationalist, Bedford's novels showed a deep concern with the problems and conflicts of marriage and careers for contemporary women. 
After the turn of the century Bedford began to publish works dealing mainly with seventeenth-century history. 'Home Life under the Stuarts, 1603-49' was published in 1903 and was closely followed by 'Social Life under the Stuarts' (1904). Favourably if condescendingly, reviewed in 'The Athenaeum', 'Home Life' was described as 'excellent, delicate in flavour, vibrating with humanity, and refreshing and delightful from cover to cover' ('Athenaeum', 58). 'English Children in the Olden Time', published in 1907, was a genuinely pioneering study of the history of infancy. These three works were largely based on diaries and family papers, such as those of the Verney family, published by Parthenope and Margaret Maria Verney. 'Heidelberg: its Princes and its Palaces' (1906) revealed Bedford's interest in German history, and was succeeded by 'A Sister of Prince Rupert', a biography of Elizabeth, Princess Palatine and abbess of Herford (1909). The choice of this seventeenth-century spinster and scholar, the friend of Descartes, may reflect Bedford's preoccupation with contemporary debates about women's political and educational rights. 
Little is known of Bedford's life, although her works suggest that she spent most of her life in southern England, living in Winchester with her widowed mother. Her last years were spent at Moor Cottage, Setley, Brockenhurst, Hampshire; her interest in the New Forest is reflected in the publication of 'The New Forest' (1912). She died unmarried at Grosvenor House Nursing Home, Southampton, on 22 May 1918, leaving the bulk of her property to her sister Lucy Palmer, wife of John Cecil Palmer. 


@@@@@


doc= 46552


Caddy, Florence (1836/7-1923), writer, was born in London, the only child of John Charles Tompson, officer in the commissariat, and his French wife. J. M. Gullick suggests that, after his early death, the young Florence lived in France with her mother, but that when her mother died shortly afterwards she was returned to England to the care of various guardians, including a severe low-church family who made her childhood rather bleak. She was educated in England and abroad, notably at Paris, Dusseldorf, and Athens. On 29 January 1857 at the Catholic Apostolic Church, Gordon Square, London, she married John Turner Caddy (1821/2-1902), naval surgeon, who came from a Devon family and trained at Guy's Hospital and Aberdeen University, serving thirty-one years at sea and later at Falmouth and Bristol. The marriage seems to have been happy: she commended in print the marriage of young girl and older, experienced man, and she and her husband had five children: John ('b'. 1858), Florence ('b'. 1862), Arnold ('b'. 1866), Hermione ('b'. 1869), and Adrian ('b'. 1879). Dr Caddy retired in 1876 as deputy inspector-general of hospitals and fleets and, though he had a pension and sought to establish a medical practice in west London, the family income was depleted at a time when the children's calls on it were growing. 
Mrs Caddy turned to writing: her first published work, 'Household Organisation' (1877), pointed to straitened circumstances with its stress on economy and insistence that there was no work unfit for a lady. She tried her hand at novel-writing with 'Artist and Amateur' (3 vols., 1878) and 'Adrian Bright' (3 vols., 1883) and revisited her earlier genre in 'Lares and Penates' (1881), with its homilies and reflections. 'Footsteps of Jeanne d'Arc' (1886) was an interesting experiment to assess 'the value of the geographical treatment of history' (p. 372), since she felt 'much might be gained by treating history geographically' (ibid., x). Her idea was to prepare by reading histories and biographies of Jeanne d'Arc, but to write as a traveller, visiting the places Jeanne had visited and writing with an immediacy that their common surroundings would bring. This commendable aim sadly resulted in a book that, although it avoided dullness, did not avoid superficiality. 

'Through the Fields with Linnaeus' (2 vols., 1887) followed a similar method, although Mrs Caddy seems to have followed her subject only to Smaland in 1886. A reviewer's remark that 'Mrs Caddy has thoughts upon many things entirely unconnected with botany... and she expresses them as they arise' ('Spectator', 60, 1218, cited in Allibone, 'Dict.') is unkind, as the book is not intended as pure biography, still less pure botany. However, the extracts from Linnaeus's diary that she commendably reproduced stand out from her prose for their conciseness, pertinence, and clarity. Mrs Caddy described Linnaeus's classification as a 'natural method' of classification, though his sexual system stands in contradistinction to Jussieu's natural system. She was sympathetic to the Scandinavians, but her observations lack penetration: visiting Smaland, a region of Sweden from which poverty was to drive thousands to the United States, she remarked 'there appear to be no poor people' (F. Caddy, 'Through the Fields with Linnaeus', 1887, 1.5). Though Gullick considers it her best book, 'To Siam and Malaya' (1889) shows the same lack of curiosity and insight on Caddy's part about the rather little-known places she visited aboard the duke of Sutherland's yacht 'Sans peur' (she had previously sailed in the yacht to the Baltic). 
This was Caddy's last book, the calls on family finances by this time being greatly reduced. When her husband died in 1902 the family was living at The Charterhouse, Richmond, Surrey. Mrs Caddy subsequently set up home with her unmarried daughter Hermione in London and the west country until her death at her home, 7 Albemarle Villas, Stoke, Devonport, Devon, on 9 July 1923. 
Mrs Caddy thought herself something of a scholar: there is no trace of irony in her statement of her appointment as botanist and naturalist to the trip to the Far East (though it seems much more likely that she was brought along to give respectability to the party, whose 'Lady Clare' was Mary Caroline Blair ('nee' Mitchell), later the duke's controversial second wife). Her prefaces stress the thoroughness of her preparatory research and the fresh insights she will give into her subjects' lives: yet if this learning was genuine, it is well masked in her books. The blend of biographical, topographical, and historical writing that characterizes her two most important works, 'Jeanne d'Arc' and 'Linnaeus', was a well-established formula which had found a ready audience with a reading public that included an increasing number of actual or future tourists. Though she aimed higher than many such authors and travelled further than most, she never consistently rose above the trivial, though her last book was considered worthy of reprint in 1992. 


@@@@@


doc= 46553


Cecil, Lady Gwendolen Gascoyne- (1860-1945), biographer, was born on 2 July 1860 at 21 Fitzroy Square, London, the second of the eight children of Robert Arthur Talbot Gascoyne-Cecil, third marquess of Salisbury (1830-1903), the leading Conservative statesman, and his wife, Georgina Caroline (1827-1899), daughter of Sir Edward Hall Alderson, a baron of the exchequer. Lady Gwendolen had no formal education, but her home, Hatfield House, gave an exceptional schooling in history, religion, and politics. In her thirties, as her mother's health declined, she became increasingly her father's confidante and amanuensis and accompanied him on official trips. In 1906 she began work on her great achievement, his biography. Four volumes, lucid and magisterial, with stylistic echoes of Creighton and Macaulay, appeared between 1921 and 1932. 
Although inevitably partial, the 'Life of Robert, Marquis of Salisbury' is not hagiography. Its language is impersonal, its scholarship massive. Lady Gwendolen's analysis of Salisbury's religion is unequalled and she writes with the authority of one who often discussed with him and his colleagues such matters as the Eastern question, parliamentary reform, and imperial expansion. Her summings-up of the politics of Disraeli (in volume 1) and Chamberlain (in the final, unpublished volume) are invaluable. Subsequent research may uncover much more, but her 'Life' will remain pre-eminent in the genre of family and contemporary biography. 
Besides historical activities, religion and philanthropy were the centre of Lady Gwendolen's existence. She fought for the release of unnecessarily incarcerated mental patients and designed many cottages on the Hatfield estate. On the political scene, passionately though she felt -- particularly where her brothers, James Edward Hubert Gascoyne-Cecil, William Gascoyne-Cecil (1863-1936), (Edgar Algernon) Robert Gascoyne-Cecil, Edward Herbert Gascoyne-Cecil, and Hugh Richard Heathcote Gascoyne-Cecil, were involved -- about such topics as women's suffrage (which she favoured), she was more commentator than participant; but her judgements in her letters well deserve the historian's respect -- for example on the Liberals' 1906 election victory and on the causes of the First World War. 
Stories of Lady Gwendolen's eccentricities abound. Once she stood in front of her car to prevent it from running downhill and was run over by it. She never married. Devotion to her father and an over-close family circle fostered by her dominating mother may be one reason; her unfeminine appearance, noble and dignified with advancing years, another. In some ways she conformed to the type of the late-Victorian maiden lady, but it would be absurd to see the richly textured life of this humorous, much loved, and scholarly woman as unfulfilled. Lady Gwendolen Cecil died at her home, the Lodge House, Hatfield Park, on 28 September 1945 and was buried in Hatfield parish churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 46554


Clayton, Ellen Creathorne (1834-1900), author and artist, was born in Gloucester Terrace, Dublin, on 15 February 1834, the eldest child and only daughter of Benjamin Clayton (1809-1883), an engraver and illustrator, and his wife, Mary Graham (died 1877). She had two surviving brothers, Albert Victor Clayton and Herbert Benjamin Clayton, both of whom became engravers. 
In 1841 the Clayton family moved from Dublin to London. From an early age, Ellen Clayton, in imitation of her father, was 'constantly scribbling with pen or with pencil' (Clayton, 2.325). By the time she was fourteen, her stories were appearing in 'Chat', an ephemeral periodical owned by her father. After its demise some three years later, Benjamin Clayton and his associates started a comic weekly, 'Punchinello', for which Ellen wrote and drew 'humorous (and numerous) designs' (ibid.) for eighteen months. She also drew illustrations for children's books and wrote several juvenile works. 
Her elder brother was now studying art in the British Museum and the National Gallery, and Ellen Clayton, thinking that art would provide a better livelihood than literature, followed his example. In the galleries she met and made friends with other women artists, such as Laura Herford, and in 1859 she was a signatory of the women artists' petition for full admission to the schools of the Royal Academy of Arts. She appears to have abandoned her artistic ambitions when the publishing company Dean & Son asked her to write a series of female biographies for young girls, in monthly parts. 'Quite sensible of her own shortcomings' as an artist (Clayton, 2.326), Clayton relinquished her gallery studies, although she continued to produce watercolours, studies of still life, etchings, and comic drawings. 
The biographies of 'Notable Women', which began publication in 1859 with a topical and hopelessly adulatory account of the career of Florence Nightingale, proved successful. The lives of the subjects promoted traditional feminine virtues -- filial and wifely devotion, piety, purity, and charity. Clayton's firmly protestant opinions were apparent in her next work, 'Women of the Reformation' (1861), also published by Dean & Son and possibly illustrated, rather ineptly, by Clayton herself. The heroines featured in this derivative and anecdotal work included Anne Boleyn, Anne Askew, Lady Jane Grey, and Anne Hooper. A further series of biographies, 'Celebrated Women', was later published by Dean & Son in 1875. 
In 1863 Clayton published her most successful novel, 'Miss Milly Moss, or, Sunlight and Shade', a coy domestic romance for young girls illustrated by her friend Florence Claxton. This was sufficiently popular to merit republication in 1895 as 'A Ministering Angel'. The more ambitious 'Cruel Fortune' (3 vols., 1865) followed: it was a confused, sensationalistic work, which Clayton seems to have found difficult to sell, as publishers found it 'painfully morbid' (Clayton, 2.328). She continued to produce rather unsuccessful fiction: 'Playing for Love' (1876), the tale of a young widow vacillating between two suitors, met with a very cool reception in 'The Athenaeum', where the reviewer commented on the lack of 'analysis of character, or descriptive writing of any sort' ('The Athenaeum', 29 July 1876, 143). 
After finishing 'Miss Milly Moss', Ellen Clayton began to research 'a work of some importance' (Clayton, 2.327), 'The Queens of Song' (2 vols., 1863), a collection of biographical accounts of leading female opera singers from the seventeenth century to the nineteenth. Partly to collect information for this work and partly to 'seek relief from a sad and irksome life' (ibid.), she visited Paris, possibly as a lady's companion; she later recalled bitterly how social engagements had deprived her of the chance to visit the Louvre. 

'The Queens of Song' was favourably reviewed, and Clayton was invited to write for 'London Society', under the 'pleasant editorship' of James Hogg, who became a supportive friend. Simultaneously, she was contributing short stories, essays, and comic drawings to 'Judy' and other periodicals and magazines. Another novel was published in a weekly journal, and she also wrote several juvenile works, including 'Topsy Turvy' and 'The World Turned Upside Down', both published in 1876. Probably in financial straits, she also painted and designed valentines, calendars, and cards for several commercial houses, including Rimmell of the Strand. 
On the strength of 'The Queens', Ellen Clayton approached the publisher William Tinsley, for whom she wrote her best-known and most valuable work, 'English Female Artists' (2 vols., 1876). In the first volume of this work she covered female artists active in England from the sixteenth century to the nineteenth; the second volume dealt with living artists, among whom featured Helen Allingham, Louise Jopling, Anna Blunden, and Lady Butler. A reviewer in 'The Athenaeum' criticized the work for excessive length, describing it as inflated with unnecessary domestic details and an 'infinity of small reflexions' on the merits of each artist. The critic preferred the first volume to the second, arguing that, although neither original nor authoritative, the accounts of past women artists were useful and readable ('The Athenaeum', 22 July 1876, 119-20). Ironically, the second volume has proved to be the more significant: based on questionnaires completed by the artists, it contains a wealth of biographical information about Clayton's women contemporaries. Nevertheless, the 'Athenaeum' critic was not without insight: although a more weighty publication than Elizabeth Ellet's 'Women Artists of All Ages and Countries' (1859), Clayton's 'English Female Artists' shared the tendency of Victorian biographies of women artists to concentrate on anecdotes and reminiscences, commenting little on the subjects' artistic development and portraying their lives as uneventful and ultimately feminine. Nevertheless, Clayton did not ignore the difficulties experienced by women artists, including parental opposition, lack of access to formal training, and straitened finances, and she celebrated with 'elan' their critical successes. 
The more radical aspects of Clayton's biographies were confirmed in her next work for Tinsley, 'Female Warriors' (2 vols., 1879). A critic in 'The Spectator', although shocked by this robust account of military-minded women from the Amazons to the Maid of Saragossa, commented only half-jokingly that Clayton had 'shown conclusively that when women do get into Parliament, we may fairly expect them... to be ready, in case of emergency, to abandon their legislative functions for the barrack and battlefield' ('The Spectator', 1353). On 15 February 1879 she married James Henry Needham (died 1892), who worked for a legal firm in Woolwich. She appears to have published only a couple of works for young girls after her marriage, which may have provided her with some financial stability. 
Ellen Clayton died childless in St Elizabeth's Home at 59 Mortimer Street, London, on 19 July 1900. In his 'Random Recollections' of the same year, William Tinsley recalled with sympathy that this 'good, hard-working little woman' had 'dragged out a poor existence' (Tinsley, 2.335): it is tempting to speculate that Clayton's miserable career as a literary and artistic hack had fuelled her increasingly radical views on women's past and present condition. 


@@@@@


doc= 46555


Cooper, Elizabeth (fl. 1865-1874), historian, made her debut as a writer in 1865 with the publication of 'A Popular History of America'. Her subsequent works were biographies. In 1866 she published 'The Life and Letters of Lady Arbella Stuart' (2 vols.), a laudatory portrait of an altruistic protestant heroine destroyed by court intrigues. It was based on original documents, some of which belonged to Sir Thomas Phillipps, the famous bibliophile. A pause in publication ensued, probably because Cooper became ill around 1869 (in her dedication to her next work she described herself as 'the hapless victim of a neglected and torturing malady'). In 1874 she published 'The Life of Thomas Wentworth, Earl of Stafford', the first scholarly biography of the seventeenth-century statesman. According to the reviewer for 'The Spectator', the work showed that she had 'industry and care, but wants the grasp of imagination which is needed for her difficult subject'. He concluded, however, that the work had 'real merits', praising in particular her account of Wentworth's government of Ireland ('Spectator', 471-2). Very little else is known of Cooper's life. She appears to have lived mainly in or near London, and was unmarried at the time of her publications. 


@@@@@


doc= 46556


Corder, Susanna (1787-1864), biographer, was born in Stoke Newington, Middlesex, the daughter of John Corder and Ruth Marriage, both Quakers. A delicate child, she was educated from 1797 to 1799 at Ackworth School in Yorkshire. About the age of twenty, after a period of spiritual depression, she experienced a deepening of her religious commitment. She nursed her mother devotedly until her death, after which she decided to pursue a career in teaching, to which she had long felt called. From 1817 to 1824 she taught at a school at Suir Island, Clonmel, Ireland, which she enjoyed. In 1824 she returned to England and, with the help of William Allen and other leading Quakers, started a school for girls at Fleetwood House in Stoke Newington, which was modelled on the Irish establishment. 
Corder's school was a progressive one: the curriculum included astronomy, experimental philosophy, physics, and natural history, as well as more traditional subjects such as writing, arithmetic, history, French, and needlework. Greek, Latin, German, and Italian were offered as extras, and William Allen gave lectures on chemistry and lent his telescope for the use of the pupils. In 1827 the wide range of subjects offered was celebrated in some doggerel verses by one Joseph Pease, who referred to the 'astounding variety of stores intellectual imbibed by pupils at the 'N[ewington] Nunnery'' (Shirren, 163). By that date the number of pupils had risen from twelve to twenty-five. 
If the curriculum was liberal, the general regime of the school was not. In her youth Susanna Corder had experienced 'much conflict of mind on the subject of dress' ('Annual Monitor', 43) and had adopted the full austerity of traditional Quaker dress. Accordingly, her pupils were required to wear stiff Quaker bonnets, which exposed them to the ridicule of their contemporaries at a neighbouring school. The religious needs of pupils were catered for extravagantly: copious spiritual readings and talks were given by such visitors as Allen and Sarah Grubb. The high days and holidays of the school year consisted of visits to the British Museum and attendance at the yearly meeting in London. 
The ethos of the school reflected the essential conservatism of Susanna Corder's religion. She herself was described as 'an embodiment of perfection as regards propriety of manner, costume, and doctrine of the medieval section of the Friends' Society' (Shirren, 162). She became an elder of the local meeting soon after her return to Stoke Newington, and it was in this capacity that she signed a warning letter to John Wilkinson, whose heterodox views produced a schism among the Stoke Quakers in 1836. She was also on the revising committee of the Morning Meeting for fifteen years. In 1841 she published 'A Brief Outline of the Origin, Principles, and Church Government of the Society of Friends', in which her strong adherence to the traditional Quaker dress, manners, and doctrine was clearly manifested. 
Susanna Corder retired between 1840 to 1845, and moved to Chelmsford, where she spent the rest of her life. She now turned entirely to her writing. Corder had already published her most successful work, 'Memorials of Deceased Members of the Society of Friends' (2nd edn, 1839), which went through at least six revised editions. These sketches of the lives of eighteenth- and nineteenth-century English and American Quakers concentrated on their spiritual experiences, opinions, and work, and often recounted their edifying deaths in great detail. Her subjects were largely obscure; one was her own pupil Ann Backhouse, who had died at the age of nineteen. Corder's emphasis on the inner spiritual lives of her characters -- rather than their (often unspectacular) public careers -- no doubt helped to ensure a roughly equal balance of male and female subjects: the second edition (1839) included twenty-seven men and twenty women. Corder's most significant work, however, was her 1853 biography of the prison reformer Elizabeth Fry, which she wrote at the request of Fry's family. Based largely on Fry's diaries, from which it quotes continually and extensively, the 'Life' succeeded in tracing the inner spiritual journey of a well-known public figure; it still remains an important source for Fry's life. Three years later Corder wrote a memoir of Priscilla Gurney, Fry's sister. 
Susanna Corder also published 'Christian Instruction in the History, Types, and Prophecies of the Old Testament' (1854), an 'epitome of Scriptural history and doctrine' (p. iii). The text of this work -- which, as Corder herself said, does not rival the 'impressive sublimity of the beautifully simple style of the Sacred Volume' (ibid., 1) -- shows the author's usual tendency towards an earnest and ponderous verbosity. She also wrote several pamphlets, including one advocating the exercise of spiritual gifts by women (1839), which reached a third edition. Susanna Corder died on 28 February 1864 at her home in Chelmsford, and she was buried in Chelmsford on 3 March. 


@@@@@


doc= 46557


Czaplicka, Marya Antonina (1884-1921), anthropologist, was born on 25 October 1884 in Warsaw, daughter of Felix Lubicz Czaplicki and Sophie Zawisza. Educated and trained as a geography teacher in Warsaw and Libau (now Liepaja, Latvia) between 1894 and 1905, from 1906 to 1909 she studied natural history in the Warsaw Museum, giving private tuition and acting as a secretary to pay her way. Aged twenty-six endowed with 'a considerable amount of personal charm' (Czaplicka MSS), the first woman to obtain a Mianowski fellowship, she studied ethnology at the London School of Economics in 1910, and met the American anthropologist Henry Usher Hall. At Somerville College, Oxford (1911-12), she obtained a diploma in anthropology. R. Marett, reader in anthropology, eager to combine her scientific and linguistic qualifications (she knew German, Russian, English, Ukrainian, and her native Polish and was to learn Uralic and Tungusic languages), thought she 'might profitably devote herself to a synthesis of recent Russian work on the tribes of the Far North' (Czaplicka MSS). He somewhat lightheartedly suggested a monograph; she enthusiastically agreed, being 'keen almost to a fault' (Czaplicka MSS). Grants from Somerville and Bedford colleges enabled the impoverished scholar to complete 'Aboriginal Siberia' (1914). 
Little fieldwork had been done in north-central Siberia, the vanishing lifestyle of whose peoples involved 'magico-religious institutions... of a very special and psychologically curious type' (Czaplicka MSS). To fill the gap this young woman became one of few Poles to volunteer for a year's exile in Siberia: 'the outcome of my own eager desire and interest' (Czaplicka, 'Siberian Year', 4). A Mary Ewart scholarship at Somerville in 1914 enabled her to visit the northern Yenisey tundra with Henry Hall of the Philadelphia University Museum and two female companions. Czaplicka and Hall wintered with the nomads. In 1915 they returned via wartime Petrograd and Warsaw. Her books and letters ignore illness, seasickness bad enough to cause vomiting of blood, lack of money, inadequate supplies, rare correspondence, harsh temperatures, lack of sanitary facilities, glutinous mud in spring, mosquitoes and dust in summer. Rare glimpses of dry humour and a lyrical joy at tundra flowers and the northern lights betray little about her emotions or relationships. One Siberian companion mentioned her 'tireless energy and a most winning address [which], even apart from her intellectual gifts and knowledge of the world, marked Miss Czaplicka's striking personality' (Haviland, 3). The other companion, Dora Curtis, tartly remarked that she would walk for 35 kilometres up to the knees in tundra moss 'with only a piece of bread and appear unsatisfied in the end... she can accomplish these feats because she has great spirit but afterwards she pays for them dearly' (Czaplicka MSS). Relevant publications include 'My Siberian Year' (1915), 'On the track of the Tungus' ('Scottish Geographical Magazine', 33, 1917), and 'Siberia and some Siberians' ('Journal of the Manchester Geographical Society', 32, 1916, 27-42). 
Subsequently (1916-19) Mary Ewart lecturer in ethnology at Oxford, Czaplicka was a member of Lady Margaret Hall, where she 'instituted a most enterprising Folk-Lore Club' (Marett, 105) and lectured in Britain and the USA. Politically she favoured an independent, democratic Poland, and advocated allied intervention in Siberia to protect its fledgeling democracy against Bolshevism. Strongly opposed to militarism, she fulminated against the 'unscientific' German-fomented pan-Turkism. Such views coupled with rare expertise led to work in the Foreign Office, the Admiralty, and the war trade intelligence department, where she merited official Polish appreciation for 'devotion to her country'. Her political views appear in 'Turks of Central Asia' (1918), 'The Siberian colonist or Sibiriak' in (W. Stephens, 'The Soul of Russia', 1916), 'A plea for Siberia' ('New Europe', 28 March 1918), and 'Poland' ('Geographical Journal', 53, 1919). 
In 1920 the Royal Geographical Society's Murchison grant recognized Czaplicka's 'ethnographical and geographical work in northern Siberia'. A fellow of the Royal Geographical Society and the Royal Anthropological Institution, she lectured in anthropology at Bristol University from 1920, becoming 'quite the life' of the university speleological society and the Clifton Ladies' Debating Society. Her sudden death in Bristol on 27 May 1921 was a great shock. The official explanation, heart failure, concealed suicide by poison. A Polish Catholic, Marya Czaplicka must have been desperate. Why should a 36-year-old woman with a substantial academic record and promising future take her own life? Failure to obtain a cherished permanent university post 'was understandably a great blow, for she was taking out letters of naturalization in order to be qualified for it' (Czaplicka MSS). She may have concluded that a foreigner and woman could never achieve acceptance. A contributory reason may have been debts of over $200. Marett wrote: 'she struck fire out of whatever she touched... Too late her many friends realised that she was living on her organic capital' (Marett, 106). Unmarried, Czaplicka left no descendants. She was buried in Bristol. In her work she had broken new ground: reclassifying the Siberian peoples, treating shamanism in a novel way, and presenting the first systematic account of arctic hysteria (Czaplicka, 'Aboriginal Siberia', vi). She provided substantial contributions to the 'Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics' (ed. J. Hastings, 1916-21), investigated Cossack communities ('Journal of the Central Asian Society', 5, 1918), and links between environment and religion ('Influence of environment upon the religious ideas and practices of the Aborigines of northern Asia', 'Folklore', 25, 1914). Had she lived she might have left a scientific legacy similar to that of her contemporary and correspondent Bronislaw Malinowski (Collins and Urry, 188-20). 
The Marya Antonina Czaplicka Fund was established in 1971 in her memory by a bequest from the anthropologist Mrs Barbara Aitken (Barbara Freire-Marreco) to assist members of Somerville College studying the ancient world, anthropology, or the natural sciences to attend conferences and meetings abroad. 


@@@@@


doc= 46558


Hill, Georgiana (1858-1924), historian and women's rights activist, was born at 9 Mount View, Lambeth, London, on 8 December 1858, the younger daughter of George Hill (1822-1897), a master printer, journalist, and newspaper proprietor, and his wife, Emily, 'nee' Kitson (1815-1894). Her father was founder and editor of a local newspaper, the 'Westminster and Lambeth Gazette', and was active in local politics, representing Lambeth on the Metropolitan Board of Works. Nothing is known of her early education, but the family was clearly close-knit, and Georgiana lived and worked for the rest of her life with her elder sister, Emily Hill (1851/2-1936): neither ever married. Both the Hill sisters became involved in a wide range of social and philanthropic movements, but also in the work of their father's business: on 15 January 1890, the 'Englishwoman's Review' recorded that they had added a new department to his printing business, and were training women in composition, proof-reading, journalism, and other related trades. Georgiana and Emily were apparently already working as journalists themselves and were responsible for the 'Woman's Page' in the 'Westminster and Lambeth Gazette' until 1891, when their father retired. 
Radical women's journals of the late Victorian period provide evidence of Georgiana Hill's advocacy of the rights of women workers. In September 1889 the 'Englishwoman's Review' carried her letter urging the French municipal authorities to provide equal funding for women workers to attend the exhibition of that year in order to improve their skills. In 1896 'Hearth and Home' recorded that Georgiana had attended the Women's Congress in Berlin to give a paper on women poor law guardians (her father read it out for her); the journal's report of the congress was written by Emily. In the later 1890s, following the example of her father, Georgiana Hill headed a sustained campaign to get female representation on the board of management of the Royal Hospital for the Incurables, which was reported in the 'Woman's Signal'. Her paper at the 1900 conference of the National Union of Women Workers focused on the issue of the work of women on hospital and other boards; it was jointly written with Louisa Stevenson, who sat on the women's sub-committee at the Royal Hospital. 
In 1893 Hill published 'A History of English Dress from the Saxon Period to the Present Day', a classic example of the cultural and social history publications characteristic of late nineteenth-century amateur women historians. Despite the title Hill's history did give brief coverage of Irish, Welsh, and Scottish costumes (at least until the eighteenth century), as well as limited attention to armour and ecclesiastical dress; she was also attentive to the distinctions between classes, recognizing that practicality and economy always dictated the dress of the lower orders (not necessarily to their disadvantage). She was systematically critical of extravagant, uncomfortable, and inconvenient fashions, suggesting that she was influenced by the late nineteenth-century dress reform movement. She praised seventeenth-century dress for both sexes as the most elegant and comfortable produced in the modern period, and suggested provocatively that medieval women's dress, which largely conformed to antique models, both following and flattering the figure, was to be preferred to modern modes. 
Like her contemporary Charlotte Carmichael Stopes, Hill moved from criticism of women's dress to criticism of their historical and social position. In 1896 she published 'Women in English Life from Medieval to Modern Times', covering women's historical experience both chronologically and thematically, and exhibiting a particular interest in women's education and work. While Hill offered a largely liberal and progressivist narrative, in which the industrial revolution brought substantial benefits for her sex, she was as critical of modern as of medieval developments, and particularly sensitive to the varying experiences of women from different classes. She considered both feudalism and the medieval church as often negative in their impact on women's lives, believing both kept women in a position of inferiority, while even chivalry (which put women on a pedestal) failed to set them in the proper place -- as the companions and equals of men. Nevertheless, she identified the potential opportunities for medieval women of status in managing large estates, households, and religious communities, and praised convents for offering employment and education to single women, as well as social services to their surrounding communities (paralleling here the arguments of Lina Eckenstein, whose work on medieval female monasticism was published in the same year). She was even more impressed with medieval guilds which (despite their sometimes restrictive practices) treated women as the equals of men: here she drew on the work of the medievalist Lucy Toulmin-Smith. 
While conscious of the increasing educational possibilities for elite women during the Renaissance, Hill highlighted the negative effects of the dissolution of religious communities on women's education, highlighting in particular the absence of literacy among women from the lower orders. She was also critical of post-Reformation religion for failing to provide the opportunities for public social work which she believed the medieval church had afforded them, and to protect them from the consequences of both puritan fanaticism and superstitious belief in witchcraft. Although critical of many of the social tendencies of the seventeenth century (in particular the declining quality of elite women's education and the poor role models for womanhood at the court of Charles II), she reserved her deepest condemnation for the eighteenth century, a period when she felt that advances in material prosperity were unmatched by any widespread improvement in women's intellectual or moral condition. 
When she turned to the modern period in her second volume Hill was profoundly critical of the tendency of industrialization to limit working opportunities for middle class women by confining them to the domestic sphere, just as technological developments were emancipating them from household drudgery. Equally she was critical of the industrial exploitation of working-class women, who were -- in her opinion -- severed from their families and homes. She believed that the role of woman was both a public and a private one, as was also the case for her equal and companion, man: she was an equal rights, rather than a complementary, feminist. The second volume also offered, however, a wide-ranging description of the increasing opportunities open to middle-class women by the end of the century in the fields of education, exploration, medicine and nursing, literature and the arts, philanthropy, administration and local government, and business and trade. However, Hill did not offer an uncomplicated celebration of women's emancipation in her own era. She commented ironically on how nineteenth-century women had to fight to regain rights and opportunities that had previously been accorded them. 
Hill's recognition of the costs as well as the benefits of increasing professionalization for women is a constant, contradictory antiphony to her catalogue of late Victorian women's achievements: she praises the emergence of institutions providing secondary and higher education for young women, but deplores the culture of 'cramming' that participation in the examination system brings, suggesting that such elite icons of sixteenth-century humanistic education as Lady Jane Grey had more genuine love of knowledge and deeper learning than contemporary female students. Similarly she suggests that the nineteenth-century professionalization of nursing, while largely a positive development, nevertheless prevented many women from continuing to exercise their traditional role as home apothecaries and domestic nurses for their own families and friends. 
Many of Hill's insights into the losses as well as the gains of women over time -- which add critical nuance to what could have been a liberal narrative of progress -- have been confirmed by later historians of gender: her account of the disempowerment of the midwife as her work was professionalized and colonized by men, and her recognition that more women had access to the franchise in some way before nineteenth-century franchise reforms than after, have both been confirmed by more recent scholarship. The shaded optimism of Hill's account is particularly apparent in her final chapter, where she described the still unsuccessful campaign for women's suffrage. 
In the early twentieth century Hill became a supporter of the ethical movement, and was a member of the committee of the Ethical Church, founded in a former Methodist chapel in Bayswater by the American-born freethinker and women's suffragist Stanton Coit. Following their parents' deaths she and her sister Emily, together with their cousin Emily Walton Fyfe (1853-1926), a former headmistress of a girls' high school and lecturer at a college of physical education, formed a household in Wandsworth. Described as 'animated in manner and very good-looking' ('The Times', 1 April 1924), she was a popular public speaker, largely on the history of costume. An address by her on wigs was broadcast on radio early in March 1924, shortly before her death, of pneumonia, at her home, 3 Blenkarne Road, Wandsworth, London, on 29 March 1924. She was buried in Wandsworth cemetery. 
Georgiana Hill's contribution to the development of women's history was largely neglected until, in 1985, Joan Thirsk pointed out her omission from the original 'Dictionary of National Biography', and celebrated the 'clarity, force, and considered judgement' (Thirsk, xvi) apparent in her work (while understandably confusing her with her near contemporary, the cookery-book writer Georgiana Hill (1825-1903)). Thirsk saw her as 'a bridge between those who had concentrated on royalty and those who were next to explore the history of middle- and working-class women' (ibid.). As a successor to the Strickland sisters and Mary Anne Everett Green, and the foremother of Alice Clark and Eileen Power, Hill was indeed aptly placed. 


@@@@@


doc= 46559


Milner, Mary (1797-1863), author, was born on 12 November 1797, the daughter of Thomas Wilberforce Compton and his wife, Sarah. Her birth coincided with the death of her great-uncle Joseph Milner, vicar-elect of Kingston upon Hull, with whom her mother, his niece and legatee, was living. After the death of her mother in August 1812, Mary Compton found a permanent home with her great-uncle Isaac Milner, president of Queens' College, Cambridge, and dean of Carlisle. Her education gained greatly from her conversations with him on religion, mathematics, natural science, and history. Shortly before the death of Dean Milner, Mary Compton married a distant cousin, Joseph Milner (1797?-1864), in 1820. He became vicar of St Lawrence, Appleby, near Penrith, in Westmorland, and they had at least six children, three sons and three daughters. 
By 1840 Mary Milner had returned from domestic to literary pursuits with 'The Christian Mother, or, Maternal Duties Exemplified', a popular work of evangelical piety which stressed the value of the individual child in the sight of God. Some were shocked that she advocated a permissive attitude to mischievous children, although she emphasized that defects of character were to be punished. At the same time she was also at work on 'The Life of Dean Milner, DD, FRS' (2 vols., 1842). This demonstrated an incisive style, attacking those 'who secretly if not avowedly, associate the ideas of piety and imbecility' ('Preface', iv). Aiming at impartiality towards the subject, she handled historical evidence ably and generally avoided personal reminiscence in an impressive biography. Dean Milner's influence can be seen in 'The Garland of the Months' (1852), in which natural history and sciences were used to exemplify 'the first great cause of all things' ('The Garland of the Months', 240), as a stimulus to observations by the growing child. In her 'Sketches Illustrative of Important Periods in the History of the World' (1843) Mary Milner showed a grasp of historical change from an evangelical point of view; she was asked to continue Sarah Trimmer's popular textbook 'History of England' to the marriage of Queen Victoria (1849). 
As an editor, Mrs Milner was probably able to count for support on William Wilberforce and Clapham Sect contacts among publishers in London and elsewhere. Her lively intellect can be seen in the 'Christian Mother's Magazine' (1844). Apart from articles on religion and the truth of scripture, this periodical contained series on astronomy, mathematics, history, archaeology, and natural history, as well as poetry and other arts which reflected Mary Milner's broad interests. It soon became the 'Englishwomen's Magazine' (9 vols., 1845-55), in which Thomas Arnold's call for articles 'written with a decidedly religious tone' (1846, frontispiece) was answered. There was a feminist edge to the contents, which included a series on celebrated women such as Hannah More, Felicia Hemans, and Maria Edgeworth, and female influence on literature and society. Reviews kept readers in touch with the latest ideas and covered such social issues as the poor laws, infanticide in India and the potato famine in Ireland. As the editor of a popular periodical series of engravings, 'The People's Gallery' (1848-9), Mrs Milner encountered redoubtable women contributors such as Caroline Norton. In 1855-6 she returned to 'scriptural christianity' with the 'Christian Lady's Magazine'. Series on the human body and the training and development of children were short-lived, possibly owing to religious opposition. She also edited a new edition of 'The Essentials of Christianity' (1855), by her great-uncle Joseph Milner. 
Mary Milner died at the vicarage, Appleby, on 10 May 1863, and was buried in St Lawrence's churchyard there. As a scholar, she demonstrated the versatility of the mid-nineteenth-century woman writer, and her editorial skill gave women a voice in Christian and wider circles. 


@@@@@


doc= 46560


Moore, Frances (1788/9-1881), historian and novelist, was born at Carlingford, co. Louth, the daughter of Peter Moore (1753-1828), a former Indian civil servant who became MP for Coventry in 1803, and his wife, Sarah (died before 1798), daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel Richmond Webb of Bandon, co. Cork. She was one of a family of five sons (only one of whom survived his father) and two daughters. Her father was the director of several shaky companies, which crashed in 1824-5, and after the loss of his seat in 1826 he was forced to flee to France to escape arrest. At his death, in 1828 at Abbeville, he is said to have left his two daughters 'respectably provided for' ('GM', 568); in 1881 her income was derived from annuities and land. 
Frances Moore's short literary career began with the publication of several novels, under the pseudonym 'Madame Panache'. Her second novel, 'Manners' (1817), commented on the work of other novelists and examined social distinctions in an English village and in Ireland. 'A Year and a Day' (1818) is a well-written and restrained silver-fork novel, which deals with the love of a fashionable man for the fascinating, unconventional, but ultimately virtuous wife of an elderly aristocrat. It was possibly inspired by the less reputable career of Lady Caroline Lamb. 
Moore's most important publication, however, is her 'Historical Life of Joanna of Sicily' (1824). This substantial biography begins with a long introductory digression on the history and literature of Provence and Italy in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries. Controversially, Moore portrayed Joanna as entirely innocent of the murder of her first husband, Andrew of Hungary, viewing her as the victim of treacherous men. The critic of the 'Quarterly Review' of December 1824 firmly opposed her interpretation of Andrew's assassination, and criticized her inclusion of superfluous material. The 'Eclectic Review' was more sympathetic, describing the work as an 'elaborate and elegant historical miscellany' (p. 412) and professing an open mind with respect to Andrew's murder. Despite its shortcomings, all subsequent English-language biographies of Joanna are substantially based on Moore's 'Life'. Moore's only subsequent publication seems to have been a translation of two volumes of Carlo Botta's 'History of Italy', published in 1828, with a useful preface considering Botta's career and its influence on his account of Italy under Napoleon. 
Frances Moore's later life is very obscure. She seems to have lived for some years in Carlingford, co. Louth. Then she moved to 16 Park Street in Taunton, where she may have resided with a nephew. In 1881 she was living at 6 Queen's Terrace, Exeter, with her three nieces. She died at Queen Square, Mount Radford, in Exeter on 6 June of that year at the age of ninety-two. 


@@@@@


doc= 46561


Newmarch, Rosa Harriet (1857-1940), writer on music, was born at 29 Lansdowne Place, Leamington Spa, on 18 December 1857, the daughter of Samuel John Jeaffreson, a doctor, and his wife, Sophy Kenney, and the granddaughter of the playwright James Kenney. On 19 June 1883 she married Henry Charles Newmarch, a surveyor; they had a daughter, Elsie, and a son, John. All her work appeared under her married name. In 1897 she made the first of many visits to Russia, the country of whose music, together with that of Czechoslovakia, she was to pioneer English appreciation. Working in the Imperial Public Library in St Petersburg under the supervision of Vladimir Stasov, she made herself familiar with Russian music, and in England put her energy and enthusiasm into awakening a wider interest in Russian composers with a long series of lectures, books, articles, and programme notes. She also translated a number of Russian operas for English performance. A close friend of Sir Henry Wood, she encouraged performance of Russian music at the Proms, and became an eloquent advocate of it in her capacity as official programme-note writer to the Queen's Hall Orchestra between 1908 and 1919 (her work continued to appear until 1928). 
Mrs Newmarch's last visit to Russia was made in the summer of 1915. When political events made further travel difficult, she turned her attention to the music of the Czech lands. Her writings had already aroused much appreciation among Czech musicians, and she was invited to the country, with her daughter, as a gesture of thanks by the conductor and composer Karel Kovarovic in 1919. Their travels included a visit to Moravia, where she met Janacek. Her advocacy of his music, then barely known in England, included a sympathetic review of 'The Cunning Little Vixen' when she went to Prague in 1925 as correspondent of 'The Times', and in the following year she was the prime mover in Janacek's visit to England. In gratitude, he dedicated his 'Sinfonietta' to her. 
Sir Henry Wood wrote that Mrs Newmarch's programme notes (which were republished in book form) were 'not merely a synopsis of the works she treats, but... beautiful specimens of English literature' (Wood, 232). As with much of her work, their somewhat subjective descriptive manner has dated, but they served to help appreciation of a great deal of the new music that Wood was introducing to Proms audiences, sometimes at her prompting. Similarly, her study of Tchaikovsky (1900), while interesting enough to have warranted a reissue in 1969, has long been superseded, though her translation of Modest Tchaikovsky's 'Life and Letters of P. I. Tchaikovsky' remains valuable. Her importance rests not on her scholarship, though she was thorough and meticulous (and contributed useful essays on Russian composers to the second, third, and fourth editions of 'Grove's Dictionary'), but on her eloquent, and successful, appeal to English audiences on behalf of Russian and Czech music at a time when taste was still largely ruled by German symphonic music and Italian opera. She also introduced Sir Henry Wood to Sibelius's music, and wrote a monograph on it (1944). Other useful books included 'The Russian Opera' (1914, reissued 1972) and 'The Music of Czechoslovakia' (1942, reissued 1969). Her energy and enthusiasm of mind were retained into old age. She died at Percival's Hotel, Heene Terrace, Worthing, Sussex, on 9 April 1940. 


@@@@@


doc= 46562


Verney, Frances Parthenope, Lady Verney (1819-1890), genealogist and author, was born on 19 April 1819 at Naples, the first among the two children of William Edward Nightingale, formerly Shore (1794-1874), and his wife, Frances (Fanny), 'nee' Smith (1789-1880). She and her sister, Florence Nightingale, were given names after their birthplace, Parthenope being the Greek form of Naples. 
After their three-year tour in Italy the Nightingales returned to Britain in 1821 and lived at Lea Hurst, Derbyshire, but from 1825 wintered at Embley Park, near Romsey, Hampshire, with visits to London. Parthe (also known as Pop) and Flo enjoyed visits from numerous cousins and distinguished guests, but Parthe was usually eclipsed by her prettier, strong-willed sister. They were educated at home by governesses, but from 1832 their father taught them Greek, Latin, German, French, Italian, history, and philosophy. Parthe was less scholarly than Florence, and turned to her socialite mother, Fanny. Nevertheless, she was fluent in French, acquired a lasting love of literature, and developed artistic talents allied to close observation of fauna and flora, later expressed in 'Sketches from Nature with Pen and Pencil' (1877). Like Florence she benefited from the family continental tour (September 1837-spring 1839) and mingling in cultured circles in Italy and Paris. 
To Florence's passionate friendships, rejected suitors, and alarming medical ambitions Parthe reacted with alternate submission and anger, adoration and jealousy. Later, like her mother, she was impressed by the official support for Florence's Crimean venture, and supported her work. On her return -- as a celebrity -- she guarded her sister's privacy. At Lea Hurst, Parthe was a devoted charitable visitor, closely observant of local life, stories, and dialect. Her latent talents blossomed when, on 24 June 1858, she married Florence's rejected suitor the handsome widower Sir Harry Verney, formerly Calvert, second baronet (1801-1894), MP for Buckingham, supporter of liberal causes, and model landowner at Claydon House, Middle Claydon, Buckinghamshire. She soon made Claydon a salon for people of talent, and conscientiously visited tenants. Her marriage also released her energies as an author, with a gift for fiction and for social comment. 
Lady Verney's novels, mostly set in the 1820s, present love stories in traditional societies, with close rendering of working-class occupations and regional dialects. The first three, published anonymously, were 'Avenhoe' (1867), 'Stone Edge' (1868), a story of Derbyshire farmers involving a tragic death, and 'Lettice Lisle' (1870), which deals with Hampshire yeomen and smuggling. 'Fernyhurst Court' (1871), 'an everyday story', is a middle-class romantic comedy, while 'Llanaly Reefs' (1873) deals with Welsh seamen. In 'The Grey Pool and other Stories' (1891) the title story depicts the grim life of bargees and poachers, while 'Hasty Feet Sorrow Meet' is a remarkably realistic study of a Welsh strike, in which miners, mine owner, and union leader are all sympathetically portrayed. 
The diverse articles collected in 'Essays and Tales' (1891) show the same imaginative and critical gifts: 'Lady Verney's essays on dreams, on female education in France, on the dignity of labor, and on the decline of honorable dealing among the English commercial classes are the work of a first-class mind' (Mackerness, 136). Several publications expressed her strong views on landownership, as in 'Cottier Owners, Little Tales and Peasant Properties' (1885). Drawing from her continental travels, first-hand enquiries, and official documents, she argued that the system of peasant patrimony, leading to tiny, scattered holdings, produces a life of grinding toil, poor returns, and brutal poverty. English farming, with its modern methods and machinery, she presented as more efficient, with the wage-earning labourer enjoying a better diet and culture. She contrasted peasant/aristocrat enmity with the English scene, where the 'big house' and park are 'the museum, entertainment ground and convalescent home of the neighbourhood' ('Cottier Owners', 25). This thesis may be one-sided, but it reflected practice at Claydon, where large parties of schoolchildren came to spend a day in the park, and villagers gathered for tea, football, dancing, games, and fireworks. In these sociological tracts, which have in mind the problems of contemporary Ireland, she comes closest to her celebrated sister. 
Lady Verney is best remembered, however, for her scholarly work at Claydon, seat of the Verneys for fourteen generations, where she 'threw herself into the congenial task of rescuing and renewing the interesting family relics which were falling into decay' (M. M. V., 'Memoir', xi). Portraits were restored and identified, furniture and carving installed, and gardens beautified. Above all she ordered the Verney family papers in the neglected long gallery, including letters (which amounted to no fewer than 30,000 up to the death of Sir Ralph in 1696), parchments, charters, account books, and rent rolls -- papers merely sampled by Bruce in his Camden Society articles of 1845 and 1853. Drawing on this copious material, she first wrote 'The House of Claydon and its Inhabitants, from 1480 to 1769' (repr. in 'Essays and Tales', 15-24). Then, contending with the painful arthritis which afflicted her in the 1880s, she completed volume 1 and drafted volume 2 of 'Memoirs of the Verney Family during the Civil War' (1892). She was encouraged by the historian S. R. Gardiner, who wrote an introductory note for volume 1, and was helped by Sir Harry's daughter-in-law Margaret Maria Verney, who continued the work. Parthenope delighted not only in the famous civil war heroes but also in 'the great stream of life of common people' (vol. 1, preface). 
After a painful illness Lady Verney died on 12 May 1890 at Claydon House. 


@@@@@


doc= 46563


Stone, Elizabeth (1803-1881), novelist and historian, was born in Manchester and baptized at the cathedral on 25 April 1803. She was the daughter of John and Mary Wheeler. Her father was the publisher of the 'Manchester Chronicle', which had been founded by her grandfather Charles Wheeler in 1781. Her brother James published 'Manchester: its Political, Social and Commercial History' (1836) and edited an anthology entitled 'Manchester Poetry' (1838). She married, probably in the 1830s, and lived mainly in London. Her earliest and most interesting historical work was 'The Art of Needlework' (1840), in which she called for recognition of women's creative contribution to culture. Stone lamented the 'ungallant silence of the historian', and praised the needle as an instrument of civilization, superior to the destructive sword (pp. v-vi). The book was reviewed in 'The Athenaeum' in August 1840, where it was described as 'a pleasant collection of antiquarian reading'. Both the 'Athenaeum' reviewer, who saw 'The Art of Needlework' as a ''conservative' production, intended to seduce the sex from revolutionary reading and writing, and to subdue their natures to a servile drudgery', and subsequent modern commentators have underestimated the vehemence with which Stone attacked the dominant male view of history in her study of a women's art form. 
In 1842 Stone published a novel, 'William Langshawe, the Cotton Lord', a social protest novel of the hungry forties, which has been identified as the first novel about the manufacturing districts of Manchester written by a native. Reviewed in 'The Athenaeum' and 'The Examiner', it was a work full of careful social observation, supported by some research: Stone had probably read recent government reports, and works such as John Fielden's 'The Curse of the Factory System' (1836). She drew a sympathetic but not uncritical portrait of the industrial magnate, and such passages as her description of Manchester on a race day show a keen eye for the dynamics of urban life. The plot of the novel detailed the seduction of a working-class girl by a rich manufacturer's son, which probably influenced the mistaken identification of Stone as the author of 'Mary Barton' (1843). 'William Langshawe' was followed in 1843 by 'The Young Milliner', a topical examination of the plight of the seamstress, partly inspired by her earlier work on needlework. In this bleak novel, she criticized middle- and upper-class women for the oppression which their pursuit of fashion imposed on their poorer sisters: one seamstress dies of overwork, while another is driven into prostitution. In 'Miss Pen and her Niece' (1843), an undistinguished historical novel set in the early eighteenth century, Stone attempted another popular novelistic genre of the 1840s; the third volume of this work contains a novelette, 'Sir Eustace de Lucie', a medieval tale based on Wordsworth's poem 'The Horn of Egremont Castle' (1807). Her next novel, 'Mr Dalton's Legatee' (1850), had a contemporary setting: it is a penetrating study of an ambitious and mercenary woman with an impeccably plausible manner. In 1856 Elizabeth Stone published a work for children, 'Ellen Merton, or, The Pic-Nic', a moral tale about the dangers of telling white lies, which was followed by 'A Handbook to the Christian Year, for Young People' (1860), a commentary on Christian festivals, displaying Tractarian leanings. 
Stone's historical work was continued in 'Chronicles of Fashion' (2 vols., 1845), a lightweight and light-hearted examination of manners, customs, and morals from the reign of Elizabeth I to the early nineteenth century. 'God's Acre, or, Historical Notices Relating to Churchyards' (1858) adopted the same anecdotal approach, interlaced with religious sentiments and personal reminiscences. It was harshly reviewed in 'The Athenaeum', where Stone's 'trite comments' and haphazard borrowings from 'very accessible sources (and not the best of these)' ('The Athenaeum', 1858, 778) were criticized. In the preface to 'God's Acre', Stone mentioned that she was going blind, but there are two further publications in her name, 'Angels' (1859) and a verse work, 'Three Incidents, Strictly True' (1873), published at Worthing. It has been suggested that she adopted a pseudonym in later life, publishing 'Royal Favourites' (2 vols., 1865), 'Political Women' (2 vols., 1873), 'History of Europe' (1877), and 'Turkey, Old and New' (1880) under the name of Sutherland Menzies (Allibone, 'Dict.', suppl.). But, given her prediction in 'God's Acre' that this would be her last work requiring 'any 'additional' reading', it seems questionable whether she was the author of these works. By 1871 she was a widow, living with her unmarried younger sister Mary in a lodging house at 7 Alfred Place, Worthing, Sussex, where she died on 2 August 1881. 
Elizabeth Stone's historical publications, apart from 'The Art of Needlework', are undistinguished; her interest in 'manners and morals' history was typical of the woman writer of the period, but, while the statistical and critical techniques essential to modern social history remained rudimentary, her work was necessarily no more than anecdotal. 'William Langshawe' and 'The Young Milliner' have deservedly received more attention, and, ironically, they now constitute her more substantial contribution to social history. 


@@@@@


doc= 46564


Taylor, Ida Alice Ashworth (1847-1929), biographer, was the eldest daughter and second child of the five children of Theodosia Alice Spring-Rice Taylor (1818-1891) and Sir Henry Taylor (1800-1886). She was born at East Sheen, Surrey, and spent her childhood there and at the family's seaside villa at Bournemouth. Her father's dual career as poet and Colonial Office administrator brought his children into contact with many of the leading political and literary figures of the Victorian age. 'Politicians, philosophers, theologians, priests of many and divers churches and poets of the world' gathered at the Taylors' Bournemouth home, and included among Sir Henry's associates were Carlyle, Tennyson, J. S. Mill, Southey, and the poet Aubrey De Vere, who was a cousin of Mrs Taylor (V. A. Taylor, 19). While there is no record of Ida's formal education, the intellectual and cultured atmosphere that pervaded the Taylor home no doubt influenced her thinking and stimulated her interest in a literary career. 
After their mother's death in 1891, Ida and her younger sister Una left the Taylor home and took a small house in Montpelier Square, London, where they conducted a popular literary salon. Neither sister married, and they apparently supported themselves primarily through their writing. Ida Ashworth Taylor was a prolific biographer, whose works reflect the expanding historicism and pervasive interest in the past which characterized the Victorian period. Taylor contributed historical pieces regularly to 'Longman's Magazine', 'Nineteenth Century', and 'Temple Bar', and her works were frequently reprinted in 'Littell's Living Age'. Although she wrote several novels ('Venus' Doves', 1884; 'Allegiance', 1886) and biographies of divers historical figures ('Revolutionary Types', 1904; 'The Making of a King', 1910), Taylor is most strongly identified with her studies of prominent women. 'Queen Hortense and her Friends' (1907), 'Lady Jane Grey and her Times' (1908), and 'The Life of Madame Roland' (1911) are crammed with factual details, demonstrating a typical Victorian emphasis on historical accuracy and a strong dependence on the evidence of letters, journals, and diaries. Her works on women not only follow in the tradition of Agnes and Elizabeth Strickland's famous histories of female royalty, but reflect the growing movement, largely undertaken by women writers, to call attention to women's historical presence and contributions. 
Taylor's works generally enjoyed both popular and critical favour and were often noted for their clear style and focused attention to narrative detail. But it appears that the Victorian fascination with 'great men' led to her omission from the canon of Victorian biographers. With the general trend to study past lives she fully complied; however, the female subjects that she examined in many of her works were deemed insignificant by some critics, and hence unworthy of study. Though acknowledging that Taylor's work on Queen Hortense was 'the best complete account of her in any language', the 'American Historical Review' (1907-8) dismissed the queen as having 'slight importance' and deserving 'scant mention' in the history of the Napoleonic era. Commenting on 'Christina of Sweden' (1909), another reviewer allowed that the biography was 'excellently written', but concluded that the book focused on a 'silly ass', whose life was scarcely worth mention ('New York Times'). The devaluation of scholarship concerning women's historical significance was not uncommon in Taylor's time, with the 'American Historical Review' often relegating narrative histories of women to the 'Minor notices' section. In addition to such prejudice against her subject matter, the advancing specialization of biography writing in the late Victorian period served to undermine and eventually to edge out the 'amateur' biographers, such as Taylor, who also wrote other types of works and who generally stood outside academic and professional circles. 
The last member of her family, Ida Ashworth Taylor died on 13 October 1929 at her home at Wootton Wood, New Milton, Hampshire. Her obituary in 'The Times' stated that Taylor's biographies of women were 'most characteristic of the authoress', and that her work was marked by 'a sincere and womanly sympathy with its subject'. Such a characterization indicates the contemporary categorization of women writers and their works which led to Taylor's subsequent obscurity. 


@@@@@


doc= 46566


Adam, William (1828-1898), carpet manufacturer, was born on 10 June 1828 in Paisley, the eldest of five children and the only son of Peter Adam ('c'.1798-1861), hand-loom weaver, and his wife, Elisa. 
Adam began his career in Paisley, working as a hand-loom cotton weaver and later as a warehouseman. On 16 June 1854 he married Agnes, daughter of John Thomson of Paisley, moving soon afterwards to Glasgow where two of their sons and a daughter were born. He was employed as a foreman in James Templeton's carpet manufacturing business where he gained a thorough understanding of the chenille Axminster hand-loom weaving process which his employer had patented in 1839. 
In the late 1850s Adam left Scotland for Kidderminster where he introduced the chenille Axminster process to Brinton and Lewis, a leading Kidderminster firm which made Brussels carpeting. Less than a year later, however, he went into partnership with George Race, a cashier of the firm, and together they founded their own chenille Axminster rug manufacturing business. The partnership was dissolved in September 1862 and Adam then became manager of the rug making business of H. R. Willis of Kidderminster. 
In 1869 Adam made the decision which was to transform his future, entering into a partnership with Michael Tomkinson (1841-1921) to found the Kidderminster firm that later played a major role in the British carpet industry and helped to make Axminster carpeting a familiar object in middle-class homes. Tomkinson supplied the leadership and commercial acumen, but Adam's contribution in technical and production aspects was no less vital. 
In 1878 when Tomkinson took a major new initiative by purchasing in the USA the United Kingdom rights to Halcyon Skinner's spool Axminster loom, it was Adam who ensured that spool Axminster looms were speedily installed and fully operational. However, his biggest achievement was the invention of a successful setting power-loom for weaving chenille Axminster carpeting, patented in 1880-82. Licences to use the invention were granted to three other firms including James Templeton & Co. which had developed a less efficient loom. Meanwhile Tomkinson and Adam were busy installing eighty looms of their own. 
Adam's wife, who had borne three more children, died at their residence, Elderslie House, Leswell, Kidderminster, on 14 January 1878. On 1 July 1879 in Derby Adam married Emma (died 1903), daughter of Edward Grigg, veterinary surgeon; they had two sons. 
The firm of Tomkinson and Adam continued to expand. It was one of the two leading producers of Axminster carpeting in the UK and was to become the fourth largest firm in the carpet industry by the early years of the twentieth century. Adam solved the practical problems involved in the expansion and patented further improvements to chenille and Axminster power-looms. He underwent major surgery in 1893, however, and was less active during the last five years of his life, as his health declined. His eldest sons, Peter and William, had become partners in the firm some years earlier. 
Adam was a staunch Liberal, but seldom appeared on public platforms. He was a strong supporter of the temperance movement and a vice-president of the Midland Temperance League. In later life he served as a JP for Kidderminster. A devout nonconformist, he attended the countess of Huntingdon's chapel in Kidderminster, and then for the last twenty-five years of his life the Old Meeting-House, later known as Baxter Congregational Church. Adam was made a deacon in 1876, and served on the executive of the Worcestershire Union of Congregational Churches. He made numerous charitable donations privately and supported various congregational churches in Worcestershire. The largest public gift was $1250 towards the cost of Baxter Church, erected in 1884. However, in the year before he died he bought a country estate of over 2000 acres at Buckland, Gloucestershire, for $50,000. 
Adam died of apoplexy on 13 December 1898 at Elderslie House, Leswell, Kidderminster, where he had lived for many years since leaving Scotland. The funeral was at Baxter Church and he was buried in Kidderminster cemetery on 17 December 1898. 


@@@@@


doc= 46570


Ambler, Geoffrey Hill (1904-1978), inventor and air force officer, was born at 10 Kirklands Avenue, Baildon, near Bradford, Yorkshire, on 23 June 1904, the eldest child in the family of two sons and one daughter of Frederick Ambler (1873-1932), a worsted spinner and manufacturer, and his wife, Annie, 'nee' Hill (1880-1964). His father was the owner of Dumb Mills, Frizinghall, in Bradford, which he ran under the company name of Fred Ambler Ltd. His mother, too, belonged to a family of wool industrialists: her father, Sir James Hill, first baronet (1849-1936), was owner and founder of Sir James Hill & Sons Ltd, a successful wool merchant, and was also the Liberal MP for Bradford Central between 1916 and 1918. 
Ambler was educated at Shrewsbury School (1918-22) and Clare College, Cambridge (1922-6), where he studied engineering and economics. He had taken up rowing at school, and excelled at the sport at university. He was a member of three consecutive winning Cambridge boat race crews (1924-6), and in 1925 was president of the Cambridge University Boat Club. 
After graduating from Cambridge Ambler joined the family firm, Fred Ambler Ltd, as a trainee manager in 1926. He also took up flying with the Yorkshire Aviation Club, before gaining his Royal Aero Club aviator's certificate in May 1928. He threw himself into flying with the same determination that he had shown as an oarsman, and was commissioned pilot officer in the Auxiliary Air Force in February 1931. Promoted flying officer (1932), flight lieutenant (1933), and squadron leader (1934), he commanded 608 (North Riding) bomber squadron from 1934 to 1938, when he took command of 609 (West Riding) bomber squadron at Yeadon. On 20 June 1940, on the eve of the battle of Britain, he married, at Guiseley parish church, Phoebe (1917-1994), daughter of Edgar Lawson Gaunt, wool merchant, of Hawksworth Hall, Guiseley. They had three daughters. 
From 1939 to 1942 Ambler was a sector commander in Fighter Command, with the ranks of wing commander (1940) and acting group captain (1941). He was awarded the AFC in July 1940. In 1942 he was made commandant of the Royal Observer Corps, and then in 1943 deputy senior air staff officer at Fighter Command, before retiring at the end of the war with the rank of vice air marshal. He was made OBE (1941), CBE (1994), and CB (1946). From 1947 to 1957 he was honorary air commodore of no. 609 squadron. 
Returning to the family textile firm after the war, Ambler developed the invention which took his name. Traditionally, turning wool fibres into thread, spinning, was done by spinning wheels. The industrial equivalent involved passing the fibre between rollers of different speeds: slow rollers at the back, faster rollers at the front. The ratio between the roller speeds is called the 'draft'. In 1946 Ambler developed a precision unit, the Ambler Superdraft (ASD), which allowed that ratio to rise from around 10 to around 100, thereby dramatically increasing the speed, efficiency, and cost-effectiveness with which wool could be spun. At around the same time, George F. Raper invented the Raper Auto Leveller (RAL). The two contemporary innovations transformed the worsted spinning industry after the war. 
While Ambler was responsible for the engineering principles and design of the ASD, it was Margaret Hannah ['see below'] at the University of Leeds who developed an understanding of its theoretical basis. They jointly published an article on the ASD system in the 'Journal of the Textile Institute' (1950). 
Ambler published on the ASD in the 'Journal of the Bradford Textile Society' (1950-51), though his was more an announcement to his colleagues in industry than an academic paper. In his talk (of which the publication was a report), he told his audience he wanted them to hear of the invention first, though added that he had taken the precaution of securing 'overseas patent rights'. In 1960 Ambler and George F. Raper were together awarded honorary fellowships of the Textile Institute in recognition of the contributions they had made to the industry, which were described as 'possibly the most important technical advances in wool textile production since the invention of the spinning jenny' ('Journal of the Textile Institute', 51/5, 1960). 
Following the success of the ASD Ambler rejoined the family firm and became its chairman. He was well regarded within the industry and served on many committees and boards including the Worsted Spinners' Federation Board, the Wool Textile Delegation, and the Wool (and Allied) Textile Employers' Council. He was also an active member of the local community. In 1949 he was made a deputy lieutenant for West Yorkshire, and in 1951 he became regional director of Martin's Bank. In 1966 he awarded an honorary doctorate by the University of Leeds. He sold the family firm to Hield Bros, Bradford, in 1974. Ambler died on 26 August 1978 in the Wharfedale Hospital, Otley, Yorkshire, and was survived by his wife and their three daughters. A memorial service was held at Bradford Cathedral. 
His collaborator (Dorothy) Margaret Hannah (1922-1999), mathematician, was born at 10 Roseworth Avenue, Gosforth, Northumberland, on 11 February 1922, the daughter of William Hannah, coal exporter's manager, and his wife, Hannah, 'nee' Hoyland, a teacher. She was educated at Central Newcastle High School for Girls, from where she won a first trust scholarship, which enabled her to enter Newnham College, Cambridge, in 1940. After taking a second in part one (1941) and a first in part two (1943) of the mathematical tripos, she became a scientific officer at the Ministry of Aircraft Production, working in the Air Warfare Analysis Section. There she worked on calculations relating to the navigational accuracy of bombing and, with Bomber Command, on the predicted scattering of debris resulting from a dropped bomb. In 1946 she moved to the Ministry of Works, where she remained until 1948, when she was appointed a lecturer in the Department of Textile Industries at the University of Leeds. On 25 March 1948 she married at Kirkstall parish church, Leeds, William Alexander Greig, a teacher, the son of Thomas Paterson Greig, civil servant. They had three sons and a daughter, and she combined a full-time career in academic research with a growing family. 
At Leeds, Hannah (the name under which she published on the ASD) completed her MSc from the University of London and her PhD from the University of Leeds (1950). Leeds University had long enjoyed a close association with the local textile industry, providing research and trained personnel in exchange for funds and support, expertise, samples, and problems in need of investigation. Hannah's work on the ASD involved studying the device and the ratios involved. She succeeded in explaining how it worked mathematically, and from this was able to make improvements to the design. She published in the 'Journal of the Textile Institute' and presented her findings at various conferences including the International Wool Conference in Australia, the proceedings of which were published in 1955. For this same work she was given the Warner memorial award in 1959 by the Textile Institute, an annual award given 'for outstanding work in Textile Science and Technology'. 
Hannah's husband became head of mathematics at Teesside Polytechnic and in 1959 she left Leeds to take up the post of senior lecturer in mathematics at the Constantine Technical College in Middlesbrough. As D. M. Greig she published a two-volume textbook, co-written with T. H. Wise, entitled 'Hydrodynamics and Vector Field Theory' (1962 and 1963). In 1964 she moved to the University of Durham to become lecturer and then senior lecturer in mathematics, and wrote another textbook, 'Optimisation' (1980). She retired in 1986 and died in the Memorial Hospital, Darlington, on 10 June 1999. 
An example of the Ambler Superdraft is on display in the Bradford Industrial Museum. 


@@@@@


doc= 46572


Anderson, Sir John (1814-1886), inventor of ordnance manufacture machinery and arsenal manager, was born at Woodside, near Aberdeen, on 9 December 1814, the posthumous child of a local merchant, J. Anderson, and his wife, Helen Hosie. His mother remarried and his stepfather, Irvine Kempt, employed him at the Woodside cotton works of Gordon, Barron & Co. from the age of thirteen. He served an apprenticeship there as a mechanic, on the completion of which he left, in 1839, to gain wider experience; he then worked for several engineering concerns in Manchester and London. In 1840 he married Eliza Norrie, with whom he had a daughter and two sons. 
In 1842 Anderson was recommended by the shipbuilder David Napier for the position as foreman at the brass gun foundry at Woolwich arsenal. Although the position was not well remunerated, Anderson saw the factory's potential. The works had scarcely changed since the end of the Napoleonic wars and Anderson rapidly mechanized the manufacture of ordnance, much of the machinery being of his own invention. He is credited with devising sixteen different machines for armaments manufacture, including one which could produce 40,000 bullets per hour. Uniform working hours were introduced and other working practices overhauled. Anderson also oversaw the modernization of the government gunpowder mills at Waltham Abbey in Essex. One of his inventions was an unattended machine for granulating gunpowder. 
After a visit to the United States in 1854, Anderson recommended the establishment of a government small-arms factory using American-style techniques of mass production. He wanted this to be part of the Woolwich complex but the authorities opted to expand an existing facility at Enfield Lock, Middlesex, albeit under Anderson's direction. This freed the government from its dependence on private manufacturers, with their reliance on slow and expensive craft-based techniques, and the Enfield armoury soon proved an enormous success. 
The outbreak of the Crimean War led to new demands on Anderson's abilities, the greatest of which was the establishment of a factory for the manufacture of Lancaster shells; he completed the project at great personal sacrifice, in the space of only two months. A floating factory was also prepared for dispatch to the Crimea. In 1859, when the government decided on the production of rifled field-guns, he was appointed assistant superintendent of the royal gun factory under Sir William Armstrong. From 1866 until his retirement in 1872 he was superintendent of machinery. 
Anderson's efforts in public service were considered to have worn out a constitution that was never strong, but he confounded expectations by enjoying a long retirement. He had already served as a juror at international exhibitions in London (1862) and Paris (1867). In 1873 he was vice-president of the jury for machinery at Vienna and president of the machinery group at Philadelphia (1876) and Paris (1878). It was after this last exhibition that he was knighted. He was also made an officer of the Legion d'honneur by the French and a commander of the order of Franz Josef by the Austrians. He was honoured in 1871 by becoming LLD at St Andrews University and by being elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh. In 1881 he was awarded the freedom of the city of Aberdeen on the occasion of his presentation of a public library to his native village of Woodside. This neatly brought his career full circle, for as a boy Anderson had been honorary librarian of his local church. After his death at his home, Fairleigh, 8 The Mount, St Leonards, Sussex, on 28 July 1886, his body was returned to Aberdeen for burial in the churchyard of St Nicholas on 3 August. He was survived by his wife. 
Anderson's work was his passion and he had no thought to profit from his expertise beyond what the government chose to pay him. He was a keen lecturer and the writer of a number of technical papers and a single book, 'The Strength of Materials and Structures' (1872), which passed through numerous editions. 


@@@@@


doc= 46575


Thomas Lake Aveling (1856-1931) was born on 25 August 1856 at Ruckinge, Kent. From the time he left school he was immersed in the work of his father's engineering firm. Control of Aveling and Porter was handed over to him in 1881, and under his direction the firm expanded until the 1920s. In 1872 about 400 had been employed at the works; in the mid-1890s there were nearly 1000, and at its peak the firm had about 1500 employees. In 1895 the firm was converted into a limited liability company, with capital of $100,000. Thomas Lake Aveling was to serve as chairman and managing director until he retired in 1928. In 1890 Aveling married Rosita Marion Porter (died 1904), and they had two sons. Among his local interests, he was chairman of the Medway conservancy, a member of the bridgewardens' board of Rochester, and served as a justice of the peace for Kent. He was a member of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, as well as of the Institution of Civil Engineers. A member of the council of the Smithfield Club, he acted as its president in 1929. He also served on the council of the Royal Agricultural Society of England and was president of the Agricultural Engineers' Association. Other business interests included a directorship of Jesse Ellis Ltd, Maidstone, manufacturers of steam wagons. 


@@@@@


doc= 46576


Avery, Thomas (1813-1894), scale manufacturer and local politician, was born in 1813, the second son of William Avery (1789-1843), scale maker, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Balden. Thomas and his elder brother, William Henry Avery (1812-1874), were born into a long-established dynasty of Birmingham scale makers; they had six siblings, one brother and five sisters. The Avery business had its origins in an eighteenth-century combination of several makers of steelyards, devices for weighing heavy goods in towns like Birmingham where manufacture and trade flourished. Among these precursors was James Ford (died 1761), whose business was taken over by a fellow craftsman, William Bridgins Barton; he in turn handed over in 1782 to Thomas Beach (1745-1824), whose sister married a John Avery. Thereafter other marriages bonded the families, many of whose members were employed as steelyard and scale makers, mostly in the expanding Birmingham area. With increasing industrialization, and the arrival of government regulations concerning the provision of accurate means of weighing many varieties of goods, this formerly humble craft developed into one which required new standards of accuracy and innovation. 
About 1799 Thomas Beach handed the business over to Joseph Balden (died 1813), who was married to Beach's niece Mary Avery. Balden died intestate, leaving two young sons. The elder son, failing to keep the business going, conveyed his estate to his cousin and brother-in-law, William Avery, then a mercer and draper, who in 1811 had married Elizabeth Balden. When William Avery inherited in 1841 he was described as a scale-beam maker. He immediately began to stimulate the business, and with his brother Thomas (died 1824) traded under the name of W. and T. Avery, late T. Beach. By the time of his death in 1843, William Avery's two sons were already in the business. William Henry had married Ann Beach while Thomas married Mary Anne Beilby (1812-1893) in 1842; the couple had no children. Thomas was an active traveller throughout Britain for Averys, which by the time of the 1851 census employed 150 men and numerous boys at its premises in the Digbeth and Moat Lane area of the city. Avery, who was by then living at 142 Highgate, Birmingham, gained a reputation throughout the local trades for his industry and trustworthiness. During a period when local government was suffering from bad management, he was one of several leading citizens who came in with a mission to return it to efficiency. He entered Birmingham council for St Martin's ward, which contained the Avery factories, and in 1864 retired from business before withdrawing his capital and leaving his brother as sole proprietor two years later. Under the efficient management of William Henry Avery and his successors, W. and T. Avery continued to prosper throughout the twentieth century, until taken over by GEC in 1993 and thereafter by the US firm Weigh-Tronix, who since 2000 have traded as Avery Weigh-Tronix. 
Avery's main interests now turned to the betterment of his increasingly populous home town, his own aims being supported by Joseph Chamberlain, leader of the council's Liberal faction. In 1868 he became mayor of Birmingham, being elected alderman in 1868, and was again mayor in 1881. After a serious early misjudgement, when he fought to keep the ancient cattle market in the centre of Birmingham, Avery was largely responsible for two significant public benefactions: the acquisition in 1874 of a private waterworks, the development of which under town ownership brought potable water to the townsfolk, and the greater achievement of the provision of a sewage works. In 1877, after a battle against the landowners concerned, a drainage board incorporating Birmingham and surrounding authorities was able to build a sewage farm which discharged purified water into the previously polluted River Tame. 
Beyond the council chamber, Avery was a magistrate for the city and the counties of Warwick and Worcester and sat as governor, trustee, or treasurer at the Birmingham and Midland Institute, Mason College, and Spring Hill College, which trained men for the dissenting ministry, and for other local hospitals and institutions. In politics he was a conservative, leaning towards the liberal; he always voted for John Bright as Birmingham MP, and supported the old Liberal policies on the council. By conviction Avery and his wife were lifelong Congregationalists, attending the well-known Carr's Lane Church, although he was never a member of the church. The onset of arteriosclerosis obliged Avery to resign his aldermanship on 4 October 1892. He was immediately presented with the freedom of the city, having to sign the freedom roll in his house, in the presence of Birmingham's mayor and civic officials. His wife died towards the end of 1893; Avery died at his home, Beech Lawn, Church Road, Edgbaston, on 17 February 1894 and was buried on 21 February at the old cemetery, Key Hill. His extensive property in Birmingham went to his nephews, and he made generous bequests to local colleges, hospitals, and institutions. 


@@@@@


doc= 46577


Wheeler, Anna (1785?-1848), philosopher, born in co. Tipperary, Ireland, was the daughter of Anna Dunbar and her husband, Nicholas Milley Doyle, a graduate of Trinity College, Dublin, and prebendary of Fennor parish in co. Tipperary. She did not have a formal education but learned French, geography, and skills of repartee from foreign dignitaries visiting her military relatives and gained political insights from her godfather, Henry Grattan. Clever, forthright, and not suffering fools gladly, Anna Doyle was a 'reigning beauty of the Irish countryside' (Sadleir, 71). In 1800, despite her mother's opposition, she married Francis Massy Wheeler (1781-1820), a wealthy squire from Ballywire, co. Limerick. She spent her unhappy marriage reading the works of Diderot, Holbach, Condillac, Mary Wollstonecraft, and Mary Hays. Exhausted by marital acrimony, in 1812 Wheeler decided to leave her alcoholic husband. With her daughters, Henrietta and Rosina, and her spinster sister Bessie, she sailed to the island of Guernsey, where her uncle General Sir John Doyle (1750-1834) was governor. 
In Caen in 1816, with followers of Henri Saint-Simon, founder of 'French socialism', Wheeler's philosophical acumen and patronage to young intellectuals titled her the 'Goddess of Reason' (Sadleir, 76) and 'most gifted woman of the age' (ibid., 79). When her estranged husband died in 1820, Wheeler went to London, where she formed close relationships with men of liberal ideas, such as the utilitarian Jeremy Bentham, the charismatic co-operative leader Robert Owen, and William Thompson, the Irish political economist, feminist, and critic of capitalism. 
Living in Paris in 1823, Wheeler met Charles Fourier, the French utopian socialist and a frequent visitor to Wheeler's salon; she dedicated herself to disseminating Fourier's ideas among London Owenites. To Fourier most of Owen's disciples seemed like pedants beside the exuberantly eclectic Anna Wheeler; she translated Fourier's writings on human harmony to make his turgid philosophy accessible, while using her diplomatic skills to mediate competitive disputes between Fourier and Owen. Wheeler stayed in France until 1826, and became a supporter of Greek independence in collaboration with Marc Antoine Jullien, the Pestalozzi educationist and Owenite follower. Wheeler returned to London after her daughter Henrietta died tragically from a 'wasting disease'. She was absent from a public gathering on 6 May 1827 at the Societe Philotechnique de Paris, where Marc Antoine Jullien read his eulogy praising the mother-daughter loyalty of Wheeler and Henrietta. 
In 1825 collaborative work between Wheeler and William Thompson resulted in the 'Appeal of One Half the Human Race', a challenge to utilitarians who looked for universal happiness but excluded women, half the human race. The 'Appeal' is a seminal statement, combining elements of liberal and socialist feminism; it exposes the misogyny in James Mill's invented fiction that women and men share an 'identity of interests', a fiction Mill used to justify the exclusion of women from the suffrage in his 'Essay on Government' (1820). Wheeler brought a woman's reasoning and experience to the 'Appeal', a role affectionately acknowledged by Thompson in an introductory 'Letter to Mrs Wheeler'. Only a few pages of the text were written exclusively by Wheeler but Thompson considered the text their 'joint property' ('Appeal', vii). Intertextual comparisons with Wheeler's other writings indicate the passages written by her pen alone. An example would be the searing critique of marriage so central in the 'Appeal'. A graphic portrayal of domestic, economic, and psychic causes of human oppression are balanced against a proposal for an alternative life of co-operative community living where gender justice might be possible. 
Wheeler adopted the pseudonym Vlasta when publishing controversial essays in the Co-operative Press on such subjects as women's enslavement to a learned ideology of romantic love, which concentrates their thoughts on pleasing male sensuality. An 1829 lecture at Finsbury Square on 'Rights of women' shows that Wheeler decried the social conditioning of men by corrupt institutions, but she aimed always to promote harmony between the sexes rather than adversarial rancour, to plead the cause of men in advocating the rights of women. Her articles stressed the need for women to act on principles and reason, liberating themselves from a captivity to uncritical social custom and conditioning; such views were encouraged by Wheeler's women friends among Saint-Simonians and Owenites, such as Frances (Fanny) Wright, Desiree Veret, Jeanne Victoire, and Flora Tristan. 
In May 1833 Wheeler wrote of her close friendship with the deceased William Thompson in a eulogy signed Vlasta and read to friends of co-operation at Lord Hampden's residence. Hampden admitted that no one knew Thompson better than Anna Wheeler, yet Thompson had determined never to marry within the unequal legal provisions constraining women. Wheeler's friends continued to try to arrange for her return to France before the 1848 revolution, but a crippling neuralgia forced her into seclusion. She died at 51 High Street, Camden Town, London, on 7 May 1848. 
Wheeler's ideas on sexual equality were perpetuated by her daughter Rosina, Lady Bulwer-Lytton (1802-1882), who had two children, Emily Elizabeth (1828-1848) and Edward Robert Bulwer-Lytton, first earl of Lytton (1831-1891). After a publicly acrimonious divorce from Edward Bulwer-Lytton, Rosina wrote 'An Appeal to the Justice and Charity of the English Public' (1857), exposing the social ostracism women experience in defending their reputations against false allegations. Anna Wheeler would not have been surprised at this tragic turn of events, having never felt either affection or respect for Bulwer-Lytton. Wheeler's great-granddaughter Lady Constance Lytton (1869-1923), third child of Edward Robert Bulwer-Lytton, continued the line of prominent feminists, and collaborated with Emmeline Pankhurst in the Women's Social and Political Union, a group prepared to face prison to acquire the suffrage. 


@@@@@


doc= 46578


Bader, Ernest (1890-1982), chemical manufacturer and industrial reformer, was born in Regensdorf, Switzerland, on 24 November 1890, the youngest of thirteen children of a protestant farmer, Gottlieb Bader, and his wife, Barbara Meier. He was expelled from school at the age of twelve and went to work as a menial in a Zurich chemical factory, achieving white-collar status as a 'stocktaker's boy' in a silk factory at the age of fourteen. He studied commerce and languages at night school, and, at twenty-one, finally qualified as a clerk. After Swiss military service he emigrated to England in 1912, and found employment as a clerk for a silk merchant. He became naturalized in 1924. Active in the Swiss Baptist community of north London, Bader developed his own challenging religious and social beliefs, with the assistance of a supportive Englishwoman, (Annie Eliza) Dora Scott (died 1979), a printer's daughter, whom he married in 1915. Their family life became the foundation for a highly successful family company, and eventually for an internationally renowned experiment in industrial democracy. 
Deeply influenced by Christian socialism and the pacifist ideals of Reginald Sorensen, in 1914 Bader was torn between civic duty to neutral Switzerland and Christian love for warring mankind. He was conscripted in October 1914, but soon took the moral plunge as a deserter, and sought refuge with English pacifists; he joined Sorensen in the campaign against the war staged by the Fellowship of Reconciliation, and suffered particularly on account of his German accent. After spells as a handyman and a bank clerk, between 1917 and 1920 Bader worked on a smallholding adjoining Sorensen's farming community of conscientious objectors at Stanford-le-Hope, Essex. The Baders adopted three war orphans of different nationalities and backgrounds, before the births of their natural son, Godric, and a daughter. 
In 1920 Bader deployed his wife's capital of $300 to start a London-based import agency for celluloid. This operation expanded into a specialist chemical manufacturing company, Scott Bader Ltd, making new products and synthetic resin; after 1940 the company was directed from Wollaston Hall, Wellingborough, and by 1950 it was worth perhaps $2 million or more. Bader combined marketing energy and individualistic leadership with a flair for spotting and applying new technology, and the company eventually became the leading innovator in plastics technology, in an industry generally dominated by capital-intensive giants. Futuristic faith in technology, personalized direction, a loyal (non-unionized) workforce, and a highly motivated management culture, financially underpinned by a policy of ploughing high rates of profit into new investment, produced an exceptional enterprise, which was welfare conscious yet consistently capable of shouldering high risks to achieve profitability. 
Bader converted to the Quakers in 1945. Fired with post-war reconstruction ardour, workplace benevolence was not enough for him. He saw that authoritarian managements were less productive than participative systems, and that human dignity in the workplace and mutual service were industrial values that transcended the hierarchical work concepts promoted by private greed or remote nationalization. A wave of imitative experiments might, he conjectured, eventually implant self-government across industry, encouraging private manufacturers and state enterprise boards to devolve power gradually to employees, to share surpluses, rights, and duties, and to shoulder ethical responsibilities. Like the utopian socialist Robert Owen, Bader was prepared to sink his hard-won assets from capitalism into the moral quest for new and socially responsible industrial structures, based upon co-operation, with the aim of replacing the immoral crudities of power-conflict between a few owners and many employees. In 1946-7 he sought to put his ideas into practice through the Scott Bader Fellowship, a naive experiment in management-staff relations outside unionization. This was followed in 1948 by an injurious strike over union recognition and bargaining rights, which taught Bader a sharp home truth: the quest for a new industrial order demanded more than Tolstoyean piety and joint consultation. Only common ownership and profit sharing would nurture a truly democratic model. 
In 1951 Bader created the co-operative enterprise Scott Bader Commonwealth. While Gandhian principles of industrial trusteeship and co-operative ownership, expounded at home by Wilfred Wellock, were his inspiration, Robert Edwards, leader of the Chemical Workers' Union, gave unique practical guidance to this venture. At its launch Bader staged an epochal renunciation at Cambridge, in which the family donated 90 per cent of its shares in Scott Bader Ltd in favour of employee ownership; he remained managing director of the flourishing, worker-governed enterprise until his son, Godric, took over in 1957. An intrusive co-operative patriarch, Ernest stayed on as chairman until 1963, when he sold his remaining shares to the Commonwealth to provide resources for communal projects. As founder president from 1966 to 1971, Bader became a titular guardian of a new constitution which covenanted some 300 working co-partners, and enlisted as trustees Mary Stocks, Robert Edwards, and E. F. Schumacher. By 1970 the Commonwealth had profitably forged ahead in new polyesters, polymers, and plasticizers, taking a far-sighted market advantage in glass-fibre-reinforced plastics, and at one time producing more than half the British output of polyester resins. 
In 1957 Bader founded, with the help of Canon Collins, the Association for the Democratic Integration of Industry, the national forerunner of ICOM (the Industrial Common Ownership Movement). The 'Common Ownership Act' of 1976 finally acknowledged the success of Bader's pioneering activities. As a sage, however, he kept aloof from ICOM and the new Co-operative Development Agency, offering activists his purist Common Ownership Association (1976) based upon Gandhian principles of non-violence and altruism. Bader's wider sponsorship of 'third-world' projects brought him into touch with leaders of self-help development in Asia and Africa. He founded STRIVE (the Society for Training Rural Industries and Village Enterprises), eventually to merge with Schumacher's Intermediate Technology Group. In India he became deeply involved with the Vinoba Bhave movement and Jayaprakash Narayan's struggles to foster Gandhian-style socialism. 
Like Gandhi, Bader accepted no honours, although, at the age of ninety, he received an honorary doctorate from Birmingham University. A contradictory, strong-willed, and often domineering industrialist, his ideas attracted strong admirers and detractors. By 1982, he had become a Quaker prophet, his experiment acclaimed as 'an island of industrial sanity' in a rising sea of social division and recession. His co-operative beliefs, longevity, personal conflicts, and ideological achievements uncannily resembled those of Robert Owen. When Bader died at his home, Wollaston Hall, Wollaston, Northamptonshire, on 5 February 1982, his insignificant private wealth accorded with his social testimony. He owned no private house, car, or personal business assets, nor had he made capital transfers or gifts before his death. He had been a 'paper millionaire' when he signed away his company ownership in 1951; the 10 per cent residual shares in the Commonwealth were relinquished to the co-operative in the 1970s. 


@@@@@


doc= 46579


Stone, Jean Mary (1854x6-1908), historian, was born at Brighton and was educated at a Calvinist school in Paris and at Aschaffenburg in Germany, where she learned French, German, and Italian. While in Germany, she became a Roman Catholic, and was received into the church by Bishop Kettler of Mainz. On her return to England, her historical studies were encouraged by the Society of Jesus. In 1892 she published 'Faithful unto Death', a study of the Franciscan order in England in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, which owed much to the encouragement of Father Joseph Stevenson, the archivist and historian; it carried a preface by Father John Morris, the ecclesiastical historian. Although unexciting to read, it was a clear improvement on Anne Hope's 1878 study of the same subject. In 1898 she published a memoir of Eleanor Leslie, a nineteenth-century Roman Catholic convert who contributed to the Scottish Catholic revival. 
Stone's most significant works, however, appeared after the turn of the century. In 1901 'The History of Mary I, Queen of England' was published. In it, Stone succeeded in producing the first full-length biography to revise the 'old traditional, but generally spurious portraits' of the queen. She used a wide range of sources, including chronicles, recently published state papers, and the dispatches of foreign ambassadors. As her successors have enjoyed the same access to these papers as she did, her achievement has gone unrecognized. The biography was favourably reviewed in 'The Athenaeum', although the critic felt that 'the whole truth is not in this book' ('Athenaeum', 9), and accused Stone of Catholic bias. It was followed in 1904 by 'Reformation and Renaissance', an ambitious 'account of the two great revolutionary movements of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries from the standpoint of the old religion'. It synthesized a wide range of contemporary research by British and continental scholars, both protestant and Catholic, and anticipated recent scholarship on the Catholic reformation. Other works included 'The Church in English History' (1907), a manual for teachers and older students, and 'Studies from the Court and Cloister' (1908), a collection of papers on topics including the marriage of Anne of Cleves to Henry VIII and Foxe's book of martyrs, which had been previously published in the 'Dublin Review', the 'Scottish Review', and other periodicals. 
Jean Mary Stone appears to have spent her last years in Sussex, some of them in the village of Storrington; she died unmarried at her home, 77 High Street, Battle, Sussex, on 3 May 1908. 


@@@@@


doc= 46581


Baillieu, Clive Latham, first Baron Baillieu (1889-1967), businessman and mining financier, was born at Melbourne, Australia, on 24 September 1889, the eldest son of William Lawrence Baillieu (1859-1936) and his wife, Bertha Martha Latham (1865-1925). He was educated at Melbourne Church of England grammar school, Trinity College, Melbourne, and Magdalen College, Oxford, where he took a third in modern history (1913) and rowed for the Oxford crew which won the boat race in 1913. The following year he was called to the bar by the Inner Temple before returning to Australia in time to serve in the First World War with the Australian Imperial Force and the Royal Flying Corps from 1915 to 1918. He retired with the rank of major, having been mentioned in dispatches and having been appointed OBE in 1918. On 24 February 1915 he married Ruby Florence Evelyn (died 1962), the daughter of his father's business associate William Clark. 
Baillieu was born into the third generation of one of the most powerful business families in Australia, part of an interlocking elite that was in turn closely linked to imperial Britain. His father had made his name as an auctioneer during the Victorian land boom and successfully weathered the crash that followed, subsequently becoming involved in the Australian mining industry. This sector of the economy relied on the London money markets for capital, and members of the family spent much of their time shuttling between Australia and Britain. 
Baillieu was quickly drawn into this dynamic world of imperial business. In 1923, after an interlude at the Melbourne bar, he returned to London to look after his father's mining interests and began working with William Sydney Robinson, the British representative of Broken Hill Smelters. He became closely involved with a number of lead and zinc mining and smelting enterprises, and in 1924 he joined the board of the Zinc Corporation, founded in 1911 to treat the tailing dumps from the Broken Hill mines in New South Wales. In 1936 he established (with Robinson) the New Broken Hill Consolidated mine. Although founded as a separate concern for financial reasons, the new enterprise was closely linked to the Zinc Corporation. From 1945 Baillieu was also chairman of the Central Mining and Investment Corporation. Between 1962 and 1965 he acted as deputy chairman of Rio Tinto Zinc Corporation, which had expanded to incorporate many of the mining companies with which he was involved. 
Baillieu developed interests in a range of other businesses, including insurance and banking. He was on the board of the English, Scottish, and Australian Bank from 1929 and of the Midland Bank from 1944, and was linked to the New Zealand Loan and Mercantile Agency from 1923 (he later became joint president of its successor, the Dalgety and New Zealand Loan). His most significant business connection was with the Dunlop Rubber Company: he sat on the board from 1929, became deputy chairman in 1945, and acted as chairman from 1949 to 1957 and president thereafter. In addition he played a role in several mining, gas, and rubber industry organizations. 
Although he did not have a parliamentary career, Baillieu played a long-running role in the public affairs of Britain and the empire. From 1929 to 1939 he sat on the imperial communications advisory committee, and between 1930 and 1947 he acted as Australian representative on the Imperial Economic Committee. Between the wars he became a friend of Churchill, and during the Second World War, like many other prominent businessmen, he was pressed into public service to help mobilize resources. He became a member of the Export Council and in 1941 travelled to Washington as director of the British purchasing commission in the USA. He also became a member of the British supply council in North America and from 1942 to 1943 headed the British raw materials mission in Washington and acted as British representative on the combined raw materials board. After returning to Britain, from 1943 to 1945 he acted as temporary chairman of the troubled Fairey Aviation Company at the request of the British government. 
Baillieu's role in public affairs continued after the war. From 1945 to 1953 he sat on the National Production Advisory Council on Industry and from 1946 to 1948 on the National Investment Council. He was a member of the General Advisory Council of the British Broadcasting Corporation from 1947 to 1952 and in 1948 led a British trade mission to Argentina. He also helped to establish the British Institute of Management and subsequently sat on its council for five years, acted as its first president in 1959, and was made an honorary fellow in 1960. After 1958 Baillieu was a governor of the National Institute of Economic and Social Research. 
Perhaps Baillieu's most significant public role in these years was as deputy president of the Federation of British Industries (FBI, a predecessor of the Confederation of British Industry) from 1944 to 1945 and president from 1945 to 1947. He was active in the FBI at a critical time, when British industry was wrestling not only with the need for post-war reconstruction or 'reconversion' but also with the Labour government's plans for the nationalization of key industries. Like other members of the federation, he was convinced of the need to dismantle wartime controls and engineer a full return to free enterprise, although he was also prepared to see some degree of co-operation between government and the private sector. It was said that the Labour government's obvious solution to its problems with nationalization would have been to nationalize Baillieu, a course of action precluded only by its potential cost and the difficulty of finding enough new chairmen to replace Baillieu on so many boards. 
Baillieu's plans for reconstruction reflected his broader view of the post-war world order. He believed that a British industrial renaissance would bring domestic prosperity and allow the Commonwealth to be strengthened as a force for international co-operation, complemented by a closer relationship with the USA. An alliance of the English-speaking peoples, an idea also promoted by Churchill and Sir Robert Menzies, would ensure the effective operation of the United Nations and provide a continuing role for Britain as a world power. This was a perspective that, in the years before the Suez crisis, was shared by many politicians and civil servants. After 1951 Baillieu also pursued his vision through the position of chairman of the English Speaking Union. He was particularly proud of his role in raising funds for the American memorial chapel in St Paul's Cathedral. In 1965 he was the principal Commonwealth organizer of the various Winston Churchill memorial trusts. 
Baillieu owed his business success to the combination of a congenial personality and a privileged upbringing. While his affable manner helped him through a number of difficult negotiating situations, his Oxford training meant that he fitted easily into the clubbable world of City finance -- 'a most delightful personality with a fine background' (Stanley Christopherson, chairman, Midland Bank, to Keith Mason, 25 May 1944, HSBC Group Archives, London, File 9/161). 
Baillieu had an interest in aviation and a love of flying that presumably dated from his wartime service. A habitual traveller, his frequent trips to the USA and to various parts of the British empire often meant that he was absent from board meetings. Nevertheless, such visits made Baillieu one of the leading public figures for whom the British empire and Commonwealth was more than a symbol. He in turn helped to make real the idea of the Commonwealth as a global political, economic, and cultural entity. Although partly of French extraction, Baillieu was proud of his Britishness. At the annual dinner of the Melbourne Scots in 1956 he stressed: 'the underlying moral unity of the British race. Their natural tolerance, the spirit of give and take, the willingness to live and let live: the innate respect for law, and the determination to defend its processes. It is the abiding faith in those great charters of liberty, broadbased upon the people's will, which has moulded the political and judicial systems under which we live and move. All of which explains the continuing cohesion of the British section of the Commonwealth and our real message of hope to the world. (FBI records, MSS.200/F/3/D3/4/18, proposal of 'The toast of Scotland', 1 Dec 1956)' Baillieu's wider imperial identity sat easily with a sense of Australian patriotism. He was equally at home 'shooting on a northern moor or salmon fishing in Scottish rivers [or] walking in the hills round Mount Macedon, Victoria' ('Profile', 'Concord: The News Bulletin of the English-Speaking Union of the Commonwealth', 20, 1966). One contemporary described him as 'a great Anglo-Australian' ('3rd Annual Report and Accounts, 1964, Rio Tinto Zinc Corporation Ltd'). He could equally be seen as an inhabitant of a British world, one that remained a significant supra-national entity well into the post-war years. 
Baillieu was appointed CMG in 1929 and KBE in 1938. In February 1953 he was created Baron Baillieu of Sefton (Australia) and Parkwood (Surrey), the first Australian hereditary peer with successors. He had one daughter and three sons, the eldest of whom, William Latham Baillieu, succeeded to the title. Predeceased by his wife in 1962, Baillieu died in Melbourne on 18 June 1967. At his funeral Sir Robert Menzies, the former Australian prime minister, gave an oration. A memorial service was also held at St Martin-in-the-Fields, London, on 11 July 1967. 


@@@@@


doc= 46584


Bainbridge, Emerson Muschamp (1845-1911), mining engineer and colliery owner, was born on 23 December 1845 in Portland Place, Newcastle upon Tyne, the third son and fourth child in the family of fifteen children (ten of whom survived childhood) of Emerson Muschamp Bainbridge (1817-1892), founder of the department store Bainbridge & Co. in Newcastle, and his wife, Anne 
(Annie; 1821-1902)
, daughter of Thomas Hudson, tanner, of Newcastle. He was the only son not to join the family business. He was educated at Edenfield House, Doncaster, and Wesley College, Sheffield. He served an apprenticeship at the marquess of Londonderry's collieries in co. Durham while studying mathematics and mining engineering at the University of Durham. In 1867 Bainbridge was chosen to report to the North of England Institute of Mining Engineers on the haulage of coal, and in 1869 he was awarded a prize by the Institution of Civil Engineers for a paper on the feasibility of working coal at a depth of 4000 feet. He also won the Hermon prize in 1874 for a paper on the prevention of colliery explosions. 
In 1870 Bainbridge was appointed manager of the duke of Norfolk's collieries in Sheffield and Tinsley. On 9 April 1874 he married Elizabeth Jefferson 
('Jeffie'; died 1892)
, daughter of G. J. Armstrong of Manchester, and sister of his late brother Cuthbert's widow. They had two sons and two daughters, but one son and one daughter died in childhood. Also in 1874 Bainbridge became managing director of the Nunnery Colliery Company Ltd, which belonged to the duke of Norfolk. Additionally he was appointed head of Bainbridge and Seymour, a firm of consulting mining engineers in London which collaborated in plans to build a ship canal to Sheffield. He founded Bolsover colliery, a limited company near Chesterfield mining pits in Derbyshire and Nottinghamshire, in 1889, and he was a director of several other collieries. He was a member of the royal commission on coal dust in mines in 1891, and a juror at the Brussels exposition in 1897. He was also involved in the development of the railways, and was chairman of the Lancashire, Derbyshire, and East Coast Railway. A Liberal and supporter of home rule, Bainbridge was elected MP for the Gainsborough division of Lincolnshire in 1895, and remained in the House of Commons until his defeat in the 1900 election. 
Bainbridge, like his father, was a Methodist, and became chairman of the Federation of Free Churches. He was also a very rich man and devoted a considerable part of his wealth to charitable causes. He built a miners' orphanage in Bolsover in 1894, and established a model village there. At Seaford in Sussex he started a holiday home for factory women, and in Sheffield he founded a home for waifs and strays. He also supported the West London Mission, the YMCA, and the Salvation Army, and established a 'Start in Life' fund at the London Polytechnic. Bainbridge was a keen salmon fisherman, and rented a stretch of salmon river in Norway every year. He bought a Scottish estate, Auchnashellach, in Ross-shire, with a 40,000 acre deer forest. 
Bainbridge's wife, Jeffie, died in 1892, and on 20 July 1898 he married his daughter's schoolfriend Norah Mossom ('b'. 1880?), daughter of J. Compton Merryweather of Whitehall Court, London. They had a son and a daughter. They built a villa at Roquebrune, near Menton, on the French riviera, and after Bainbridge's death Norah spent much time there, and with her second husband, Captain George Francis Warre, created a magnificent garden. Bainbridge died of double pneumonia at his London home, 47 Upper Grosvenor Street, on 12 May 1911. He was buried at Brookwood cemetery, Surrey, on 15 May 1911. 


@@@@@


doc= 46586


Balfour, Alexander (1824-1886), merchant, was born on 2 September 1824 at Levenbank, Leven, Fife, Scotland, the eldest son of Henry Balfour, a foundry owner, and his wife, Agnes, 'nee' Bisset. The family had a business background. Alexander was educated locally at Leven parish school, then at Dundee Academy and St Andrews University, and gained his first commercial experience with an uncle in Dundee. His career flourished when he moved to Liverpool, the great centre of nineteenth-century international trade, where he first became a clerk in a small firm which shipped goods to and from Mexico; later he took a job with the partnership of Graham, Kelly & Co. By 1850 he had decided to go into business for himself, and in February 1851 he formed a partnership with two other young clerks from Fife, Stephen Williamson and David Duncan, who were also working for Liverpool merchant houses. The new firm did not have sufficient funds or reputation to trade immediately on its own account, but instead, using borrowed capital from one of Williamson's uncles, the partners shipped manufactures to Chile on consignment or joint account, generally for principals in the United Kingdom. This was a familiar nineteenth-century commercial pattern, which minimized risk (since the partners did not own the goods they shipped) but limited profit, since the firm would earn only a commission income. 
Balfour Williamson, as the new firm was styled, was thus typical of many that sprang up in Liverpool to handle the growing volume of British and world trade. The firm was exceptional in the way that it flourished during the next three or four decades, despite a close call in 1857, when a financial crisis threatened its solvency. The partners soon diversified their business. Even when the firm shipped British manufactures on its own account, rather than merely on a commission basis, it was obvious that, given limited purchasing power on the west coast of South America, such a business would never yield a good living. Accordingly, the partners developed a return trade in local primary products. Soon Balfour Williamson owned land on the west coast, received in settlement of debt or purchased as a substitute for holding cash at a time of currency depreciation. The firm also contributed to the diversification and modernization of the Chilean economy. The partners managed local mines, arranged agencies, and floated companies to work concessions in high-risk/high-return infrastructural projects. Balfour Williamson promoted Chilean industrialization by processing primary products, especially in the grain trade, and filled gaps in the local market for complementary business services by investing in warehouses, shipping, and insurance agencies. By 1876 it was one of the largest shipowners on the west coast of South America, with a fleet of more than twenty vessels. Eventually, like many British trading houses, Balfour Williamson entered the world of financial services and merchant banking, supplying mortgages, banking facilities, and loans. The house also diversified geographically along the Pacific coast, developing business interests in Peru and California. 
Balfour's contribution to the commercial success of the partnership derived from his prudence and a capacity for hard work typical of Victorian businessmen. His great strengths were attention to detail and careful consideration of issues. Of central importance, too, were his Victorian virtues of integrity and trust which underpinned the firm's reputation for fair dealing. But Balfour was not without his faults. Though he mellowed in later life, he had a hasty temper which frequently got the better of him, contributing in no small way to the dispute with Duncan which subsequently split the partnership. Duncan accused Balfour of mismanagement and left the firm in 1863 to join what became Duncan Fox, one of Balfour Williamson's main rivals in Chile. Williamson was also a scathing critic of his partner's business acumen. Balfour was unsuited to Chile, where flexibility and imagination were needed. He visited that country only on tours of duty between 1860 and 1868 and he left much of the overseas business to the more daring Williamson. Nevertheless, Williamson, increasingly regarded as the head of the firm, recognized his partner's solid qualities, since it was he who, in 1863, made the crucial choice between Balfour and Duncan -- in Balfour's favour. 
Outside business Balfour used his accumulated wealth and reputation as a devout Christian and committed philanthropist to support the temperance cause, the welfare of children, and improved conditions for seamen. In 1864 he married Mary Jessie (died 1923), the third daughter of the Revd Roxburgh, with whom he had at least four children. During the 1870s he represented St Peter's ward on Liverpool city council and served as a JP for Denbighshire but, unlike his partner, Williamson, would not stand for parliament. He bought a country estate, Mount Alyn, at Rossett -- south of Chester, but close enough for contact with Liverpool, since he did not retire -- and there he indulged his taste for painting and music. However, ill health, the untimely death of his eldest son, and depression seem to have troubled his later years, and he died at Mount Alyn on 16 April 1886, shortly after an unsuccessful operation to remove a cancerous growth. 


@@@@@


doc= 46588


Balfour, Jabez Spencer (1843-1916), company promoter and politician, was born in Marylebone, Middlesex, on 4 September 1843, the younger son of James Balfour (1796-1884) and Clara Lucas Balfour (1808-1878), who were prominent workers in the mid-Victorian temperance movement. Balfour's career is best understood in the context of the increasingly prominent part played by militant middle-class nonconformists in the business world, in the Liberal Party generally, and in the anti-drink campaign in particular, during the later nineteenth century. After some years working as a parliamentary agent at Westminster, Balfour embarked in the late 1860s on an ambitious, spectacular, but ultimately disastrous course as promoter and director of a number of interlocking public companies involved in large-scale property development in London and the provinces. The continuous growth of the Balfour group of companies in the 1870s and 1880s rested on two simple but erroneous assumptions: first, that the judicious acquisition of suitable land and its development by speculative builders offered an infallible opportunity for profitable investment; and second, that the combined resources of many small savers represented a hitherto untapped but potentially unlimited source of capital which might be applied to this purpose. The Liberator Building Society (1868) was the key to Balfour's operations. Thanks to skilful publicity, an attractive rate of interest, and the effective use of contacts in the worlds of temperance and nonconformity the Liberator had become the country's largest building society by the end of the 1870s, with a nationwide network of local agents and thousands of depositors. 
Balfour's growing eminence in the City was paralleled and reinforced by a career in radical politics. After his marriage in 1866 to Ellen Mead, he and his wife moved in 1869 to Croydon, where he was elected to the local school board in 1874 and served as first mayor of the borough in 1883-4. He became Liberal MP for Tamworth in 1880, but following the borough's disfranchisement he was without a seat until 1889, when he was returned unopposed in a by-election at Burnley. An assiduous constituency man and a plausible public speaker, Balfour was said to have been disappointed at not being given office by Gladstone in 1892. 
At the end of the 1880s Balfour gave every appearance of being a highly successful and prosperous public figure. Energetic, genial, and generous, he had acquired a country house at Burcot in Oxfordshire, and he and his wife had a son and a daughter. Balfour at this time boasted an impressive string of company directorships, but the subsequent economic recession revealed the speculative and unsound nature of his building schemes. From September 1892, when his London and General Bank (which had provided banking facilities for the Balfour group) suspended payment, his companies followed one another in quick succession into the bankruptcy courts. The demise of the Liberator caused a particular furore because many thrifty but misguided small investors lost their life savings. Investigations by the official receiver uncovered a sorry tale of misleading statements, false accounting, and petty fraud by Balfour and his fellow directors over many years. Faced with the likelihood of prosecution, Balfour resigned his seat in parliament and fled to Argentina in December 1892. His dramatic disappearance was immediately taken as an admission of guilt, and for many years afterwards his name was a byword for financial skulduggery and sanctimonious humbug. Eventually extradited in 1895, he was tried and sentenced to fourteen years' imprisonment. After his release in 1906, with maximum remission for good conduct, Balfour lived quietly in London and supported himself as a consulting engineer. He was travelling by train to take up a new appointment at Morriston colliery in south Wales when he died on 23 February 1916. 


@@@@@


doc= 46598


Sir John Barran, first baronet (1821-1905), who was born on 3 August 1821 at New Wandsworth, Surrey, the son of John Barran, a London gunmaker and his wife, Elizabeth Fletcher. He was educated privately. In 1842, for reasons which are not clear, he travelled by boat from London to Hull, and by railway to Leeds, where he found employment as an assistant in Thomas Gresham's small pawnbroking, jewellery, and clothing firm. As far as is known his family had no previous connection with Leeds. Within a few months he opened his own shop at 30 Bridge End South, Leeds, and began his career as a tailor. On 7 October 1848 he opened his 'Emporium of Fashion' at a more prestigious location, no. 1 Briggate, one of the major thoroughfares in Leeds. There he carried a stock of ready-made items and tailored made-to-measure garments. His business expanded rapidly. He was one of the first in Britain to use Singer's new sewing machine to manufacture clothes. He established a small factory in Alfred Street, Leeds, then moved to larger premises at 1 Boar Lane. By 1856 he had between twenty and thirty machines at work, sewing his ready-to-wear clothes. 
In 1858 Barran saw a bandsaw used for cutting furniture veneers being demonstrated at a furniture exhibition in Leeds. He recognized its potential in his trade and had it modified for cutting cloth in quantity. This led to the real take-off of his business. In 1867 he moved to much larger premises in Park Row, Leeds, where his technical innovation continued. With his eldest son, also John, he patented a counterweight iron and a foot control for powered sewing machines. By the 1870s his business had become extensive: he had 2000 sewing machines at work in 1872, all driven from a gas engine through shafting. In 1877 a yet larger factory was opened at Park Square, Leeds, and, in the following decade, yet another huge factory, in Hanover Lane, and a warehouse in Somers Street were built. By 1904 the firm employed more than 3000 in Leeds. It was the pre-eminent business in the early years of the Leeds ready-made clothing industry, specializing in the ready-to-wear trade for boys' clothes. John Barran was known as the little boys' tailor, but also made men's ready-made clothing. He married his first wife, Ann (died 1874), daughter of Major Hirst, a local woollen manufacturer, in 1842, soon after his arrival in Leeds. They had six sons. He married his second wife, Eliza ('nee' Brown), the widow of John Bilton of Park Lea, Scarborough, in 1878. 
The rise and early success of the Barran business was primarily the result of John Barran's personal endeavours. He was particularly perceptive and innovatory in his production techniques and organizational methods: he is recognized as one of the innovators of the 'divisional system' in the manufacture of clothing, by which different workers sewed different parts of the garment; he was instrumental in starting the transition from manufacture in small 'sweated workshops' to airy, purpose-built premises; and he was in the vanguard of improving employment conditions for women and children in the clothing trade, campaigning as early as 1864 for reductions in the working hours for girls in the trade and paying attention to the welfare provisions for his workers. 
John Barran was a prominent Leeds Baptist and a resolute nonconformist. He acted as president of the local Young Men's Christian Association. He served Leeds in a variety of political and philanthropic roles. An obituary described him as having 'occupied well-nigh every important honorary position in Leeds' ('Yorkshire Evening Post', 3 May 1905). He was involved in, and a benefactor for, the purchase of Roundhay Park for the town. He was its Liberal MP from 1876 to 1885, then served the Otley constituency from 1886 to 1895 as a Gladstonian Liberal. He was never an orator in parliament, where his main contribution was to look after local interests. He was mayor of Leeds from 1870 to 1871. He served as a member of the council of the Yorkshire College, the forerunner of Leeds University, chairing its finance committee. He also served as president of Leeds chamber of commerce from 1873 to 1876. He served a long term as JP for the West Riding of Yorkshire and for Leeds. In February 1895 he was created a baronet for his public and political services. John Barran died at his London residence, 24 Queen's Gate, Kensington, on 3 May 1905. 
His first son, John, died in tragic circumstances in 1886. His second son, Alfred, born on 29 June 1851, appears not to have been involved with the business, but three other sons, Charles, Henry, and Rowland ['see below'], were all closely connected with the firm. Charles was a partner from 1878 to 1888. Henry, born in Leeds in 1856, succeeded his father as chairman from 1903 to 1918 and floated the business as a public company in 1903. He remained a director to 1942. He was succeeded as chairman in 1918 by 


@@@@@


doc= 46599


Barratt, (Arthur) William (1877-1939), shoe manufacturer and retailer, was born on 8 October 1877 in Ethel Street, Northampton, the fourth of seven sons of John Barratt, a shoemaker, and Eleanor, 'nee' Yeomans. William Barratt, as he was always known, came from a working-class background, and after attending the local elementary school he worked as a shop assistant selling shoes in Northampton and London. The poor conditions he experienced encouraged his socialist convictions. In 1899 he married Alice Johnson, who survived him until 1958. They had two daughters by adoption. On return to Northampton he became a prominent member of the local Social Democratic Federation, which had growing influence in a town where the industry was subject to considerable technical change. As a local socialist council candidate he just failed to get elected. 
In 1902 Barratt went into partnership with his brother to sell shoes in a local shop. Another brother made a chance purchase of a stock of boots which he then tried to sell by post. This alerted William Barratt to the potential of a mail-order business but financial difficulties led to the original partnership going bankrupt in 1906. However, the potential of the mail-order business was clear, exploiting as it did the possibility of selling in rural areas and more remote villages and towns. With the help of a Rushden shoe manufacturer, Barratt recommenced business and quickly began to make a more permanent mark in the shoe trade. W. Barratt & Co. was created as a limited liability company in 1907. In 1913 Barratt opened his large Footshape works in Northampton and in 1914 the first retail outlet in London of what was to become a major retailing chain. The rapid development of the firm was assisted by the boom conditions of government orders in the First World War, but continued into the post-war period through the combination of worldwide mail-order sales and urban retail outlets, of which there were 150 at the time of his death. 
Barratt's standing in the shoe trade was founded on his general business acumen and a reputation for quality. The mail-order service gave the firm international renown, since wherever the post went so too could Barratt's shoes. Barratt pioneered his own personal advertising style in many different languages, marketing both the product and himself as the guarantee of quality. His motto was that he who has good goods to sell should shout, not whisper down a well. He believed that business organization should display 'the individual touch' and cultivated an image of himself as a man of the people. However, although Barratt played a decisive entrepreneurial role, a number of his brothers and others also made important contributions to the success of the company. 
Barratt was an unsuccessful parliamentary candidate for Labour in the Bethnal Green constituency in 1931. In Northampton he succeeded in being elected to the town council between 1929 and 1934 as a Labour Party member, but then resigned in protest against what he saw as the unbusinesslike character of local government. This was typical of someone who was strong-willed and something of a loner. In 1933 he became president of the Northampton Town Boot and Shoe Manufacturers Association, but created controversy by urging a shorter working week for workers in the shoe industry. 
Barratt's local interests involved the support of many sporting groups, including the Northampton 'Saints' rugby club. As a young man he participated enthusiastically in many sporting activities, including early motorcycle racing. With his wife he made a major contribution to Northampton by financing a modern maternity home to check maternal mortality and suffering, thus relieving some of the contradiction that he felt between his wealth and his political and social views. Together they spent between $50,000 and $60,000 on the home. 
During his lifetime Barratt developed W. Barratt & Co. into one of the leading shoe manufacturing and retailing firms in inter-war Britain, with over 2000 employees. He died on 8 December 1939 at St Andrew's Hospital, Northampton, two weeks after having suffered a nervous breakdown. He was cremated, and his ashes scattered on his brother Richard's grave at Kingsthorpe cemetery, Northampton, on 12 December. 


@@@@@


doc= 46600


Barratt, Thomas James (1841-1914), soap manufacturer and pioneer of advertising, was born on 16 May 1841 at 25 Tottenham Place, St Pancras, London, the son of Thomas Barratt, a piano maker, and his wife, Emma Price. He was educated at a private day school, and at fifteen was apprenticed to a firm of London merchants, George and Frederick Evans. Merchant enterprise seems to have been in his nature, and through hard work and natural inclination he moved upward in another London establishment, Ellis and Hale, colonial brokers. In 1864 he joined the newly enlarged soap-making establishment of A. and F. Pears in Great Russell Street as a bookkeeper, shortly becoming a commercial traveller for the firm. Barratt's skill and dedication to the work were enhanced by a family connection with his marriage on 11 March 1865 to Mary Frances (died 1916), eldest daughter of Francis Pears, after which he joined Francis and Andrew Pears as partner in the firm. 
Leaving the soapworks to be overseen by his partners, Barratt began what would be his life's work: to expand the firm through increased advertising. The questionable value of advertising, along with its reputation of being the last resort of failures and frauds, made Barratt's task a difficult one. Francis Pears, uncertain of Barratt's vision and apparently unwilling to be a party to this endeavour, withdrew from the firm in 1875 leaving $4000 in capital. His son Andrew continued to manage the soapworks while Barratt handled advertising. 
Barratt was an innovator, both in his use of advertising and his methods, as well as a great promoter of the advertising profession. By placing the name Pears repeatedly in a column of newspaper space, or filling several columns with a single PEARS spelt out in hundreds of iterations of the name in minute type, he contrived to get round newspaper restrictions against illustrated advertisements. Celebrity endorsements and comic, even self-parodying, advertisements became trade marks of Pears advertising. Regular daily advertising in the national and regional press made Pears one of the most recognized names in the English-speaking world, making, as Barratt claimed, as many as 2000 appearances before the average reader. Such was the coverage that W. E. Gladstone, speaking in the House of Commons, made a passing reference to amendments 'as thick as the leaves in Vallombrosa or as plentiful as the advertisements of Pears soap' ('DBB', 189). Barratt continued personally to buy all the firm's advertising space until the end of his life. 
Barratt was renowned in addition for his use of 'stunt' advertising. He imported 10 centime coins, accepted as pennies in England, which he had stamped 'Pears' and put into circulation at fourteen for the shilling. Buying works of art and then offering high-quality reproductions at a nominal price, Barratt created the 'Pears' Pictures for People' plan which brought the name Pears into millions of homes. The most famous of these was the portrait of a child by Sir John Everett Millais, distributed by Barratt under the title 'Bubbles', which generated as much debate about the commercial use of art as it did simple enjoyment. 
Under Barratt's hand the firm expanded, and Pears' soap became one of the most recognized products of the late nineteenth century. In 1892 A. and F. Pears became a public company with $810,000 in assets, continuing to pay a healthy 10 per cent dividend during Barratt's stewardship. Advertising expenditure, which had never exceeded $80 annually when Barratt joined the firm, stood at over $100,000 at the time of his death. 
Barratt brought the same energy to his other interests that he brought to advertising. As a proponent of conservation, Barratt started a programme to buy open lands for preservation against development, a scheme which he urged others to emulate. He was also a historian, completing a multi-volume history of Hampstead. Notwithstanding the controversial commercial use of art in Pears' advertising, Barratt filled his estate, Bellmoor, with a substantial collection of British art. He was also passionately interested in microscopy, and was a fellow of the Royal Microscopical Society. 
Barratt died at Queen's Highcliffe Hotel, Margate, on 26 April 1914 after a short illness, and was buried on 30 April at St Pancras cemetery, East Finchley. At some point Barratt had separated from his wife, and the principal beneficiaries of his estate were his two sons from a relationship with Florence Bell, daughter of a doctor, who lived with him and called herself Mrs Barratt. His collection of Nelson memorabilia, including a considerable amount of plate, was given to the Royal Naval Hospital, Greenwich. Alfred Harmsworth, Lord Northcliffe, described Barratt as 'the father of Modern Advertising from whom I have learned so much' ('DBB', 190), and he was popularly described as 'the man who washed the face of the world' (ibid.). 


@@@@@


doc= 46603


Bartlett, Sir Charles John (1889-1955), motor vehicle manufacturer, was born on 12 December 1889 at Bibury, Gloucestershire, the son of George Bartlett, a miller journeyman, and Elizabeth, 'nee' Stevens. After attending the village school in Bibury he completed his formal education at Bath Technical College, studying business methods and specializing in accounting. 
Having enlisted in the Devonshire and Dorsetshire regiment in 1914, Bartlett was severely wounded at the battle of Loos, and after recovery saw further service in France and the Middle East. He was demobilized in 1919 with the rank of sergeant and in the following year joined General Motors Ltd (the American car manufacturer) as an accounting clerk at its London branch in Hendon. His leadership qualities were soon recognized, and by rapid promotion he reached the post of managing director in 1926. 
General Motors (GM) was anxious to acquire a British manufacturing base to circumvent import tariffs on foreign vehicles, and in 1926 the board recommended the purchase of the ailing Vauxhall Motor Company in Luton. Bartlett was considered an ideal person to oversee Vauxhall and transform it into a mass producer of vehicles. A story current at the time was that when J. D. Mooney, the director of General Motors' overseas operations, was told by Alfred P. Sloan, president and chairman of GM, to pick an Englishman to run Vauxhall, he replied: 'Well I guess it had better be Charlie Bartlett; he's about as English as they come' (Platt, 93). 
Under Bartlett's control the first car to be produced in the recapitalized and reorganized Luton plant was the Vauxhall Cadet, which was followed by the much more popular Light Six in 1933, and later by the outstandingly successful Vauxhall Ten in 1937. The greatest success, however, was in the light truck market; 11,200 trucks were produced in 1931, and the figure rose to a commercial vehicle output of 60,800 Bedfords in 1954. According to Sir Reginald Pearson it was Bartlett who convinced Sloan that trucks would be very profitable for Vauxhall, and by the end of the 1930s Vauxhall was one of the 'Big Six' vehicle producers in Britain. CJB, as he was known, was summed up by a former colleague thus: 'He never lost his simple and sturdily democratic approach to industrial management. This robust attitude went well with a determined character, a strong stocky physique and a sense of humour leavened what could otherwise have been too paternal an outlook towards the Vauxhall workforce. (Platt, 93)' A number of policies were introduced under Bartlett's management to ensure good industrial relations and the loyalty of the workforce. Rates of pay were relatively high, a profit sharing scheme was introduced in 1935, he provided greater job security so that workers were not automatically laid off 'en masse' when orders were low, and in 1941 he introduced a form of works council. He pursued an active policy of promoting shop floor workers to managerial positions, among the most notable being Sir Reginald Pearson. He also encouraged the development of welfare and leisure programmes. During the Bartlett era there were no serious industrial disputes at Vauxhall. Unionists in other car firms referred to it as 'the turnip patch' in recognition of its apparent rural tranquillity in industrial relations. 
Despite his obvious success at managing Vauxhall, which included a huge reorganization to mass produce Churchill tanks and Bedford army trucks during the Second World War (for which he was knighted in 1944), Bartlett did not always see eye to eye with the top management of GM. These differences became more severe in the post-war years, particularly over future plans for the company. In April 1953 Bartlett was replaced by Walter Hill, a GM man, and he was offered the post of chairman without executive responsibility until his retirement in 1954. 
Bartlett married Emily May, 'nee' Pincombe, on 24 October 1925. He was active in many associations, serving as president of the Luton chamber of commerce (1938-45), deputy lieutenant of Bedfordshire (1952), vice-president (1946-53) and president of the Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents, and council member for the British Institute of Management. He retained a lifelong love of horticulture, was a keen cricketer and golfer, and had a passion for sport which led to the strong encouragement of recreational activities while managing director at Vauxhall. He died from heart failure at his home, Whitewalls, Kinsbourne Green, Harpenden, on 10 August 1955. 


@@@@@


doc= 46607


Batey, John Thomas (1862-1951), shipbuilder, was born in Newcastle upon Tyne on 28 July 1862, one of the eleven children of the tug boat operator Francis Batey (1842-1915) and Margaret, 'nee' Nicholls (1842-1912). Batey was educated at the Royal Grammar School, Newcastle, and in 1880 began an apprenticeship at Andrew Leslie's shipyard at Hebburn. In 1886 the shipyard amalgamated with the engine builders R. and W. Hawthorn to form R. and W. Hawthorn, Leslie & Co. Ltd. While still an apprentice, Batey took evening classes and obtained a bronze medal in naval architecture and a first class honours degree, a rare qualification on Tyneside at that time. Later he lectured part-time in naval architecture at Rutherford College in Newcastle. Batey married Adelaide Frederick Sewell (1861-1946). They had two daughters and two sons. 
Batey became chief draughtsman at William Dobson's Low Walker shipyard in 1889 and remained there for twelve years. In 1901 he rejoined the Hebburn shipyard of Hawthorn Leslie as chief draughtsman, but soon became general manager under Herbert (later Sir Herbert) Rowell. In 1907 Batey became a director of the company. In this period Hawthorn Leslie had a series of Admiralty contracts to build torpedo boat destroyers, turning out more than thirty by 1914. Nevertheless, a number of merchant ships were also built, including several specialist iron-ore carriers. One of these, the 'Sir Ernest Cassel' (10,800 deadweight tons) built in 1910, was the largest single-decked vessel engaged in ocean trade at that time. Rowell and Batey carried through a shipyard modernization programme shortly before the First World War, with capital investment including cranage and pneumatic tools. 
During the First World War the yard built two light cruisers, twenty-one destroyers, and twelve merchant ships. In 1916 Rowell became company chairman and Batey took on increased responsibility for running the shipyard. On Rowell's death in 1921 Batey was appointed managing director. During the 1920s Hawthorn Leslie built several passenger liners, such as the 'Andania' (14,000 gross tons) of 1922 for Cunard, a type of large merchant ship the management had long wanted to build. Close production control and bold sales policy led to the shipyard being more successful than many of its rivals in the depressed inter-war years. After a small loss in 1932-3, increasing naval orders improved the yard's performance. Batey retired from the company in 1935. 
In 1934 Batey had become president of the North East Coast Institution of Engineers and Shipbuilders, a body he had first joined in 1885, soon after its foundation. Similarly, after many years of membership, Batey became president of the Institution of Naval Architects in 1938. He was awarded an honorary DSc by Durham University in 1935 and in the following year he was honoured with presidency of the international conference of naval architects held in New York. An early supporter of standardization in shipbuilding and engineering, Batey served as a member of the British Engineering Standards Association, which later became the British Standards Institution. Batey was active in various employers' organizations, being chairman of the Tyne Shipbuilders Association for four years and later serving on the central board of the Shipbuilding Employers' Federation. 
Early acquaintance with inadequate responses to accidents at work led Batey to take a keen interest in the St John Ambulance Brigade, an activity he pursued right up until his death. In recognition of his work he was made a knight grace of the venerable order of St John of Jerusalem. Batey was president of the Hebburn Nursing Association and chairman of the chest hospital in the west end of Newcastle. Batey died of cancer on 23 July 1951 at Egypt End, Farnham Common, Farnham Royal, Buckinghamshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 46608


Baxendale, Lloyd Henry (1858-1937), road transport entrepreneur, was born on 3 February 1858 at Totteridge, Hertfordshire, the eldest son of Lloyd Baxendale, gentleman, and his wife, Ellen, 'nee' Turner. Although born into an active transport dynasty, his education was that of a member of the upper class, Eton College being followed by Christ Church, Oxford. He married Constance Louisa, daughter of Charles Raymond Pelly, and they had one daughter. 
Baxendale's grandfather Joseph Baxendale, son of a Lancaster physician, had become a partner of Pickfords' road- and canal-carrying business in 1817. Harry Baxendale, as he was usually known, whose father was Joseph's second son, was one of three members of the third generation of Baxendales to join the Pickfords' business: he entered the firm in 1879, and was preceded by his older cousin, Joseph William (1871), the only son of Joseph's eldest son, and followed by his younger brother, Frank (1884). By a partnership agreement of 1894, eight shares were allocated to Joseph William as senior partner, six to Harry, and three to Frank. Capital was distributed in similar proportions in 1901 when the firm converted to limited liability. 
Joseph William's tenure as chairman of the limited company was short. The firm's link to the London and North Western Railway (LNWR) as its cartage agents was broken in 1901, apparently as the result of Pickfords' resentment of what was seen as the restrictive and ungenerous attitude of the railway company. However, this adversely affected Pickfords' position and, following a family row, Joseph William resigned and withdrew his capital. A cartage agreement with the new Great Central Railway Company did not provide an adequate alternative, especially at a time when capital for conversion to mechanical transport was required by Pickfords. 
On succeeding as chairman, Harry Baxendale presided over this difficult transitional period of the establishment of mechanical transport in the company's service. Steam vehicles were Pickfords' first choice. They purchased eleven Hindley wagons (made in Bourton, Dorset) in 1905, and brought in, as engineer, William Elliott, who remained with Pickfords to become manager of the heavy haulage department, chief engineer, and, finally, general manager of Pickfords and Hay's Wharf Cartage Company. 
Motorization was expensive and Pickfords were financially weak, following their break with the LNWR and J. W. Baxendale's retirement and withdrawal of his capital. In these circumstances, amalgamation with their major cartage rival, Carter Paterson & Co., came about in 1912. Harry Baxendale became chairman of the joint company, but 'although face was saved to some extent... the real power lay with the Patersons' (Turnbull, 'Traffic and Transport', 156). Some progress with rationalization was made before the First World War intervened; Carter Paterson and the former Beans Express (another road carrying company) took over London and suburban parcels traffic, but Pickfords retained their provincial strength and heavy haulage specialism. 
This aspect of Pickfords' operations prospered with the increased demand for the transport of heavy war 'materiel', whereas Carter Paterson's parcels trade collapsed. In 1920 the Pickfords' side of the combine's operation attracted a successful bid from the Hay's Wharf Cartage Company. Baxendale ceded the chairmanship of Pickfords to Major O. C. Magniac of Hay's Wharf, but, together with James Paterson, remained a director and joined the board of Hay's Wharf Cartage. After lengthy negotiations, on 1 July 1933 Hay's Wharf Cartage, Pickfords, and Carter Paterson were acquired by the four main-line railway companies. Although James Paterson remained in power at Carter Paterson, and W. J. Elliott of Pickfords became general manager of Pickfords and Hay's Wharf Cartage, Baxendale, who was by then seventy-five, resigned in December 1933. 
Baxendale's Berkshire home, Greenham Lodge, near Newbury, provided the focus for quite different business interests. In addition to his other interests, Baxendale served as chairman of the Newbury Racecourse Company, formed in 1905; the grandstands of the course were built on former Greenham Lodge estate land, and when George V and Queen Mary visited the Newbury races he personally received them. Local affairs also occupied Baxendale, as JP, a Conservative county councillor for six years from 1889, and churchwarden of his local church. Baxendale died on 21 May 1937 at his home; the funeral took place at Greenham church, where he was buried, and he was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 46611


Buchanan, John Young (1844-1925), chemist and oceanographer, was born at Dowanhill, Glasgow, on 20 February 1844, the son of John Buchanan of Dowanhill (1807-1876), a merchant, and his wife, Jane (died 1899), the daughter of John Young of Rowmore, Dunbartonshire. Both his parents came from prosperous Glasgow merchant families. Buchanan was the second of four sons, of whom the eldest died young and the third, Thomas Ryburn Buchanan (1846-1911), became a member of parliament. There were also four daughters. Buchanan was educated at Glasgow high school and the University of Glasgow. He graduated MA in 1863 and then spent several years abroad, studying chemistry at Marburg, Leipzig, and Bonn and at the Ecole de Medecine in Paris (1867), before becoming assistant to Alexander Crum Brown, professor of chemistry at Edinburgh. His investigation into the hydrolysis of chloroacetic acid to glycolic acid (1871) was subsequently exploited by J. H. van't Hoff in his establishment of the laws of chemical kinetics. 
In 1872 Buchanan was selected to join the scientific team sailing round the world in HMS 'Challenger' (1872-6) in the first major scientific study of the sea. His work both during the voyage and subsequently was pivotal to the development of oceanography. He studied the chemistry of the sea in its broadest sense, contributing to all the main divisions of marine science. Observations on the chemical and physical properties of sea water, on sea ice, and on marine deposits begun in the 'Challenger' formed the basis for much of his later research. However, his best known observation during the voyage was the discovery that T. H. Huxley's 'Bathybius', thought by many to be a primitive life form inhabiting the ocean floor, was in fact an inorganic residue created when sediment samples were stored in alcohol. He further showed that the black 'rocks' the 'Challenger' dredged from the sea-bed were in fact concretions of manganese and other metals. 
After the expedition's return Buchanan continued working on problems in oceanography and related sciences for the rest of his career. However, apart from a brief spell as lecturer in geography at Cambridge (1889-93) he held no official position. He had a substantial private income and lived in the family home in Edinburgh until his mother died in 1899, subsequently moving to London. Both houses were equipped with a private laboratory but for twenty years Buchanan also occupied rooms in Christ's College, Cambridge. He appreciated the social side of college life and freedom to work unhindered by formal society obligations or, latterly, by teaching commitments. Some people found him 'cold and distant' (Mill, 'Autobiography', 50) but in Cambridge he was welcomed as a gifted conversationalist. Although reserved and sensitive in disposition, he was a man of strong family feeling, and generous in case of need. He inspired great affection among a small circle of close friends and colleagues, some in the upper echelons of European society. Chief among these was Prince Albert I of Monaco, who also devoted a substantial part of his life and fortune to the study of oceanography. 
Buchanan listed travel as his recreation in 'Who's Who'. During the 1880s and 1890s he made a number of scientific voyages in cable ships and in Prince Albert's yachts. He was often in South America, looking after family property in Argentina, and in 1885 journeyed on up the Pacific coast. In Europe he visited friends and, increasingly, spas, but whatever the reason for the journey he employed his habit of observation, on his special fields of scientific interest if appropriate, if not, on other topics. A trip to Switzerland in 1893, for example, intended as a rest-cure, led to a long-term study of glaciers. 
Buchanan's scientific researches ultimately covered oceanography, chemistry, limnology, and meteorology. While many arose out of his work in the 'Challenger', he also identified important new areas of interest. He was an outstanding experimentalist; during the 'Challenger's' voyage he had devoted much attention to methods of measuring the temperature and specific gravity of sea water, devising a stopcock water bottle (named after him) and piezometers for measuring pressure and temperature in the ocean depths. His observational work was admired by contemporaries for its painstaking accuracy, but it was felt that his preoccupation with detail prevented him from publishing his results fully. A colleague wrote: 'I never knew a man who did so much work and wrote so little about it' (Mill, 'Autobiography', 50). Nevertheless, Buchanan still published over a hundred scientific papers. Late in life he collected the most important in three volumes, published by Cambridge University Press: 'Scientific Papers, vol. 1' (1913), 'Comptes rendus of Observations and Reasoning' (1917), and the best known, 'Accounts Rendered of Work done and Things Seen' (1919). 
Buchanan helped write the narrative of the 'Challenger' but because of a dispute with the Treasury only part of the expedition's chemical results -- 'Specific gravity of samples of ocean water' -- appeared under his name in the official report. This contribution included the first global chart of the surface salinity of the oceans. He continued to work extensively on the chemistry of marine deposits and on the formation and distribution of oceanic and littoral manganese concretions, his interest in this topic being augmented by his discovery in 1878 of manganese nodules in Loch Fyne, while dredging off the west coast of Scotland in his specially built steam yacht, 'Mallard'. He also investigated the seasonal variation of temperature in the sea and in lakes, together with their freezing and the nature of ice and brines. His findings, in both fresh and salt water, contributed to the concept of thermocline formation, and influenced later development of ideas on the thermohaline circulation of the ocean. He was also probably the first person to draw attention to the oxygen minimum layer in the ocean. 
Observing cold water off the west coast of South America in 1885 Buchanan concluded that this could not be due to a surface current from the south polar regions, as had been previously supposed, but was due to upwelling of cold deep water off a windward shore, and further that this occurred in similar sites elsewhere. Another feature he recognized to be of great significance in ocean circulation was the equatorial undercurrent, discovered off the African coast when he was in the cable ship 'Buccaneer' in 1886. The same voyage revealed the existence of huge submarine canyons in continental shelves. On an earlier trip, in the 'Dacia', Buchanan had drawn scientific attention to the existence of isolated seamounts rising from the deep-sea floor. Lack of resources meant that it was not until the second half of the twentieth century that these phenomena were more widely investigated and their full significance understood. 
As Buchanan was meticulous to a fault and lacked the ability to relinquish old projects as he added new ones, the internal pressures on him grew. From the 1890s onwards he increasingly complained of ill health which appears to have been at least partly stress-related, and in 1912 he suffered a nervous breakdown. The outbreak of war in 1914 exacerbated his depression and he sold his London house and went to North America, only returning after hostilities were over. His final years were spent as a recluse, the enthusiasm of his youthful personality transformed into profound pessimism about the destructive power of modern civilization, both towards itself and on indigenous peoples and habitats. 
Buchanan became a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1870 and was awarded its Keith prize in 1887, in which year he was also elected fellow of the Royal Society of London. He was an active member of other scientific societies and the Royal Scottish Geographical Society, which he had helped found, awarded him its gold medal in 1911. He held honorary memberships of the Berlin Gesellschaft fur Erdkunde (Geographical Society) and of the Societe Helvetique des Sciences (Swiss Natural Sciences Society). Prince Albert made him a vice-president of the Comite de Perfectionnement of the Institut Oceanographique in Paris and conferred on him the order of St Charles of Monaco. Buchanan never married. He died suddenly in London on 16 October 1925. 


@@@@@


doc= 46612


Beckett, Rupert Evelyn (1870-1955), banker, was born on 2 November 1870 at Meanwood Park, Chapel Allerton, near Leeds, the third son of 
By the 1860s the Becketts of Leeds were prominent north-country bankers of a century's standing. In this and the following decade they acquired a number of well-established banks elsewhere in Yorkshire and Nottinghamshire to extend their business beyond the wool textile region. Two of these were in the rich agricultural area around Malton (Bower, Hall & Co., acquired in 1875) and York (Swann, Clough & Co., in 1879). In 1879 they were formed into Beckett & Co., the York and East Riding Bank. William Beckett Denison became the bank's managing partner, grandly renting Nun Appleton Hall near York for his residence. He later became president of the Country Banker's Association. He was MP for East Retford, 1876-80, and for Bassetlaw, 1885-90. 
His marriage, in 1855, allowed him to straddle the world of the Yorkshire aristocracy and that of his own plutocratic banking and railway-promoting circle. William Beckett was killed by a passing train while walking along the track at Wimborne, Dorset, on 23 November 1890. He was survived by his wife. His sons all achieved eminence in Yorkshire affairs. The eldest, Ernest William (1856-1917), MP for the Whitby division of the county from 1885 to 1905, succeeded his uncle Edmund Beckett (1816-1905) as second Baron Grimthorpe in 1905; the second, Sir Gervase Beckett (1866-1937), was MP for several Yorkshire constituencies between 1906 and 1929. 
Rupert, the third and youngest, was educated at Eton College and at Trinity College, Cambridge. He was destined to carry on the family's great banking tradition, becoming a partner on leaving Cambridge. Having completed his apprenticeship in Leeds, he became resident managing partner of the Doncaster branch (formerly Cooke, Yarborough & Co., acquired in 1868). An officer in the Yorkshire hussars, he built up for himself a first-rate reputation as a businessman in the West Riding of Yorkshire. He became a director of two important companies, the Great Northern Railway (of which his grandfather had been a principal promoter, ensuring that the route from London to York did not bypass Doncaster) and the Aire and Calder Navigation Company. On 21 December 1896 Beckett married Muriel Helen Florence (died 1941), daughter of Lord Berkeley Paget, and the couple had four daughters. 
Around 1910 Beckett moved to Leeds and became deeply involved in its affairs. He was nominated a director of the Yorkshire Penny Bank on its reconstruction by Sir Edward Holden and of the Yorkshire Conservative Newspaper Company in 1911, holding both appointments for forty-four years. During the First World War he was an active member of the directing board of a munitions factory in Leeds, and in 1918 sat on the Treasury committee on bank amalgamations. Three years later, and by this time senior partner, he carefully steered Becketts, with its thirty-seven branches, assets of over $12 million, and status as one of the last two private note-issuing banks in England, into a merger with one of the 'big five' banks -- the Westminster. Becketts brought to the new bank, which as a result of earlier amalgamations already possessed good bases in London, the west country, the east midlands and the north-west, a strong presence east of the Pennines. Rupert and his brother Gervase became main board directors. 
A decade later, reversing usual practice, Rupert Beckett, the representative of an acquired subsidiary, became chairman of the Westminster Bank in 1931 -- not a propitious year in which to assume a senior banking post. As chairman for twenty years, he guided the bank's affairs 'with complete reliability and with sturdy Yorkshire good sense' ('The Times', 29 April 1955). Another 'Times' correspondent (3 May 1955) thought him 'a giant amongst bankers', while the 'Men and Matters' column in the 'Financial Times' (quoted in the 'Yorkshire Post', 27 April 1955) maintained that he 'was outstandingly the best British Banker of this century'. Certainly, during his chairmanship the bank's assets grew from $300 million to over $800 million and its branch network was sensibly extended. In 1947 he became chairman of the Committee of London Clearing Bankers and of the British Bankers' Association. Aged eighty, he retired as chairman of the Westminster Bank in 1950, though he continued as a board member until 1955, attending a meeting only a few days before his death. 
Rupert Beckett was a big man, with a high-pitched laugh; he was modest, generous, and well liked. He hid a decisive financial brain behind a genial exterior. Reckoned to be a good judge of character, he enjoyed a game of bridge and golf and the smart house parties of the inter-war years; he liked to entertain his friends at York and Doncaster races. Above all, however, he possessed a great sense of duty. Operating easily in metropolitan social and banking circles, he was nevertheless most at home in Leeds. He was a great fosterer of Yorkshire industry; he held a formidable string of offices in Leeds, of which he was a freeman from 1931. He was treasurer of the university for more than thirty years, of the chamber of commerce and of the Leeds Club. 
Beckett's chief interest after banking was newspapers. Associated with the company which produced the 'Yorkshire Post' -- the Conservative voice of the county -- Beckett served as its chairman for more than thirty years, and guided its finances wisely, while preserving its editorial freedom. A true Conservative in the long tradition of the Becketts, he was a JP and a deputy lieutenant of the West Riding. But with a father, an uncle, and two brothers in the House of Commons, he himself declined entering parliament, preferring to concentrate upon his banking and business interests. 
Beckett died on 25 April 1955 at his apartment in the Park Lane Hotel, Piccadilly, London. His wife had pre-deceased him in 1941. He was cremated at Golders Green on 28 April and his ashes interred at Acaster Selby, Yorkshire, on 1 May. 


@@@@@


doc= 46613


Bedford, John (1903-1980), department store manager, was born on 16 January 1903 at 26 Court 6 New John Street, west Birmingham, the only son of John Bedford and his wife, Rosalind Nicholls. His father was a journeyman brass-caster who established his own small brass foundry, money from which was to be used to enable his son to enter the legal profession. Unfortunately, the business failed and his son was required to start work. He did so in a Birmingham department store, first as an assistant and later as a buyer. It was this experience that was to set his future career in the retail trade. 
At the age of twenty-nine Bedford became manager of the department store of J. C. Smiths in Stratford upon Avon after it had been taken over by Debenhams. Three years later he was put in charge of a newly acquired Debenhams store in Great Yarmouth. His management skills were to be fully tested three years after that, however, when he was appointed to run the Plymouth outlet, Spooners. 
Managing the store during the difficulties of the war years, Bedford established a reputation as a dynamic business teacher. Spooners was one of the earliest buildings to be destroyed by German bombing, but Bedford quickly reopened in makeshift premises. He also played an active role in the Home Guard, firewatching, and in the eventual planning of the new store. In recognition of his wartime role Bedford was appointed a military MBE, as well as an OBE. 
Bedford was to become a rapidly rising star in the Debenhams organization under the chairmanship of G. M. Wright. His useful experience of provincial store management was recognized in 1949, when he was sent to London to examine the difficulties of using Debenhams' fragmented buying power. Appointed a director, Bedford nevertheless continued for a time to run the Plymouth store as well as representing the board in Scotland. 
The key problem facing Debenhams was its lack of co-ordination: the Debenhams group had grown through the haphazard acquisition of stores throughout the country, each of which retained its own name, purchasing policy, and distinctive identity. Bedford realized that Debenhams needed a more concerted strategy to respond to changes in consumer taste and spending power, and he managed to persuade the various factions in its organization to support some element of centralization in purchasing, stock control, and planning. One positive step towards integration was the decision that each department store should carry notices declaring that it was 'A Debenhams Store'. 
In 1954 Bedford was appointed deputy chairman, and then chairman and managing director two years later. He proved to be a tireless managing director who made regular visits to all the stores. Bedford was responsible for introducing a contributory pensions scheme for employees in 1957. When he reorganized the main Debenhams board of directors in the following year, Bedford secured the appointment of a number of younger figures (each of whom was to direct a group of stores, and also serve as chief executive of the principal store in that division). 
Bedford undertook a strong expansionist policy that saw many new stores added to the group. One consequence was the much publicized and unsuccessful attempt to take over the Harrods group of department stores in 1959. Bedford later confessed that 'I do not like take-over bids, and I do not like the people who make them' ('The Times', 28 Aug 1959). He had only begun merger talks with Harrods after Sir Hugh Fraser had begun buying up its shares; nevertheless, he was bitterly disappointed when Fraser won over a majority of Harrods shareholders. 
By nature a shy man who disliked personal publicity, Bedford was also a complex character who had strong personal beliefs. On 22 August 1927 he married Florence Mary, daughter of Aaron Illingworth Oddy; they had one daughter. A keen and active Methodist, Bedford for many years served as a lay preacher. In this role he occupied the pulpits of many of the small chapels in the Greater London area, and he was for some years a member of the Hinde Street Church in the West End of London. His greatest passion away from work, community service, and the church, however, was sport. As a young man he was keen on cricket and football, and in later years he moved to snooker, badminton, and golf. 
In addition to his role at Debenhams, Bedford served as a director of the Commercial Union Insurance Company from 1952 to 1973, as well as serving on the executive council of the Association of British Chambers of Commerce. In 1962 he served on the Banwell committee for the Ministry of Public Building and Works. He was also a director of London Transport. 
Bedford gave up active managerial responsibilities in 1970, and stepped down as chairman early in 1971. He made a positive contribution to the reorganization of Debenhams, but its underlying problems were hard to resolve; and the positive effect of central buying and the closure of loss-making outlets only began to be felt after Bedford's departure. He died of prostate cancer on 11 November 1980 at his home, 23 Kepplestone, Staveley Road, Eastbourne, Sussex. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 46614


Beecham, Sir Joseph, first baronet (1848-1916), manufacturer of patent medicines, was born at Wigan on 8 June 1848. He was the eldest of the family of two sons and two daughters of Thomas Beecham (1820-1907), founder of Beecham's pills, and his first wife, Jane Evans (1811/12-1872). Educated from 1859 onwards at Moorflat Church of England school, St Helens, in 1863 he entered his father's business, which produced digestive and cough pills. Until the late 1870s, they ran it jointly with only a few employees; he later claimed to have worked daily from 5.30 a.m. until midnight, occasionally escaping to Liverpool for an evening in the gods at a concert or opera. 
In 1873 Beecham married Josephine Burnett Dickins (1850-1934), daughter of Martha Dickins, of Everton. Of their ten children, two sons and six daughters survived childhood. With a narrow provincial outlook, she failed to unlock his deeply introverted nature, caused by an overbearing father and domestic tension in early life. Then, in 1882, he met the eighteen-year-old Helen McKey Taylor (1864-1920), a Scottish girl who had been brought up in New York. In 1889 he installed her in a London suburb. Their relationship lasted until his death, and although childless provided the emotional and domestic support he sought as he pursued his entrepreneurial activities. 
Having appointed the publicity-minded Charles Rowed (1855-1933) as his general manager, Beecham increased the firm's advertising outlay to $109,856 in 1890. Light-hearted advertisements, such as 'What are the wild waves saying (Try Beecham's pills)', printed on boats' sails and billboards stretched over beauty spots, offended the fastidious but sold his pills -- no fewer than 250 million, or a quarter of all factory-made pills in Britain, in 1890, and 366 million in 1915. Exports over that period rose from 14 to 28 per cent of turnover. In 1890 he established a manufacturing subsidiary in New York. By then he had become a cosmopolitan, claiming to have bought his tie in Cairo, his coat in Australia, and his boots in San Francisco. 
In 1899 Beecham had Josephine secretly committed to an asylum in Northampton. Later discovered by two of their children and released, she obtained a judicial separation and an allowance. The elder son, Thomas Beecham (1879-1961), the conductor, broke with his father over this cold-hearted act. By the new century Joseph was concentrating on his outside interests. He was mayor of St Helens three times between 1889 and 1911 and a very active chairman of the town's electricity committee. He also acquired a large collection of British landscape and other paintings. Having in 1909 become reconciled with Thomas, between 1910 and 1914 Beecham subsidized, at a reported cost of $300,000, a sequence of brilliant grand opera and ballet seasons at top London theatres. For these and philanthropic services (he gave $30,000 to Bedford College, London), Beecham was knighted in 1912 and in 1914 made a baronet; he was also created a knight of the Russian order of St Stanislaus. 
In 1914 Beecham was induced to underwrite the purchase for $2 million of the Covent Garden estate and market in London. The deal went awry when the outbreak of the First World War prevented the flotation of a company to sell off the properties. After two years of increasing anxiety, he died of an undiagnosed heart complaint; he was found dead in his bed at his Hampstead home, West Brow, 9 Arkwright Road, on 23 October 1916. He was buried on the 27th at Denton Green cemetery, St Helens. His estate had to be put in Chancery, and was finally wound up in 1924 with a valuation of $1,479,447. 
Unimpressive in appearance, with a reddish moustache and grey eyes, Joseph Beecham combined shyness and inarticulacy with a hankering after the grand gesture. By inspired publicity he made his firm one of the best-known in Britain, but he did almost nothing to modernize its products or organization; it was not even a limited company until 1924. He was at ease only with a few close associates; an unselfish love for his son, Thomas, was repaid with condescension. Helen Taylor was loyal to him until the end but few such men of achievement can have enjoyed so little affection in their lives. 


@@@@@


doc= 46616


Behrens, Sir Jacob (1806-1889), textile merchant, was born on 20 November 1806, one of the sons of Nathan Behrens (died 1842), a Jewish merchant, and Clara Hahn, daughter of a Hamburg silk merchant, at Pyrmont, in the small German principality of Waldeck between Hanover and Westphalia. The Behrens family had for generations traded as textile merchants. At the end of the Napoleonic wars the family moved to Hamburg. Jacob was educated by a family tutor, a theological student of the Reformed church, aided by an emigre Jesuit abbe who provided instruction in the French language, and by a shipwrecked Scottish sailor who taught English. A competent teacher of mathematics was also employed. It is recorded that Jacob was fluent in several languages. 
Jacob joined his father's firm in Hamburg, assisting with the merchanting activity of the family, and taking control of the declining business in 1826. He travelled widely. His first crossing to England was in 1832, on board a paddle steamer from Hamburg to Hull. He returned in 1833 in order to attempt to persuade Thomas Clapham, a Leeds merchant with whom he traded, to adopt a different finish to the goods being supplied, and to pack them in small bales. He failed, and a visit the following year showed little more success. In 1834 he settled in Leeds, renting a small warehouse, and thus establishing his own firm of Jacob Behrens. This enabled him to finish cloth himself according to the requirements of his German market. In due course Behrens began to sell directly to Germany on his own account and not via the Hamburg business. The Leeds firm expanded rapidly, and two younger brothers, Louis and Rudolf, joined him in 1837, Louis acting as the business's traveller in Germany. 
Jacob Behrens helped to pioneer the transition of merchanting from Leeds to Bradford, which was to become the dominant mercantile centre for the wool textile industry. The move brought him closer to his main suppliers and set him further on the path to a major position in the textile merchanting field. In 1840 Louis set up a branch of the business in Manchester to trade in cotton goods. He was soon joined by another brother, Edward. Their father, Nathan, died in 1842, shaken by a disastrous fire at his Hamburg premises, though the firm's stocks escaped its ravages. Subsequently, the firm set up branches in Manchester, London, Glasgow, Calcutta, and Shanghai. 
In 1844 Jacob Behrens married Dorothea Hohenemser (died 1884), daughter of a wealthy Jewish family from the south-west of Germany. They had five daughters, Wilhelmina, Clara, Julia, Louisa, and Rosa Emily, and four sons, Gustav (1846-1936), Charles (1848-1925), Fred (1849-1933), and Harry (1854-1921). His brother Rudolf retired from the business in 1864, and Edward died in 1866. In 1870 Louis and his four sons started their own business. The following year Gustav entered into partnership with Jacob, followed in due course by the other three sons. Gustav remained a partner for sixty-five years, becoming a director of the Midland Railway for forty-five years and helping to establish the Halle Concert Society in Manchester. 
By the time of his marriage Jacob Behrens was firmly established in the Bradford trade and making his mark as an important member of the large local merchant community. He gained a reputation as a hardworking but cautious businessman, researching the trade and becoming extremely knowledgeable about its operation. That knowledge developed through the rest of his life, and he was often called upon for advice and information. He represented Bradford in negotiations about commercial conditions and foreign tariffs, and he provided regular commercial advice to the government. He helped to form the very influential Bradford chamber of commerce, serving as its vice-president for seven years, and its president for six. He was chairman of its important tariff committee for nearly forty years. In 1860 he advised the government about the commercial treaty with France, and became involved in negotiations for its creation. At various times in the later nineteenth century he helped to provide statistical information on the industry. He was reputed to be an avid reader of the government blue books. He was one of the founders of the Association of Chambers of Commerce, and it was pressure from him that helped in the formation of the commercial department of the Foreign Office in 1872. In 1882 he was knighted for his services to commerce. 
Behrens's business specialized in the export of textiles to Germany. He traded with Belgium, the Netherlands, and Italy, and took the opportunity to trade with Japan when that market began to open up from the 1850s. His goods also found their way into China. He was a strong believer in the virtues of free trade. It was said that, initially, he found it difficult to be accepted in Bradford society. But it is clear that he gradually gained a great deal of respect. He gave much time to local issues and was a strong supporter of local charities. He campaigned for the improvement of postal services. He took a particular interest in the Bradford Eye and Ear Hospital. 
Sir Jacob Behrens died at the Imperial Hotel, Torquay, on 22 April 1889, five years after his wife, and following a long period of failing health; he was buried at Undercliff cemetery, Bradford, on 26 April. The tribute to him from Bradford chamber of commerce remarked: 'He seemed to exist only to be of service to his fellow man.' The local newspaper, the 'Bradford Observer' (23 April 1889), recognized him as a 'warm-hearted philanthropist' with 'an unreserved devotion to the commercial interests of the town' and 'an unswerving fidelity in the principles of free trade'. 


@@@@@


doc= 46620


Belling, Charles Reginald (1884-1965), electrical engineer and manufacturer, was born on 11 May 1884 at Fore Street, Bodmin, Cornwall, the son of Samuel Thomas Belling, a dentist, and his wife, Maria, 'nee' Harry. Charles Belling, known to all as C. R. B., was educated at Burts Grammar School, Lostwithiel, and at Crossley School, Halifax. He attended technical college at Derby and Chelmsford. From 1903 to 1906 he was apprenticed to Crompton & Co. Ltd, of Chelmsford, remaining on their staff until 1909, when he joined Ediswan Electric Company Ltd, of Ponders End, Middlesex, to supervise the production of arc lamps, auto-transformers, and Bastian electric heaters. By 1912 Belling felt he had enough experience to set up on his own as a manufacturer of electric heaters. With just $150 of his own capital and $300 from two colleagues, Belling took on a local boy and a fitter from Ediswans and began equipping a small shed in Lancaster Road, Enfield, ready to begin work on a firebar that would revolutionize electric fire design. Rather than adapt the workings of the Bastian heater, which consisted of a resistance spiral inside a quartz tube, Belling hit on the idea of winding a resistance wire on the front face of a strip of fireclay, which would allow the wire to work at high temperatures and the heat to be thrown forwards. On the back of this success, Belling began to develop a new electric geyser which could deliver instant boiling water at a rate of 3 pints a minute. He clearly anticipated the declining need for coal in the home, and with full order books, a move to larger premises was now essential. During the summer of 1913, just one year after taking the plunge, Belling moved to Derby Road, Edmonton, and set about producing his second brochure devoted exclusively to a range of about a dozen fires. 
Profits from Belling's first balance sheet of $3500 on sales of $11,000 must have come to the attention of the Admiralty, for, when war was declared and Lloyd George announced that it was 'business as usual', Belling was called on to switch production to heating and cooking equipment for submarines as well as supplying ovens for canteens. The war not only provided Belling with increased turnover and profits, but also offered the opportunity to buy out his two partners, who were no longer able to commit themselves to the firm. This freed Belling to oversee a period of expansion and diversification that continued virtually unchecked until 1939. The inter-war years saw the company establish itself as one of the leading suppliers of electrical appliances to the British domestic market. The year 1919 saw the introduction of the first modern cooker -- the Modernette -- followed by the first imitation coal fire and the forerunner of a range of Baby Belling cookers that were to grace countless bedsits over the following decades. By 1924, soaring sales persuaded Belling to buy a 10 acre site at Enfield, and in 1935 he formed the private limited company of Belling & Co. Ltd, because he had 'got a bit sick of paying super tax on works extensions, etc.' On the eve of war, the Enfield site accommodated 500 workers engaged in producing cookers and 50,000 fire units a year. 
The Second World War again saw Belling & Co. shift production to wartime requirements. Flexibility and innovation allowed emphasis to be placed on the manufacture of hand and rifle grenades, trench mortar sights, and fuel jettison tanks. This ability to confront new challenges stood the company in good stead in the boom years following the war as the high price of competitive fuels and the 'Clean Air Act' saw the swing towards electricity gain momentum. 
Belling married, on 19 March 1946, Cicely Edith ('b'. 1906), daughter of William Ernest Williams, a railway goods manager. There were no children. By 1955, Belling again found he was short on factory space and he decided to buy a new 30 acre site at Burnley and to move all fire production there, leaving the Enfield works free to concentrate on the production of all types of cookers. By the time of Belling's death in 1965, the company owned 70 acres of freehold property and over 1 million square feet of production space, and had some 3500 workers on its payroll. Belling was immensely proud that he had built up the business entirely out of profits, and that the firm was able to remain a private company. In spite of insisting that all employees had the right to decide whether or not to become a member of a trade union, relations with the thirteen unions represented in the two factories were generally cordial. This is partly explained by the pension fund and profit-sharing schemes Belling had introduced, which were a major factor in securing the loyalty of the workforce. The royal warrant received by the company in 1962 (its golden jubilee year) was for Belling the highest seal of approval anyone could bestow. 
Yet, in spite of buoyant sales, Belling remained acutely aware of the shortage of qualified technical staff who had the capability of converting original ideas into practical applications. He had long pioneered the idea of technical training colleges, a move designed primarily to prevent other countries 'exploiting our brains'. In his will, Belling set aside $1 million for a technical school to be built on the 60 acres lying to the side of Owls Hall Farm, his home in Enfield, in the hope of bridging the deep divide between pure research and its shop floor application. That said, Belling's autocratic style and his propensity to promote from within ultimately stifled the company's chances of further development after his death. 
Charles Belling died on board the 'Empress of England' on 8 February 1965 while cruising in the Bahamas. He left the bulk of his estate, worth over $2.5 million, to his wife. His cousin, Richard Eric Belling, who had been groomed as the future director of the company, was the other main beneficiary. 


@@@@@


doc= 46621


Benham, John Lee (1785-1864), stove manufacturer, was born in Reading, Berkshire, on 3 November 1785, the second son of Avery Benham ('b'. 1753), whitesmith, and his wife, Ann Lee. In 1791 his father moved to London, where he set up in business as A. Benham & Son, tinplate workers, of Commerce Row, Blackfriars Road. John worked for his father until 1817, when he bought an ironmonger's shop in Edward Street (which soon after became part of Wigmore Street), Marylebone, all manufacturing being done by his father. His first wife having died after giving birth to the second of two children, he married in 1818 Jane Kirkpatrick, from an old and well-connected Scottish family. A daughter, Emily, survived from his first marriage; five sons and two daughters were born of the second. 
The nondescript area north of Oxford Street was being rapidly covered by large and elegant new houses for the gentry, complete with the new stoves and cooking and bathroom appliances designed for comfortable living. Benham was well aware of his market; he advertised his fancy lamps for the forthcoming coronation of George IV in 'The Times' (14 July 1821), and in 1827 in 'John Bull'; he advertised in the 'Morning Post' his portable shower bath for use in the bedroom, which he patented in 1830. In 1824 he took over premises formerly occupied by the bishop of Chichester, on the corner of Wigmore and Welbeck streets. The family occupied the upper part of the house and showrooms were laid out on the ground floor. Workshops were installed in the basement and cellars, though Benham had to weather opposition to this supposed desecration of a former bishop's palace. The Benhams' first and third sons, James Benham (1820-1885) and Frederick ('c'.1824-1891), father of the traveller Gertrude Emily Benham, went straight from school into the business; the second son, Edward, settled in Essex where he started a printing business in Colchester and was proprietor of the 'Essex County Standard'. The junior sons, Augustus ('b'. 'c'.1826) and John ('c'.1830-1899), were put into a coppersmithing business, but it could not support both of them, and John joined his brothers in his father's business. By 1848 James was married, to Eliza Horsey; they had at least two children. 
The enlarged showrooms encouraged Benham to diversify beyond the domestic market. From the 1840s he secured several major contracts to fit up kitchens, most famously in 1841 that of the Reform Club. The entire cooking apparatus, made to the requirements of its chef Alexis Soyer, was manufactured at Wigmore Street. Benham was employing forty-four men by 1851, the year that he won medals for his extensive displays at the Great Exhibition. He was successful at the Paris exhibitions of 1855 and 1867, and the London Exhibition of 1862. When workshop space became inadequate for the ninety-three men labouring to fulfil his orders, he took over two adjacent houses, with land on which he built a fine modern factory. Much of the trade centred on the extremely successful range of 'combined' cooking apparatus designed by Samuel Hazard Huntly, who was Benham's works manager from about 1850. A single fire heated one or more ovens, supplied steam to the boiling pans and hot water for washing up, and in certain instances, for laundries and hot baths. The arrangement was so efficient that, under test at the Royal Artillery barracks, Woolwich, all the food for 663 men, including their bread, was cooked, and hot water delivered for washing up, from 33/4 oz of coal per head per day, which worked out at a cost of 8died per head per annum, a remarkably small sum, even allowing for the low cost of coal and the simple meals. By 1876 similar stoves were in use throughout the country, in twelve military barracks, sixty workhouses, twenty-two hospitals, several schools, and some of the larger West End department stores. When the Admiralty decided that henceforth sailors should have bread rather than pre-baked ship's biscuit, Huntly designed a compact stove with one furnace heating four ovens and four boiling pans; between 1859 and 1876 Benhams stoves were put into eighty-four ships of the British navy and some seventy other foreign and commercial vessels. Benhams' peak of success was 1874, when the partners, James, Frederick, and John, made a profit of over $15,000, much of which they prudently reinvested. 
John Lee Benham, whose ability and drive had underpinned this success, died at 19 Wigmore Street, London, on 10 March 1864. A Baptist, he was involved in many religious and philanthropic activities and his judgement and advice were widely sought. Seven Benhams had joined the new Bloomsbury Baptist Chapel at its opening in 1848, participating actively and generously in Baptist missionary, educational, and poor relief projects. James served as the first treasurer; from 1864 he was also steward in charge of its building fabric, and he rose to be senior deacon. 
Huntly had departed and the firm was going through difficult times when James Benham died suddenly at 50 Wigmore Street, London, on 15 June 1885. Unwisely, the combined stoves were abandoned in favour of large boilers and steam appliances but the directors lacked experience in costing these and the heart of the West End was ill suited to their noisy manufacture. Losses were continuing to mount when Frederick Benham, a man of charm and humour but unable to impose order, died in 1891, whereupon Benhams was formed into a private company. (Frederick's daughter Gertrude Emily Benham became a noted traveller.) John's son Stanley J. Benham joined the business in 1892 and was appalled at the inefficiency and drunkenness accepted on the shop floor. 
By the early years of the century the various directors were eager to sell the Marylebone leases and cancel their losses. The old company was quietly liquidated and a new one having the same name was formed with Stanley Benham and his cousin Walter Benham (died 1908) as managing directors. Benhams' prosperity was restored by commissions to refit the galleys of warships prior to the First World War. They subsequently absorbed various smaller companies, the first of which, Johnson and Ravey, brought with it the royal warrant which surprisingly Benhams had not been given for their work on the royal yacht in 1898. The business continued under the command of various members of the Benham family and was absorbed into the Thorn Group after the Second World War. 


@@@@@


doc= 46623


Benson, Samuel Herbert (1854-1914), advertising agent, was born on 14 August 1854 at 7 Somerset Street, Marylebone, Middlesex, the son of Samuel Miles Benson, solicitor, and his wife, Phillipa, daughter of James Bourne of Lincolnshire. Benson began training for the law but at sixteen changed his mind and passed the entrance examination for the Royal Navy. His active service took him to various points of conflict in west Africa, to Gallipoli, and to Suez during the campaign against Arabi Pasha in 1882. There he was severely bitten by a poisonous insect, had to be invalided home, and spent three years on crutches, employed as secretary to several Admiralty committees, before he decided to resign from the navy. 
In 1882 Benson married Mary Ann Phillips, daughter of a naval paymaster; they had three sons and two daughters. In 1885 he set up the Express Courier Corps, an organization of messenger boys, but Post Office opposition compelled him to disband it. He then undertook a series of managerial posts: from 1886 with the Normal Company, fish processors, at Aberdeen; from 1889 with John Lawson Johnston at his Bovril works at Clerkenwell, London; then briefly in France. 
When the owners of Bovril invited Benson to become their advertising agent he admitted to knowing no more of the subject than most businessmen, but he had the foresight to see the part that skilful advertising might play in business practice. He accepted the invitation, entering into his new profession with dignity and purpose, and, in a milieu where sharp practice and outright fraud were commonplace, he earned a reputation for integrity. From its inception in 1893, with the prestigious Bovril company on his books, his agency held the front rank. Among his more innovative schemes were his thirteen full-page advertisements depicting topical events of 1896-7 such as the Jameson raid and the budget, in which he introduced, incidentally yet forcefully, three well-known branded goods. The 'Cocoa War' which he orchestrated on behalf of Rowntrees was even more colourful, introducing free samples, exchangeable coupons, and London buses disguised as cocoa pods, causing a surge in demand which delighted Rowntrees. In 1899 he moved the agency to a new three-storey block in Tudor Street and in 1909 to its best-known home, Kingsway Hall, the first office building in the new thoroughfare of Kingsway. 
In the spring of 1899 Benson organized the Advertisers' Exhibition at the Niagara Hall in London, with eye-catching electric signs and a phonograph player -- still very much a novelty. The inaugural lunch was attended by all the great Fleet Street newspaper magnates, advertisers, and their agents. Benson clashed memorably with Sir George Newnes of 'Strand Magazine', but his challenging assertion that newspapers and magazines would wither without advertising and not the other way round proved true. But the confrontation raised the old controversies over reliable circulation figures and commission charges. 
Benson brought new ideas into the advertising world; his two booklets, 'Wisdom in Advertising' (1901) and 'Force in Advertising' (1904) were widely read by the industry's practitioners. From 1905 his biennial handbook, 'Benson's Facts', presented data on press and outdoor publicity. He believed that a study of the market should precede product development and that advertising campaigns should have definite objectives, rather than simply announce existing products. His attempt to set up an organization, the Association of Advertising Agents, failed, however, as there was no agreement on who might join or how to exclude the many charlatans who sullied the profession's name. Benson was thought to pay the best wages in London, rewarding his staff for loyalty and ability. Though somewhat remote and autocratic by nature, his temper often frayed by recurring pain in his injured leg, he took a personal interest in the welfare of his staff and assisted their families in time of trouble. Benson also found time in 1899 to be a founder of the war employment bureau, which provided work for the wives of reservists called up to fight in the South African War. 
After being struck by a bus in Fleet Street in November 1913 Benson was found to be suffering from an incurable disease of the gall bladder, from which he died at his home, Beechgrove, Sydenham Hill, London, on 21 July 1914. He was buried on 24 July at All Saints' Church, Hertford. He was survived by his wife. His son, Philip de Gylpin Benson (1881-1931), was the first president of the Institute of Practitioners in Advertising (1927), but when he died there was no one in the family to succeed him and the firm passed into other hands, and later became part of Ogilvy Benson Mather. 


@@@@@


doc= 46624


Leonard Hugh Bentall (1875-1942), who was born on 2 September 1875 at Holly Lodge, Orchard Road, Kingston upon Thames, Surrey, the second of the two sons and third of the four children of Frank Bentall (1843-1923), draper, of Kingston upon Thames, and his wife, Laura, daughter of George Dowman, a pharmacist, of Southampton. He was educated at New College, Eastbourne, and Forest House, Woodford, and considered becoming an engineer. 
Instead, on leaving school in 1894 Bentall followed his brother George into the family drapery business, started by Frank Bentall in 1867 when Kingston was still a small market town, and worked in the shop for a short time before spending two years employed at Jones and Higgins in Peckham, followed by a year with Peter Jones in Chelsea, gaining experience before returning to Kingston. On 5 February 1902 Leonard Bentall married Winifred Ivy Smith (1879/80-1953), youngest child of Edward Smith JP, clothing manufacturer, of Bewdley, Worcestershire. They had two sons, Gerald Chalmers Bentall and (Leonard Edward) Rowan Bentall ['see below'], and four daughters. At the end of the 1890s the firm bought several adjacent shops and knocked them down in order to build a new department store, which opened in 1904. By 1907 there were departments selling china and glass, stationery, silver, beds, and toys, and there was a Moorish tea-room, with 'Sesame' doors which opened automatically. 
When Frank Bentall retired in 1909, the annual turnover was $60,000. He handed the business over to his sons, and Leonard became general manager. The name of the business was changed from Frank Bentall to Bentalls in 1912. George left the business in 1917, but Leonard continued the expansion, buying up more properties and opening new departments, and in 1925 he converted the business into a private limited company. In the inter-war years Kingston grew rapidly as a prosperous London suburb, and the opening of the Kingston bypass in 1927 helped to make it into a major shopping centre for Surrey and west London, able to compete successfully with the West End. In 1927, to celebrate the store's diamond jubilee, Bentall opened the Tudor restaurant (formerly the vicarage) in the main store, featuring murals by Herman Cawthra showing scenes from Kingston's history. A large covered car park was built opposite the entrance to the store in order to attract the wealthier middle classes. In 1926 Bentall had decided to install his own generator in the basement to provide power for the store, and he was able to introduce the latest electrical gadgets such as electronic calculating machines and power sunblinds. In the 1930s he continued to add departments, including a food hall, a theatre booking agency, a travel bureau, and a building department selling new houses. 
From 1930 to 1935 a new Bentalls store was built, in order to bring all the new departments under one roof, while business continued in the old store as building work went on underground. The architect, Maurice Webb of Sir Aston Webb & Sons, designed a steel-frame building faced with bricks and Portland stone which extended for 750 ft along Wood Street and 230 ft facing Clarence Street (the latter the site of Frank Bentall's original shop). The facade of the new building was modelled on the William and Mary wing of nearby Hampton Court Palace, designed in the seventeenth century by Sir Christopher Wren. Escalators were installed and many of the store's fittings came from Gamages in Oxford Street, which had recently closed. Webb also designed a new furniture depository for Bentalls, in the Italian Renaissance style, and a drawing of it was exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1936. 
From the start, Bentall was interested in publicity and in the 1930s, under the publicity director Eric Fleming, who had been recruited from Gamages, Bentalls began to stage a number of exhibitions and other special attractions. In 1930 Albert Sadler and his Palm Court Orchestra were engaged to play in the Tudor restaurant, and in 1932 'Bluebird', the car in which Sir Malcolm Campbell broke the world land speed record, was on display. When the transatlantic liner the 'Queen Mary' was built, Bentall not only created a special window display but also organized school trips to Southampton to see it. One of the more sensational attractions was the Swedish diver Anita Kittner, who twice a day dived 63 ft from the top of the store into a pool of water. The food exhibition in the new food hall in November 1933 attracted 35,000 visitors, while the sewing exhibition in 1933 was attended by the Lancashire cotton queen. The store also hosted a schoolboys' hobbies exhibition, and a bonny baby competition, judged by the customers, as well as fashion shows. Every year Bentalls bought the floral displays from the royal box at Ascot to decorate its foyer. All this publicity, and the slogan 'Why go to the West End -- when there's Bentalls of Kingston', was successful, and the expansion continued, so that the number of employees grew from 1000 in 1925 to 2000 in 1946. 
Leonard Bentall devoted a lot of attention to his staff and their well-being. In 1925 he started a bonus scheme for employees who invested in the business and he introduced a pension fund in 1929. There was a staff clinic and food parcels were delivered by its matron to those who were ill. When he and his wife returned from a world tour in 1937, the staff put on a welcome-home ball in the store. Bentall was brought up in a Congregationalist household and was active in the Congregational church all his life. He devoted much time and energy to charitable causes, in particular the Warehousemen, Clerks' and Drapers' School in Purley for the children of textile workers. He was president of the appeal which raised $52,000 for a second school in Addington, and from 1924 he was chairman of the after-care committee, which helped to place the school-leavers in business, mainly in the textile trade. He was on the committee, and was later trustee and chairman, of the Steadfast Sea Cadet Corps at Kingston from 1911 to 1936, and he also built cottages at Mill Hill for the Linen and Woollen Drapers' Cottage Homes, helped to raise money for the Kingston YMCA in 1927, and was treasurer of the Roberts Marine mansion, a convalescent and holiday home for shop assistants in Bexhill, Sussex. Bentall was elected a JP in 1925. An enthusiastic cricketer and golfer, his other interest was gardening, and he created a magnificent garden at his home in Cobham. He died on 24 December 1942 at Oakwood Court, Givons Grove, Leatherhead, Surrey, and was buried at Dorking cemetery in Surrey. 
Both sons of Leonard and Winifred Bentall made a career with the firm. The elder son, 


@@@@@


doc= 46626


Berry, (Henry) Seymour, Baron Buckland (1877-1928), financier and coal industrialist, was born at 73 Lower Thomas Street, Merthyr Tudful, on 17 September 1877, the eldest of three sons of John Mathias Berry (died 1917), JP, estate agent and valuer, of Gwaelod-y-garth, Merthyr Tudful, and his wife, Mary Ann (died 1922), daughter of Thomas Rowe of Pembroke Dock. He was educated locally at Caedraw higher grade school and (as a pupil teacher) at Abermorlais School. He soon left teaching to join his father's business where he stayed for two decades. On 5 September 1907 he married Gwladys Mary, eldest daughter of Simon Sandbrook JP, of Hawthorns, Merthyr Tudful, and they had five daughters. Both he and his wife, as natives and long-term residents of the town, shared a deep interest in the fortunes of Merthyr. 
Berry seems to have had no direct involvement with the coal industry until about 1916, at just under forty, when his name first appeared in the 'South Wales Coal Annual'. In the next two years he became a major star in what was then the glittering industrial firmament of south Wales. The transformation was not fortuitous: as a protege of Lord Rhondda, the dominant figure in the Welsh coal industry and trade, Berry had a head start owing to the long family connection through his father, who had several times acted as election agent for Rhondda (when still D. A. Thomas). The initial opportunity was soon greatly added to when Rhondda was persuaded by David Lloyd George to join the wartime government; this necessarily threw much more responsibility and control onto his industrial lieutenants and the shift was given a permanent status with Rhondda's death in July 1918. Once thus provided with the opportunities, Berry's remarkable business gifts flourished, especially in visualizing and negotiating mergers and acquisitions. 
After a few years of relative quiet Rhondda had in 1916 launched a new offensive to expand his industrial empire, and in that single year it swallowed at least four major companies (Gwaun-cae-Gurwen; Celtic Collieries; North's Navigation; and D. Davis & Son). Closely involved were the two contemporaries described as Rhondda's proteges -- H. S. Berry and the stockbroker Archibald Mitchelson -- who 'are on the Boards of several of the companies of which Lord Rhondda is Chairman' ('South Wales Coal Annual', 1917, 143). Already in 1916, when Rhondda became food controller, Berry was chairman of one of these companies (Celtic Collieries). With his main allies -- Mitchelson and D. R. Llewellyn -- the campaign of expansion was continued into the 1920s. At one stage on the boards of more than sixty companies, at the time of his death Berry still held a position on about twenty of the larger companies (including the massive steel company of Guest Keen and Nettlefolds, of which he became chairman in 1927). The process was one of financial engineering, but the motivation seems to have been production-orientated: consolidating the coal holdings of various undertakings and, especially, negotiating sales and distribution. 
Raised to the peerage in 1926 Berry wished to choose as his title Baron Bwlch, but the authorities refused him Bwlch and he settled for Baron Buckland of Bwlch. It is probably a record of sorts that, despite being from a non-aristocratic family and an unfashionable industrial town, not only he but his two brothers, William Ewert Berry and (James) Gomer Berry (later Viscount Camrose and Viscount Kemsley, respectively), attained peerages. Perhaps no less remarkable for a strong-willed and powerful trio, they were mutually supportive: William Berry's first newspaper-owning venture of 1901 derived all of its capital ($100) from a loan by Seymour Berry, and William and his younger brother, also a newspaper tycoon, shared a joint bank account for three decades. 
Berry trod a familiar path for Welsh industrialists, from Liberal to Conservative, but it was a Labour-controlled council which in 1923 made him a freeman of the borough in recognition of his many benefactions to Merthyr. Although the council disliked his politics it esteemed him for his civic virtue. He does not seem to have been directly involved in industrial relations, but he was reputed to have helped relieve unemployment distress in his native Merthyr by keeping open the G. K. N. ironworks at Dowlais and by buying a local colliery which was to have been dismantled. 
At his country estate, Buckland, Bwlch, Brecknockshire, Berry enjoyed rural pursuits. He died there on 23 May 1928: death resulted instantly from a head injury while he was taking a customary early morning ride -- his horse suddenly veered close to a telegraph pole, and he was dashed against it. His funeral service was held on 26 May at the Congregational church, Market Square, Merthyr, of which Berry had been a lifelong member. Vast crowds gathered along the route, in the town, and towards Pontypridd, where he was then cremated. He was survived by his wife and his five daughters, and the barony became extinct on his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 46628


Bettmann, Siegfried (1863-1951), cycle and motor vehicle manufacturer, was born on 18 April 1863 at Nuremberg, Bavaria, youngest of the eleven children of Mayer Bettmann and his third wife, Sophie Weil. Educated in Germany, he taught himself the linguistic skills which enabled him to take up clerical posts throughout Europe. In London he befriended Maurice Schulte, a fellow Nuremberger and trained engineer, later his business partner. 
On the continent Bettmann noticed that bicycles were appearing, and determined to exploit the new market. He established a London office and arranged for two Coventry firms to supply bicycles which were to carry Bettmann's own logo, Triumph, a name chosen because it sounded sufficiently English and superior to attract continental buyers. His company, S. Bettmann & Co., struggled at first and did not start to prosper until Schulte joined in November 1886. Schulte found a manufacturing base at Much Park Street, Coventry. Shortage of capital almost killed the venture, but a coterie of wealthy directors was assembled and the firm soon moved into a modern factory in Priory Street, Coventry, the financing being arranged by Bettmann. He contributed nothing to the design and manufacturing side, which was Schulte's province. Bettmann's role lay in marketing, in which capacity he travelled widely. 
The New Triumph Cycle Company was successfully floated in May 1895 and the following three boom years saw Triumph's profits rise into six figures, persuading Bettmann to refloat the company at a grossly inflated capital of $130,000 which involved heavy debenture liabilities. A stormy period followed as the cycle boom petered out, until the motorcycle provided a product with which to forge a recovery. Bettmann claimed the credit for this inspirational move, though the fact that Schulte test-rode a German motorcycle suggests his role was greater than his jealous partner would admit to. Whatever the provenance of the Triumph motorcycle, its appearance in 1902 was a turning point for the company. Until the Triumph Trusty of 1904, motorcycles were notoriously unreliable. The design was Schulte's, with Bettmann's role being to seek orders from dealers and public bodies. By 1909 annual production at the Priory Street works had reached 3000. 
On the Thursday before Britain entered the First World War in August 1914, the War Office asked Bettmann to organize a meeting of motorcycle manufacturers. They were informed that an expeditionary force would be sent to Belgium, and that motorcycles were required for dispatch riders. Shortly afterwards Bettmann received a request for one hundred, the first of many orders. The Model H, introduced in 1915, proved so reliable that 30,000 were ordered by the army during the conflict, a greater quantity than that ordered from any other motorcycle manufacturer. 
In 1919 Bettmann, incensed at Schulte's desire to end bicycle production, engineered his removal. Schulte's departure was soon felt; the Model P motorcycle, launched in 1924, was a commercial disaster and soured Triumph's trustworthy reputation. At Bettmann's behest, the company moved uncertainly into motor car manufacture under the guidance of Captain Claude Holbrook. The Super Seven, a more sophisticated rival to the Austin Seven was produced by the Triumph Motor Company in the premises of a failed marque in Clay Lane, Coventry. Healthy export sales underpinned its success until the depression of the 1930s, which also adversely affected motorcycle sales. This time, the sale of the bicycle division could not be averted. Nor did Bettmann get his way over staying with light cars rather than moving into sports car production, and he resigned as managing director on 18 April 1933. He remained bitter about the turn of events, but his attempts to wallow in nostalgia by buying the rights to manufacture Triumph bicycles in 1936 proved unsuccessful. 
Although he became a British citizen in 1895, Bettmann remained an outsider. In September 1914, anti-German hysteria led to his resignation as mayor of Coventry. After dallying with the Labour Party, Bettmann returned to the Liberal fold, serving as president of the Coventry Liberal Association (1937-40). In 1895 Bettmann married Annie Mayrick, a tradesman's daughter. The marriage was childless, and his wife was seriously ill from 1916 until her death in 1941. In 1920 Bettmann established the Annie Bettmann Foundation, a school for young business people. He died at his home, Elm Bank, Stoke Park, near Coventry on 23 September 1951. 


@@@@@


doc= 46629


Bevan, Francis Augustus (1840-1919), banker, was born on 17 January 1840 at 42 Upper Harley Street, London, the second son among the fourteen children of Robert Cooper Lee Bevan (1809-1890), banker; his mother, Robert Bevan's first wife, was Lady Agneta Elisabeth Yorke, who died in 1851 when Francis was aged ten. His widower father did not immediately remarry and was assisted in bringing up the children by his deceased wife's maid, Lydia Marsh, and a private tutor, the Revd R. S. Tabor. Francis was then educated at Harrow School, before undertaking two years of foreign travel for which his taste persisted, with regular visits to the continent, and trips further afield to America, the Middle East, and India. 
Bevan was married three times. In 1862 he married Elizabeth Marianne (1840-1863), daughter of Lord Charles James Fox Russell. They had one son. Bevan's second wife, whom he married on 19 April 1866, was Constance (1841-1872), youngest daughter of Sir James Weir Hogg, baronet. They had five sons. In 1875 he married Maria (died 1903), second daughter of John Trotter of Dyrham Park, Barnet. 
Bevan became a partner in the leading Lombard Street bank of Barclay, Bevan & Co. in 1859, succeeding as senior partner on his father's death in 1890. He was less decisive and rigid than his father and did not show his father's determination to maintain the bank's profitable independent existence at the heart of a national network of private banks. In 1896 he became the first chairman of a new corporate entity, Barclay & Co., which merged his Lombard Street partnership with the dominant East Anglian bank of Gurney & Co. (then controlled by the Barclay family and others), the north-eastern Backhouse Bank, and several smaller private banks. The new corporate bank grew rapidly, both by building new branches and by acquiring many small private banks whose owners warmed to Bevan's relaxed acceptance of their continuing local independence. However, the corporate bank was not as profitable as the old partnership, and from 1902 (when its shares were first quoted) the founding families' ownership interest was gradually diluted, becoming a minority one by the time Francis Bevan retired. 
An Anglican, Bevan gave generously to a large number of Christian charities and missions; at a personal level, too, he was often uncritically open-handed. This generosity, together with his somewhat lax business instincts, appears to have led to a decline in the Bevan family fortune in real terms: his wealth at death was substantially below his father's, even in money terms. This was unlikely to have been due only to tax avoidance strategies, though certainly such strategies were more critical in 1919 than in 1890. The family estate at Trent Park, New Barnet, Hertfordshire, was sold in 1909 to Sir Edward Sassoon and Bevan settled at an old Mayfair house, at 1 Tilney Street, Park Lane. Although his son Cosmo (1863-1935) was a local director in Lombard Street from 1896 to 1933 and a main board director from 1905 to 1933, he was overshadowed in the bank's senior management by the professional manager Frederick Goodenough from 1917: Bevan's descendants in the bank, including another son, Bertrand Yorke (1867-1948) who also became director, did not produce another chairman until 1981. 
Bevan enjoyed travel abroad, cricket, classical concerts, and motoring, but his latter years were marred by intermittent illness, and he retired from the chairmanship at the beginning of 1917. He continued to attend the board and committee meetings until his death from heart disease on 31 August 1919, at Monk Sherbourne, Granville Road, Eastbourne, aged seventy-nine. He was buried in the family vault at Trent Park churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 46631


Bibby, Joseph (1851-1940), animal feed and soap manufacturer, was born on 12 January 1851 at Conder Mill, Vale of Conder, Lancashire, the second of the three sons of James Bibby, farmer and miller, and his wife, Amelia Barnett. He attended an elementary school until 1861 and the Abbeystead School, Over Wyresdale, until 1865; he then joined his father in the milling business. An avid reader, he studied privately in his spare time. 
Bibby was at first employed in a newly acquired warehouse in Lancaster, distributing the produce of the family mill, but he hankered after less restrictive employment. Soon after his twenty-first birthday, in 1872, he travelled steerage to Canada. Then, after six months in the United States, he was encouraged to return home by his father, who promised him and his younger brother James greater responsibility in the running of the firm. 
Having seen at first hand the dramatic increases taking place in North American grain production, which would inevitably affect the livelihoods of millers in Britain, Bibby planned to diversify into the production of animal feeds. In 1878 he and his brother James were made partners in what became J. Bibby & Sons, when their father went into semi-retirement from the business. This allowed Bibby to begin research into improving the specifications of cattle feed. Hitherto, most farmers had used whatever fodder the merchants had on offer, sometimes to the detriment of their livestock. Bibby therefore experimented, on a small farm, with the development of specially blended (or compound) feeds for different requirements, such as rapid fattening, higher milk yields, or calf rearing. In 1881 he married Ruth Pye (1858-1946), two of whose sisters successively married his brother James. Joseph and Ruth had six sons (one of whom died in infancy) and two daughters. 
As demand for feedstuffs grew, in 1882 Bibby felt able to replace the Lancaster warehouse by a five-storey steam mill, with a milling capacity of 60 tons a week. This was burnt down in 1885, the year the brothers decided to transfer milling to Liverpool, the major port for the transatlantic grain trade. There, they leased two upper floors of a warehouse very close to the docks; they also installed Anglo-American hydraulic presses for crushing seeds and extracting the oil. After rapid growth in 1886-8, they transferred the firm's head office to Liverpool and closed the Lancaster operations. 
James Bibby used his organizational skills and sound judgement to the full on the production side, with a cousin acting as manager. In 1892 the mill at Liverpool was also badly damaged by fire and immediately rebuilt on an ampler scale. That year the firm planned to make soap with its stocks of oil, Bibby's Pure Soap appearing in 1896. Meanwhile, the energetic and publicity-minded Joseph Bibby managed the marketing side. He set up a team of direct representatives, who gradually replaced the earlier non-exclusive mercantile agents. 
Joseph Bibby often said that, if the accident of birth had not made him a miller, he would certainly have gone into journalism; as the opportunity arose, he spent more and more time on writing and editorship. From 1886 onwards, he produced several one-off magazines, and in 1896 he launched 'Bibby's Quarterly'. Intended mainly for farmers, it contained material of agricultural interest (including photographs of livestock reared on Bibby's feeds), as well as general articles. Of good technical quality, from 1904 to 1905 (when it closed) it was printed by a subsidiary plant of the firm. By then it had become an almost exclusively literary and artistic magazine, with excellent colour reproductions of celebrated paintings. Agricultural matters were covered in 'Bibby's Farm and Dairy Notes', published quarterly between 1905 and 1928. From 1906 to 1922 Joseph Bibby also produced 'Bibby's Annual'. 
Although brought up in a devout Methodist family, in 1889 Joseph Bibby joined the Theosophical Society. A number of articles by Annie Besant, and by other theosophists, subsequently appeared in his publications. A lifelong teetotaller, as a member of the Theosophical Society he now became a vegetarian. Although he continued to attend Methodist services regularly, his mixture of beliefs embarrassed some fellow worshippers. 
By 1900 J. Bibby & Sons was claiming to have the largest feeding-cake mill in the world. Despite intense competition from rivals, it succeeded in doubling the output of animal feeds from about 100,000 tons in 1902 to 200,000 tons in 1914. With assets valued at about $1 million and a workforce of 3000, it had reached a size where it needed to become a limited company. In August 1914 J. Bibby & Sons Ltd was registered, with issued capital of $500,000. James Bibby was elected chairman, while Joseph, at the age of sixty-three, became vice-chairman. During the 1920s the company introduced a number of measures designed to improve the working conditions of staff: these included non-contributory pensions, subsidized canteens, workers' councils, and a recreation centre. Three sons of Joseph and three sons of James became directors, and this allowed their fathers to pursue other interests. 
Joseph Bibby served as a Liberal member of Liverpool city council between 1904 and 1911, and was also a JP. He continued to write on social questions, and his books on 'Social Progress' (1926) and 'Capitalism, Socialism and Unemployment' (1929) were published by the firm. On James's death in 1928, Joseph succeeded him as chairman, but concerned himself little with running the business. He died at his home, The Priory, Upton Road, Bidston, Birkenhead, Cheshire, on 11 March 1940. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 46633


Bird, Sir Alfred Frederick, first baronet (1849-1922), food manufacturer, was born in Birmingham, on 27 July 1849, the elder son of Alfred Bird, FCS (bap. 1811, d. 1878), and his wife, Elizabeth Lavinia Ragg, a martyr to dyspepsia. To overcome his wife's allergies to yeast products and to eggs, Alfred senior, an experimental chemist and analyst, had invented a baking powder and a cornflour-based custard powder, and had begun making these. 
While at King Edward's School, Birmingham, Bird planned to read for the bar, but on leaving school in 1867 he entered his father's business, and helped to launch Bird's blancmange powder, in fourteen flavours. In 1875 he married Eleanor Frances, eldest daughter of Robert Lloyd Evans, a tobacconist, of Handsworth. They had four sons and two daughters. Three years later Alfred senior died, and Bird ran the firm jointly with his father's younger brother, who not long afterwards retired and died. 
As sole owner, Bird at once planned a modern factory, with up-to-date machinery, to replace the outdated premises. After demand began to soar he opened an even larger factory on a new site in 1886; this burnt down a year later, and he had a specially designed works erected. He then diversified into other convenience foods, such as an egg substitute in 1890, jelly crystals in 1895, and tablet jellies a few years later. Although he continued to make some toiletries and chemist's products, they were not compatible with foodstuffs, and were discontinued after 1905. 
To market his rapidly increasing output, as early as 1880 Bird was using pictorial advertisements, the speciality of his London agent, T. B. Browne, who gave Bird's products an equally colourful image to those of his other clients, Cadburys and Pears. Instead of the previous costly system of direct contact with retailers, Bird appointed a network of wholesale agents throughout Britain, who worked with the salesmen he hired. The sales force developed into one of the most effective in the field of groceries. 
In 1900 Bird and two of his four sons, Robert and Geoffrey, registered Alfred Bird & Sons Ltd, with authorized capital of $300,000, their prospectus being dismissed by 'The Statist' (23 June 1900) as 'slipshod'. They set up a London office and warehouse for the metropolitan trade. Bird remained chairman and managing director until his retirement in 1905. He then stood as a Conservative for Wednesbury in the 1906 general election, but lost rather badly. Two years later he became JP for the county of Warwickshire. Elected to Wolverhampton West in January 1910, he held the seat until he died. He was not regarded as a great debater, and never rose higher than parliamentary private secretary to the under-secretary of state for the colonies in the First World War. 
While appearing genial to outsiders, Bird was a strict father and employer, requiring a high level of dedication in exchange for better wages and working conditions than elsewhere in Birmingham. He was exceptionally keen on physical fitness. As a youth he had been a good athlete, and was given a penny-farthing bicycle on his nineteenth birthday; later, he broke the record for tricycling from Land's End to John o' Groats. A pioneer motorist, he became a founder member of the Royal Automobile Club in 1897. Bird was also an ardent mountaineer and member of the Alpine Club. He was a connoisseur of fine art, and his home, Tudor Grange, Solihull, contained a number of important paintings, some of which he gave to the houses of parliament. 
Bird was made a deputy lieutenant of Warwickshire in 1916, at a time when he was generously helping discharged former servicemen. Knighted in 1920, he was raised to a baronetcy in the new year honours list of 1922. A month later, he was knocked down by a car, while crossing Piccadilly, and died shortly afterwards, on 7 February 1922, in St George's Hospital, Knightsbridge, London. He was buried on 12 February. 


@@@@@


doc= 46634


Blackburn, Robert (1885-1955), aircraft designer and manufacturer, was born on 26 March 1885 at Kirkstall near Leeds, the eldest of three sons of George William Blackburn, an engineer, and his wife, Kate, 'nee' Naylor. His career was influenced by his engineering background -- George Blackburn was works manager of William Green & Sons, lawnmower and steamroller manufacturers -- and by the world's first heavier-than-air flight by the Wright brothers in 1903. He attended Leeds modern school and gained an honours degree in engineering at Leeds University; he became an associate member of the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1906, and was given practical experience at his father's firm. 
Blackburn considered the company's methods old-fashioned and went to the continent to study new techniques. In France he saw Wilbur Wright fly, and this proved the catalyst for his future career. He began to design an aircraft in Paris during that year (1908) and when he returned home his father set him up with a workshop in Benson Street, Leeds. There the first Blackburn aircraft, a monoplane powered by a 35 hp Green engine, was built. He had it transported to Marske by the Sea on the Yorkshire coast, where he taxied it along the sands at increasing speeds, eventually becoming airborne. Although the machine side-slipped into the ground and was wrecked, Blackburn had achieved his initial ambition and his second monoplane was more successful. Within three years he had proved himself as designer, builder, and pilot. By June 1914 he had become a manufacturer, founding his own company, the Blackburn Aeroplane and Motor Company. He was twice married, first to Jessica Tryphena Thompson on 31 October 1914; they had three sons and two daughters. This marriage was dissolved on 23 March 1936. His second wife was Phyllis Margaret Kirton, whom he married on 9 April 1936; they had two daughters. Both wives survived him. 
Blackburn's genius for organizing large-scale production showed itself during the First World War, when the company received Admiralty and War Office orders and through subcontracting arrangements proved itself capable of undertaking aircraft work of every kind. In January 1920 he was made OBE for services in connection with the war. 
During 1915 Blackburn had sponsored two important developments for his company -- the acquisition of an airfield and slipway at Brough, by the River Humber, and a decision to specialize in naval aircraft design and manufacture. In post-war years he demonstrated his organizational skill overseas, setting up, at the Greek government's invitation in 1925, a national aircraft factory near Athens. For this he was awarded the gold cross of the order of the Redeemer. 
During the Second World War Blackburn's Brough works, to which all manufacturing had been transferred in 1936, built 1700 Fairey Swordfishes and 700 Barracudas -- in addition to its own Skuas and Rocs -- for the Royal Navy, plus Bothas for the RAF, and co-operated with the Clydeside shipbuilders Dennys of Dumbarton in building Sunderland flying boats. A 1948 amalgamation with General Aircraft led to production of the Beverley heavy freighter for the RAF, and Blackburn saw one of these on show at the Society of British Aerospace Companies' display only a few days before his death in Exeter from a heart attack on 10 September 1955. 
In 1950 the Royal Aeronautical Society had made Blackburn an honorary fellow, and in 1953, when he went to live in Branscombe, Devon, in semi-retirement, he proudly said at a dinner given in his honour that 274 of his employees had served for twenty-one years. A friendly, unpretentious but determined man, who remained based in Yorkshire throughout his career, Blackburn inspired such loyalty; his original belief in the future of aviation never wavered. 


@@@@@


doc= 46635


Blackwood, Sir (Stevenson) Arthur (1832-1893), secretary of the Post Office, was born at Rosslyn Lodge, The Grove, Hampstead, on 22 May 1832, the only son of Arthur Johnstone Blackwood (1808-1874), groom of the privy chamber, and Cecilia Georgiana (died 1881), daughter of the Hon. John Byng, and widow of John Wright of Lenton Hall, Nottinghamshire. Stevenson was the grandson of Vice-Admiral the Hon. Sir Henry Blackwood and had one sister. The family was of Scottish origin, related to Adam Blackwood, from an Irish branch. Stevenson grew up to be very tall and good-looking, though prone to illness. He became a pupil (1843-4) of the Revd Jeremiah Carver, vicar of Great Sampford, Essex. At Eton College in 1845-8 Blackwood maintained his classics. To learn German he lived at Proseken, Mecklenburg (1848-50). He then matriculated from Trinity College, Cambridge. A keen sportsman, Blackwood possessed 'bright intelligence' ('Record', 1012), but took no degree, for in 1852 Lord John Russell appointed him to a clerkship at the Treasury. On volunteering in 1854 for the Crimean campaign, Blackwood became deputy assistant commissary-general. He did well, gaining the applause of his men, a Crimean medal with clasps, and a Turkish decoration. His godmother, Charlotte Wright, by sending him a biography of Colonel Holcombe, stimulated a gradual conversion experience. Recalled in December 1855, he was promoted second-class clerk in the Treasury chest division. In 1856 he suffered from a bout of rheumatic fever. 
While being encouraged by Catherine Marsh, daughter of Dr William Marsh, to commit himself further to personal faith in Christianity, Blackwood still moved in London society, where he was known as Beauty Blackwood. His conversion was made complete under William Pennefather. He renounced worldly pleasures and began to learn Hebrew. On 16 December 1858, at St George's, Hanover Square, Blackwood married Harriet Sydney Montagu (1834-1907), the daughter of Conway Richard Dobbs of Castle Dobbs, co. Antrim, and the widow of a prominent evangelical peer, George, sixth duke of Manchester. They had three daughters and two sons, of whom the younger, Algernon Blackwood, became a notable author; his 'Episodes before Thirty' (1923) includes reflections on a secluded evangelical upbringing, albeit by loving parents. In successive homes near London, Blackwood held Christian gatherings. At intervals during 1862-92 he published his 'Bible' addresses. Habitually putting his official duties first, he was prone to overworking. In 1870 and 1872 he served on Treasury commissions overseas. In 1873 he succeeded Pennefather as chairman of the annual Mildmay Conference. Although he accepted moderate Holiness teaching, he continued a strong advocate of Reformation principles. 
To enable the Treasury to monitor postal affairs, Blackwood was appointed financial secretary of the Post Office in 1874, becoming CB. At St Martin's-le-Grand, the Post Office headquarters, he soon came to understand its internal tensions. In April 1880 Blackwood was promoted secretary of the Post Office. His administrative gifts and Christian character -- not wholly austere, for he retained through life a boyish quality -- made him 'one of the ablest, most successful, and consistent servants of the state' (H. S. Blackwood, 399-400). Scholarly opinion, while perceiving an autocratic tendency, continues to regard him in a favourable light. Under Blackwood postal orders were introduced in 1880, inland parcel post in 1883, and sixpenny telegrams in 1885. At a universal postal congress in Lisbon (1885) Blackwood was prominent: his command of French increased his country's influence, and he received a Portuguese decoration. A new postmaster-general, H. C. Raikes, chose to assert his authority at home, but Blackwood was made KCB in 1887. Thereafter he dropped his first name, becoming known as Sir Arthur Blackwood. In 1890 his decisive action at the beginning of a postal strike prevented disruption from spreading; Raikes approved. In 1891 ill health delayed his departure for a postal congress in Vienna. On arrival, his influence still proved strong. In 1892 influenza left Blackwood considerably weakened. Returning to work in May 1893, he persisted until August with departmental reorganization. Clearly in worse health, he left for better air in the Engadine. Growing weaker, he travelled homewards with difficulty, reaching Harwich almost unconscious. Taken ashore to the Great Eastern Hotel, Parkeston, he died on 2 October from pernicious anaemia. He was buried with his parents in Kensal Green cemetery, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 46639


Bolton, Sir George Lewis French (1900-1982), banker, was born on 16 October 1900 at 1 Lawley Street, Lower Clapton, Hackney, east London, the son of William George Lewis Bolton, a shipping clerk, and his wife, Beatrice Louise, 'nee' French. He was educated at Leyton county high school before joining the London branch of the Societe Generale de Paris at the age of sixteen to be trained as an exchange dealer. He can be regarded as a leading influence behind the rebirth of London as the world's leading international financial centre from the 1950s. 
Bolton's successful career as an exchange dealer was well-suited to his intellectually agile and highly individualistic character. After working with Societe Generale he was employed by the merchant bank Helbert Wagg in 1920, where he remained for twelve years, developing an extensive foreign exchange business. This expertise brought him to the attention of the governor of the Bank of England, Montagu Norman. Following the pound's dramatic departure from the gold standard in 1931, the Bank of England had become involved in the management of the sterling exchange rate. Bolton joined the Bank of England in 1933, became deputy principal of the foreign exchange section in 1934, and served as principal between 1936 and 1941. 
At the Bank of England, Bolton exercised a considerable influence on international monetary policy. During the late 1930s he undertook secret preparations for a structure of wartime exchange control plans, which were duly implemented following the outbreak of war. He was appointed adviser to the Bank of England on exchange and monetary policy in 1941, and following his appointment as external director of the bank in March 1948, Bolton exercised a personal ascendancy on most questions of external financial policy. Few officials could challenge his forceful and powerful arguments, even though they were sometimes erratic. 
The problems of sterling, undermined by Britain's deteriorating economy, were a central concern. In a speech in 1956 Bolton predicted that the loss of international confidence in sterling would lead to 'a collapse of civilisation as we know it over a very large area of the world' (Fry, 43), but his solutions to the difficulties which beset the British currency in the post-war world were idiosyncratic. He was one of the chief proponents of a radical scheme (codenamed Robot) in 1952 for a floating rate of exchange for sterling and for the full convertibility of the currency subject to the funding of 80 per cent of the sterling balances held by non-dollar countries. After a bitter controversy, the ROBOT scheme was finally rejected by the prime minister, Winston Churchill. In retrospect, it is widely believed that if the scheme had been adopted it would have had politically and economically disastrous consequences for Britain. 
In 1957 Bolton was persuaded to become chairman of the Bank of London and South America (Bolsa), the descendant of more than half a dozen British overseas banks which had established branches in Latin America in the nineteenth century. In the 1950s the bank's prospects did not look good in the face of growing economic nationalism, while its management lacked vigour, a situation which its main shareholder since the inter-war years, Lloyds Bank, showed little interest in improving. 
Bolton's period as chairman of Bolsa between 1957 and 1970 was of major significance both for the bank and for London's financial community more generally. Bolton had finally become convinced that sterling's role as a world reserve currency was doomed, but he firmly believed that the City of London could none the less be reborn as a dynamic financial centre. He argued that the key to this rebirth was the removal of tight government restrictions, and the existence of a liberal regulatory framework which would enable London to flourish as a financial entrepot. He was one of the first to see the potential of London as a location for new global financial markets. On appointment as chairman of Bolsa he set up a foreign exchange department, with the dealers instructed to look for deposits in foreign currencies. Bolsa thereby became one of the first movers in the new eurodollar markets, whose location in London was to provide such a major impetus behind the City's renewal. 
During the 1960s Bolton was extensively engaged in a series of schemes to reorganize Britain's overseas banking interests. In 1965 Mellon National Bank acquired a 15 per cent shareholding in Bolsa. Subsequently Bolton sought to build on the Mellon connection by uniting all the overseas banking operations of Lloyds and Barclays to create a global Anglo-American multinational bank which would have had branches spanning Latin America, Europe, Africa, and Asia. However it never proved possible to secure such a fusion in the face of vested interests. 
Bolton's vision of an Anglo-American multinational bank reflected his attachment to the United States. He was disconcerted by, and distrustful of, the European Common Market, formed in 1958. He strongly opposed British membership, fearing that the Common Market would lead to a political union with a written constitution and a common currency and legal system, which he considered would be intolerable for Britain. In place of ties with continental Europe, Bolton favoured the formation of a north Atlantic free trade association including Britain, the United States, and Canada. 
During the 1970s Bolton pursued a wide range of international business and other interests. In 1973 he became deputy chairman of Lonrho, the controversial British conglomerate active in Africa, and he served as chairman of the Commonwealth Development Finance Company (1968-80) and Premier Consolidated Oilfields (1974-6). He was chairman of the influential Bolton inquiry in 1971 on the financial problems facing small firms. In addition, he served as sheriff of London in 1952 and 1961, governor of the London School of Economics from 1961, and was a member of the council of Benenden Girls' School in Kent. 
Bolton had an impressive physical appearance. He was well over 6 feet tall, had reddish hair, light blue eyes, a cheerful countenance, and a deep and seductive voice. Combined with his imagination, ebullience, and conviction, it was not surprising that his ideas often carried the day. He was a man of strong principles, which he pursued stubbornly and with candour, qualities which made him enemies as well as friends. 
Bolton married, on 3 March 1928, in Bayswater, London, May, daughter of Charles Colley Howcroft, a designer; with her he had one son and two daughters. He was created KCMG in 1950, and received decorations from Argentina in 1960 and Chile in 1965. He died on 2 September 1982, at 61 St George's Square, Westminster, survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 46641


Bonsor, Sir (Henry) Cosmo Orme, first baronet (1848-1929), brewer and railway manager, was born on 2 September 1848 at Great Bookham, near Dorking, Surrey. He was the son of Joseph Bonsor (1807-1873) of Polesden Lacey, Surrey, a partner from 1852 in the London brewing firm of Combe, Delafield & Co. (later Combe & Co.), and his wife, Eliza Denne, 'nee' Orme. In 1865, after an education at Eton College, Cosmo joined the family brewing firm (his father was by this time the senior partner). He quickly established himself as a competent manager, orchestrating the company's expansion through the purchase of public houses and smaller breweries, and emphasizing the retailing and marketing functions of the business. He was also the driving force behind the incorporation and amalgamation of important brewing interests in London. He joined the board of Watney & Co. when it became a limited company in 1885, and in 1888 became a director of his own firm on its incorporation. 
In 1898 the interests of Combe, Watney, and a third company, Reid's Brewery, were merged as Watney, Combe, Reid & Co., and Bonsor became its first chairman, a post he retained for thirty years. Capitalized at $15 million, it was not only the largest brewing company of its day, but also the biggest company in British manufacturing. However, with its evident over-capitalization and high gearing, the new giant was a daunting prospect for any manager. It says much for Bonsor's tenacity and financial acumen that he stayed on to pull the company round from the bad times (no dividend was paid on the deferred ordinary shares, 1908-16) to comparative security in the 1920s. The written-down capital was restored in 1922-5, and the company was strong enough to embark on a fresh wave of merger activity, acquiring the Cobham, Isleworth, Higgins, and London and Burton breweries in 1923-9. Bonsor was also a strong supporter of the brewing lobbies, serving as chairman and treasurer of the National Trade Defence Association from its establishment in 1888 to 1895. He was master of the Brewers' Company in 1881 and a vice-president of the Institute of Brewing from 1901. 
Bonsor was also for many years manager of another controversial large corporation -- the South Eastern and Chatham Railway. Elected chairman of the South Eastern Railway in 1898, and thereby inheriting the dubious legacy of the recently retired Sir Edward Watkin (1819-1901), Bonsor did much to restore stability between that company and its long-term rival, the London, Chatham, and Dover Railway. In 1899 he organized a 'working union' of the two companies, in the form of a merger which fell short of a full financial amalgamation. Bonsor acted as chairman of the South Eastern and Chatham managing committee, until the merged companies were themselves amalgamated into the Southern Railway in 1923. During his tenure of office the two railways, once the butt of music-hall jokes, became models of technical advance, efficiency, and competent management, although the price of rationalization was high, resulting in the addition of $9 million to the capital account between 1899 and 1912. 
Bonsor also had other business interests. He was a director of the Bank of England for forty-four years (1885-1929), and of the Northern Assurance Company, and was for thirty-nine years chairman of the income tax commissioners for the City of London (1886-1925). He was also treasurer of Guy's Hospital and Conservative MP for Wimbledon from 1885 to 1900. He was created a baronet in 1925, and was a JP and deputy lieutenant for Surrey and a deputy lieutenant and alderman of the City of London. He was also an officer of the Legion d'honneur. In 1872 he married Emily Gertrude, 'nee' Fellowes, of Dorset; they had three sons and four daughters. After his wife's death in 1882 he married Mabel Brand of Croydon. 
Frank, open, likeable, and a good talker, Bonsor had an excellent grasp of financial affairs, and was supported by solid political connections. He also had the gift of choosing competent subordinates. His memorable achievement was to take five of Britain's problematic companies and fuse them into rationalized, more efficient units -- a model others would have done well to follow. Bonsor died on 4 December 1929 at boulevard Carabacel in Nice. 


@@@@@


doc= 46642


Booth, Alfred (1834-1914), merchant and shipowner, was born on 3 September 1834 in Liverpool, the eldest son of Charles Booth (1799-1860) of the same city and Emily Fletcher (1803-1853). His father's family ran a corn-factoring business and his mother's side was descended from West Indies merchants. He was educated at Edgbaston proprietary school and at the Liverpool Mechanics' Institute. In 1867 he married Lydia Allen Butler; they raised six children, two sons and four daughters. 
Booth did not enter the family business but from 1850 worked for Lamport and Holt, shipping agents. His younger brother Charles Booth (1840-1916), subsequently famous for his pioneering social investigations, joined him, but Alfred Booth left in 1857 for a brief appointment with Rathbones in New York, where he gained valuable experience in transatlantic trading. In 1860 he formed a partnership with Charles, and an American named Walden, to act as commission agents. More by chance than design they found themselves exporting skins to the United States, a small specialist business which exploited Booth's detailed knowledge and contacts but which did not compete with established trading. On Walden's retirement in 1863, the partnership was reconstituted as Alfred Booth & Co. of Liverpool and Booth & Co. of New York, with the brothers as principals, Alfred in the United States and Charles in Britain. Although supplemented by agency work and produce handling, the business was slow to prosper. Commission work brought only modest returns and the usual problems of price and seasonal fluctuations and the remittance of funds dogged the enterprise. However, improving American prospects after the civil war and investment in leather manufacturing on both sides of the Atlantic did increase profitability. 
Encouraged perhaps by Charles Booth's fascination with steam shipping at a time when the compound engine was revolutionizing cargo traffic, and drawing upon their experience with Lamport and Holt, the brothers formed a shipping company to trade with northern Brazil. This market avoided competition with the established carriers to the east coast of Latin America but the new company could not afford a prolonged clash with R. Singlehurst & Co., which was already exploiting the Amazon business. Since cargo volumes were still small and sailing ships undercut steamers, profits eluded the Booths until they created commercial stability through agreements with their competitors. Booths integrated leather and shipping into mutually supportive activities as Brazilian skins were exchanged for American produce, with the parent firm acting as a holding company. By 1914 Booths dominated the Amazon trade, operating one of Liverpool's largest fleets, and owned the Surpass Tanning Company in America, which obtained international status in kid leather. 
Booth's contribution to the success of the firm which bore his name is hard to evaluate. He certainly possessed qualities crucial for business success -- sound judgement, an inability to suffer fools gladly, composure during commercial crises, and a methodical approach to administration. His tactical awareness complemented his brother's longer-term strategic sense. But Booth regarded business as a means to secure the financial independence required for the pursuit of life as a country gentleman, in complete contrast to his brother. He retired early, in 1887, before the firm's conspicuous success. Moreover, his experience and sources of funds, even the survival of the business in moments of crisis, owed much to the family alliances with the pillars of Liverpool's commercial elite, the Holts, the Lamports, and the Rathbones. Luck, hard work, and adaptability enabled Booth to learn from past mistakes and to seize opportunities when they arose. 
In his private life Booth, though reserved, inspired loyalty and affection. In the best traditions of Liverpool merchants he gave generously of his time and money to public and philanthropic activities, both as a magistrate and as a devout Unitarian. Politically, he supported the Liberal cause. He died at his home, 46 Ullet Road, Toxteth Park, Liverpool, on 2 November 1914, of pneumonia and heart failure. 


@@@@@


doc= 46644


Borthwick, Sir Thomas (1835-1912), meat importer, was born at Musselburgh, near Edinburgh, on 11 January 1835, the son of Thomas Borthwick of Edinburgh. He worked his way up from apprentice butcher in the family business at nearby Ratho, and at an early age it was clear that his real talent lay in assessing livestock. He was soon an acknowledged expert: it was said that he could walk into a pen holding 500 or more sheep and tell the weight and value of any of them at a glance; he was later to become a judge at the Royal Agricultural Show. He was only twenty-two when he established himself as a livestock agent, initially in Midlothian, but since he also handled Irish cattle landed at Liverpool he was attracted by the prospects there and in 1863 moved to Liverpool. In 1870 he rented a farm near Llanrwst in north Wales, and it was from there that he established a flourishing trade with Liverpool butchers. An indication of his drive is that, occasionally dissatisfied with prices, he slaughtered animals and sold direct to the consumer. 
The 1860s and 1870s were years of experimentation in long-distance transport of meat from overseas suppliers. When refrigeration finally made it possible to bring meat across the equator from Australasia and Argentina (the first consignments of frozen meat were arriving by the late 1870s, the first from New Zealand in 1882), Borthwick was quick to recognize the possibilities in international trade in the product. In 1883 he became the selling agent for the New Zealand Loan and Mercantile Agency Co. Ltd. He opened meat depots in Liverpool, Manchester, Glasgow, and Birmingham, and in 1892 transferred the firm's headquarters to London, at the same time securing a stall in Smithfield. This was the real beginning of the large wholesale and distribution business that covered the major livestock products of meat, wool, and tallow. But the main business was meat, and Borthwick was a leading figure in promoting the trade, especially in experimenting with chilling (as opposed to freezing) techniques, which indirectly made him responsible for improving the quality of Australian beef. 
Borthwick married Letitia Banks of Liverpool in 1872, and had four sons and three daughters. All the sons went into the business; the eldest son, Thomas Borthwick ('b'. 1875), later Baron Whitburgh, went to Australia and New Zealand in 1904; he purchased meat-processing works and established branch offices at Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane, and Christchurch. That same year the firm became a limited liability company under the name of Thomas Borthwick & Sons Ltd, registered with a capital of $300,000. More meat works were added later, and the company continued to prosper until the early 1980s, and, together with the Vestey brothers, dominated the Australasian meat trade. At the time of his death in 1912 Borthwick was still chairman of Thomas Borthwick & Sons Ltd and a director of Lancashire Cold Storage Co. Ltd, Thames Cold Storage Co. Ltd, and Thomas Borthwick & Sons (Australasia) Ltd. 
Borthwick was a staunch Presbyterian throughout his life, and contributed to church activities both in Midlothian and at Regent Square Presbyterian Church, London. He was in his late sixties before he took an active part in local Midlothian politics. In 1902 he was appointed chairman of the Midlothian Liberal Association, a post he held until his death, and in 1908 he was knighted for his services to the Liberals. He was known for being a plain and blunt man, and while he probably lacked any serious political ambition he was certainly not without friends in high places, being a close friend of Gladstone and later of Lloyd George and Asquith. Weeks before he died he was named as baron in the birthday honours, and so the title of Baron Whitburgh passed to his eldest son. Sir Thomas Borthwick died at his home, Whitburgh Ford, Midlothian, on 31 July 1912. 


@@@@@


doc= 46646


Sir Harold Bowden, second baronet (1880-1960), born in San Francisco on 9 July 1880, was educated at Clifton College, Bristol, then went to Lausanne to study languages before entering Clare College, Cambridge. His studies were prematurely ended in 1899 when his father brought him into the business and in 1905 he was elected to the board as a director. Despite suffering ill health as a boy, as a young man he was a cyclist and keen athlete. In later years he was a supporter of the athletics movement and acted as a fund-raiser for, as well as serving as chairman of, the British Olympic Association in 1931-5. He maintained a high public profile, writing and broadcasting on the activities of the company and promoting cycling in the popular media. Throughout his life he held senior offices in cycle trade associations and employers' associations and at local level served as high sheriff of Nottingham in 1933. 


@@@@@


doc= 46647


Bowes, John (1811-1885), coal industrialist and art collector, was born at 13 South Street, Chelsea, London, on 19 June 1811, the illegitimate son of John Bowes, tenth earl of Strathmore (1769-1820), and Mary (1787-1860), the daughter of George and Ann Milner of Stainton, co. Durham. His grandmother was Mary Eleanor Bowes, countess of Strathmore. Mary Milner had become Strathmore's mistress about 1809, after his two failed love affairs with members of the Delaval family, and John Bowes was their only child. The earl married Mary on his deathbed with the aim of legitimizing their son by Scots law. Bowes's claim to the title was rejected in 1821, but he succeeded to the estates of Streatlam near Barnard Castle and of Gibside near Newcastle. He was educated at private schools in Ealing and Lincolnshire, and then at Eton College. He went to Trinity College, Cambridge, from 1828, where his tutor was William Hutt (1801-1882); Bowes's mother, Mary, married Hutt in 1831. 
Bowes and Hutt entered parliament in 1832. Without party affiliation but supporting reform, the anti-slavery movement, and religious liberty and toleration, Bowes was elected for South Durham. He was re-elected in 1835, 1837, and 1841, but he declined to stand in 1847; he never spoke in the house but was regarded as a good lobbyist. 
Bowes, his mother, Hutt, and Nicholas Wood (1795-1865) created the Marley Hill Coal Company in 1839, to exploit the coals on the Gibside estate. Bowes had also inherited his father's stud at Streatlam and he bred four Derby winners. Betting on his own winning horse in the 1843 Derby he won $21,000, which enabled him to meet his 1841 election expenses and put $4000 into the temporarily ailing coal company. In 1844 Charles Mark Palmer (1822-1907) joined the business, and in 1847 the company was renamed John Bowes Esq. & Partners. It soon became one of the greatest companies in British coal history and the source of Bowes's wealth. 
Since a continental tour in 1830 Bowes had made several visits to Paris and he decided to settle there in 1847. A keen theatre-goer and an amateur actor from his early days, he bought the Theatre de Varietes for more than $15,000. There he met Josephine Benoite Coffin-Chevallier (1825-1874), an actress and painter, whom he married on 23 August 1852. With a town house in the rue de Berlin, Bowes bought a chateau by the Seine as a country retreat, and stocked it with works of art. It was sold in 1860, and some of the contents were shipped to Streatlam. 
Bowes and Josephine had now determined on a museum for their art collections, and in 1869 the Bowes Museum, which was designed in an elaborate French-Renaissance style, was begun at Barnard Castle. Josephine died in February 1874, while the museum was still under construction. Three years later, on 18 August 1877, Bowes married Alphonsine, comtesse de Courten ('b'. 'c'.1837), who was also French. Bowes's second marriage proved to be troubled, as Alphonsine spoke no English and disliked the north of England. She returned to France, leaving Bowes behind, on more than one occasion. He took divorce proceedings against his wife between 1883 and 1885, but a compromise was reached and they remained married, but separate, for the last few months of Bowes's life. Neither marriage produced any children. 
Work continued on the museum, at considerable expense, but Bowes's last years were troubled, and he suffered ill health. He died on 9 October 1885 at Streatlam Castle and was buried at Gibside, on 16 October, alongside the remains of his first wife. With his financial affairs in some disarray, his gross personal estate of $147,874 19's'. 3died was insufficient to meet the very generous bequests of his will. The museum was officially opened in 1892 and remained a major collection of French art at the end of the twentieth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 46648


Heath, Cuthbert Eden (1859-1939), underwriter and insurance broker, was born on 23 March 1859 at Forest Lodge, near Southampton, the fourth of the seven children of Captain Leopold George Heath RN (1817-1907), and his wife, Mary Emma, 'nee' Marsh. His father had a brilliant naval career, being knighted in 1868 and promoted to rear-admiral in 1871. Heath was educated privately until the age of eight, then followed his brothers to Temple Grove preparatory school, East Sheen, and to Brighton College. Partial deafness prevented him from entering the navy, and he remained at Brighton College until 1874; he later went to France and Germany for two years to study languages. In 1876 he joined the insurance brokers Henry Head & Co. as a junior clerk. He later said that he was regarded in his youth as 'the fool of his family', 'poor Bertie', who, because of his disability, had to go into a respectable but dull job in the City (Brown, 'Cuthbert Heath', 62). 
In 1880, aged twenty-one, Heath joined a Lloyd's syndicate, helped by a loan of $7000 from his father. In 1881 he began marine underwriting for himself and three 'names', and extended this to broking from 1883. In 1885 his father, who was a director of the Hand in Hand Fire Office, invited Heath to reinsure its fire risks. Traditionally Lloyd's had ignored such business, although there was nothing in its rules to prevent it. In the following years Heath instigated a series of radical innovations which amazed his fellow underwriters and changed the face of Lloyd's for ever. He became 'the most original talent ever produced by the insurance industry of this or any other country' (ibid., 75). Heath's innovations included the first American non-marine risk underwritten at Lloyd's, insurance against loss of profits through fire (which the tariff offices complained would ruin fire insurance), 'all risks' policies against accidental loss, 'jeweller's block' policies to cover diamonds in transit, insurance against burglary (1887), earthquakes (1895), smallpox (1901), workmen's compensation (1906), and air-raid damage (1914), and excess of loss reinsurance. From the 1890s he helped to develop trade credit insurance, and became the first chairman of the Trade Indemnity Company in 1918. From 1919 to 1921 he ventured, unsuccessfully, into aviation insurance. In 1926 Heath also helped to introduce to London a cheaper system of establishing premium rates for reinsurances. 
In 1890 Heath established C. E. Heath & Co. which became a substantial independent broking firm with considerable overseas business. In 1894, faced with a need for greater capacity for non-marine business, he established the Excess Insurance Company. His practice of writing (doing business) for the Excess from his 'box' (working area) at Lloyd's, however, got him into repeated trouble for breaking the rule banning company underwriting there. Over this and many other matters, Heath had, as one Lloyd's chairman, Neville Dixey, put it 'a fine disregard for conventions' (quoted in obituary, 'Post Magazine'). Standing 6 foot 2 inches tall, carrying his familiar black box for his hearing aid, courteous, soft-spoken, and popular with the brokers, Cuthbert Heath was a striking figure at Lloyd's. 
In 1902 Heath finally persuaded Lloyd's to accept security deposits for non-marine business. In 1908 Lloyd's also accepted Heath's idea of introducing a compulsory audit of members' accounts. The annual audit, together with the incorporation of non-marine business in the second 'Lloyd's Act' of 1913, became the cornerstone of Lloyd's solidity for most of the twentieth century. Most of Heath's innovations arose, however, from others' suggestions. His flair lay in recognizing opportunities and in rating novel risks quickly and accurately, if sometimes intuitively. He was undoubtedly one of the most dynamic figures at Lloyd's in the early twentieth century. 'No other individual had such a profound effect on the scope of the business, its institutions and its competitive structure' (Westall, 140). He led the market 'in the literal sense that many risks were only undertaken when it was clear that Heath was first involved' (ibid.). In 1911 he was elected to Lloyd's committee, and served for four years. During the 1920s Heath withdrew from daily business at Lloyd's, but his syndicate continued to lead the non-marine market. By the 1930s his annual income was estimated to be $60,000, and his syndicate was writing for 300 members. At the time of his death his estate was valued at just over $1m gross. 
In 1891 Heath married Sarah Caroline Gore Gambier (1859-1944), daughter of the Revd Charles Gore Gambier and his wife, Elizabeth. A son, Leopold Cuthbert, and a daughter, Genesta, were born in 1894 and 1897. In 1907 Heath moved into Anstie Grange, Holmwood, near Dorking, which his late father had built in 1863. Heath's wife entertained lavishly -- employing fifty servants at Anstie -- with guests drawn from London's social elite. Heath himself, diffident, a little austere, and shy by nature, preferred country walks and enjoyed fishing, shooting, and hunting. In 1918 he became joint master of the Surrey Union hounds. In 1929 he gave 200 acres near Leith Hill to the National Trust for conservation. 
During the First World War Heath advised the government on air-raid insurance and was appointed a trustee for Lloyd's Patriotic Fund. Anstie Grange was converted, at his own expense, into an officers' hospital, through which nearly 700 patients passed between 1916 and 1918. Heath was made an OBE in 1920 and was also a knight of grace of the order of St John of Jerusalem. He served as high sheriff of Surrey in 1925-6, and as deputy lieutenant from 1928. 
Heath was a member of the Royal Yacht Squadron, and in later years often sailed his yacht in winter in the Mediterranean. In 1930 he purchased a small estate, La Domaine de Savaric, at Eze in the Alpes-Maritimes. He relaxed with reading, and his paint-box of water colours. In 1938 he suffered a stroke, which left him partially paralysed. He died at Anstie Grange on 8 March 1939, and was cremated in a private ceremony. His ashes were interred on 11 March 1939 at Coldharbour church, Holmwood, Surrey. 


@@@@@


doc= 46651


Maybrick, Michael (1841-1913), singer and composer, was born on 31 January 1841 (not 1844, as is often stated) at 8 Church Alley, Liverpool, the fourth of the seven sons of William Maybrick (1815-1853?), an engraver, and his wife, Susannah (1815?-1883?). His grandfather and father served as parish clerk at St Peter's, Liverpool, and were minor composers; his uncle Michael (1799-1846) was organist at St Peter's, wrote sacred music, and conducted the Liverpool Choral Society. Proficient on the piano by the age of eight, the young Michael studied the organ with W. T. Best and at the age of fifteen became organist of St Peter's; he also wrote anthems and had a work performed in London. In 1865 he went to Leipzig to study keyboard and harmony with Carl Reinecke, Ignaz Moscheles, and Louis Plaidy, but later decided to perfect his fine baritone voice under Gaetano Nava in Milan. After gaining experience in Italian theatres, he was acclaimed in London on 25 February 1869 in Mendelssohn's 'Elijah'. Success as Telramund in Wagner's 'Lohengrin' led to appearances with Charlotte Sainton-Dolby, including her farewell concert on 6 June 1870, and to regular engagements at the English festivals and with Carl Rosa's opera company. 
By the early 1870s Maybrick was already presenting his own songs, beginning with 'A Warrior Bold'. Published under the pseudonym Stephen Adams and mostly with lyrics by Fred Weatherly, these achieved extraordinary popularity: the early sea song 'Nancy Lee' sold more than 100,000 copies in two years. The composer's versatile output included other sea songs like 'The Tar's Farewell', 'They All Love Jack', and 'The Midshipmite', sentimental pieces like 'Your Dear Brown Eyes', romances like 'The Children of the City', and sacred songs like 'The Blue Alsatian Mountains', 'The Star of Bethlehem', and the well-loved 'Holy City'. He also celebrated national occasions, as in 'The Veteran's Song' for the coronation of Edward VII. He performed his ballads at St James's Hall matinee concerts, and in 1884 toured North America with them. Though later disparaged, they are direct and sincere and audiences found them ennobling. With his resonant voice and winning smile, the tall, distinguished-looking Maybrick had great presence on the stage. His character was more complex: friends spoke of his charming personality, but detractors thought him arrogant and vain. 
Although Maybrick never ceased to compose, and became vice-president of Trinity College, London, he abandoned public singing after the conviction of Florence Maybrick for the murder of her husband, James, his brother, in 1889; he wished her life to be spared (as it was), but had largely helped to instigate this controversial case. On 9 March 1893 he married his forty-year-old housekeeper, Laura Withers, and settled with her at Ryde, where he had purchased Lynthorpe; they were joined there by James's orphaned children. In a new civic career, Maybrick became chairman of the Isle of Wight Hospital, justice of the peace, and five times mayor of Ryde. He also played cricket, yachted, cycled, and was an active freemason. While convalescing at St Ann's Hotel, Buxton, from periodic gout, he died of heart failure on 26 August 1913, and was buried four days afterwards at All Saints', Ryde, survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 46652


Weatherly, Frederic Edward (1848-1929), songwriter and barrister, was born on 4 October 1848 at 7 Woodhill, Portishead, near Bristol, the eldest son in the large family of Frederick Weatherly (1820-1910), a country doctor, and his wife, Julia Maria, 'nee' Ford (1823-1898). He was educated at Hereford Cathedral School (1859-67) and admitted with a scholarship at Brasenose College, Oxford, in 1867. Walter Pater was his tutor. Being small and slight he made a useful cox for the college boat. Despite poor examination results he secured a college exhibition, took his BA degree in 1871 (MA 1874), and remained in Oxford, briefly as a schoolmaster, and then as a drudging university 'coach' and author of textbooks on logic. On 31 December 1871 he married Anna Maria Hardwick (died 1920), and they had a son and two daughters. They later lived apart. Weatherly left teaching to qualify as a barrister at the Inner Temple in 1887 and moved to London. In 1893 he joined the western circuit, living first at Clifton and from 1900 at Bath, busy in his profession until the end of his life. With Edward Cutler he published 'The Law of Musical and Dramatic Copyright' (1890). On 2 August 1923 he married a widow, Mrs Miriam Bryan, 'nee' Davies (died 1941). He was appointed king's counsel in 1925. 
Although he competed unsuccessfully for the Newdigate prize three times, as an undergraduate Weatherly published poems and his first song lyrics, and they were followed during his years at Oxford by two novels, many children's books, and librettos for cantatas and oratorios. In devising texts for music he found a talent in which he was fluent and lucky from the start, and came to have no rival. Weatherly wrote the words of many of the most popular songs in the English-speaking world for half a century, in association with composers such as Molloy, Cowen, Tosti, Michael Maybrick (Stephen Adams), and Coates. His songs were performed by the leading singers of three generations. Although he seldom wrote for existing music, he took pains in translating Italian and French opera, and his versions of 'Cavalleria rusticana' (1892) and 'I pagliacci' (1893) have lasted. He did not claim that his lyrics were fine poetry, nor pretend to musical ability beyond a good ear, but he felt strongly that the words of a ballad were as important as its setting, as their author was the equal of the composer. He was alert to changing tastes and versatile in several styles from the patriotic and naval to the humorous, religious, rustic, and sentimental. Inevitably he attracted parodists who reflected his success; this itself depended on the popularity of ballad concerts promoted by music publishers that created a vast lucrative market for sheet music for home entertainment. William Boosey, the music publisher, remembered him as 'certainly the most prolific lyric writer and the happiest in his ideas' (Boosey, 84). He was described as 'always a cheery, happy, good-humoured little man' (R. W. J., 13). 
For many years Weatherly gave lively, anecdotal lectures on his craft, illustrating, for example, the need to 'get a point at the end of each verse, and the best point in the last' (Weatherly, 166). The advent of recording and later of radio kept his songs alive, and in the 1920s he broadcast for the BBC. Unashamed of popularity and prosperity, he had no patience with musical snobbery that equated popular songs with want of artistry or scorned a good melody. A jubilee dinner was held in his honour in London in December 1919. Weatherly lost count of his songs, but claimed to have published more than 1500. Dozens of them were extremely popular in his lifetime, and a number, including 'Nancy Lee' (1876), 'The Holy City' (1892), 'Danny Boy' (1912) to the 'Londonderry Air', and 'Roses of Picardy' (1916) set by Haydn Wood, survived him. Weatherly's autobiography, 'Piano and Gown', in which he glossed over unhappy parts of his life, appeared in 1926. He died at his home, Bathwick Lodge, Bath, after a short illness on 7 September 1929 and was buried four days later in Bathwick cemetery. A memorial tablet was unveiled in Bath by Clara Butt in 1931. 


@@@@@


doc= 46658


Allitsen, Frances (1848-1912), composer, was born on 30 December 1848 at 159 Oxford Street, London, one of the seven children of John Bumpus (1817/18-1880), a bookseller, and his wife, Emma Louisa Barton (1824/5-1892). She was baptized Mary Frances Bumpus at St Andrew, Holborn, on 25 December 1853. Little is known about her early life other than that her parents were opposed to the idea of a woman entering the musical profession or studying music seriously. Mary Bumpus was initially interested in writing novels and stories, but with the encouragement of its principal, Weist Hill, studied at the Guildhall School of Music, where she was a corporation exhibitioner for at least four years when she was in her thirties (1881-5). Even as a student she was known as Frances Allitsen, a pseudonym doubtless chosen to assuage her parents' dismay at her choice of career. Nevertheless they may still have refused to help her financially, since she seems to have given singing lessons in order to pay for composition tuition. 
Many of Allitsen's early works were performed at Guildhall concerts in the early 1880s, including a piano sonata, a 'Slavonic' overture for orchestra, and several songs. It was as a songwriter that she was to become best known, although she continued to write instrumental music throughout her life. Her songs are on a large scale, displaying formal inventiveness, complex harmonies (often with an additional accompanying instrument as well as the piano), and a keen ear for detailed word painting. 
Allitsen took great care over the financial details of her career, keeping a precise record of her transactions with various publishers from 1885 to 1896 (BL, Add. MS 50071). For most of her songs she received a 3'd.' royalty for every copy sold, sometimes with an additional down payment. By the 1890s her passionate and harmonically complex songs were being frequently performed all over Britain by the leading singers of the day, such as David Bispham and Clara Butt, often accompanied by Allitsen herself. A collection of 'Six Songs' to poems by various authors, including Tennyson and Marie Corelli, was published in 1889 and sold well. But her most popular song was a setting of Charles Mackay's 'There's a land', published in 1896 and widely performed by Clara Butt during the South African War. Other of her bombastically patriotic songs also became particularly popular at this time, as did her religious songs, such as the psalm setting 'The Lord is my light' (1897). In addition, Allitsen wrote several works that she regarded as more 'artistic', including the song cycle for baritone and piano 'Moods and Tenses' (1905). 
Allitsen's cantata 'For the Queen', to a libretto by Frank Hyde, for baritone, mezzo-soprano, bass, chorus, and orchestra, was first heard at the Crystal Palace, London, in 1911. Several elements of this work, such as details of plot and aspects of musical style, can also be found in 'Bindra the Minstrel' (1912), her only opera. This is a dramatically engaging work for which she wrote her own libretto, about how a deposed king in tenth-century Asia is saved by his trusty minstrel who rekindles the devotion of the people through the power of his songs. 
In 1911 Allitsen kept a short diary (BL, Add. MS 50071) which shows her unsuccessful attempts at getting 'Bindra the Minstrel' performed, as well as her depressed state of mind towards the end of her life. A typical entry reads: 'As usual -- health delicate, people unkind, remiss and neglectful -- professional anxieties and indecisions'. She died of pleurisy on 1 October 1912 at her home, 20 Queen's Terrace, St John's Wood Road, London, and was buried in Hampstead cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 46660


Jones, John (1777-1842), politician, was born at Carmarthen on 15 September 1777, the son of Thomas Jones, an attorney and estate agent, and his wife, Anna Maria, daughter of John Jones, also an attorney. After the death of his father in 1790 he was placed under the guardianship of his kinsman John Williams (1757-1810), a serjeant-at-law. Educated at Eton College (1791-3), and briefly at Christ Church, Oxford (1796-7), he was admitted at Lincoln's Inn in 1798 and called to the bar in 1803 after being a pupil of his guardian. He subsequently developed an extensive practice on the south Wales circuit, being considered the region's leading advocate. Although not a great rhetorician, he was a cogent speaker and had 'an unerring judgement of the temper and tastes of a Welsh jury'. One jury, indeed, is said to have announced its verdict thus: 'My lord, we are all for John Jones, 'with costs''. He practised until the abolition of the court of great sessions in 1830, and later became chairman of the Carmarthenshire quarter sessions. 
Able advocate though he was, Jones was most famous as a politician. In his youth, he was apparently the 'rankest Radical' in Carmarthen (George Thomas, letter to 'The Welshman', 6 May 1842), and a fierce supporter of Charles James Fox. His early political career in Carmarthen took place in association with the whigs, and he was mayor of the town in 1809. On their refusal to support his parliamentary ambitions, however, he defected to the tories, and with their support became member for Pembroke Boroughs (1815-18), Carmarthen Boroughs (1821-32), and Carmarthenshire (1837-42). He was always a relatively poor man and his election expenses were met by subscriptions from his supporters. 
In parliament, Jones followed Sir Robert Peel, even supporting Catholic emancipation in 1829. Jones's parliamentary career, however, was most interesting for his attention to local interests. Particularly important was his attempted defence of the court of great sessions, which the whigs in Wales (led by Lord Cawdor, Jones's chief opponent in Carmarthen) were seeking to abolish. Jones, in addition to urging the practical utility of the system, defended it on nationalistic grounds, arguing that the great sessions had been a gift to the nation from Henry VIII and that parliament must respect this. The court was abolished, however, in 1830. 
For all his appeal to 'nationalism', Jones was no friend of the Welsh language: although he spoke Welsh himself and was instrumental in founding the Welsh Anglican Church in Carmarthen, he earnestly sought the decline of the Welsh tongue which he believed hindered the material progress of Wales. This was, however, only one instance among many of the paradoxes which were the hallmark of Jones's character. Despite the 'populist' style of his political campaigns, for example, he opposed the extension of the franchise in 1832. Hospitable and genial, he nevertheless had a most violent temper, as his antics during the 1831 election revealed. Not only did he assault a fellow lawyer in the street, believing him to be the author of a hostile article in the 'Cambrian', but he also brawled with the leader of a rioting election mob, and fought a duel with the Hon. G. F. Greville. This side of his character earned him the nickname 'Jack Slack' after the celebrated pugilist. John Jones died unmarried at his seat, Ystrad Lodge, Carmarthenshire, on 10 November 1842. His death robbed the principality of one of its most colourful public figures. 


