@@@@@


doc= 46661


Probyn, Sir Dighton Macnaghten (1833-1924), army officer and courtier, was born in London on 21 January 1833, the third of six sons of George Probyn, captain in the East India naval service, and his wife, Alicia (died 1864), the daughter of Sir Francis Workman-Macnaghten. Her brother was Sir William Macnaghten (1793-1841), and this family connection enabled Probyn, following schooling at the Revd C. Worsley's at Finchley, to obtain a cornet's commission in the 6th Bengal light cavalry in 1849, when only sixteen. In 1852 he transferred to the 2nd Punjab cavalry in the Punjab frontier force, then commanded by Samuel James Browne, inventor of the sword belt. 
Probyn served with his regiment during the siege of Delhi in 1857, repeatedly distinguishing himself. He later accompanied his regiment in the force dispatched for the relief of Agra, where he captured an enemy standard and was recommended for the VC, awarded to him in 1857. The citation by General Hope Grant, commanding the force, described Probyn as: 'skilful in the use of his sword and spear and an excellent horseman, his active courage and coolness in conflict have borne him safely through many combats' (dispatch, 10 Jan 1858). He transferred to the 1st Sikh irregular cavalry, with which he served throughout the operations to relieve Cawnpore and Lucknow and to drive the rebels out of Oudh, first as second in command, and then as commanding officer in 1858. The regiment soon became known as Probyn's Horse. Probyn was made CB in 1858. 
In 1860 a joint Anglo-French expedition was mounted in response to the Chinese refusal to abide by the treaty of Tientsin (Tianjin) (June 1858), whereby China had agreed to accept a resident minister from each of the two countries at Peking (Beijing). However, when the two ministers designate arrived at the mouth of the Peiho (Beihe) River in the Gulf of Pecheli (Beizhili), escorted by a fleet commanded by Admiral Hope, their way upriver was barred by the Taku (Dagu) forts on 17 June 1859. Permission to proceed further was refused, and eventually it was decided by the French and British governments to enforce the terms of the treaty. 
Lieutenant-General Hope Grant was made the overall commander. The British contingent, of both British and Indian troops, included only three cavalry regiments, two of them Indian and irregular -- Probyn's and Fane's Horse. All were required to volunteer, which Probyn's, mostly Sikhs, did to a man. They then marched to Calcutta from Lucknow to embark, covering 600 miles in eighteen days. They sailed for China in May 1860. Reporting back to the duke of Cambridge, Hope Grant praised the two irregular cavalry regiments and their commanders, 'two excellent officers, Major Fane and Major Probyn' (H. Knollys, 'Incidents in the China War of 1860', 1875). 
Probyn and his regiment added to their laurels in China. The cavalry showed to advantage during the advance to Peking, both in reconnaissance and in shock action, which the Chinese Tartar cavalry tried to avoid. Probyn's regiment returned to India in November 1860, after what had been a very well-conducted campaign, Probyn receiving the brevet of lieutenant-colonel and being mentioned in dispatches. 
Probyn's reputation, already high in the Indian army, was enhanced by his conduct in China. He had led several charges on his horse Clear-the-Line. In 1861 he was rewarded by his regiment's being taken onto the regular establishment as the 11th Bengal cavalry, remaining known unofficially as Probyn's Horse. Shortly after its return from China the regiment was informed that it had been paid twice. This was disputed, but until the matter was settled the duplicate pay was lodged in the regimental treasure chest. Nothing more was heard from the army pay department, and after two years the money was used to establish a regimental stud farm in the Punjab, which came to be known as Probynabad. The first Arab stallion at the stud was Probyn's Clear-the-Line. 
Probyn commanded his regiment in the Ambela campaign in 1863, his last active service. In 1870, as a colonel, he was chosen as equerry to Prince Alfred, duke of Edinburgh, Queen Victoria's second son, during the prince's tour of India, and in 1872 he was appointed equerry to the prince of Wales, whom he accompanied on his tour of India in 1875. Probyn had been promoted major-general (15 July 1870), but his career as a soldier had ended, and that of courtier had begun. In 1901, on Edward VII's accession, he was made privy councillor and keeper of the privy purse. After the king's death in 1910 Probyn became comptroller of Queen Alexandra's household. In his biography of Edward VII, Sir Sidney Lee comments on Probyn's competence, fidelity, and faculty for rigorous finance. He took a prominent part in advising the king over the development of the Sandringham estate. On 25 April 1872 he married his first cousin, Letitia Maria, daughter of Thomas Robarts Thellusson. They had no children and she died on 17 January 1900. After his wife's death it was believed that he was on the verge of marrying Charlotte Knollys (Queen Alexandra's principal lady in waiting), who was deeply attached to him, but he did not marry again. 
Probyn was promoted full general on the half-pay list on 1 December 1888. He was made KCSI in 1876, KCB in 1887, GCVO in 1896, GCB (civil) in 1902, GCB (military) in 1910 and GCSI in 1911. He was made a companion of the Imperial Service Order in 1903, and in 1904 was appointed honorary colonel of Probyn's Horse, an appointment he held until his death aged ninety-one. He died on 20 June 1924, at Sandringham, Norfolk, and was buried at Kensal Green cemetery. He left no memoirs or papers, but his extensive correspondence with Field Marshal Lord Birdwood, who served many years in Probyn's Horse, survived in the British Library oriental and India Office collections. 


@@@@@


doc= 46662


Trevor, George Rice Rice-, fourth Baron Dynevor (1795-1869), politician, was born on 5 August 1795, the eldest son of George Talbot Rice, third Baron Dynevor (1765-1852), and his wife, Frances (1772-1854), third daughter of Thomas Townshend, first Viscount Sydney. George Talbot Rice used the surname De Cardonnell between 1793 and 1817. The younger George was educated at Westminster School and at Christ Church, Oxford, where he matriculated in 1812 but did not graduate. The Rice (or Rhys) family was descended from an old Welsh royal line; George Rice Rice, however, assumed the additional name of Trevor by royal licence (28 October 1824) on inheriting the estates of the Trevors of Glynde in Sussex. A month later, on 27 November 1824, he married Frances (1803-1878), eldest daughter of Lord Charles Fitzroy, with whom he produced four daughters but no male heir. 
By this time, Trevor had entered parliament, being returned unopposed for Carmarthenshire on 16 March 1820. An unflinching tory, and a 'thick and thin Church of England man', he opposed both the emancipation of Catholics in 1829 and the 'Reform Bill' in 1831, resigning his seat at that year's general election knowing that he disagreed with a majority of his constituents on the matter. In 1832, however, with the 'Reform Act' a fact of life, he recaptured the seat, having first indicated that he supported the maintenance of the corn laws and a reduction in the malt tax. Although Trevor's parliamentary career was uneventful, his friendship with the duke of Wellington -- he received an honorary DCL on the occasion of the duke's election as chancellor of Oxford University in June 1834 -- gave him a certain status in metropolitan Conservative circles. 
Trevor's most important public role, however, came during the Rebecca riots, an outbreak of turnpike gate breaking which swept through south-west Wales in 1842-4. The co-ordination of the official response to the disturbances fell to him when his ageing father, then lord lieutenant of Carmarthenshire, appointed him his vice-lieutenant. His response was uncompromising. He forced the county quarter sessions to establish a professional police force, called in troops of the 73rd infantry regiment and the 4th light dragoons, and worked closely with Colonel James Francis Love, commander of the south Wales military district, to restore order. Nor were the troops simply for show: he assured a meeting of magistrates at Newcastle Emlyn in June 1843 that he would order them to fire on the rioters if necessary. The response of the protesters was predictably fearsome: in September 1843, they audaciously dug a grave within sight of Dinefwr Castle, the family seat, and announced that Trevor would occupy it by 10 October. Trevor, however, surrounded by soldiers, survived unscathed. 
Once tranquillity had been restored, through an upturn in the economy and an act of parliament which addressed the administration of the turnpike trusts, Trevor continued as county MP until 1852, when his father died. His succession to the title released him from a political life of increasing frustration: after the Conservative split of 1846 he confessed, 'I cannot join the staff of Lord George Bentinck, cannot place confidence in Sir Robert Peel, nor join the ranks of Lord John Russell' ('Dod's Parliamentary Companion', 1847, 246). Although he attended the House of Lords regularly, voting consistently with the Conservative peers, he lost interest in Carmarthenshire politics, passing the administration of his interest to Lord Cawdor. In local affairs, however, he remained active, associating his name with useful projects such as the Carmarthen Literary and Scientific Institution and the Lifeboat Society. 
His elevation to the House of Lords as fourth Baron Dynevor, in April 1852, coincided with his appointment as militia aide-de-camp to the queen, with the rank of colonel, and in August 1861, he was appointed honorary colonel of the Royal Carmarthen and Pembroke militia. Dynevor died at Great Malvern on 7 October 1869, from an attack of paralysis, and was interred in the family vault at Barrington Park, in Gloucestershire. 


@@@@@


doc= 46663


Gee, Thomas (1815-1898), newspaper publisher and politician, was born at Denbigh on 24 January 1815, the second son of Thomas Gee (1780-1845), printer, and Mary Foulkes of Hendre'r-wydd, Denbighshire. He was educated at Grove Park School, Wrexham, and Denbigh grammar school; at fourteen he was apprenticed to his father, though he continued to attend the grammar school to read Greek and Latin with the masters there. In 1836, having finished his apprenticeship, he spent two years in London working at the offices of the publishers Eyre and Spottiswoode, before returning to his father's business in Denbigh in 1838. 
At this time Gee seriously contemplated a career as a preacher. In 1837 he wrote to his parents 'it is my wish to employ my talent (which I know is but very small) to the glory of God' (Gwynn Jones, 54) and began to preach with the Calvinistic Methodists. In 1838 he became a member of this connection's Denbighshire monthly meeting, of which he was to remain a member for the rest of his life, taking an especial interest in education and Sunday schools. Any thoughts Gee might have had of a career in the ministry, however, were terminated in 1845 when his father died, leaving him in sole charge of the family business. On 11 October 1842 he had married Susannah ('b'. 1817), daughter of John Hughes, Plas Coch, Llangynhafal, Denbighshire. They had six daughters, including Sarah Magdalene Matthews, and three sons. 
Gee's success as a publisher was the basis for the great influence he enjoyed in nineteenth-century Wales. His success was based on expansion of the business -- he was described as a 'publisher-wholesaler, printer, binder, newspaper proprietor, stationer and retail book-seller' (P. H. Jones, 30) -- and stemmed from a number of factors. In part, he was able to exploit his denominational connections: for example, he published the official hymnbook used by all Calvinistic Methodists before 1876. However, he was also alert to developments in the market for Welsh-language texts, and put himself in a position to supply it with a wide range of general religious books, collections of sermons by famous preachers, and poetry. Although his methods did not make him popular with everyone -- he fell out badly with some of his authors -- his motivation was by no means the simple pursuit of profit. From early publishing ventures such as the innovative quarterly 'Y Traethodydd' (which he published from 1845 to 1854), to the massive Welsh-language encyclopaedia 'Y Gwyddionadur' (1858-78), the total cost of which exceeded $20,000 -- Gee aimed deliberately to educate his compatriots through the medium of their native tongue. 
Perhaps Gee's most successful publishing venture, however, came in 1857, when he saw an opening in the market for a weekly Welsh-language newspaper. He told a friend that he planned a family paper 'of a superior class... of a distinctly religious character... and as liberal in its politics as you please' (P. H. Jones, 110). On 4 March 1857 'Baner Cymru' (known as 'Baner ac Amserau Cymru' after its merger with the Liverpool-based title 'Yr Amserau' in October 1859) was launched. 'Baner', with its highly talented staff, among whom were such luminaries of mid-Victorian Welsh politics as John Griffith (Y Gohebydd), became the most authoritative newspaper in the Welsh language -- what one contemporary called 'the mightiest regenerating engine in our country' (J. Davies to T. Gee, 24 July 1865, NL Wales, Gee MSS, 3305 D/41). Gee's influence pervaded its pages, and it was said that he checked all copy before it went to press, as well as writing many of the leading articles. Under his editorship 'Baner' defined the agenda of Liberal politics in Wales for a generation: vote by ballot, the disestablishment of the Anglican church in Wales, the abolition of tithes (especially during the so-called 'tithe war' of 1886-9, in which Gee played a leading part), Welsh home rule, and even, in the 1890s, land nationalization were all key issues backed by the paper. 
If, on occasion, 'Baner' overstepped the mark in its enthusiasm, as in 1868, when Gee was successfully sued for having libelled a Conservative candidate at the general election, the paper helped make Gee 'the ruling power of all the great Liberal Party of North Wales' (reminiscence of Lady Watkin Williams [1913], NL Wales, Gee MSS 8319E). Yet he remained personally unambitious, and asked few favours from either the party or from the individuals whose popularity his newspaper did so much to promote. Though offered several chances to stand as a candidate for parliament himself, notably at Cardiganshire in 1867 and South Caernarvonshire in 1885, he preferred to remain in his native town, where he could keep a close eye on his business interests. His political activism was confined to the affairs of the region. He was a familiar figure on the platform at Liberal political meetings across north Wales, and he also took a leading role in the municipal affairs of Denbigh. And alongside his political activities, he always remained an active member of the Calvinistic Methodists. 
Gee died in Fronallt, Denbigh, on 28 June 1898, and was buried in the new graveyard at Denbigh. As a businessman, he played a part in nearly all the important developments in the Denbighshire economy after 1850, having, in addition to his publishing business, interests in mining and slate quarrying, the Ruthin Soda Water Company (of which he was a director), and both the Vale of Clwyd Railway and the North Denbighshire Building Society (of which he was the first president in 1866). Yet his fame and posthumous reputation ultimately rested on his political role. To Welsh politicians of the generation before the First World War Gee was 'one of the Pioneers of Welsh liberty' (O. Williams to T. Gee [1892], NL Wales, Gee MSS 3809D); to his first biographer and former employee, T. Gwynn Jones, writing in 1913, Gee 'was the one man who practically made modern Wales what it is politically' (T. Gwynn Jones to Miss Gee, 12 Sept 1911, NL Wales, Gee MSS 3811D). 


@@@@@


doc= 46664


Hughes, Thomas John (1853-1927), journalist, was born in Bridgend, Glamorgan, the son of the Revd Thomas Hughes of Miskin, Llantrisant, Glamorgan. He rose to prominence in October 1886 when he published under the pseudonym Adfyfr the first of three essays on the political condition of Wales in the Liberal 'Daily News' (on the land question on 12 October 1886, the established church on 27 October 1886, and education on 16 November 1886). These essays appeared as 'Neglected Wales' (1887), the first of a series of pamphlets published by the South Wales Liberal Federation. Third in the series was his 'Landlordism in Wales' (1887), an indictment of the power of landowners and the 'politico-ecclesiastical alliance in Wales', endorsed in an appendix by Stuart Rendel, Liberal MP for Montgomeryshire (1880-94) and president of the North Wales Liberal Federation. Privately, however, Rendel and other Welsh Liberal leaders disapproved of Adfyfr's overblown political style and sought to marginalize his influence within Welsh Liberalism. A pamphlet entitled 'The Welsh Magistracy' also appeared under the name Adfyfr. Between January 1888 and May 1889 he was the founding editor of the bilingual Liberal nationalist monthly 'Cymru Fydd', and in June 1890 was delegated to represent the North and South Wales Liberal Federations on the general committee of the National Liberal Federation. 
In declining health from the early 1890s, Adfyfr turned to newspaper journalism, becoming south Wales correspondent of the 'Daily News' and the 'Manchester Guardian', papers which he praised for having 'substantially assisted the Principality to speak its deep-seated convictions in English' ('Cymru Fydd', 1/3, 1888, 126). He was also for more than forty years before his death Pontypridd and Rhondda reporter for the 'South Wales Daily News', and served for a time as its sub-editor. He augmented his income by acting as a private secretary to Alfred Thomas, Liberal MP for East Glamorgan (1885-1910), and as an official shorthand writer in the bankruptcy court and public inquiries. He was a practising Calvinistic Methodist, and helped establish the St David's Calvinistic Methodist Church, Gelliwastad Road, Pontypridd. He resisted on grounds of ill health Lord Rhondda's inducements to return to active political life during the First World War, and devoted his final years to newspaper reporting and shorthand writing. He died of heart disease at Pontypridd on 24 October 1927, leaving a widow, six sons, and six daughters. He was buried at Glyntaf cemetery, Pontypridd, on 28 October 1927. 


@@@@@


doc= 46667


Castrucci, Pietro (1679-1752), violinist and composer, was born in Rome, the elder of the two known children of Domenico Castrucci (died in or after 1709). Details of his early life are scarce, but his father was a violinist, and together they were in the employment of Francesco, Marchese Ruspoli, during Handel's periodic visits to Rome ('c'.1707-9). Together with his younger brother, the violinist Prospero Castrucci (1690?-1760), Castrucci was a pupil of Archangelo Corelli. Richard Boyle, third earl of Burlington, another Corelli pupil and an English patron of Handel, took the brothers to London. From their arrival in May 1715 until 1721 or later, they resided at his home in Piccadilly. 
At his first public appearance in London (23 July 1715) Castrucci performed 'several Solos on the Violin, intirely New' (Avery, 1.363). By 1716 he had become a member of the orchestra at the King's Theatre, Haymarket. In 1718 Castrucci became leader of the newly established Royal Academy of Music, a post in which he remained until 1737. Handel became 'master of the orchestra' in November 1719, and many of his subsequent works featured the Castrucci brothers prominently. The operas 'Sosarme' (1732), 'Ezio' (1732), and 'Orlando' (1733), together with the oratorio 'Deborah' (1733), all indicate the involvement of an instrument called the 'violetta marina'. This was probably a viola d'amore with sympathetic strings like that described by Leopold Mozart as an 'English violet' (Mozart, 12). Burney suggests that Castrucci invented this instrument, first playing it at his own benefit concert in 1732. Desirous of making an impression, Castrucci often included novelty attractions at his benefits. On 26 February 1731, for example, he advertised his intention to execute 'twenty-four notes with one bow' (Burney, 'Hist. mus.', 2.770), probably in the giga of his sonata op. 2 no. 2. This was parodied the following day in an advertisement which suggested that a solo would be played by 'the last violin of Goodman's Field's playhouse' including 'twenty-five notes with one bow' (ibid.). 
Most contemporary commentators speak favourably of Castrucci's playing. Sir John Clerk of Penicuik, who attended the last night of 'Orlando' on 5 May 1733, noted that the violins 'made a terrible noise & often drown'd the voices', but singled out the Castrucci brothers 'who play'd with great dexterity' (Dean and Knapp, 33). Sir John Hawkins likewise thought Castrucci 'an excellent performer on the violin' (Hawkins, 891), but Burney suggests that 'he was long thought insane... his compositions were too mad for his own age', but 'too sober for the present' (Burney, 'Hist. mus.', 2.1004). Burney's ascription of Castrucci as the subject of Hogarth's 'Enraged Musician' is now considered unlikely by Hogarth experts, and the subject is more likely to be the German oboist and flautist John Festing although this identification has also been questioned. 
Castrucci was extremely active outside the opera, performing frequently at various London concert venues and theatres. However, anecdotal accounts of his later years suggest that his playing declined significantly. In 1737 Handel seemingly decided to replace him as leader of the opera orchestra, Castrucci's reluctance leading Handel to devise a scheme to shame him into resignation: 'Handel... composed a concerto, in which the second concertino was contrived, as to require an equal degree of execution with the first; this he gave to Clegg, who in the performance of it gave such proofs of his superiority, as reduced Castrucci to the necessity of yielding the palm to his rival. (Hawkins, 891)' This dismissal did not signal the end of his career, and on 28 August 1739 Castrucci became one of the original subscribers to the Royal Society of Musicians. Little is known of his activities during the 1740s, although he advertised a yearly benefit concert in the 'General Advertiser' for 30 March 1748. 
Burney observed 'that among the many passages of Corelli and Handel' in Castrucci's compositions, there are 'several of his own', but qualified this caustic comment with the statement that they nevertheless show Castrucci 'to have been a man of genius, well acquainted with the bow and finger-board of his instrument' (Burney, 'Hist. mus.', 2.1004). In collaboration with his friend Francesco Geminiani, a fellow Roman and pupil of Corelli, Castrucci produced 'Six Sonatas or Solos... for a Flute and a Bass' ('c'.1720), of which he probably wrote the first four. His other significant extant published works include two further sets of twelve violin sonatas and a set of twelve concerti grossi which Hawkins described as 'hardly known' but having 'great merit' (Hawkins, 891). Castrucci's op. 1 sonatas, dedicated to his patron Lord Burlington, are remarkably similar to, but much shorter than, Corelli's op. 5 sonatas, and together with op. 2 call for a number of extended techniques including 'bariolage', multiple stops, scordatura tunings, and 'battute'. Many of the movements also have descriptive titles, such as 'Venetiana', 'Commodo alla francese', or 'Corni da cacci'. The concerti grossi op. 3 are much more simplistic, bearing a close resemblance to those by Geminiani. Some of Castrucci's music manuscripts are in the British Library and the Gesellschaft der Musikfreunde, Vienna. 
In 1750 Castrucci went to Dublin, where he appeared at the Charitable Musical Society at the Fishamble Street Music Hall on 5 October. Two of his concertos were performed at the Philharmonic Society later that year, and he held a benefit concert on 21 February 1751. He died in Dublin between 7 February and 7 March 1752, probably of natural causes. His funeral took place on 10 March at St Mary's Church, Dublin, and despite his extreme poverty, it was a magnificent event. 'Faulkner's Journal' reported that his cortege included 'the whole Band of Musick from the New Gardens in Great Britain St., who will perform the Dead March in Saul, composed by Mr Handel' (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA', 3.105). He was buried in St Mary's. 


@@@@@


doc= 46671


Clancy, Michael (1703/4-1776), physician and playwright, was born in co. Clare, Ireland, the son of Daniel Clancy, physician. He was sent to school in Paris, where he attended the College de Navarre from about 1712 until 1716; he then ran away after an escapade in which he had played truant in order to glimpse the duke of Ormond, who was paying a visit to Mary of Modena, queen of James II, at St Germain. 
Back in Ireland with no money and only a vague idea of where his family home was, Clancy was fortunate to be taken in by a certain Captain Tracy, son of the judge Robert Tracy. Tracy was under some sort of obligation to Clancy's father, who, it seems, had by this time died. At Tracy's expense Clancy was sent to Kilkenny College, where he was to remain for three years, during which time he made the acquaintance of the noted physician Richard Helsham. Tracy's sudden mental breakdown and the consequent cessation of his remittances threw Clancy back on his own resources. This time he was successful in making contact with his relations in co. Clare; despite their somewhat straitened circumstances they were able to send him to university. 
Clancy was entered as a sizar at Trinity College, Dublin, on 6 June 1721, aged seventeen. He was singularly unimpressed by the academic life of the college, and in his 'Memoirs' wrote some very tart words on the subject. Especially disillusioning to the rather naive young man was the realization that advancement depended not on merit but on favour. While at Trinity he cemented his friendship with Helsham, who was a senior fellow and 'the only Person to whom I owed any Obligations while I was at the University' (Clancy, 1.46). 
Clancy left Trinity College in 1724 without taking a degree, having resolved to return to France to study medicine. He studied at Bordeaux for three years, and after leaving there about 1728 was resident for some time at Montpellier, where it is probable that he continued his studies. He graduated MD, but it is not clear from which university he gained his degree. He loved France and made many friends there, chief among whom was Montesquieu. A strong attachment developed between Clancy and the older man, and for six glorious months during 1725 Clancy was Montesquieu's feted guest at his country estate at La Brede, near Bordeaux. 
By 1737 Clancy had returned to Dublin, where his career as a physician was brought to an abrupt end when he 'had the Misfortune of loosing his Sight by a cold' (Clancy, 2.54). Completely blind and unable to practise medicine, Clancy, with admirable resolve and an optimism born of ignorance, turned to literature for his livelihood. He worked up into a play a series of dramatic sketches he had composed for amusement during the summer of 1737; the play, 'The Sharper' (1750), a comedy inspired by the life of the notorious Francis Charteris, was performed at the Smock Alley Theatre, Dublin, in January 1738, and was well received. Clancy made the acquaintance of Swift, who had praised 'The Sharper', and quickly became a well-known figure in Dublin society. A second play, 'Tamar Prince of Nubia', was performed at Smock Alley in 1740. 
Blindness did not prevent Clancy from travelling, and in 1741 he was again in France. He was now at the height of his literary celebrity. In 1744 he visited London, where on 2 April Dryden and Lee's 'Oedipus' was revived at Drury Lane Theatre with Clancy himself taking the part of Tiresias, in a performance given for his benefit. 
Clancy was possessed of a very useful skill in making friends in high places. He was on good terms with Viscount Molesworth and with the viceroy, the earl of Chesterfield; and in 1745 he secured the grant of a life pension from the Irish public purse of $40 per annum. After his next play, 'Hermon Prince of Choraea' (1746), Clancy retired from writing for the stage. His 'Memoirs' appeared in 1750 in two volumes, and in 1751 he produced 'The Wanderings of the Heart and Mind', a translation of the novel 'Les egarements du coeur et de l'esprit' by C.-P. Jolyot de Crebillon; he continued to publish occasional verse up to the end of his life. 
Clancy was very well aware of the charge -- not entirely groundless -- that his success derived from his blindness rather than his talent as a writer. He certainly considered himself fortunate in his short career as a playwright, and he quit the world of the theatre with little regret. 
On 1 September 1752 Clancy opened a grammar school in Dublin for the teaching of the Greek, Latin, and French languages, and he devoted the rest of his life to pedagogy. On 4 June 1758 he was appointed master of the diocesan school at Kilkenny, a post which he held until his death. 
John O'Keeffe recalls meeting Clancy at Kilkenny about 1769: 'He was upwards of eighty, quite blind, yet seemed comfortable in circumstances, though living entirely alone. He was polite and communicative; yet melancholy; a large, well-looking man, with a great white wig' (J. O'Keeffe, 'Recollections', 1826, 1.vi.212). 
Clancy died at Kilkenny on 7 April 1776. 


@@@@@


doc= 46672


Cianchettini, Pio Lewis Frederick (1799-1851), composer and pianist, was born on 11 December 1799 in London, the second child of the Roman-born Francesco (Francis) Cianchettini (1765/6-1833), head of the London music publishers Cianchettini and Sperati, and his Bohemian wife, Catharina Veronica Anna Rosalia Dussek (1769-1833), a pianist, harpist, singer, music teacher, and composer. Taught and fostered intensively by his parents, Cianchettini became a precocious linguist and a child prodigy on the piano. At a recital in the concert chamber of the London Opera House (now Her Majesty's Theatre) in 1805 he played an original sonata and improvised on given themes; later that year his father took him on an extensive and successful concert tour of Germany, Holland, and France, and by the age of nine he was performing a grand concerto of his own composition. Some idea of the manner in which he was produced may be gained from the dedication of his op. 2, published by his father's firm in 1807: 'To His Royal Highness, the Prince of Wales, these two Fantasias for the Piano-Forte, composed at the age of seven years by Pio Cianchettini surnamed Mozart Britannicus are... offered as a 'Primizia' of his Infantine Musical Talents.' The flattering sobriquet the 'British Mozart' was, however, due more to Cianchettini's juvenile ability than to any lasting genius, and his early reputation fast declined, though in adult years he produced varied and abundant piano music as well as choral and vocal pieces, including a 'Benedictus' for three soloists and chorus, a cantata based on Milton's 'Paradise Lost', and settings of Pope's 'Ode on Solitude' and the Shakespeare song 'Take, o take those lips away'; he also arranged a large group of Italian canons by Giambattista Martini, edited works by Mozart and Beethoven, and made himself a secondary fame as accompanist, conductor, and composer for the soprano Angelica Catalani during her English concert tours. But he never enjoyed the pecuniary fortune which might have been expected. From the mid-1830s he resided much in Cheltenham, where he taught music and performed his own works and those of his mother's family before often quite small audiences in St James's Church, at the Rotunda, and at the new organ of the Roman Catholic chapel in Somerset Place, to which he was as generous as circumstances allowed. In his public appearances he was frequently associated with two other provincial musicians, the tenor Antonio Sapio and the organist and string player John Uglow. On 21 June 1841 he married Emma Athanasia Everill (1820-1849), with whom he had a son, Francis Pio Thomas, born on 20 September 1842, but indifferent health and money problems kept the family moving from address to address, and Emma died on 10 April 1849. Cianchettini, who suffered from chronic diarrhoea, died at 10 Northwick Terrace, Cheltenham, on 13 July 1851 and was buried at St Mary's parish church on 18 July. Friends in the town raised a subscription for his destitute orphaned son. 


@@@@@


doc= 46674


Collins, Charles (c.1680-1744), bird and mammal painter, of whose parents nothing is known, lived and worked in London. George Vertue noted that he 'painted all sorts of fowl and game. He drew a piece with a hare and birds and his own portrait in a hat' ('Anecdotes of Painting', 2.122). He used watercolour when making records of single species of birds and mammals for patrons, and he painted still life and composite pictures in oil. A set of twelve oil paintings of landscapes with British birds was used as the basis for a set of twelve oblong folio etched prints, without text, published under the title 'Icones avium cum nominibus anglicis: designed by Charles Collins, published by him and John Lee according to the act of parl. Sept 29th 1736'. Six were engraved by Henry Fletcher and six by James Mynde. Nine of the original oil paintings are at Anglesey Abbey, Cambridgeshire; the remaining three were sold at Sothebys, London, in July 1995 from the collection of the Gilby family. The set included 114 figures of birds flying, preening, and perching, in landscapes with cottages or river landscapes. Collins's bird figures are more lively and better drawn than those of his contemporaries Eleazar Albin, George Edwards, and Peter Paillou, though they are not as natural and convincing as those of the Flemish artist Pieter Casteels, who issued a similar set of twelve prints from his oil paintings under the title 'Icones avium' ('c'.1726). Collins also painted several still lifes in oil of dead birds. 
Many of Collins's watercolour studies were made from stuffed birds in the collection of Taylor White of Wallingwells, Nottinghamshire, a judge on the north Wales circuit and an enthusiastic, wealthy collector of curios and natural history specimens. He commissioned Collins, Peter Paillou, and others to paint records of the live and stuffed birds and mammals in his collection, resulting in a long series of 659 watercolours which included 201 signed bird paintings by Collins (including a dodo) and some unsigned mammal paintings. Each bird drawing had one figure subject in a conventional composition with a grassy mound or stump; but Collins attempted to make his models appear alive and active. They were very well coloured, with the addition of delicate highlights on the soft feathering. Most of the signed drawings are dated 1737-9, but many others in his style are neither signed nor dated. This, the largest collection of his work, is in the Blacker Wood Library at McGill University, Montreal, Quebec. 
A preparatory watercolour study of a buzzard by Collins was used by Thomas Pennant for an illustration in his 'British Zoology' (1766). The watercolour for the buzzard ('Buteo buteo'), signed and dated 1739 (Cecil Higgins Art Gallery, Bedford), is particularly fine. With their finely detailed plumage of dead birds, and their sombre colouring, Collins's still-life paintings were done in the style of the Dutch old masters, as seen, for example, in 'Lobster on a Delft Dish' (1738, Tate collection). He frequently signed and dated his compositions. Charles Collins died in London in 1744. Examples of his work are in the collections of the British Museum, London; City of Birmingham Museum and Art Gallery; National Gallery of Ireland, Dublin; Leeds City Art Gallery; and the Minneapolis Institute of Arts. 


@@@@@


doc= 46675


Cecil, Mildred, Lady Burghley (1526-1589), noblewoman and scholar, was born in 1526, the eldest of five daughters and four sons of Sir Anthony Cooke (1505/6-1576), Edward VI's tutor, of Gidea Hall in Essex, and Anne (died 1553), daughter of Sir William Fitzwilliam of Milton, Northamptonshire, and Gaynes Park, Essex. She was educated at home by her father, himself a noted scholar. As well as undergoing a classical education equal to that offered to boys, she developed a long-lasting commitment to the puritan leanings of her father. 
Mildred Cooke married William Cecil as his second wife in December 1545, bringing with her important kinship links. Her first child was not born until nine years after her marriage, although she was involved in the upbringing of her stepson Thomas Cecil. In total she had five children, of whom only Robert Cecil was still living at the time of her own death. There is little direct evidence of her role in the household or her relationship with her children apart from what can be deduced from William Cecil's writings after her death, where he refers to strong affective ties. According to his eulogy on her monument in Westminster Abbey, Mildred was 'dearest above all' and 'far beyond the race of womankind'. For her part Mildred Cecil in a letter wrote of her happiness and 'everlasting comfort... living with this noble man in divine love and charity' (BL, Lansdowne MS 104, fol. 158'r'). Writing to his son Robert, William Cecil refers to 'the virtuous inclinations of thy matchless mother, by whose tender and godly care thy infancy was governed, together with thy education under so zealous and excellent a tutor' (Wright, 9). 
Wimbledon Manor was the chief home of the Cecils for ten years after 1550. Cecil continually added to the family property, buying land and building a great house in the Strand and subsequently further houses in the country. The household governed by Mildred Cecil was substantial, numbering at least fifty people, and grew in size as William Cecil became more significant politically; he was ennobled as Baron Burghley in 1571. The Cecils obtained several wardships, and a number of young men whose families sought advancement and connections for them were sent to live in the Burghley household. In addition, they were joined by the three daughters of the unhappy marriage of the Cecils' daughter Anne to Edward de Vere, earl of Oxford, after their father rejected them. 
As Burghley's wife, Mildred Cecil was in a key position to exercise influence. She was known to have acted as an intermediary between petitioners and her husband, receiving at least one substantial payment of $250 in 1580. Her importance to her husband can be seen in letters to her in 1560 from three of the Scottish leaders negotiating the treaty of Edinburgh, including William Maitland, Lord Lethington. Cecil was urging the queen against her inclinations to commit herself to military involvement in Scotland. The letters were couched in terms indicating that Mildred Cecil had a considerable knowledge of the issues under discussion and could influence her husband in the attempt to secure English support against the French presence in Scotland. These political skills can be seen again in a single letter of advice, written in Latin and dating from 1573, to her cousin William Fitzwilliam, the lord deputy of Ireland. The letter demonstrates that Mildred Cecil was not afraid to give advice even on public affairs at a high level. 
By reputation among her contemporaries Mildred Cecil was supremely well educated. Strype later said she spoke Greek as easily as she spoke English, and she received three dedications of books. However, she left few manuscripts; those that do exist confirm her reputation for scholarship, revealing her fluency in both Greek and Latin and her interest in classical and religious authors. She made several lengthy translations including a sermon of Basil the Great from the Greek. Her preface reveals an appreciation of the art of translation while at the same time presenting the conventional modesty of intention. In a letter to the fellows of St John's College, Cambridge, written in Greek, she appears at ease, referring with gratitude to the hospitality she received on a visit with her husband and her desire to mark the occasion with an appropriate gift: the polyglot 'Bible' she presented in 1580. Ballard adds that she also sent an epistle in Greek, written in her own hand. Having inherited only three books from her father, over a number of years Mildred Cecil built up an impressive library mainly in Latin and Greek; some thirty volumes still exist inscribed with her name. The titles indicate the breadth of her intellectual interests and the depth of her scholarship, covering medical texts, literature, history, religious commentaries, and church fathers; many of them were printed abroad. Seventeen of her books in Latin, Greek, French, and English remain at Hatfield House, which became her son's property. Lady Burghley was the owner of one of the finest private libraries of the day. 
Mildred Cecil died at Cecil House in the Strand on 4 April 1589. Evidence of the extent of her concerns can be seen in the disposal of her property. She made a number of charitable bequests at her death, as well as gifts of books and money during her lifetime. Many of these she concealed even from her family by the use of intermediaries such as Dean Goodman of Westminster; in 1579 two scholarships were granted to St John's College, Cambridge, in this way. A number of gifts were structured in an attempt to create work. For example, in 1583 wool and flax were provided for the poor women of Cheshunt to process, and in 1586 she funded a scheme through the Haberdashers' Guild to provide loans for tradesmen. She also made more conventional donations, including provisions and money to the poor in Cheshunt. Mildred Cecil gave careful thought to the disposal of her library and divided her books between a number of institutions. In addition to her gift of the 'Bible' to St John's, Cambridge, in 1587 she gave Christ Church, Oxford, eight volumes of Galen's works: three in Latin and five in Greek. She also gave two books each to St John's College, Oxford, and to Westminster School. 
After Mildred Cecil's death, Lord Burghley arranged an impressive funeral involving 315 mourners as 'a testimony of my harty love which I did beare hir, with whom I lyved in the state of matrimony forty and tow yers contynually without any unkyndnes' (BL, Lansdowne MS 103, fol. 167'r'). A further indication of Burghley's devotion to his wife and their unfortunate daughter Anne can be seen in his joint memorial to them in the chapel of St Nicholas at Westminster Abbey. It is a substantial monument, containing more than the usual effigies; a lengthy eulogy testifies to the importance of his wife to him. 


@@@@@


doc= 46678


Cockburn, Patrick (d. 1568), Church of Scotland minister, was born at Choicelee, Berwickshire, in the early years of the sixteenth century, the second of the five sons of Christopher Cockburn (died 'c'.1520) and his wife, Margaret Hoppringle. The family was a cadet branch of the Cockburns of Langton. The head of the house, Cockburn's uncle Sir William Cockburn, was slain at Flodden in 1513. Cockburn matriculated at the University of St Andrews on 24 February 1526, and graduated BA in the same year (deferment of formal matriculation until graduation was not uncommon at the time). Afterwards he went to Paris to complete his education, and excelled in the study of Latin, Greek, and Hebrew. On his return to Scotland it seems likely that he was engaged to teach at his old university. He was also appointed prebendary of Pitcox in the collegiate church of Dunbar, Haddingtonshire, in which capacity he was present at the election of his kinswoman Janet Hoppringle as prioress of Coldstream, Berwickshire, on 23 February 1538. 
In 1548 Cockburn was one of the attendants licensed to go to France with Lord James Stewart (afterwards earl of Moray), commendator of St Andrews Priory and probably a student of his. For most of the following decade Cockburn divided his time between St Andrews and Paris, where he became professor of oriental languages at the Sorbonne. While there he published two doctrinal works: 'Oratio de utilitate et excellentia verbi Dei' (1551), with a dedicatory epistle to his friend John Hamilton, archbishop of St Andrews, in which he reflects, among other things, on the pleasure he derives from teaching; and 'De vulgari sacrae scripturae phrasi' (1552), with a dedicatory epistle to Lord James Stewart, who in the same year granted him a pension of $50 per annum from the rents of the kirk of Leuchars in Fife. The former work was popular enough to be translated into French by Jacques Vincent in 1553. At St Andrews Cockburn published 'In Dominicam orationem pia meditatio' (1555), believed to be the first printed book to mention Mary, queen of Scots, by name. On 15 November 1557 Cockburn was one of several persons elected to an academic committee of his old college, St Mary's, at the University of St Andrews. He was in Paris in April 1558, once more in the company of his protege Lord James Stewart, to attend the wedding of Queen Mary and the dauphin (afterwards Francois II). He remained there to see through the press a second and much enlarged edition of 'De vulgari sacrae scripturae phrasi' in July. 
Cockburn, who had always leaned towards the reformers, openly joined the protestant party at the advent of the Reformation in Scotland in the following year. In 1561 he published 'In secundae partis catechismi (quae est de simbolo quod apostolicum vocant) enarrationem, de fide, et iustificatione, praefatio', part of a much longer work which, in the foreword, Cockburn complains he has not money to publish. In 1562 he became first protestant minister of Haddington, a post he held until his death. It is inconceivable that he would not have known John Knox, a native of Haddington, who must have preached there many times. Along with Thomas Hepburn, David Lindsay, and John Craig, Cockburn was appointed in 1562 to preach in the unplanted kirks (that is, those lacking ministers) of the Merse in Berwickshire. In the same year his name was mentioned for the superintendency of Jedburgh; and in 1563 he was appointed chaplain of Trinity aisle in the parish of Haddington. 
Cockburn died at Haddington in 1568 and was buried there. He was renowned in his lifetime for his learning and erudition, as also, in marked contrast to the tenor of the age, for his moderation and humanity. 


@@@@@


doc= 46686


Chaloner, Edward (1590/91-1625), Church of England clergyman, was born at Chiswick, Middlesex, the second of the four surviving sons of Sir Thomas Chaloner (1563/4-1615), naturalist and courtier, and his first wife, Elizabeth (1568-1603), daughter of William Fleetwood, recorder of London. He matriculated at Magdalen College, Oxford, on 22 February 1605 and graduated BA on 8 July 1607, proceeding MA on 15 May 1610. On the occasion of the visit to Magdalen in August 1605 of Prince Henry (Chaloner's father was the young prince's tutor) he was among several undergraduates who took part in disputations before the prince, and later it was Chaloner who, in the name of the college, presented him with two pairs of gloves. He was elected a fellow of All Souls College in 1611, graduated BD on 30 May 1617, and was created DD on 6 November 1619. 
By this time Chaloner had already risen to prominence as a preacher and a man of learning. In 1617, at the invitation of John King, bishop of London, he preached a sermon at Paul's Cross in London, perhaps the most public pulpit in England. He published 'The Masse Displayed' (1619), a translation of 'La messe en francois' (1610) by the French protestant Jean Bede de la Gormandiere. He preached sermons at several official university occasions, including the annual 'Oxford Act' in 1620. By 1621 he was a royal chaplain, an appointment renewed with the accession of Charles I in 1625. A collection of his preaching, 'Sixe Sermons', appeared in 1622 (a further collection, also entitled 'Six Sermons', was published posthumously in 1629). 
In October 1622 Chaloner resigned his fellowship at All Souls, and shortly afterwards married Elizabeth ('b'. 1604), daughter of George Hovenden, canon of Canterbury, and niece of the warden of All Souls. They had a son, Thomas, who died in infancy. Chaloner preached in Canterbury Cathedral on more than one occasion, presumably at the invitation of his father-in-law. At Oxford, Chaloner was a protege of the chancellor, William, third earl of Pembroke, and when the headship of St Alban Hall fell vacant Pembroke chose Chaloner to fill it; he was admitted as principal on 29 December 1624. 
Chaloner's polemical work 'Credo ecclesiam sanctam catholicam: the authoritie, universalitie and visibilitie of the church' (1625; 2nd edn, 1638) was a contribution to the current debate about whether the antecedents of the Church of England were to be found inside or outside the Church of Rome. Dismissing the idea of a simple polarity, Chaloner skilfully argues for a complex synthesis -- 'our Church had in those dayes a twofold subsistencie, the one separate from the Church of Rome, the other mixt and conjoyned with it' (Chaloner, 'Credo', 91) -- that is, separate in the persons of all the early reformers, and conjoined in the persons of all those who retained in their hearts the simple faith of the early church, and who were 'baptised into Christs Truth, and not the Popes errors' (ibid., 95). Published in the same volume with 'Credo' was 'Unde Zizania? The Originall and Progresse of Heresie', a sermon that Chaloner had preached before James I at Theobalds in Hertfordshire in 1624. 
In religion Chaloner was a Calvinist episcopalian very much in tune with the then prevailing orthodoxy of the Church of England establishment under Archbishop George Abbot. He charts a course between, on the one hand, the Arminians -- 'shall we feare... lest Altars and Images be taken away?... Neither our Prayers nor Sacrifices stand in need of such trimming' (Chaloner, 'Sixe Sermons', 321-2) -- and, on the other, the puritans, who 'cannot brooke the Pope in the world, [but] would be glad, were they of the number, to have ten in a Parish' (ibid., 182-3). 
Chaloner deplored obfuscation of any kind, and valued exposition through clear and precise language, of which his sermons are models. His knowledge of the church fathers, the schoolmen, and more recent theologians was compendious, and his interests also ranged beyond theology: he was, for example, conversant with contemporary developments in science. His respect for learning was great, as was his scorn of ignorance: 'I could wish them more charitie then to grudge that other men see with two eyes, because they can see but with one' (Chaloner, 'Sixe Sermons', 347). He was signally ready to accept what he felt to be essential truths whatever their immediate source, whether from the ancient philosophers and poets 'who had not those lights that wee have, and yet saw farre more then many of us doe' (ibid., 338), or even from the Church of Rome: 'Christian libertie... ties us not to abrogate a good or indifferent thing for the abuse, but rather to preserve the substance, and to pare off the corruption' (Chaloner, 'Masse', preface). 
Chaloner died at St Alban Hall on 25 July 1625, aged thirty-four, a victim of an outbreak of the plague. His body was hurriedly buried the same night in the churchyard of St Mary the Virgin. A monument was later raised to his memory. 


@@@@@


doc= 46687


Althans, (Andrew) Henry (1784-1855), educationist, was born on 22 October 1784 at Whitechapel in the East End of London. He was the eldest son of Frederick Charles Althans, a corn factor, and his second wife, Margaretta Magdalen Jasper (1752-1789), who was partly of German origin. His mother's piety was commemorated by the posthumous publication of her papers, 'The Christian Character Exemplified' (1791). After attending a boarding-school at Greenwich run by John Bitterman, he conducted a business as a corn factor in London, having premises at Tower Hill from 1822 until his death. He probably married before 1805, but no details of his wife are known. 
Like his mother, who died when he was a child, Althans was devout; in 1811 he became a Sunday school teacher at the Sion Congregational Chapel in Whitechapel, and a little later he opened a school for pauper children near the Tower of London. When this school was forced to close he transferred his efforts to a Sunday school at Bethnal Green. In 1814 he helped to establish the east London auxiliary of the Sunday School Union, remaining a leading committee member for many years and editing tracts and magazines. In 1831, when Henry Dunn became secretary of the British and Foreign School Society, with its headquarters in Southwark, Althans was appointed half-time agent and inspector for the society's metropolitan schools within 12 miles of central London, at a salary of $80 a year. As he informed the parliamentary select committee on the state of education in 1834, it was his duty to visit schools 'unexpectedly' and keep in touch with teachers and committee members. His 1837 report on the Borough Road model school at Southwark contained a detailed description of the monitorial system and was the most informative account of Borough Road since Joseph Lancaster's day. 
In 1838, Althans gave evidence to the select committee on education of the poorer classes. He also wrote two reports on education in London, one on Whitechapel and the East End, and one on the south London parishes. He played a prominent part in the opening of the Abbey Street British day schools at Bethnal Green in 1840, becoming superintendent of the Sunday school section. A strong supporter of the monitorial system and of scriptural education, he was opposed to free education for the children of the poor, believing it would be little valued. On his retirement in 1854, he was presented with a portrait of himself which was later engraved in his memorial testimonial. Little is known about his family life: several of his sons worked as clerks at their father's corn factor business in George Street, Tower Hill; one of them, John (died 1882), was prominent in the Religious Tract Society. Althans died from hepatitis at his home, 12 Great Cambridge Street, Shoreditch, on 4 March 1855 and was interred at Abney Park cemetery, Stoke Newington. 


@@@@@


doc= 46688


Blair, Sir Robert (1859-1935), educational administrator, was born in Wigtown in south-west Scotland on 8 March 1859, the eldest of the ten children of William Blair and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Hood. His father, a Presbyterian, appears to have had a variety of jobs but was principally a cobbler by trade. Robert attended the Free Kirk school in Wigtown, where he was introduced to classical scholarship and academic rigour. The school catered for children from different social backgrounds, a style of education which he later recalled with approval. He was a pupil teacher at the Garlieston endowed school from 1873 to 1876 before entering Edinburgh University with the help of a bursary from the Edinburgh Galloway Association. The novelist S. R. Crockett was a fellow student and Blair appears as Rob Grier in Crockett's semi-autobiographical 'Kit Kennedy' (1899). 
After graduating MA in 1880 Blair taught for a short time in Kelso before moving to London in 1881 to take up an appointment at Aske's Hatcham School, New Cross, where he was a master for twelve years. During this period he became increasingly interested in science education, studying part-time for a London University BSc, and eventually taking responsibility for this area of work throughout the school. This experience helped him to secure his next appointment as headmaster of the Cheltenham Science and Technical School. This was followed in 1894 by six years as an inspector with the Scottish education department, after which Blair moved to Ireland, where he became inspector of science and art and subsequently assistant secretary for technical education. He was a member of Alfred Mosely's commission to study American education in 1903. 
The period of Blair's greatest influence came with his appointment in June 1904 as the first education officer to the London county council (LCC). Physically impressive (he had 'a magnificent leonine head'), and with a forceful personality, he came to exercise great authority at the LCC. His first task was to effect the fusion of the London school board and the technical education board; his work in this area helped to establish the professional role of the chief officer. He was president of the National Association of Education Officers in 1914 and was knighted in the same year. A strong believer in educating adolescents for employment, he recognized the fundamental importance of technical education. He reorganized technical education in London in 1913, attempting to raise its quality, but his failure to win support from London employers convinced him of the need for compulsory day-continuation schools for all those aged between fourteen and sixteen not in full-time education. As chairman of the Liberal Party's advisory committee on education he was able to exert a significant influence upon H. A. L. Fisher's 1918 'Education Act', which gave continuation schools a central role. Compulsory attendance was enforced by the LCC until opposition from employers became overwhelming in the council elections of 1922. In 1924, the year of Blair's retirement, London began the reorganization of elementary schools into junior and senior branches, which he had long advocated. 
In 1883 Blair married Ida Kathleen Westrup of Kensington, London, with whom he had four sons and one daughter. He died at his home, 33 Gresham Gardens, Golders Green, Middlesex, on 10 June 1935 and was buried in Hampstead cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 46689


Buchanan, James (1784-1857), headmaster, was born in Edinburgh on 10 March 1784. Nothing is known of his ancestry or early life. He married twice. With his first wife, whose name is not known, he had a son, William. He married his second wife, Isabella Anderson, in Edinburgh and was living at Haddington in 1812 when his son Ebenezer was born. A weaver by trade and a Primitive Methodist lay preacher, he served in the militia in Scotland during the Napoleonic war, moving to New Lanark in June 1814 to obtain employment in the recently opened mills. 
Buchanan's association with Robert Owen began in January 1816 when the Institution for the Formation of Character was opened and he became the first master in a 'rational infant school'. This day school for children aged between two and six was an integral part of the system, which included evening classes for older children and adults. Kindness was all-important, corporal punishment was forbidden, and competition had no place. Buchanan received specific instructions from Owen on many aspects of child education and evolved his own approach with emphasis on music, marching, movement, gymnastics, and concern for moral welfare. In 1819 Buchanan was recruited by Henry Brougham to open the first infant day school in England (the Westminster Free Day Infant Asylum), 'according to Mr. Owen's Plan', at 23 Brewers Green, later moving to Carey Street, Vincent Square, Westminster. The original school was administered by a committee representing mainly whig, radical, and nonconformist interests, charging no fees and relying solely on private philanthropy; but by 1824 a weekly fee of 1died was charged, substantially less than the fees then current in dame-schools and child-minding establishments. 
Buchanan's methods, predominantly personal, reflected the view that moral education was as important as basic subjects in the curriculum for working-class children. An excellent storyteller, he encouraged children's self-expression during simple object lessons when they did most of the talking, learning to observe and describe. Such interaction between teacher and child differed from the usual monitorial school relationships and impressed numerous influential visitors to Westminster, which served as a model for other infant schools. Contemporaries recalled that he never grew up, was simple-hearted and natural with a child's power to imagine and dramatize. Mystical, eccentric, completely unpractical, he was unable to cope with everyday school activities without the assistance of his wife, who was responsible for maintaining basic standards of behaviour and cleanliness. 
Buchanan was an active member of the New Jerusalem Church based on Emanuel Swedenborg's doctrines which endorsed the innocence of infancy and believed knowledge was derived from the senses. Samuel Wilderspin, who opened Spitalfields infant school in 1820, and David Goyder, master of Bristol Meadow Street infant school in 1821, both Swedenborgians, frequently visited Buchanan's school and acknowledged his influence on infant school methodology which they subsequently developed and publicized. Thomas Bilby, another protege, who taught at Vincent Square, opened infant schools in Chelsea and the West Indies and published 'The Infant Teacher's Assistant' in 1831. 
Buchanan conducted the London infant school, with the assistance of his wife and daughter Anne, for almost twenty years, with only a year's absence in 1826 when he established an infant school at Crich in Derbyshire. In 1839 he accepted an invitation from the New Zealand Land Company to promote infant schools but on reaching Cape Town, where his eldest son was living, he was persuaded to stay and was joined by his wife and daughter. Buchanan continued to support infant school development, moved to Natal in 1856 to join his sons, and died in Pietermaritzburg on 14 January 1857. 


@@@@@


doc= 46690


Findlay, Joseph John (1860-1940), educationist, was born on 6 September 1860 at Wesley Place, Barton upon Humber, Lincolnshire, the younger son of James Findlay, a Wesleyan minister, and his wife, Mary ('nee' Hare). He was educated at Kingswood School, Bath, at Wadham College, Oxford (where he gained firsts in mathematical moderations in 1881 and history in 1883), and at the universities of Jena and Leipzig, gaining his PhD at the latter in 1893. He was a teacher at Bath College (1884-5) and headmaster of two Wesleyan proprietary schools (Queen's College, Taunton, and Wesley College, Sheffield) between 1885 and 1891, before undertaking a study of the educational philosophy of Herbart (1776-1841) and methods of teacher training, at Jena and Leipzig under professors Rein and Ziller. Much of his later career in London and Manchester was spent disseminating Herbartian principles and methodology, and in integrating theory and practice in teacher training using the Ziller paradigm of the demonstration school. 
Findlay returned briefly to England to teach at Rugby School in 1893-4, which inspired his first book, 'Arnold of Rugby' (1897). He then visited North America to witness the spread of Herbartian ideas and to report on American education for the royal commission on secondary education. His appointment to a lectureship (1895-8) in the College of Preceptors, London, gave him the opportunity to lecture and to write about Herbatian methodology in the 'Journal of Education'. Above all it involved him in the creation of the first rationalist demonstration school of the King Alfred School Society, Hampstead. Invited to draw up the curriculum of the flagship school, he based it upon the 'scientific application' of the Herbartian aim of developing 'many-sided interests' through a 'concentrated' curriculum which integrated subjects. In 1898 he rejected the directorship of this co-educational day school (which excluded religion, preparation for examinations, and punishment) for the headship of Cardiff's first intermediate school for boys, although he remained associated with the venture as its president until 1937. 
At Cardiff Intermediate School for Boys, from 1898 to 1903, Findlay was involved in a very different educational experiment, with the introduction of a new kind of wider access secondary school under the 'Welsh Intermediate Education Act' of 1889. The curriculum, based upon rigid subject hierarchies with the classics at its apex, examination success, and formal discipline, was totally at variance with that of King Alfred's and with that which he devised for the Letchworth Garden City Association in 1903; its undue emphasis on the classics and examinations was criticized by Sir Philip Magnus. Nevertheless, the period was productive in that Findlay wrote 'Laudate, a Hymn and Tune Book for Secondary Schools' (1901) and 'Principles of Class Teaching' (1902), which broke new ground, being written from 'the workshop instead of the lecture room'. 
The integration of lecture room theory and classroom practice became Findlay's principal and controversial mission as Sarah Fielden professor of education at Manchester between 1903 and 1925, a post which he had been persuaded to accept rather than the more prestigious Bell professorship at Edinburgh. His use of the Sarah Fielden demonstration school to produce professionals able to analyse classroom processes rather than teachers versed in 'technical tricks of a dubious kind' placed him at the forefront of contemporary educational debate and at odds with the university authorities and many within his own department. His radical approach, well illustrated in 'The Demonstration Schools Record' (1908-12), was also found in the books he published both before his retirement in 1925 ('The School', 1912, 'The Young Wage-Earner', 1918), and afterwards (especially his celebrated two-volume 'The Foundations of Education', 1925, 1927), and in the active interest he had in the teaching of modern languages. 
In 1923 and 1924 Findlay unsuccessfully stood as the Labour Party parliamentary candidate for the Combined English Universities. On 20 December 1890 he married Charlotte Anne (1859/60-1938), daughter of Thomas James Denne, manufacturer, of Hemel Hempstead. Resident in Devon after his retirement, he died at Fulwood, Vansittart Road, Torquay, on 9 June 1940. 


@@@@@


doc= 46691


Gilkes, Arthur Herman (1849-1922), headmaster, was born on 2 November 1849 at Leominster, Herefordshire, the fourth child of William Gilkes (1813-1866), chemist and ink maker, and his wife, Mary ('nee' Heming). He had six brothers and four sisters. The family was Anglican with a Quaker ethos. Gilkes was educated at Shrewsbury School, for which he always felt a deep affection. Elected to a junior studentship at Christ Church, Oxford, in 1868, he gained first classes in classical moderations and 'literae humaniores'. He was one of the founders of the Oxford University association football club and a member of the Christ Church cricket eleven. He returned to Shrewsbury as an assistant master in 1873 and remained there until 1885, when he was appointed master of Dulwich College in succession to J. E. C. Welldon. 
During the twenty-nine years of his mastership, Gilkes secured Dulwich's position as one of the leading public schools of the period, particularly by its scholarship successes at Oxford and Cambridge. He had unshakeable convictions about education: he thought little of success in examinations or games, and attached prime importance to the moral training of the boys under his care, striving to instil into them a reverence for what is good, an instinct for doing right rather than wrong, and an appreciation of beauty. At first his hesitant manner, apparent mildness, and slight stammer led staff and boys to underrate his moral strength, but they soon learned that behind the diffidence was an iron determination. He was involved in every aspect of the school, knew every boy by name, and had a workload which would have broken a lesser man. Himself a noted classical scholar, he taught classics and divinity to the sixth forms. Plato was one of his favourite authors, and he adopted a Socratic method of moral instruction. He also introduced many of the ideals that he had admired at Shrewsbury: thriving science and engineering sides were established; he founded a school mission on Walworth Road; a rifle corps came into being; and the prefect system was reformed. Sport of all kinds was encouraged, but participation was voluntary. He punished little -- a Board of Education inspector's report in 1909 spoke of 'his kindly severity' -- and he had a natural simplicity which gave him a strong insight into the minds of his charges. Gentle as his manner was, however, his sarcasm could be withering. He once said, defending his habitual attitude of reserve, 'You know, I have to be very careful: I was meant by nature for a buffoon.' Many of his ideas were embodied in a series of semi-fictional books, which are virtually unreadable because the message, the paramount importance of goodness, takes precedence over everything else. 
As Gilkes grew older his immense stature (he was 6 feet 5 inches tall and weighed 18 stone), habitual air of gravity, and long beard ('Did he sleep with it inside or outside the bedclothes?', his younger pupils sometimes wondered) made him a formidable figure. In 1892 he married Millicent Mary (died in or after 1922), daughter of B. M. Clarke of Sydenham; they had four sons. In his latter years at Dulwich, Gilkes increasingly suffered from poor health and resigned in the summer of 1914. He incurred temporary unpopularity at the start of the war by a letter to the 'Daily Mail' criticizing the recourse to arms as 'miserable nonsense'. In 1915 he was ordained, serving as curate at St James's, Bermondsey. Christ Church, Oxford, appointed him in 1919 vicar of St Mary Magdalene, Oxford, where he remained until his death of a heart attack at his house, 53 Broad Street, Oxford, on 13 September 1922. 
Gilkes's third son, 


@@@@@


doc= 46692


Graves, John James (1832-1903), schoolmaster and advocate of teachers' associations, was born on 15 January 1832 at Chesterton, near Cambridge, the son of John and Sarah Graves. He was the eldest of eight children, six of whom survived childhood. His father was a shoemaker who in 1835 moved to Cambridge, where John James attended the national school. In 1844 the family moved to Meppershall, Bedfordshire, where his father took charge of the village school, with his two oldest sons acting as monitors. In 1846 John James (now aged fourteen) went to London, where he attended the central school of the National Society at Westminster before becoming an assistant at St Anne's Anglican charity school in Soho. In 1847 he became an assistant at St Paul's School, Cambridge, and in 1848 was appointed master of the school at Saleby in Lincolnshire. 
On 3 March 1851 Graves married Elizabeth Ann Lister of Saleby and in the same year he and his wife were appointed to take joint charge of the school at Hanging Houghton, near Lamport, Northamptonshire. Graves had attended a teachers' mutual improvement society at Cambridge in 1847-8 and, on moving to Lamport, joined the Northampton Church Teachers' Association which had been founded in 1846 with clergy support to hold monthly lectures and demonstration lessons. He also attended the first meeting of the Associated Body of Church Schoolmasters (ABCS) held in London in 1853, and in 1855, as secretary of the Northampton association, put before the ABCS a resolution in favour of admitting Anglican clergymen to membership. This was defeated by a large majority but, despite this defeat and his relative youthfulness, Graves was elected secretary of the ABCS in 1857. While remaining a firm supporter of the church system of education, he became a champion of teaching as a profession in its own right. He vigorously defended the teachers against the criticisms made in the Newcastle report (1861) but the imposition of the revised code in 1862 seemed to demonstrate the futility of the teachers' associations and Graves resigned as secretary of the ABCS in 1863. He was, however, re-elected three years later and re-formed the local associations into a General Association of Church Teachers, which played a key role in the movement towards a united profession. 
The extension of the franchise in 1867 stimulated discussion of the need for universal, compulsory elementary education and in 1868 the church schoolmasters formed a London association to bring their views before parliament. In April 1870 a joint conference was held with the nonconformist teachers' associations which agreed to support a general system of 'Bible' teaching, with a conscience clause similar to that adopted in the 'Education Act' of that year. In June a meeting representing teachers of all denominations agreed to establish a National Union of Elementary Teachers and elected Graves as its first president. His presidential address in September 1870 combined good sense and idealism in equal proportions. The union dropped the word 'Elementary' from its title in 1889 and Graves continued to serve on the executive of the union until 1900. In that year he was able to claim that many improvements had taken place in the status and position of the teacher, including better salaries, pensions on retirement, modifications in the code, and the abolition of payment by results. 
Graves was chairman of the Schoolmistress Newspaper Company, one of the founders of the Church Teachers' Benevolent Institution, and several times president of the Northampton and District Teachers' Association. He was, however, content to remain as the village schoolmaster and choirmaster at Lamport. His wife Elizabeth died in 1882 and on 21 May 1885 he married Georgiana Perkins (died 1919), schoolteacher at nearby Maidwell, when he was fifty-three and she thirty-three. With his first wife he had two sons, but the eldest died in 1874 and the second in infancy; there were no children of his second marriage. In the 1880s Graves was secretary of the Brixworth Conservative Association and in the 1890s served on the Brixworth Board of Guardians. He retired from the mastership of Lamport school in 1901 and died at Scaldwell, Northamptonshire, on 31 January 1903, of pernicious anaemia. He was buried at Lamport, where a memorial plaque was installed in the church by his fellow teachers. He was a man of firm convictions but without strong personal ambition, and it was said of him that 'he worked simply for teachers'. 


@@@@@


doc= 46693


Heller, Thomas Edmund (1837-1901), teachers' union leader, was born on 15 May 1837 at Bishopsteignton, Devon. He was the son of Edmund Heller, a schoolmaster, who later moved to Cheam, Surrey. Heller attended the Cheam Schools as a pupil and then a pupil teacher, subsequently winning a queen's scholarship to the Cheltenham Training College, where he trained as a teacher from 1857 to 1858. He was then appointed master of the college's model school, and in 1862 became headmaster of the National Schools, Hercules Buildings, Lambeth. He rapidly became active in various Church of England teachers' associations, and was at the founding meeting of the National Union of Elementary Teachers (NUET) in 1870. In 1873 he became the second general secretary of the union, known from 1889 as the National Union of Teachers (NUT), and the first paid secretary. He served until 1891, when he became seriously ill and retired. In 1895, St Andrews University awarded him an LLD for services to education. 
During Heller's period as general secretary the union's membership rose from under 7000 to over 18,000, and its finances became much more sound. He fought hard for a teachers' pension scheme, finally established soon after he retired, and campaigned against payment by results, the great 'bete noire' of teachers of his period. For a long time progress on the latter was limited by the unco-operative attitude of the education department; the rapid decline of the system after 1890 was the result of pressure from a variety of groups, of which the NUT was one. Within the union, Heller seems to have been a moderate, opposing excessively militant demands which were likely to alienate the church school teachers, while pursuing a reasonably vigorous policy of attempting to ameliorate grievances. He was also a member of the London school board from 1874 to 1888 and of the royal commission on education (the Cross commission) between 1886 and 1888. On this latter he supported educational liberalization and opposed rate aid for voluntary schools. 
Heller's career spans the transition from a largely church-dominated system of education to a much more secular one. He went to an Anglican evangelical training college, and was aligned with the church teachers' wing of the NUET in its early years. Subsequently his liberalism and his support for school boards seems to have caused some disaffection among church school teachers. He was also representative of the strong presence in the union of college-trained teachers: on the Cross commission, he supported the extension of college training and restrictions on untrained teachers. He symbolizes much that was characteristic of the NUET: church-influenced but also increasingly receptive to the pressures of secularization; educationally liberal but also concerned, in classic trade-union fashion, to limit entry to the teaching profession. 
Heller was married twice: in his early twenties to Margaret Jane White (died 1874); and in 1877 to Lydia C. Lee, a former headmistress, who also predeceased him. He had a daughter, who became a training-college tutor, and two sons, one a solicitor and the other an educational administrator. He was an enthusiastic musician and encourager of music in schools, and a freemason. He died on 17 February 1901 at his home, 51 Southside, Clapham Common, London, and was buried at Brompton cemetery, where also had been buried both his wives. 


@@@@@


doc= 46694


Holmes, Edmond Gore Alexander (1850-1936), inspector of schools, was born at Moycashel, co. Westmeath, Ireland, on 17 July 1850, the fourth son of Robert Holmes (1803-1870) and his wife, Jane, daughter of William Henn, a master in chancery, of Dublin. He had four brothers, including T. R. E. Holmes, and two sisters. He was educated at Merchant Taylors' School, London (1863-8), and at St John's College, Oxford (1869-74), where he gained first classes in classical moderations and 'literae humaniores'. He taught for a short time at Repton and Wellington before becoming tutor to the family of the eleventh earl of Winchilsea. A Conservative politician, Winchilsea was responsible for advancing Holmes's claim for an inspectorship after the return of the Disraeli government in 1874. Holmes was appointed as one of her majesty's inspectors of schools the following year at the age of twenty-four. He served in the West Riding of Yorkshire (1875-9), Kent (1879-97), Oxford (1897-1903), and Northumberland (1903-5). Touring the elementary schools of his districts, he observed and noted the effects of the 'payment by results' system on both teachers and pupils. The system led to the undue concentration on the 'three Rs'; mechanical methods were employed and the curriculum was largely confined to 'paying' subjects. As he wrote in his general report for 1878-9, 'I do not reproach them [the teachers] for this defect. I only wonder that it is not more striking and more disastrous than it is. Circumstances are against the teacher from first to last.' Holmes believed that it was through the teaching of English, especially literature and poetry, that the emotions could be cultivated and the child's imagination stimulated. 
In 1880 Holmes married Florence Mary, daughter of Captain P. M. Syme RA. They had two daughters and a son, Maurice Gerald Holmes, who entered the Board of Education in 1909 and was permanent secretary from 1937 to 1945. 
When Holmes was appointed chief inspector of elementary schools in 1905, he had thirty years' experience of inspecting. In that year, the Board of Education issued a volume entitled 'Suggestions for the Use of Teachers and Others Concerned with the Work of Elementary Schools' (later retitled 'Handbook of Suggestions for Teachers'), which encouraged teachers to apply the teaching methods that were most suitable to the needs of their school. He had been largely involved in the final form of the 'Handbook'. In the course of one of his many visits to elementary schools, in 1907 he discovered a school at Sompting, Sussex, which was a living embodiment of his philosophy. The headmistress, Harriet Finlay-Johnson, whom he called his 'Egeria', had created an atmosphere in which the children were engaged in all forms of self-expression through an imaginative approach that included respect for each individual. 
On his retirement in November 1910, Holmes published 'What is and What Might Be' (1911), a condemnation of the existing education system, which stressed competition rather than co-operation, emphasized visible results, and demanded the mechanical obedience of the child. The book attracted wide public attention. In 1912 he spent some time in Rome visiting the infant schools of Maria Montessori, an account of which was published by the Board of Education. Shortly before his retirement, he became involved in the furore over the so-called 'Holmes-Morant circular', a highly confidential memorandum which he had issued in January 1910 to inspectors, criticizing the quality of the local inspectorate. Its disclosure in parliament in March 1911 led to changes in office of the permanent secretary of the board, Robert Morant, and the president, Walter Runciman. 
Holmes was influenced by the idealist philosophy of T. H. Green, though differing from it in some aspects. He wrote extensively on education, philosophy, and religion, and was also a poet. He had become interested in theosophy in his youth and, inspired by the work of Madame Blavatsky, became president of the Quest Society in 1921. But his main interest was in education. He arranged a large conference for educational progressives with the Montessorian Society in 1914 at East Runton, Norfolk. Out of this grew the New Education Fellowship which became a world-wide movement. He died at 108 Cromwell Road, London, on 14 October 1936. 


@@@@@


doc= 46695


Kekewich, Sir George William (1841-1921), civil servant and politician, was born on 1 April 1841, the fourth son of Samuel Trehawke Kekewich (1796-1873), landowner and MP for South Devon, and his second wife, Louisa, only daughter of Lewis William Buck, MP for North Devon. He had three brothers and seven sisters. He was educated at Eton College and at Balliol College, Oxford, taking a second-class degree in 'literae humaniores' in 1863. Rejecting the possibility of a career in the church, Kekewich started reading for the law at Lincoln's Inn but in 1867 readily accepted an appointment to the education department as an examiner through the patronage of Sir Stafford Northcote, a distant relative. He was promoted to senior examiner in 1871 and in 1890 Lord Cranbrook appointed him permanent secretary on Patrick Cumin's death, being impressed by his grasp of departmental matters as well as his liberal education views. 
Kekewich desired equity in education and believed that schoolteachers should be free to implement the task entrusted to them. The education code of 1890 reflected his views and initiated the demise of the Draconian system of payment by results introduced by Robert Lowe in 1861. Similarly, the establishment of the principle of free elementary education in the 1891 'Education Act' owed much to his success in circumventing the more reactionary aims of Lord Salisbury. From 1892 to 1895 he enjoyed a harmonious working relationship with the Liberal vice-president A. H. D. Acland and their adjustments to the annual education department Code effected a liberalization of the elementary school curriculum. The Code was used also to force incompetent schools to improve and the issuing of 'Circular 321' in 1893 enforced adherence to the required standards for buildings and facilities. Innovations were made in the education of handicapped children, while steps were taken to initiate reform of the secondary school system. These changes were the necessary precursors to a more fundamental overhaul of the system, but one consequence of the election of Lord Salisbury's Unionist government in 1895 was that Kekewich would not oversee this. 
An initial rapport with his two new political masters, the eighth duke of Devonshire and Sir John Gorst, allowed Kekewich to continue to contribute to policy formulation and in 1900 he was appointed secretary of the newly created Board of Education. Thereafter he found it difficult to accept policies designed to establish new local education authorities based upon the county and county borough councils and involving the demise of the 'ad hoc' school boards, which he had encouraged since their inception in 1870. His opposition alienated him from the government and he was deemed unfit to ensure the successful implementation of the 1902 'Education Act'. His premature retirement was enforced in October 1902, with Robert Morant succeeding him. Kekewich's feeling of injustice was so strong that his first act was to resign from the Junior Carlton Club and thereafter he campaigned vigorously against the act. In 1906 he was elected as Liberal MP for Exeter, a seat he held until 1910; but his hopes that the Liberal governments would redress the imbalances of the 1902 act remained unfulfilled. His lively memoir, 'The Education Department and After' (1920), provides useful insights about the governance of English education in the late nineteenth century but has to be treated with caution because of its embittered mien. 
Kekewich's achievements in education reform have been overshadowed by those of his more charismatic successor but his administration was beneficent. By 1900 he could see the promised land and, while he did not enter it, his efforts earned him the gratitude of many teachers; in 1903 he was made the first honorary member of the National Union of Teachers. A devotee of salmon fishing, which he believed to be a panacea for all human ills, Kekewich was also a keen gardener. He was married twice: first, on 19 November 1863, to Hannah (died March 1890), daughter of George Lovegrove; and then, on 10 June 1890, to Agnes Jane (died 1931), daughter of William Symmons. He died at 6 Sackville Gardens, Hove, Sussex, on 5 July 1921. He was appointed CB in 1891, KCB in 1895, and was awarded the honorary degree of DCL by Durham University in 1897. 


@@@@@


doc= 46696


Moss, Henry Whitehead (1841-1917), headmaster, was born at Lincoln on 23 June 1841, the eldest son of Henry Moss, a draper, and his second wife, Louisa, 'nee' Bainbridge; there were four sons in all. After early schooling at Lincoln grammar school, Moss went in 1857 to Shrewsbury School (then under the headmastership of Benjamin Hall Kennedy) and thence in 1860 to St John's College, Cambridge. Here he won several university prizes (including the Porson prize three times, as Kennedy had done before him) and was senior classic in 1864. He was elected to a fellowship at St John's, but in 1866, just before his twenty-fifth birthday, and having been ordained earlier in the year, he was chosen, on the nomination of St John's, to succeed Kennedy as headmaster of Shrewsbury School, where he remained for forty-two years. 
Under the successive headmasterships of Samuel Butler and Benjamin Kennedy, Shrewsbury had been rescued from being a virtually moribund foundation at the close of the eighteenth century to one which had greatly grown in numbers, while gaining an unparalleled number of university successes in the classics. But the school's location, in a cramped town site, would have been bound to hinder its future, and numbers had been declining in Kennedy's later years as headmaster. Moss's supreme achievement was to persuade the governing body, against much lasting hostility (especially locally, but also among the old boys) that the school had to be moved. Despite his youth, he first made the case for the move soon after his arrival; but it was not until 1875, after much diplomatic manoeuvring over possible sites and a catastrophic error of judgement by Moss himself (involving a birching scandal and arousing national interest) which had the result of ruling out his own choice for the school's new location, that the move to the site at Kingsland was agreed. This was initially of some 27 acres but grew to well over 100 by April 1882. There can be no doubt that this crucial move, virtually a re-foundation, saved the school from relapsing into the status of a local grammar school. 
It was during Moss's headmastership that the three term year became the norm. Although no lover of games, he presented the school (on its new site) with a swimming pool. Regarded by the boys as rather distant and unapproachable (perhaps because of the difficulties arising from his appointment at so early an age), he also had the reputation of being a superb raconteur and excellent after-dinner speaker. His industry was prodigious. In politics both Conservative and imperialist, Moss was early convinced of the inevitability of war with Germany, and engaged a master to re-establish the school's cadet corps. With unusual prescience he had already foreseen by 1873 the increasing competition which the study of the classics would meet from other disciplines and which would ultimately lead to their decline in relative importance. He was chairman of the Headmasters' Conference from 1899 to 1902. He probably remained too long as headmaster, and numbers at Shrewsbury were again declining when he retired in 1908, though scholastic successes had been remarkably good. 
In 1887 Moss had married Mary Beaufort (died 1948), the daughter of another Salopian, the Revd William Augustus Beaufort; they had two sons and a daughter, the Egyptologist Rosalind Louisa Beaufort Moss. From 1887 he had been prebendary of Hereford. In retirement he lived in or near Oxford, latterly at Highfield Park, Headington, and died at 69 Lancaster Gate, London, following a stroke, on 14 January 1917. He was buried in the Shrewsbury cemetery. Such few literary remains as exist consist of some sermons and some Latin verses, preserved (in the case of one sermon and the Latin verses) by the biographical memoir written by his widow. 


@@@@@


doc= 46697


Reddie, Cecil (1858-1932), educationist, was born on 10 October 1858 in Colehill Lodge, Fulham, London, the sixth of ten children of James Reddie, Admiralty civil servant from Kinross farming stock, and his wife, Caroline Susannah, daughter of Daniel Burton Scott of Ingham, Norfolk. He spent four years as a day boy at Godolphin School in London, but after his parents' death and the children's dispersal throughout Britain he was a day pupil at Birkenhead School in 1871-2, and a boarder at Fettes College, Edinburgh, from 1872 to 1878. At Edinburgh University, in 1878-82, he read in succession medicine and science, and after two years at Gottingen University took a doctorate in chemistry in 1884. He returned to Fettes to teach science, moving thence to Clifton College, Bristol, in April 1887; after a breakdown he left Clifton in April 1888. In October 1889 he helped to open Abbotsholme, a private school in Derbyshire, and he made the school his life's work, until retirement in 1927. 
Reddie was unhappy in the traditional boarding-school. As a pupil he was bored by the classical curriculum and by competitive games; agonizing over his homosexual nature, he craved emotional guidance. Ideas for school reform came to him as a young teacher, his mentors including his Fettes colleague Clement Charles Cotterill, the Scottish polymath Patrick Geddes, and the romantic socialist Edward Carpenter. They were Ruskinians, and Abbotsholme was inspired by Ruskin's disdain for the competitive society, and his wish to replace undue bookishness with 'learning by doing' so as to foster co-operativeness. Other influences on Reddie were Whitman's vision of the 'love of comrades', or guiltless affection between men, and Thoreau's endorsement of rural life as more 'natural' than the town. In 1888-9 Reddie lived with Carpenter, and planned the 'new school' with his circle, the Fellowship of the New Life. Abbotsholme, the first modern progressive school, began as a joint venture, but after friction Reddie soon bought the others out with borrowed money. 
The Abbotsholme regime stressed practical work on the school estate. Although Reddie was a very directive headmaster, pupils were given unusual freedom to roam the countryside, while their responsibilities stretched as far as the stitching of cuts by 'boy surgeons'. Progressive parents were attracted by its ingenious combination of Ruskinian 'helpfulness' with public-school authoritarianism, its sympathetic atmosphere and sensitive sex instruction, its eclectic Christianity with chapel readings from Confucius and Emerson, its Jaeger uniform, and its cult of fresh air. Some of the sixty pupils present in 1900 came from the empire and continental Europe. Abbotsholme was a model for similar foundations in France and Germany. Yet growth was discouraged by the lack of concern for specialist teaching and external examinations. Reddie liked boys to be spirited but saw adult disagreement as a threat; he chose yes-men as assistants and they were often poor teachers. His contradictory temperament, subject to intense drives that were inadequately sublimated, led to tangled emotional storms. In 1906 numbers dropped to thirty and the school never fully recovered. Isolated in Abbotsholme, Reddie abandoned his flirtation with romantic socialism and developed his authoritarian strain, an inconsistency for an apostle of co-operativeness; he saw the German state as the model that Britain should follow to defeat commercial competition. During the First World War, an old boy recalled, 'only Germany was extolled, although... German bullets were tearing Old Abbotsholmians to death' ('Fifty Years of Abbotsholme', 38). Numbers fell again, and when Reddie transferred Abbotsholme to a group of old boys in 1927, only two pupils were left; yet the school's achievements since then have been based on the progressive tradition he initiated. Reddie retired to 1 High Oaks Road, Welwyn Garden City, and died in St Bartholomew's Hospital, London, on 6 February 1932. He was buried in the grounds of Abbotsholme. 


@@@@@


doc= 46698


Roberts, Ernest Stewart (1847-1912), college head, was born on 11 April 1847 at Swineshead, Lincolnshire, the eldest of the eight children of Stewart Blacker Roberts, a country doctor, and his first wife, the daughter of a Dr Milson of Swineshead. He was educated at Boston grammar school to the age of seventeen, then privately until he won a scholarship at Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, in 1865; in Caius he lived for the rest of his life, as scholar (1865-70), junior fellow (1870-80), senior fellow (1880-1903), college lecturer in classics (1870-1903), tutor (1876-1903), president (1894-1903), and master (1903-12). 
Roberts was an able classical philologist, and author of the substantial 'Introduction to Greek Epigraphy' (2 vols., 1887-1905), the second volume written in collaboration with E. A. Gardner. As master he also edited 'The Works of John Caius' (1912). But his life's work was as tutor and master, remodelling the college and guiding its students. He lived through a period of rapid change in the university, which from being little more than a provincial seminary was to become a notable centre of 'education, religion, learning and research', and in this change Roberts played a leading role. He was devoted to the college and in many ways naturally conservative -- and this made it easier for him to carry more cautious colleagues with him in pursuit of his ideals. He believed, as many in other colleges were coming to believe -- inspired especially by the example of Trinity -- that the fellows should form a cadre of teachers, and he presided over the appointment of effective college lecturers not only in classics (his own field) and mathematics (the traditional core of the Cambridge curriculum), but law, modern languages, history, and natural sciences. No aspect of college life escaped his notice. He took orders (1877), regarding this as still proper for a tutor, and fostered the chapel and the college mission. He was devoted to the boat club and invited every freshman to join it. He believed, as many did in that age, that military training was the best way to secure peace, and himself became eventually Lieutenant-Colonel Roberts, officer commanding the university corps. Outside the college he showed sympathy with the education and higher education of women. He became a central figure in Cambridge as well as in the college (he was vice-chancellor 1906-8), yet he was a quiet, unostentatious man, quite without eloquence; he was good-looking, with a pleasant bearded face. He lacked the intellectual eminence of Henry Sidgwick, philosopher and founder of Newnham, but his dedicated vision of what a college should be helped him to carry the senior fellows who governed the college over many shoals. 
On 3 August 1886 Roberts married Mary Harper, daughter of Hugo Daniel Harper, principal of Jesus College, Oxford. His devotion to the college was such that he insisted on a tutor's house being formed in its innermost court, which he and his wife and three children exchanged for the master's lodge in 1903. He died there after a heart attack on 16 June 1912, survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 46699


Williams, William (1788-1865), politician, was born on 12 February 1788 at Tredarren, Llanpumpsaint, Carmarthenshire, the fourth of twelve children of Thomas Williams and his wife, Esther ('nee' Phillips). He received his only schooling at Llanpumpsaint church school. Having served an apprenticeship in Carmarthen, he went to London in 1804 to seek his fortune. By 1820 he owned his own cotton and linen business in the City, and he soon acquired great wealth, building up his enterprise by travelling to Russia and America. In 1833 he was elected to the court of common council of the City of London, and two years later he was returned as one of the two members of parliament for Coventry, retiring from business to concentrate on his political work. Williams was accustomed to call himself a radical reformer, seeking the secret ballot, shorter parliaments, and the extension of the franchise. He achieved the distinction of being called ''the' Williams' in 'The Times'. Although he was a churchman, he worked for the separation of church and state. He lost his seat in Coventry in 1847, mainly because of complacency on the part of his supporters during the election, but he represented Lambeth in parliament from 1850 until his death. 
Williams's chief distinction during his parliamentary career was his dogged commitment to government retrenchment, but in the longer perspective he is better remembered for having proposed, on 10 March 1846, that an inquiry should be made 'into the state of Education in the Principality of Wales, especially into the means afforded to the labouring classes of acquiring a knowledge of the English language'. He considered that many of his countrymen were handicapped in their careers by their lack of knowledge of English. The reports (the blue books) of the commission, published in 1847, gave rise to widespread controversy. Williams presided at an important meeting at the Freemasons' Tavern in London on 1 December 1863 on the question of the creation of a university in Wales, and on 13 March 1865 he added a codicil to his will leaving $1000 to the proposed university. 
Williams died, unmarried, on 28 April 1865 at his residence, 12 Park Square West, Regent's Park, London, after a protracted illness following a fall from a horse. He was buried in Kensal Green cemetery, next to Joseph Hume, his political mentor. 


@@@@@


doc= 46701


Constance, duchess of Brittany (c.1161-1201), was the only daughter and sole heir of Conan (IV), duke of Brittany (c.1135-1171), and Margaret, daughter of Henry, earl of Huntingdon (died 1152), and Ada de Warenne (d. 1178), and sister to Malcolm IV ('r'. 1153-65) and William I ('r'. 1165-1214), kings of Scotland. Her parents married in 1160 and Constance is first mentioned in 1166 as a young child, when Conan was persuaded by Henry II to betroth her to Geoffrey, the fourth son of his marriage to Eleanor of Aquitaine. The subordination of the native Breton ruling dynasty to their powerful Plantagenet neighbours, symbolized by this act, provides the background to Constance's own life: it shaped her personal destiny and that of her children, and radically affected the political history of Brittany and the Angevin empire as a whole. 
After Conan (IV)'s death in 1171 Henry II further tightened his hold on Brittany. Conan's widow married Humphrey (III) de Bohun, hereditary constable of England. It is likely that Constance accompanied her mother to England, where Margaret had dower lands, and Constance's claims as countess of Richmond were eventually acknowledged by the king. After the constable's death (1185) mother and daughter remained close; Margaret is found on at least one occasion with Constance in Brittany, where she died early in 1201; she was buried, according to her wishes, at Sawtry Abbey, Huntingdonshire. But little is definitely known of Constance's movements or whereabouts before her marriage to Geoffrey was finally celebrated in 1181; during their betrothal, although Geoffrey was occasionally to be found in Brittany, usually after being dispatched by Henry II, the duchy was administered almost entirely by men nominated by the English king, with only the barest reference to the young duchess or her rights. 
Matters changed when Constance and Geoffrey married. Until Geoffrey's premature death in August 1186 Constance was frequently at her husband's side, both within and outside the duchy. She was actively associated in his government of Brittany at a critical moment in the duchy's institutional and legal development. Together they also made benefactions to several Breton abbeys (among them Beaulieu, Boquen, and Bonrepos), as well as a grant to Rouen Cathedral in memory of Geoffrey's eldest brother, Henry, the Young King (died 1183). Constance also patronized Sainte Croix de Quimperle. Two daughters were born during Geoffrey's lifetime: Eleanor (d. 1241) and Matilda (died before 1189), while at Easter 1187 (29 March) Constance gave birth to a posthumous son, Arthur, for whom high hopes were entertained by Bretons chafing at Angevin domination. 
On Geoffrey's death, although Constance assumed control of the duchy, it was under the continuing supervision of Henry II, at whose command in February 1189 she married Ranulf (III), sixth earl of Chester (d. 1232). In contrast to her first marriage, this appears to have been an unhappy and loveless affair; Constance and Ranulf seldom kept each other's company, no children were born, and the major incident in the marriage was Ranulf's seizure of his wife at Pontorson in 1196, while on her way to Normandy for an interview with Richard I, and her subsequent imprisonment in his castle at St James de Beuvron. His part in this ploy can be surmised since, as king, Richard had also been very anxious to continue the tradition of Plantagenet control of Brittany. In 1190 he acknowledged his nephew, Arthur, as his own heir in the treaty of Messina negotiated with Tancred of Sicily, and he tried to smother dissension among Breton nobles anxious to shake off his authority. Some, appointed by Constance to high positions in the Breton administration or as members of her council, also served Richard in a similar capacity. But disputes continued and tension remained high; soon after returning from captivity in Austria (1194), Richard invaded Brittany in force, further alienating many Bretons by his aggression. Ranulf's capture of Constance exacerbated matters still more, while her subsequent escape from confinement gave rise to many legends. 
By 1198 peaceful relations with Richard I had once again been restored, following complex negotiations which can only be traced with great difficulty through not entirely trustworthy later sources, which apparently paraphrase contemporary records. But both Constance and Ranulf were anxious to end their marriage and it was annulled (probably in 1199). The death of Richard I, on 6 April 1199, the claims of Arthur to the Angevin succession, and his rivalry with John, opened a final dramatic chapter in Constance's life. Initially she was closely involved in the military and diplomatic moves of Arthur and his supporters to implement his claims to the Angevin succession. She was with him at Angers in April 1199 after an invasion of Anjou, and accompanied him to Le Mans shortly afterwards to seek the support of the barons of Maine. Her role as Arthur's 'councillor' is acknowledged in several charters from this period. 
In the autumn of 1199 Constance married Gui de Thouars, younger brother of Aimery, vicomte de Thouars, a move probably designed to widen her political contacts, but which also brought her considerable personal happiness. She also sought help for Arthur at Tours from Philip Augustus, king of France. However, domestic matters increasingly claimed her attention: three more daughters were born in quick succession -- Alix (later duchess of Brittany), Marguerite, and Catherine -- and Constance gradually withdrew from active politics. The treaty of Le Goulet (22 May 1200), by which Philip reserved Arthur's wardship, while stipulating that he must perform homage for Brittany to King John, represented a severe setback for the policies Constance and her supporters had been pursuing. Moreover, by summer 1201, Constance was ailing; some contemporary sources claim she had contracted leprosy, though it is more probable that recent pregnancies had undermined her constitution. She died in early September 1201, and was buried in the Cistercian abbey of Villeneuve (diocese of Nantes) which had been refounded in 1200 through her generous endowment. 


@@@@@


doc= 46702


Eleanor, 'suo jure' duchess of Brittany (1182x4-1241), princess, was the elder daughter of Geoffrey, duke of Brittany, and Constance, duchess of Brittany, and sister of Arthur, duke of Brittany. At her father's death in August 1186 she was heir to the duchy, and Philip Augustus, king of France, claimed her wardship. However, Arthur's birth on 29 March 1187 and the procrastination of Henry II temporarily reduced her diplomatic value. As part of his ransom terms from Leopold, duke of Austria, in June 1193, Richard I arranged for Eleanor to marry the duke's son, but her journey to join him under the care of Baldwin de Bethune in 1194 was interrupted on news of Leopold's death. In 1195 plans for marrying her to Louis, the French royal heir, were discussed but again the match was unsuccessful. Duchess Constance then pressed for her release from royal custody and by the time of Richard's death on 6 April 1199 Eleanor was living in France with her mother and brother. But further misfortune befell her in August 1202 when she was captured at Mirebeau along with Arthur by her uncle King John. 
Because of her claims on the Angevin and Breton successions and John's fear that she would transmit them by marriage, Eleanor was once again placed in protective custody from which she never emerged, despite efforts over several years by Philip Augustus and the Bretons to negotiate her release. In 1203 John had her moved to England and imprisoned in various strongholds, including the castles of Corfe (Dorset), Burgh (Westmorland), and Bowes (Yorkshire). One order for her maintenance provided for cloth, 'not however of the king's finest' ('Rotuli litterarum clausarum', 2.168), but otherwise she was treated with consideration. She spent some time with the queen and the king of Scotland's daughters, hostages for a treaty. John also continued to use her as a diplomatic pawn: for example, in her sole surviving letter, clearly written with royal consent in 1208, she is styled 'duchess of Brittany and countess of Richmond' ('Rotuli litterarum patentium', 91). In 1214, when John attempted to regain his continental lands, she accompanied him to Poitou, and there are occasional hints of continued support for her in Brittany. Eleanor returned to England and her latter years were spent in further comfortable confinement at various locations, including Marlborough, Gloucester, and Bristol, where she had apartments in the keep between 1224 and 1234, and again from 1238 or 1239 until her death. Her name occurs occasionally in royal accounts, and those of the constable of Bristol Castle from the 1220s furnish considerable detail on her household and lifestyle during her captivity, providing an early example of this form of documentary evidence. She was visited once or twice a week by the bailiffs and four leading citizens to ensure her welfare, while she also enjoyed the company of chaplains and serving ladies, and a typically varied, high-protein, aristocratic diet. This included many different types of freshwater and sea fish and abundant supplies of meat; the main beverages mentioned are ale and milk. Still unmarried at her death on 10 August 1241, Eleanor was first buried at St James's Priory, Bristol, but her body was later moved in accordance with her will and Henry III's instructions to Amesbury convent. 


@@@@@


doc= 46703


Eleanor, countess of Pembroke and Leicester (1215?-1275), princess, daughter of King John and Isabella of Angouleme, was born probably in 1215, a year before the death of her father. Her brothers and sisters were the future Henry III, Richard (future earl of Cornwall), Joan, and Isabella. In 1224, at the age of nine, she was married to the powerful William (II) Marshal, earl of Pembroke, a man about fifteen years her senior, at the behest of the king's council, after some three years of debate as to whether she should marry a foreign prince. The earl acquired a papal mandate and won both Eleanor and substantial revenues and estates in England, Wales, and Ireland. Until the marriage was consummated in 1229 Eleanor remained at her brother's court under the guardianship of Cecily of Sandford; thereafter she accompanied the Marshal on his travels in England, France, and Ireland. In 1231, however, at the marriage celebrations of Richard, earl of Cornwall, William Marshal died suddenly, and the grieving Eleanor took a vow of chastity in the presence of Edmund, archbishop of Canterbury. The king seized her estates, while her brother-in-law, Richard Marshal, earl of Pembroke, her husband's heir, took many valuable chattels. She retired to the castle of Inkberrow (Worcestershire), and in 1233 compounded with her brother and Earl Richard for $400 yearly, less than a quarter of the annual value of her estates. Their failure to meet these obligations, together with Eleanor's extravagant spending, led to substantial debts. Henry III made spasmodic payments towards some of these, and in 1237 granted her Odiham Castle (Hampshire) which became her principal residence. 
In January 1238 Eleanor married Simon de Montfort in secret. When their union became known at court, Richard, earl of Cornwall, and other councillors were greatly angered, and Archbishop Edmund appealed to the pope on the grounds that Eleanor had broken her solemn vow. Montfort visited Rome to obtain a confirmation of the union, and on 28 November 1238, shortly after his return, Eleanor gave birth to their eldest child at Kenilworth. The following spring the king confirmed the earldom of Leicester to Montfort, and ordered that Eleanor's dowry be paid to him. In August 1239, however, Henry publicly turned on him, accusing him of defiling his sister before marriage, bribing the pope, and using the crown as security for his debts; Montfort and Eleanor fled in haste from England to France. While Montfort raised funds for a crusade, and made a return visit to England, Eleanor probably remained in France. She then stayed at Brindisi in southern Italy, in a castle belonging to her brother-in-law, the emperor Frederick II, while Montfort joined Richard of Cornwall's crusade in Palestine. 1242 saw the restoration of Eleanor and Simon de Montfort to the king's favour and she accompanied her husband on campaign in Poitou. The ruinous expense of this compounded their financial problems; but the king met their debts in part and settled an annual 500 marks on Montfort as Eleanor's dower, although the issue of her dower from her earlier marriage remained unresolved. 
At the same time Henry made a formal grant of Kenilworth Castle to Eleanor, and this became her principal residence. Her eldest son, Henry de Montfort, was followed by others: Simon de Montfort the younger, Amaury de Montfort, Guy de Montfort, Richard, and a daughter, Eleanor de Montfort. Robert Grosseteste, bishop of Lincoln, was their tutor and the Franciscan theologian Adam Marsh acted as confessor to Eleanor herself. A vivid insight into her fiery temperament emerges from letters she received from him in 1251: Marsh gently upbraids her for her language and temper, her contentiousness, and her extravagance. The last point is well borne out in her surviving household roll of 1265; yet so too is her administrative capacity. Between 1248 and 1254 Simon de Montfort, as seneschal of Gascony, spent most of his time abroad; Eleanor accompanied him in 1249-50, 1251, and 1253, and on later visits to Paris to negotiate peace with Louis IX of France over Gascony. The issue of her dowry, which remained unsettled, featured in the provisions of Oxford (1258) and complicated the settlement with Louis contained in the treaty of Paris. Eventually ratified in 1259, this included a renunciation by Eleanor and Montfort of their own hereditary rights in France, while 15,000 marks due to Henry III under the treaty were set aside to act as a pledge for his future settlement of Eleanor's claims to dower in England. But although arbitrators were appointed, no final agreement was reached, even though the French king and queen later tried to mediate. 
Eleanor remained at her stronghold at Kenilworth while Montfort and their sons led the baronial coalition which defeated Henry III and Prince Edward in 1264; in 1265, as the tide turned against them, she moved south to Dover, where in August, after the battle of Evesham, she received the news of the death of her husband and her son Henry. Her next son, Simon, was holding Richard, Eleanor's brother, a prisoner at Kenilworth, and released him only on condition that he protect Eleanor's interests. This was of little effect against the king's desire to disinherit and banish Eleanor; but Prince Edward, who took Dover Castle from her in October with the help of the prisoners there, allowed her a dignified retreat into exile in France. Here she retired to the Dominican convent at Montargis, founded by her sister-in-law Amicia de Montfort. In 1267, with the help of Louis IX, she obtained an annual payment of $500 from the English exchequer provided that she remained in exile; this was confirmed in 1273 by Edward I. She died in 1275 (before 3 June) and was buried at Montargis. 


@@@@@


doc= 46704


Eustace, count of Boulogne (c.1129-1153), claimant to the English throne, was the eldest son of King Stephen (c.1092-1154) and Matilda of Boulogne (c.1103-1152). He was the brother of William (William of Blois), earl of Surrey (c.1135-1159), and Mary (Mary of Blois), countess of Boulogne (d. 1182). His date of birth has to be surmised from his knighting and advancement to comital rank in late 1146 or early 1147. If he was eighteen at this time he was born in 1129: he may have been a year or two younger, but no more, for he occurs in one of his parents' charters dated not later than 30 August 1131. Eustace was a Boulogne family name, but his father's coup in claiming the English crown in December 1135 moved him onto the wider stage of Anglo-Norman politics. 
On this stage, however, Eustace would never enjoy more than a subordinate role. Of the numerous mentions of Eustace in charters and in chronicles, all but a few relate to his position as his father's intended heir. As such, he did homage to the French king for Normandy in 1137. As such, he was betrothed in some state within France to Constance, the sister of Louis VII ('r'. 1137-80), in February 1140 -- if the marriage did not take place at the same time, it took place very soon afterwards. As such, in 1141, with his father in captivity after the battle of Lincoln, his still powerful family asked for the release to him of the Boulogne lands and other family estates. This the Empress Matilda and her party refused. Both for the Angevins and the house of Blois it was all or nothing. Henry of Anjou, the son of the empress, claimed to be the lawful heir to England and Normandy: Eustace could claim to be the legitimate heir of an anointed king. In the late 1140s the issue was joined between them. Henry always had the initiative. He came to England in 1149, and was knighted at Carlisle; but Eustace pursued him through the west country, and Henry left England with little achieved. Eustace then followed him to France in 1151, as an ally of his brother-in-law Louis VII; but the French king then accepted Henry's homage as duke of Normandy. In the following year also he was in France, as part of a wider coalition of Henry's enemies; but Henry's control of the duchy remained unshaken. 
In diplomatic manoeuvrings ultimately equally fruitless Stephen had attempted to follow Capetian custom, and have Eustace crowned in his own lifetime. His mother assiduously cultivated Archbishop Theobald (died 1161); but all to no avail. The papacy referred to English custom, and declined to approve Eustace's coronation. His mother died on 3 May 1152, at which point he inherited the Boulogne estates and became count of Boulogne. By the end Eustace alone believed in the legitimacy of his cause. That stage was reached after the second siege of Wallingford in July 1153, after Duke Henry had invaded England and attracted widespread support. Stephen was persuaded to agree to terms, at which Eustace withdrew from the court, 'greatly vexed and angry because the war, in his opinion, had reached no proper conclusion' ('Gesta Stephani', 238-9). Very soon afterwards, on about 17 August 1153, he died in East Anglia. He had wasted the lands of Bury St Edmunds, and that powerful saint was seen by some as implicated in his death; others said more simply that he had died of a broken heart. He died childless, and was buried at Faversham Abbey. 
The reputation Eustace left behind was mixed. In the courtly world he was seen as a true son of his father, able to 'meet men on a footing of equality or superiority as occasion required' ('Gesta Stephani', 208-9). In the countryside he was a lord no less demanding than his peers, 'a bad man... he robbed the lands and levied heavy taxes' ('ASC', 202). His wife, the Countess Constance, was remembered as 'a good woman' ('ASC', 202), but she did not linger in her adopted land, and early in 1154 married Raymond (V), count of Toulouse. 


@@@@@


doc= 46705


Isabella, 'suo jure' countess of Gloucester (c.1160-1217), queen of England, first consort of King John, was the third and youngest daughter of William, earl of Gloucester (d. 1183), and Hawisia (died 1197), daughter of Robert, earl of Leicester (d. 1168). Through her father she was first cousin once removed of Henry II. She emerged from obscurity in 1176, ten years after the death of her only brother, Robert, when King Henry and her father made her the centrepiece of a marriage agreement formalized on 28 September at Windsor. In his dynastic predicament Earl William betrothed Isabella to Henry's youngest son, John, and declared John the heir to Gloucester. Should the pope prevent the marriage on the grounds of the couple's close affinity, the king pledged to arrange the best marriage possible for Isabella; and if a legitimate son of the earl were to survive him, that son would divide the earldom with John. Contrary to an earlier custom, whereby inheritances were divided equally among daughters, Isabella's two sisters, who were already married -- Mabel to the future count of Evreux, and Amicia to Richard de Clare, earl of Hertford (died 1217) -- were excluded from the comital inheritance, explicitly in order to prevent its division, though they were to be provided with annuities of $100 each. 
When Earl William died in 1183, still without a male heir, the king, instead of pressing for the marriage of Isabella and John, took Isabella into wardship as the unmarried heir of a tenant-in-chief, and enjoyed the income from her lordships and demesne estates. Only after Richard I's accession in 1189 was Isabella's wardship ended and her marriage to John celebrated on 29 August at Marlborough. Archbishop Baldwin of Canterbury (died 1190) reacted by summoning John before him to answer for his transgression against canonical prohibition of marriages within his degree of affinity to Isabella, and upon John's failure to appear, laid an interdict upon his lands. John appealed to an ecclesiastical council attended by the papal legate Giovanni di Anagni. Almost certainly out of deference to King Richard, the legate quashed the archbishop's penalty, and the pope never intervened. Some time between their marriage and 1199 Isabella and John visited Normandy, but by 1193 they seem to have become estranged. In that year, as part of his conspiracy with the French king, Philip Augustus, against his captive royal brother, John formally promised his continental overlord to marry the latter's half-sister Alice. John's implicit repudiation of Isabella probably resulted from their inability to have children, particularly a son. 
After John became king upon Richard's death in 1199, he obtained an annulment of his marriage to Isabella on the grounds of consanguinity. Continental papal judges-delegate accomplished the desired divorce, whereupon the new king took his former wife, once again an unmarried heiress, into her second wardship along with most of her estates. John granted the comital title and a small fraction of the earldom's estates to Isabella's nephew, Amaury, count of Evreux, to compensate him for the loss of his county which John would surrender to Philip in the treaty of Le Goulet (22 May 1200). In 1213, perhaps in anticipation of her death, Isabella made a will disposing of her moveable goods. However, by the beginning of 1214 her wardship had ended and a new marital gambit begun. On 26 January John announced that he had sold the right to marry the countess of Gloucester to Geoffrey de Mandeville for 20,000 marks. Earl Amaury's death without issue ('c'.1213) had made Isabella once more heir of the earldom of Gloucester. Apart from being a possible source of financial gain for John, the marriage was more of a political tool to be exploited by the king in his baronial relations than a desirable asset for Mandeville, whose proffer may have been made unwillingly. Among other things the earldom's most valuable manor, Bristol, was specifically excluded from the new earl's grant. John also required Mandeville to liquidate his debt in four instalments during 1214, and when he failed to keep to the payment schedule, the king confiscated the earl's Gloucester estates. Although they were restored and John offered to negotiate Mandeville's debt, Isabella and her husband joined the baronial rebellion against John. 
During the second phase of the barons' war with the king, on 23 February 1216, Mandeville died of wounds received in a tournament. For about a year Isabella, usually styling herself 'countess of Gloucester and Essex in my free widowhood' (Patterson, nos. 142-7) enjoyed possibly more personal freedom than at any other time during her adult life. But this situation ended some time in late 1217, possibly after 17 September, when Hubert de Burgh, justiciar and one of the regents for Henry III, became Isabella's third husband. Hardly had this been accomplished than the countess of Gloucester died on 14 October, supposedly at her father's Augustinian foundation, Keynsham Abbey, near Bristol, and was buried at Christ Church, Canterbury. The Gloucester earldom then passed via Isabella's sister Amicia to the latter's son Gilbert (died 1230), commencing the Clare tenure of the earldom which was to last until 1314. 


@@@@@


doc= 46706


Chilham, Sir Richard of (d. 1246), soldier, commonly termed Richard fitz Regis or fiz le Roy, occasionally as Richard of Dover, and exceptionally as Richard de Warenne, was the illegitimate son of King John and one of the sisters of William (IV) de Warenne, earl of Surrey (d. 1240). He was probably born in the 1190s, and he was the only one of John's illegitimate children to gain honorific title, following his marriage on or before 10 July 1214 to Rose of Dover, daughter and heir of Fulbert (II) of Dover. Thereby he became lord of the castle and honour of Chilham, Kent, consisting of about fifteen knights' fees in Kent and also Essex. It is not always easy to distinguish Richard from his namesake and half-brother, Richard, earl of Cornwall (died 1272), especially before the latter's assumption of the titles count of Poitou (1225) and earl of Cornwall (1227), and from another Richard of Dover (died 1244/5). Knighted in 1215, Richard of Chilham served as a royalist captain and administrator during the civil war between 1215 and 1217. His most important appointment was as constable of the strategically vital castle of Wallingford and as custodian of its honour, comprising some 120 knights' fees. He held the position from June 1216 at the latest to at least March 1218, and then again, if he ever surrendered it, from May 1218, when he was granted the honour at royal pleasure. He appears to have held it until 1227, although when he went on crusade he resigned the castle, at least, to the king, his seneschal answering for the honour on his behalf. From 1217 until 1221 he was also sheriff of Berkshire, Henry de Scaccario accounting for him at the exchequer. 
Chilham's single most important action occurred during the critical sea battle off Sandwich on 24 August 1217, when the English royalist naval forces engaged the French fleet bringing equipment, supplies, and reinforcements to Prince Louis of France in support of his bid for the English throne. Chilham commanded one of the ships in the battle and brought his vessel alongside the flagship of the French fleet, commanded by Eustace the Monk. Chilham and his men boarded this vessel, the largest and most formidable of the enemy ships, and, according to Roger of Wendover, it was Chilham himself who beheaded Eustace once he had been captured. Other sources, closer to events, suggest otherwise, although they do not deny the importance of Chilham's action in the engagement. The victory was crucial in obliging Louis to come to terms, thus ending the war. Richard departed on the fifth crusade to Egypt in 1218, presumably in the company of the other English crusaders known to have sailed at this time. That he duly reached the crusaders' camp at Damietta is proved by the fact that in 1228 he was pressed to repay money that he had borrowed there. He returned home in 1220 or, more likely, 1221. 
Clearly trusted by his father, Richard of Chilham never seems to have enjoyed a close relationship with Henry III, although he received occasional gifts from his half-brother, and he played only a limited role in affairs following his return from the East. He apparently accompanied the royal forces who fought the Welsh in 1223 and went on pilgrimage to Canterbury with Alexander II, king of Scots, in the same year, although in both cases it may have been Richard of Cornwall who is meant in the records. In 1225 he was certainly one of the collectors in Kent of the tax of the fifteenth granted for the campaign in Poitou that year, and in 1230 was granted a judicial protection in view of his accompanying Henry III on his campaign in Brittany that year. His final significant action occurred in May-June 1242 when he, with William Bardrolf, was specially deputed to lead the seaborne operations against the notorious outlaw, pirate, and would-be regicide William de Marisco, who with his accomplices had based himself on Lundy island in the Bristol Channel, plundering shipping, taking ransoms, and committing robberies on land. Marisco and his associates were successfully captured, and most were subsequently executed in London. Chilham died in 1246, his widow, Rose, performing homage to the king, on or before 24 June, for all the lands that Richard had held in chief of the inheritance of Rose. They left a son, Richard (died before 1265), and a daughter, Isabel, to whom the honour of Chilham passed. 


@@@@@


doc= 46707


William, earl of Surrey (c.1135-1159), prince and magnate, was the youngest son of King Stephen and his queen, Matilda of Boulogne. Nothing definite is known of William's birth or childhood, but given Boulonnais naming practices and his mother's absence from Stephen's coronation in December 1135, it seems reasonable that William was born about this time and named for his great-grandfather, William I, the Conqueror. Although royal aspirations were left to William's elder brother, Eustace, who was married to a sister of the king of France, knighted, and invested with their mother's county of Boulogne, William was still intended to play a crucial, if secondary, role in forwarding the Blois agenda. His marriage to Isabel de Warenne, heir to the earldom of Surrey and the vast Warenne Norman lands, which may have taken place as early as 1147, was a smart strategic move meant to strengthen Blois control in their East Anglian and south-eastern strongholds. The addition of the honour of Pevensey to his wife's estate, and a further grant of the 'totus comitatus' of Norfolk (with reservations), greatly increased William's standing, making him a certain instrument for containment of Hugh Bigod (died 1176/7), an East Anglian rival of the Blois family who had long proved troublesome to them. 
William's circumstances, however, changed overnight with Eustace's death in August 1153. King Stephen, giving way to public opinion, officially adopted Henry FitzEmpress as his son and direct heir to the English throne in November 1153, at Winchester. William's status as the foremost baron in the realm was assured by the compromise. He was to have all the Warenne lands in England and Normandy, the honour of Pevensey, the 'totus comitatus' of Norfolk, enlarged by rents worth $700 yearly, together with his paternal and maternal inheritances: the honours of Lancaster, Eye, and Boulogne in England, and the county of Mortain in Normandy. Basing wealth on enfeoffments alone William would be lord of more than 600 knights. And beyond this there was an independent title too, for he was to succeed his brother as count of Boulogne. No Anglo-Norman magnate, save perhaps Robert de Belleme, had amassed a like collection of lands and power. Even so, William at first was dissatisfied with the outcome at Winchester, and although he is said to have rendered homage to Henry, his name is noticeably absent from the Winchester treaty's witness list. In the early months of 1154 a Flemish plot, probably masterminded by William of Ypres, to assassinate Duke Henry came to light. The king's son himself was implicated. Henry left hastily for Rochester, eventually reaching the safety of Normandy in April. William, who had recently broken his leg, meanwhile convalesced with the monks of Canterbury. But if William, or for that matter Stephen, harboured any thoughts of manoeuvring out of the Winchester compromise in the coming months, they ended abruptly with the king's death on 25 October. At no time did any coalition arise to promote the earl's rights to succession. Once crowned, Henry II made certain of William's isolation. 
In 1157 Henry II took advantage of a clash in East Anglia between William and Hugh Bigod, and confiscated all the former's lands and castles in England and Normandy, handing back only his paternal and maternal inheritances without their fortresses. William evidently appealed to Pope Adrian IV, claiming mistreatment, but to no avail. Henry II did at least allow the earl substantial exemptions from past gelds and county 'dona' afterwards -- generosity freely shown only when, despite his great resources, William no longer posed a threat. The king even consented now to knight the earl, and the ceremony was performed at Carlisle on 24 June 1158. The next year William joined the great Toulouse expedition, the largest gathering of nobility from the Angevin dominions and its allies since Henry II's coronation. William's presence with the expeditionary force was probably prompted by sheer adventure, though no doubt he hoped to win favour with the king and increase his stature as one of the foremost lords among the Angevin nobility. This was not to be. In October 1159, while returning home, William succumbed to the same illness that had swept the Angevin forces before the gates of Toulouse, and was buried at the Poitevin abbey of Montmorel. William's dying childless sent ripples through Angevin patronage and politics for years into the future. His widow, Isabel de Warenne, was married to Hamelin of Anjou, Henry II's natural brother, who took the title Earl Warenne. His sister, Mary, countess of Boulogne, was taken from the convent of Romsey against her wishes and married to Matthew of Flanders, who became count of Boulogne, outraging not only clergy but his own father and brother as well. The honours of Lancaster, Eye, and Boulogne, and the county of Mortain, Henry II kept for his own uses. 
Whatever promise William's life had held went unfulfilled. Even in death he was isolated from land and family. Stephen, Eustace, and Matilda all rested in Faversham Abbey in Kent, a Blois foundation, while William lay in Poitou. Recent excavations show that Faversham had been planned on a grand scale, but was completed as a much smaller church only in the thirteenth century. Faversham's fate provides a fitting metaphor for William's life. 


@@@@@


doc= 46709


William FitzEmpress (1136-1164), magnate, was born at Argentan on 22 July 1136, the youngest of the three sons (his eldest brother became Henry II) of Matilda (1102-1167), empress of Germany, countess of Anjou, and daughter of Henry I, and Geoffrey Plantagenet (1114-1151), count of Anjou. Little is known of his youth, but he was mentioned in the 'acta' of his parents from infancy onward, and he was frequently at the side of his eldest brother after the latter became king in 1154; one such occasion was the siege of Chinon in 1156. William was greatly enriched when Henry came to the throne. In the second year of the reign he received geld exemptions on more than 300 hides of land in nine counties, and by 1162 his lands exempted from geld had increased to more than 500 hides in fifteen counties. His English holdings, which made him one of the wealthiest men in the kingdom, were concentrated in eastern England, a region of royal strength under both Henry II and his predecessor Stephen, and included the manors of Maldon in Essex; Dartford, Hoo, and Shorne in Kent; Aylsham and Cawston in Norfolk; and Hintlesham in Suffolk. He was also vicomte of Dieppe in Normandy and held lands in that area. 
In 1155 Henry II consulted his court about the possibility of conquering Ireland as an appanage for William. The plan was opposed by their mother, the empress, and Henry laid it aside. A later plan to provide for William was through a proposed marriage to Isabella, the widowed heir of William (III) de Warenne, earl of Surrey (died 1148); she had previously been married to King Stephen's younger son, William, who died in 1159. Her marriage to William FitzEmpress would have brought him not only further lands but also a title to match his already considerable wealth. Archbishop Thomas Becket, however, objected to the match on the grounds of consanguinity, and the matter was not pressed. In 1164 Isabella married instead Hamelin of Anjou, an illegitimate brother of the king. William was said to be despondent at the loss of the earldom, seeking solace at Bec-Hellouin (a house much patronized by his mother) in 1163. He died shortly afterwards, on 30 January 1164, at Rouen, where he was buried in the cathedral. The thwarted marriage evidently rankled with at least one of his followers, Richard Brito (le Bret), who took part in the archbishop's murder in 1170; as he delivered the final blow, Richard cried, 'Take that, for the love of my lord William, the king's brother!' ('Materials', 3.142). 


@@@@@


doc= 46710


Aaron Arrowsmith the younger (1802-1854), born in London on 21 May 1802, was trained by his father. He printed maps from his father's plates and produced his own, of which none equalled the standards set by his father. None the less he was accorded the title of hydrographer to the king. He was a founder fellow of the Royal Geographical Society in 1830, but, his interest in geography waning, in 1833 he resigned from the society and in 1834 he handed the map business to Samuel. He then went to Magdalen Hall, Oxford, taking his BA in 1836 and MA in 1839 before taking holy orders. His only known clerical post was that of curate at Kidlington, Oxfordshire, in 1842. As a clergyman he compiled several geographical textbooks, dictionaries, and maps, including a 'Bible' atlas, published under his brother Samuel's name. He died on 26 April 1854 at Whitchurch, Shropshire. The map business continued in the hands of 


@@@@@


doc= 46711


Samuel Arrowsmith (1805-1839) whose maps, like his brother's, were competent but unremarkable. He was elected fellow of the Royal Geographical Society in 1832 and was hydrographer to the king. He produced maps mainly of Britain, including many for parliamentary purposes, while his cousin John Arrowsmith (1790-1873) specialized in maps of foreign countries in his independent map establishment. Samuel married Caroline Lyon (died 1838) on 9 April 1835 and they had at least one child, Aaron, baptized on 19 August 1836. Samuel ran the business until his death on 30 August 1839 when it passed into the hands of his cousin John. 


@@@@@


doc= 46712


Cruchley, George Frederick (1796/7-1880), map publisher, was born in London. He may have been the George Frederick Crutchley, son of John Crutchley and his wife, Ann, who was born on 1 April 1797 and baptized at St Clement Danes on 23 April 1797. Nothing more is known of his parentage or early life save that he described himself in his early days as 'from Arrowsmith's', having presumably been apprenticed to the celebrated Aaron Arrowsmith, the elder. In 1823 Cruchley established his own firm at 349 Oxford Street, London. In 1825 it moved to 38 Ludgate Street and in 1833 to 81 Fleet Street where it remained until its dissolution in 1877. He married, probably in the late 1820s, Mary Ann, 'nee' Hume, with whom he had at least four daughters. 
Initially Cruchley concentrated on publishing clear, attractive plans of London which he promoted energetically. Many were republished many times, with revisions and extensions, in varying formats, sometimes with additional information, notably about railways and postal districts. From 1826 he created a fine series of London plans which was represented at the Great Exhibition of 1851. Their popularity is shown by their frequent re-edition and longevity. His maps of London's environs, such as 'Cruchley's Environs of London Extending Thirty Miles from the Metropolis' (issued from 1824), were superior in some respects to the Ordnance Survey's one-inch sheets: for example in differentiating grades of roads and footpaths; noting distances from London; listing fairs, markets, and watermen's fares; and by their more frequent revision. He was one of the last major map publishers to undertake private estate mapping, but no examples of his estate maps are known to survive. The quality of his work resulted in his being commissioned from the late 1820s to engrave plans for official reports on railway proposals. 
From the mid-1830s, however, Cruchley progressively abandoned the high standards for which his apprenticeship had prepared him and of which his early work showed him amply capable. The turning point can perhaps be traced to his 1836 revision and reissue of Christopher Greenwood's 1818 map of Lancashire. Such ready profits were to be had from making minor alterations to existing maps and publishing them as allegedly new works that Cruchley began assiduously to buy up or acquire for issue the stock of others, notably the plates of George and John Cary, acquired some time between 1846 and 'c'.1850. His only significant updating of the Cary maps was the frequently inaccurate addition of railways and telegraphs. This was typical of his growing practice of issuing maps of doubtful reliability created from old plates using cheap lithographic transfer techniques. The Cary maps and others were also adapted to appeal to the growing market for touring and excursion maps. They were sold widely at bookstalls and railway stations and Cruchley promoted them vigorously by advertising, by offering them in different portable formats, coloured or uncoloured and by mail order, by producing special exhibition issues, and even printing them on silk or as handkerchiefs. 
Cruchley extended his output through the republication of earlier atlases, such as 'Outlines of the World' (1843), first published by Arrowsmiths in 1825. Some of these general atlases were aimed at the growing educational market and he boasted that his educational maps were used by the royal children. He also recognized a growing commercial market and supplied maps to merchants and traders and to institutions such as public libraries. On 16 January 1877 Cruchley's stock was sold at auction by Hodgson's whose sale catalogue revealed the high proportion of his plates which had been acquired from others. Much of the stock was bought by Gall and Inglis who continued to issue some, notably the Cary maps, until well into the twentieth century. Cruchley had lived at 12 Penn Road Villas, London, while still in business, but retired to 65 Grand Parade, Brighton, where he died on 16 June 1880. His wife predeceased him and a nephew, Alfred Frederick King, was left to execute his will, proved at the surprisingly small sum of under $2000. 
Cruchley began his career by producing high-quality maps, mainly of the London area, but soon saw the opportunities for supplying an expanding market which demanded neither quality nor reliability but only cheapness. In exploiting this demand Cruchley pioneered vigorous and innovative marketing techniques later imitated by competitors. 


@@@@@


doc= 46714


Lazell, (Henry George) Leslie (1903-1982), pharmaceutical industrialist, was born at 9 Canal Terrace, Camden Town, London, on 23 May 1903, the elder son (there were no daughters) of Henry William Lazell, a wine merchant's manager, who died prematurely, and his wife, Ada Louisa King. Leslie Lazell (as he was known) was educated at a London county council elementary school until he was thirteen and a half, when he became an office boy in the solicitor's department of the Inland Revenue at Somerset House. After the end of the First World War Lazell sat and failed the examination for a permanent civil service post. For a time he worked as a bookmaker's clerk and then joined the wholesale druggists Allen and Hanburys as a ledger keeper. Determined to succeed in life, he attended evening classes for his professional examinations, including those of the Association of Certified and Corporate Accountants and the Chartered Institute of Secretaries, which bodies later gave him fellowships. On 17 November 1928 he married Doris Beatrice, daughter of Edwin Try, an engineer; they had one son. 
Lazell's first opportunity to show his worth came in 1930 when he was recruited as an accountant by Alexander Maclean, an enthusiastic marketing man who had founded the Macleans toothpaste and stomach powder firm. Maclean needed an up-to-date budgeting system; Lazell, having set this up, was made company secretary, and a director in 1936. His managerial horizons were widened when he became Macleans' representative on certain trade associations. Contact with his opposite numbers in international corporations such as Colgate and Sterling Drug persuaded him that unless British companies paid more attention to research, they would fall badly behind these giants. 
In 1938 Philip Ernest Hill, chairman of Beechams, acquired Macleans. Almost immediately he made Lazell secretary of Beechams, in 1940 promoting him to the board and to its inner committee. Lazell then went back to take charge of the profitable Macleans. In wartime conditions of shortages and disruptions, he quickly learned how to improvise within the framework of a clear business strategy. Before Hill died in 1944, Lazell secured the board's authority to create a central research organization for the parent company, and in the following year the Beecham Group -- as it had become -- set up the Beecham Research Laboratories. Lazell's ultimate goal was to achieve some major pharmaceutical discovery. However, Hill's successor at Beechams, Sir Stanley Holmes (later first Baron Dovercourt) planned to diversify into wholesale groceries, and had little time for pharmaceutical research. Lazell therefore volunteered to take control of research, and meet its running costs out of the buoyant profits of Lucozade, a Macleans' glucose drink. Group profits, however, remained disappointing: groceries proved to be poor earners, and a widespread corporate malaise was exacerbated by infighting among senior executives. As a result Beechams earned a mediocre reputation in investment circles. Finally, in 1951, institutional investors forced Lazell's appointment as group managing director, mandated to give the company once again a sense of direction. 
Lazell's initial task was to reorganize the group along more logical, and hence more profitable, lines. This involved amalgamating and restructuring more than a hundred subsidiary companies and their shareholdings, thus allowing Beechams to raise money on more advantageous terms. Not until 1962 was he able finally to create an organization of three -- later four -- divisions in product, and later regional, groupings. That step both rationalized production and marketing and permitted more effective head office control. On the sales side, he made the group into one of the largest advertisers in Britain; he adopted American publicity methods and improved on them by requiring top management personally to lead marketing teams. 
Once the first phase of Lazell's corporate plan was satisfactorily launched, he arranged in 1954 for his researchers to begin investigations of antibiotics. The group's consultant, Sir Charles Edward Dodds, worked closely with Ernst Chain, the leading scientist in the field. Existing types of penicillin needed improvement, which they hoped to achieve by a chemical rather than by the existing biological process. Eventually the basic penicillin molecule, 6-APA (amino-penicillanic acid), was isolated. By 1959 Beechams had developed its first semi-synthetic penicillin, Broxil, obtaining some help from the American company Bristol-Myers, with which a licensing agreement was concluded. 
According to Lazell, it was in the early 1960s that the balance of the group's affairs shifted from proprietary goods towards pharmaceuticals, that decade being probably the most hectic for the group as a whole as well as for his research activities. As managing director, and then as chairman from 1958 onwards, he was the driving force in the conversion of Beechams into an international science-based and marketing orientated enterprise. To become truly international, the group needed above all to build up a strong presence in both the United States and Europe. While some products had little success in the American market, Brylcreem, the hair preparation, and Macleans' toothpaste both did well after some years of intensive marketing effort. 
The considerable financial and management resources required for development in the United States delayed the group's entry into Europe on a large scale. Even so, by the time Lazell stepped down as chairman in 1968, the western hemisphere -- which included Australia and New Zealand -- accounted for almost a quarter of Beechams' sales and nearly a third of its profits, while continental Europe contributed one-seventh of sales and over a fifth of profits. In 1951-2, the year of his appointment as managing director, group turnover had been $25 million and profits $21/2 million; in 1968-9 turnover was $134 million and profits $25 million, the ratio having nearly doubled. Lazell was then made president of the Beecham group, and until 1972 retained the chairmanship of Beecham Inc. in the United States. 
Like the company's founder, Thomas Beecham (1820-1907), Lazell was essentially a self-educated man, almost uniquely so among those then at the head of a major UK manufacturing enterprise. He had a healthy disrespect for snobbery and nepotism, and never became assimilated into the British establishment; Lord Dovercourt is said to have dubbed him 'not one of us' (Lazell, 'Pills', 2). Possessing an incisive and analytical mind, he was quick to learn from both mentors and trusted lieutenants. As a layman he was able to pick up a working knowledge of the scientific technicalities of pharmaceutical research. He was a great reader, especially of autobiographies; as a young man he played cricket and squash, and later enjoyed yachting. 
Lazell's outside professional interests were necessarily limited, and chosen very much to harmonize with his philosophy of life. A tireless and uncompromising free-market advocate, he was one of the original subscribers to the Institute of Economic Affairs, founded in 1957. Although in his outlook he was ahead of his time, he was granted no honours from the state or any university. He was chairman of the board of governors of Ashridge Management College and a council member of the Institute of Directors. He also acted as appeal president of the British Heart Foundation. He was hostile to bureaucracy in all its forms; as a non-executive director of ICI from 1966 to 1968, he regularly voiced his criticism of that company's top-heavy structure. In retirement he spent much of each year in Bermuda, but he was in London when he died of heart failure at his home, 3 Whaddon House, Williams Mews, Westminster, on 17 November 1982. As no will seems to have been proved in England, the value of his estate is unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 46715


Daly, James (c.1840-1911), political activist and newspaper proprietor, was born in Boghadoon, co. Mayo, the son of a bailiff on the Elm Hall estate at Belcarra. He was educated by the Franciscan brothers at Errew monastery, near Castlebar, co. Mayo. A tenant and bailiff of estates in co. Mayo, and one in Kilkenny, he also rented property from the Lucan estate in Castlebar. By the end of the 1860s he had become an important figure in Castlebar as town councillor, poor-law guardian, and agent for Dublin-based firms. In 1876 he bought the 'Connaught Telegraph', an old-established Liberal newspaper, and became its editor and proprietor. He always regarded himself as a tenant farmer first and only by accident a newspaper proprietor. 
Daly's initial involvement in local politics came in 1874 when he worked with members of the supreme council of the Irish Republican Brotherhood to elect John O'Connor Power to parliament. He went on to organize tenants' associations, saying that he had purchased the newspaper in order to agitate on behalf of small farmers against their landlords. Daly is best known for his part in organizing the meeting at Irishtown, co. Mayo, on 20 April 1879, which opened the land war and inaugurated the Land League of Mayo, the precursor of the Irish National Land League. Although the meeting was held at Daly's initiative, he was put under pressure by local Fenians. Daly later said that the meeting was held at the request of tenants, who had asked him to publicize a threatened eviction. Here Daly's position as a newspaper proprietor certainly helped him to mobilize local agitation. He co-operated with Michael Davitt, who organized the Dublin-based Fenians who took part, and Daly chaired the meeting; Davitt was not present. Daly was arrested with Davitt and James Bryce Killen at Gurteen, co. Sligo, in November 1879 for using seditious language; he had suggested that if anyone was evicted tenants should gather together and reinstate him. They were later released and the case was abandoned in January 1880. Dublin Castle believed him to be a member of the Irish Republican Brotherhood, but Daly was not a Fenian; he was a constitutionalist. With his background as a tenant farmer his knowledge of local conditions was immense. His evidence to the Bessborough commission inquiring into the operation of the 'Land Acts' influenced their recommendations, and these in turn gave Gladstone the basis for the 1881 'Land Act'. Daly remained a local politician, not a national parliamentarian; he warned that agrarian outrage would lead to coercive legislation and fought a constant battle against the National League, whom he believed to be incompetent and corrupt, arguing that they acted against the interests of poor tenants. In 1889, at the special commission hearing, Davitt accused Daly of being the agent of a landlord to evict a tenant. This accusation Daly never forgave; he denounced Davitt for what he described as his 'crass ignorance' of Mayo politics, and forced him to amend his account. Despite his position as a grazier, Daly continued to campaign for small farmers and evicted tenants against the large graziers. He supported Parnell in the general election of 1880, but had little faith in Westminster's legislation for Ireland. 
In his 'Recollections' (1905), William O'Brien described Daly as 'A rough-spoken giant, with an inexhaustible fund of knowledge of the people' (p. 225). Because of his combative relationship with the leaders of the National League, he went unnoticed in their memoirs. Daly was married and had two daughters and a son, James. He died on 22 March 1911 in Castlebar, and was buried there in the Old Church cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 46716


Gill, Thomas Patrick (1858-1931), journalist and politician, was born at Ballygraigue, Nenagh, co. Tipperary, on 25 October 1858, the son of Robert Gill, a civil engineer. He was educated by the Christian Brothers in Nenagh and entered Trinity College, Dublin, in January 1876, but he appears not to have graduated. In early life he was greatly influenced by his uncle Peter E. Gill, the founder and proprietor of a Nenagh paper, the 'Tipperary Advocate', and a member of the National Brotherhood of St Patrick, a Fenian organization. Through his uncle's influence, Gill became secretary of the North Tipperary Farmers' Association, a forerunner of the Land League. While still at college, he was sent by E. Dwyer Gray, the owner of the 'Freeman's Journal', to visit the west of Ireland, and he wrote a series of articles, 'The famine fever in the west'. He subsequently worked as associate editor with William O'Brien of 'United Ireland', and in 1881 founded 'Tipperary', a nationalist paper in Thurles, co. Tipperary. After the suppression of the Land League in 1881, Gill went to America and worked in New York as editor of the 'Catholic World', and was hired by the 'North American Review' to study land tenure in the United States. He subsequently wrote a series of articles for the 'Review' called 'Landlordism in America'. 
Gill returned to Ireland in 1885 when, under the patronage of Charles Stewart Parnell, he became home-rule MP for Louth South. In November 1889 Gill went to America with John Dillon, William O'Brien, and Timothy Harrington to raise funds, and at this moment Parnell published his 'Manifesto to the Irish People', which precipitated the split in the Irish party. On his return, Gill took part in negotiations held in Boulogne in an attempt to repair the rift. However, these failed and he decided not to seek re-election in 1892. During this period, he met Horace Plunkett, and became a key figure in Plunkett's work to establish agricultural co-operatives and assistance for industry. In 1895 Gill worked with Plunkett on the recess committee (so-called because it met during parliamentary recess), whose task was to study the Irish economy. Gill reported on developments in state assistance in continental Europe, and as its secretary he wrote the committee's report recommending a system of financial and administrative backing for Irish agriculture. His skilful drafting ensured that the report was adopted unanimously. 
In 1898 Plunkett bought the Dublin 'Daily Express' and appointed Gill as editor. Here he provided a platform for the Irish literary revival, publishing articles by W. B. Yeats, John Eglinton (W. K. Magee), Lady Gregory, and 'AE' (George Russell); James Joyce reviewed regularly for the paper. In May 1899 Gill was the host of a Dublin banquet for the Irish Literary Theatre, which was satirized by George Moore in 'Hail and Farewell', likening Plunkett and Gill to Flaubert's clerks, Bouvard and Pecuchet. The experiment with the 'Daily Express' lasted just over a year, for, in 1900, Gill was appointed secretary to the newly formed department of agriculture and technical instruction, again headed by Plunkett, where he remained until 1923. During the last ten years of his life, he was a member of committees that considered various aspects of Irish agriculture and forestry. He negotiated the removal of the American government's embargo on the import of Irish potatoes, and during the First World War was a member of war committees for the supply and distribution of food and materials for agricultural and industrial production. He ended public life as president of the Irish Free State central savings committee. 
Gill's background and his linguistic ability (he spoke French and Italian fluently) led to his appointment as one of the original members of the general assembly of the International Institute of Agriculture in Rome. He was a member of the council of the Ligue Internationale pour l'Education Familiale in Brussels, and a corresponding member of the French Academy of Agriculture. He wrote a pamphlet on the constitutions of the British empire, and his translation of a book by L. Paul-Dubois on the Irish question was published in 1934. Plunkett described Gill as 'a practical Thomas Davis' (quoted in West, 42); Gill's political connections provided Plunkett with an essential link with the nationalists. He was called 'neutral Gill' because of his tendency to go with the majority, and although his politics were on the moderate wing of nationalism he was frequently attacked by Unionists, who prevented his appointment to the constitutional convention of 1917 chaired by Plunkett. 
In 1882 Gill married Annie, daughter of John Fennell; they lived in Dun Laoghaire, co. Dublin. He died on 19 January 1931 in the Whitworth Hospital, Dublin. 


@@@@@


doc= 46718


Prim, John George Augustus (1821-1875), antiquary and newspaper proprietor, was born in Kilkenny, the eldest son of John H. Prim. He was probably educated in Kilkenny. He was a general printer and stationer in the city and in the mid-1850s became proprietor of the 'Kilkenny Moderator', a Conservative newspaper founded in 1814. In 1849, with James Graves, Prim founded the Kilkenny and South East of Ireland Archaeological Society and acted as its honorary secretary. The society's object was to publish articles on local history and archaeology, but Prim and Graves did not stop there, regarding themselves as the guardians of their antiquities, and as their interpreters. They tackled local landowners who were neglecting and destroying monuments: in 1848 they physically intervened in the case of the Dunbell ogham stones, which they rescued when their site was being destroyed (the stones are now in the National Museum of Ireland in Dublin). They also published the collections held in the muniment room in Kilkenny Castle. This was particularly fortunate as much of this material was subsequently sent to the Public Record Office in Dublin, where it was destroyed in the fire of 1922. 
Prim saw the 'Moderator' as more than a reporter of local news, and used it to widen understanding of the history of Kilkenny and the county. When the society was unable to issue a journal of its own, he used the newspaper to publish articles on local history and archaeology. The society became the Historical and Archaeological Association of Ireland in 1868, and Prim was one of its founding fellows. Prim and Graves wrote the history of the architecture and antiquities of St Canice's Cathedral, Kilkenny (1857). It was first intended to be a history of the see and bishops of Ossory, and of the corporation of Kilkenny, but the material proved to be so large that this plan had to be abandoned and they confined themselves to the cathedral. They had hoped to publish a second volume to include the rest of their material, but this never happened. Prim also planned to write a series of articles on the most important families of Kilkenny as part of a history of the county -- one of the original objects of the society. His 'Memorials of the Family of Langton of Kilkenny' (1864) was part of this project. 
Prim was married -- to a woman of whom nothing is known but that her name was Mary -- and had a family. He died on 2 November 1875 at Nore Cottage, Kilkenny, his brother's house, and was buried in the churchyard of St Canice's, Kilkenny. His kindness and generosity, and his work on the history and culture of Ireland, were widely recognized. 


@@@@@


doc= 46722


Redhead, Brian Leonard (1929-1994), broadcaster and journalist, was born on 28 December 1929 at Princess Mary Maternity Hospital, Newcastle upon Tyne, the only child of Ernest Leonard Redhead, a silk screen printer and advertising agent, and his wife, Janet Crossley, 'nee' Fairley. Precocious and, as he later admitted, 'cocky' (Redhead, 'Desert Island Discs', BBC Radio 4, 6 July 1986), Redhead won a scholarship to Newcastle's Royal Grammar School, played the clarinet on 'Children's Hour', and, following national service and a stint on the Whitley Bay 'Seaside Chronicle', went to Downing College, Cambridge, where he took a first in part one of the history tripos but only a second in part two. Much of his subsequent work, and his civic activity, reflected continuing awareness of the importance of the past: 'Journalism should be seen, and heard, as the first attempt at writing history', he wrote (Redhead, 'The Best of 'From our Own Correspondent' 4'). 
Redhead joined the staff of the 'Manchester Guardian' in 1954, rising quickly through the ranks. In the same year, on 19 June, he married Jean (generally known as Jenni) Salmon ('b'. 'c'.1930), a teacher and fellow Geordie. They had two sons, Stephen and James, and then twins, Annabel (Abby) and William. After making his mark as an innovative and energetic features editor, in 1965 Redhead was appointed northern editor of what was by now 'The Guardian'. Four years later he was made editor of its sister paper, the 'Manchester Evening News', but the ultimate prize of editing 'The Guardian' eluded him. He applied when the post fell vacant in 1975 but was beaten by Peter Preston. A few months later he left the company, saying he had been sacked; others felt he had walked out in a fit of pique. One problem was that he had been absent too often, his good looks, lilting voice, unassailable self-confidence, and enviable fluency making him much in demand as a broadcaster. This had started in the late 1950s, when he regularly hosted BBC's weekly Manchester-based television show 'Points North'. He resigned from 'The Guardian' in the early 1960s to join BBC's popular television programme 'Tonight' (moving with his family briefly to London) but was back on 'The Guardian' within a year. He chaired Radio 4's talk series 'A Word In Edgeways' for more than twenty years. 
It was this natural broadcasting talent that resulted in an invitation to co-present Radio 4's breakfast programme, 'Today', in succession to Robert Robinson. He signed for an initial three months but stayed for eighteen years, taking a London flat in the Barbican but maintaining the family home in Rainow, outside Macclesfield. He brought to the programme verbal dexterity, political acumen, and Pennine folksiness. For ten years he and John Timpson, the other main presenter, formed the greatest double act ever to accompany the British breakfast. They complemented one another perfectly: tenor and baritone, town and country, north and south and (many felt) left and right, though in truth their politics were more complex than that. True, Redhead irritated the tory faithful with his frequent anti-Conservative jibes, clashing on air with Nigel Lawson (1987) and Peter Lilley (1991) over his alleged support for Labour. But he was also a staunch defender of Britain's constitutional monarchy, described himself as a 'wet' (Donovan, 'All Our Todays', 99), sent all his children to a fee-paying school (Cheadle Hulme), and had a lucrative sideline making corporate videos. Lady Thatcher, who during his era gave 'Today' a unique imprimatur by telephoning it direct from 10 Downing Street, paid tribute to him on air after his death. Having spent so many hours in the studio in the presence of Redhead's shaggy beard and elfin twinkle, it was Timpson who came up with the best physical description of his partner: 'I always felt he would look most at home sitting with a fishing rod beside a garden pond with a little curly hat with a pom-pom on top. He was everybody's idea of a lovable garden gnome' (Donovan, 'All Our Todays', 59). 
Redhead had a sharp rather than a deep mind, but he found himself setting out on a long spiritual journey after his youngest son was killed in a road accident in France in 1982 at the age of eighteen. The tragedy drew him towards the Church of England and he was confirmed seven months later, going on to 'read the 'Bible' from cover to cover' (Donovan, 'All Our Todays', 78), and to make an epic Radio 4 series about it entitled 'The Good Book'. When it was broadcast in 1986 he wrote: 'The whole point of a pilgrimage is not the distance covered but the act of identifying yourself with a purpose larger than your own' (Redhead, 'Personal Perspectives', 34). 
One of the many causes for which Redhead campaigned and raised funds was the hospice movement, which he described as 'the best thing that has happened in this country since the Second World War' (Redhead, 'Personal Perspectives', 30). Sadly, he was not able to spend his own last days in one. Having in 1993 arranged to leave 'Today' the following year to concentrate on his chancellorship of Manchester University, his lay work in the church, and a new Radio 4 series, he was admitted to hospital in December for a hip operation. Found to have a ruptured appendix discharging toxins into his body, he died of acute kidney failure and blood poisoning in Macclesfield District General Hospital on 23 January 1994. After a funeral service in Rainow parish church he was cremated at Macclesfield crematorium on 28 January, and his ashes were scattered behind his home. He was survived by his wife, Jenni, and by their two elder sons, and their daughter. 
Redhead was a professional northerner who became a national voice. There was much national sadness when he died at the early age of sixty-four. Cheeky, opinionated, and often politically provocative, he had made 'Today' the one programme no member of the decision-making classes could afford to miss. Insufferably bumptious for some of his colleagues, irrepressibly cheerful for most of his listeners, Redhead it was who first noted that 'Today' was where people came to 'drop a word in the nation's ear' ('Evening Standard', 3 July 1978). The archbishop of Canterbury wrote to the programme after his death: 'The loss of such a brilliant and warm personality must leave you all feeling bereft and very sad' (private information). One listener from Stoke-on-Trent spoke for many others when she said that for eighteen years Redhead had for her been 'a friend, brother, and teacher' (Donovan, 'All Our Todays', 111). 


@@@@@


doc= 46723


Giles Firmin (1665-1694), born on 22 May 1665. He married Rachel (died 1724), daughter of Perient Trott, and became a successful merchant, but he too predeceased his father, dying at Porto on 22 January 1694, and was buried at Newport on 13 April. 


@@@@@


doc= 46735


Hanson, Joseph (1774-1811), radical and 'the weavers' friend', was born on 17 October 1774, the son of William Hanson (1728/9-1798), a merchant-manufacturer of checks and cotton goods of Cannon Street, Manchester, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Wagstaff (1749/50-1822). He was baptized on 30 October 1774 at Cross Street Unitarian Chapel, Manchester. He joined the family business but after his father's death an inheritance enabled him to retire from trade and in 1808 he moved to Strangeways Hall, a mile north of Manchester. 
Manchester became a centre of political radicalism during the French Revolutionary wars. Middle-class radicals were involved with Cross Street Chapel and with the Literary and Philosophical Society, to which Hanson was admitted as a member in 1795. In December 1795 he and his father signed a petition to parliament calling for peace with revolutionary France and protesting against legislation introduced by William Pitt's government to prohibit 'seditious' meetings and publications. The Hanson family were friends with the radical printer William Cowdroy, and donated money to support his newspaper, the 'Manchester Gazette'. Following the Irish uprising of 1798 a magistrate's informant alleged that Hanson, 'a young man in partnership with his Father, a Merchant and who is supposed to be worth $100,000', were providing financial support for the republican United English cells and the United Irish delegate James O'Coigley (TNA: PRO, PC 1/42/140). The Hansons may also have been visited by the London radical John Thelwall when he stayed with William Cowdroy in 1801 (TNA: PRO, HO 42/62/238). Manchester was governed by high church, high Tory gentlemen and manufacturers, but they did not act on the information against Joseph Hanson and his father, unlike their well-publicized arrests for treason of Hanson's friends, the merchant and printer Thomas Walker in 1794 or William Cowdroy's son in 1798. Joseph Hanson never openly advocated parliamentary reform, so there was no evidence to support any possible charge against him. 
The resumption of war with Napoleonic France in May 1803 caused the British government to announce a 'levee en masse' to defend the country against invasion. In the 1790s volunteer military regiments had been the preserve of the loyalist associations and anti-radical local elites. The huge demand for manpower and the consequent patriotic fervour against Napoleon Bonaparte in 1803, however, offered an opportunity for gentlemen like Hanson and his friend and fellow Unitarian, Francis Dukinfield Astley of Dukinfield Hall, to raise volunteer regiments. In August 1803 Hanson formed the Manchester and Salford volunteer rifle corps, commanding six companies of riflemen, later joined by seven more companies from Bury and Stockport. On the eve of a military review on 4 June 1804, Hanson claimed the position of lieutenant-colonel, thereby assuming command over all the volunteer regiments. This was disputed by John Leigh Philips and James Ackers, commanding officers of the Royal and First Manchester and Salford volunteers respectively, and leading members of loyalist associations. Lord Hawkesbury, secretary of state, upheld Hanson's position, but the conflict escalated. Leigh Philips and fifty-three officers of the first regiment resigned in protest. Hanson challenged Leigh Philips to a duel on Kersal Moor on 28 July 1804. Magistrates prevented the duel and bound both men over to keep the peace. In December 1805 Hanson published a pamphlet, 'Brief Remarks on the Present Volunteer Establishment', in which he called for reform of inefficient volunteer corps. Critics published several retorts that portrayed his remarks as unpatriotic. Hanson eventually resigned his command in December 1807. 
Hanson developed his political ambitions at the general election of May 1807. He attempted to secure parliamentary candidacies at Chester and Stafford before the 'Friends of Independence' at Preston put him forward to challenge the sitting whig-tory coalition, which had been orchestrated there by Mancunian merchant-manufacturers as a proxy for their own town, which lacked directed representation in the House of Commons. Preston was also a significant borough because of its extended franchise, which included a high proportion of weavers and cotton spinners employed by the two sitting MPs, Lord Stanley and Samuel Horrocks. Hanson attended weavers' meetings and announced his support for their petition to parliament for a minimum wage bill. As a receiver of goods to his father's business, he had first contact with the handloom weavers of the Manchester region and was aware of the impact of economic depression caused by the wartime closure of continental and American markets. Though Stanley and Horrocks retained their seats, Hanson gained 1001 votes, including nearly two-thirds of those cast by weavers. 
Hanson quickly gained the moniker of 'the weavers' friend'. In November 1807 delegates from south Lancashire and the West Riding of Yorkshire held a meeting that resolved to ask Hanson to organize a regional petition for peace. He agreed, and the petition was signed by 40,000 people from the region. John Leigh Philips and the other Manchester local authorities again opposed his actions. In retort, Hanson published a pamphlet, 'A Defence of the Petitions for Peace', which by February 1808 was in its third edition. It is notable as an early example of the 'Manchester School' of political-economic thought about the impact of war upon commerce. 
On 25 May 1808, after the House of Commons rejected George Rose's motion to bring in a minimum wage bill for handloom weavers, Hanson attended the second of two large protest meetings on St George's Fields in Manchester. Denied permission from Lieutenant Trafford of the 4th dragoon guards to speak to the crowd, Hanson refused to leave the field and addressed the weavers' delegates, urging order but supporting their cause. He was arrested and charged for inciting disturbance of the peace. Nearly a year later, tried and found guilty at Lancaster spring assizes in April 1809, he was sentenced in May 1809 at the court of king's bench, London, to six months' imprisonment in the king's bench prison, Marshalsea, and a fine of $100. Although he declined the offer of the weavers' committee to pay his fine, 39,600 inhabitants of Manchester, Bolton, Ashton, and Stockport subscribed a maximum of a penny each to a gold cup and silver salver, which the weavers' delegates presented to him in prison. Released on 15 November 1809, he was met five miles south of Macclesfield by a large crowd who drew his carriage through the town, which was repeated at Stockport and Manchester. A commemorative medal celebrating him as the weavers' friend was struck in 1810. 
Chastened by his experience, Hanson retreated to his estate to live a private life. He nevertheless maintained his reputation among the handloom weavers, and when in 1811 the weavers' committee of Manchester with Bolton produced another petition of over 40,000 signatures they asked him to represent them at the ensuing House of Commons select committee to investigate their distress. Hanson went to London and gave evidence in June 1811 to testify to the weavers' grievances, but the select committee proved perfunctory and rejected proposals for limitations on apprentices and machinery. 
Hanson was isolated from other middle-class radicals throughout his political career. His predicament reflected in part the 'church-and-king' loyalist dominance of the Manchester elites, and also his own temperament. He seems to have made little attempt to co-ordinate his activities with his Unitarian and radical colleagues such as Francis Dukinfield Astley, Joseph Kershaw, and William Cowdroy, though they did send affidavits in his support during his trial. His family attended Stand Unitarian Chapel in Pilkington near Bury rather than the more influential Cross Street Chapel in Manchester. Many Cross Street members, moreover, felt it necessary to dissociate themselves from supporting working-class movements. The merchant Samuel Hibbert-Ware dissolved his friendship with Hanson in 1808 because of his involvement in the peace petition campaign ('A Reply to the Real Writer of a Pamphlet', by A Townsman, Manchester, April 1808). 
Joseph Hanson died, unmarried, on 7 September 1811, at Strangeways Hall, from dropsy and a liver disorder. He was buried in the family vault at Stand Chapel. His memorial tablet was inscribed with the purpose to 'remind those who live in happier times of one who in darker days loved his fellow men'. Popular memory of his actions in the industrial regions of the north was however quickly overtaken by the tumultuous events of the post-war period. 


@@@@@


doc= 46738


Rhodes, John Milson (1847-1909), general practitioner and poor-law reformer, was born on 14 September 1847 in Broughton, Salford, Lancashire, the youngest of the three sons of Milson Rhodes (1818-1884), fustian salesman, and his wife, Ann Keith (1818-1885), daughter of Thomas Wemyss, of York, teacher and biblical scholar. Rhodes's parents were both born in Yorkshire. Among his first cousins was Sir Thomas Wemyss Reid, litterateur and editor of the 'Leeds Mercury'. Rhodes matriculated at Glasgow University about 1865; his family lived in Glasgow from about 1863 to 1868. After deciding to follow his brothers into the medical profession, Rhodes attended Owens College, Manchester, and the Manchester school of medicine, where he was a major prizewinner. In 1874 he obtained the LRCM and LRCS in Edinburgh; in 1879 he graduated MD in Brussels. 
From 1874 until his death Rhodes was a general practitioner in Didsbury, near Manchester. Familiar in the village as a tall, neat, kindly, and scholarly bachelor, he was a member of Didsbury Liberal Club and a sidesman at Emmanuel (Anglican) Church. In addition to running his busy practice, Rhodes was a factory surgeon and a medical referee for an insurance company. A prolific writer, he contributed articles to the medical press on topics as diverse as infant mortality, the alleged increase in insanity, and hospital floors. His article 'The poor law and the medical profession' appeared posthumously in the 'British Medical Journal' in 1910. 
It was as a poor-law expert and reformer that Rhodes was best-known. In 1880 he was appointed overseer of the poor for Didsbury in Chorlton (south Manchester) union, and in 1882 he was elected to the Chorlton board of guardians. In 1891 he became the first chairman of the Northern Workhouse Nursing Association and in the early 1900s he chaired the central poor-law conference of England and Wales and the Association of Poor Law Unions. He was vice-president of the Societe Internationale d'Assistance Publique and held office on international infant-welfare committees. 
Rhodes gave evidence before the royal commissions on the care and control of the feeble-minded (1904-8) and on the poor laws (1905-9). He was much in demand as a lecturer to statistical and scientific societies, and a noteworthy lecture to the British Association, entitled 'Pauperism past and present', in 1890, was discussed in a leader in 'The Times'; it was also translated into French and widely circulated in pamphlet form. Between 1886 and 1906 Rhodes presented some thirty papers at central and district poor-law conferences, covering such topics as provision for epileptic and weak-minded paupers, the care of infants and children, and the design, nursing, and dietary practices of workhouses. A recurring theme was the iniquities of the 'general mixed workhouse' and the need for separate provision for different groups, the cost of special schemes being mitigated by neighbouring unions working together. Rhodes backed a plan to move 300 workhouse children to the country. In 1898, as chairman of Chorlton union's schools and cottage homes committee, he officially opened Styal Cottage Homes in Cheshire. 
Rhodes's chairmanship of the Chorlton board from 1894 to 1898 coincided with a time of great hardship and overcrowding at the union workhouse, and in 1898 he organized a combination with the neighbouring Manchester union to establish joint casual wards in the city centre. He visited rural colonies for epileptics in Germany (1897) and in the USA (1901) and his favourable reports encouraged the authorities in Chorlton and Manchester to build a joint epileptic colony at Langho near Blackburn, which was opened in 1906. Rhodes also helped establish epileptic colonies in Cheshire and Birmingham. 
For nearly thirty years a member and chairman of the board of guardians of the huge Chorlton union, south of Manchester, Rhodes spearheaded many reforms which were held up for praise by the Local Government Board and emulated in other unions. In his efforts to control able-bodied paupers while protecting the aged and the feeble 'deserving' poor at as little cost to the ratepayers as possible, Rhodes was no different from the majority of guardians, but his rational investigations into the causes of pauperism and his ability to communicate his findings to others placed him in a class apart. As he observed towards the end of his career: 'If I have done good work for the poor it has been by bringing science to bear upon it, and by trying to show a good many of the causes lying at the root of the evils under the existing system. ('Manchester Evening Chronicle')' Rhodes's research led him to his major conclusion: that outdoor relief was a perpetuator of pauperism and a waste of the poor rate. He advocated instead the provision by boards of guardians -- in combination if necessary -- of separate institutions for vagrants, children, the elderly, sane epileptics, and the mentally defective. Such institutions would be kinder to the young, the old, and the sick; would deter wastrels; would ensure that those able to work earned part of their keep; and would help prevent that anathema to eugenicists, 'the multiplication of the unfit'. In response to criticism of such expenditure, Rhodes insisted that 'laissez-faire' would no longer do and that this use of public money would, in the long run, result in public benefit. 
In 1892 Rhodes became a Liberal councillor (and later alderman) for Lancashire and did sterling work on the Lancashire Asylums Board, particularly in making provision for incurable cases. In 1906 he was appointed a JP and visiting justice to HM prison, Strangeways. Rhodes died at his home, Ivy Lodge, 104 Wilmslow Road, Didsbury, near Manchester, on 25 September 1909, after accidentally taking an overdose of strychnine. A funeral service was held on 29 September at Emmanuel Church and his body was later cremated at Manchester crematorium. 


@@@@@


doc= 46749


Wortley, Edward James Montagu-Stuart- (1857-1934), army officer, was born on 31 July 1857, the second son of Francis Dudley Montagu-Stuart-Wortley (1829-1893) and his wife, Maria Elizabeth, 'nee' Martin (died 26 Sept 1891), the eldest daughter of William Bennet Martin of Worsborough Hall, Yorkshire. As the grandson of John, second baron Wharncliffe (1801-1855), he was heir presumptive to the earldom. The family was known for its wealth, and sporting and social rather than political influence. 
After Eton (1866-70), Stuart-Wortley joined the army via the militia, and was gazetted to the King's Royal Rifle Corps (ensign, October 1877; lieutenant, March 1880). He first experienced action with the Kurram field force in the Second Anglo-Afghan war in 1879, and was mentioned in dispatches. He also served in the ill-fated Transvaal campaign of 1881. In 1882 he was military secretary to General Valentine Baker in Egypt, then aide-de-camp to Sir Evelyn Wood, and fought at Tell al-Kebir (13 September 1882). He served on Wolseley's Gordon relief expedition (1884-5) and was involved in the final dash for Khartoum in the vain attempt to save General Gordon. 
In 1886 Stuart-Wortley entered staff college by nomination and after graduation was posted to Malta, where he served three years as an infantry brigade major (captain, March 1886). On 5 February 1891, while serving in Malta, he married Violet Hunter, daughter of James Alexander Guthrie of Craigie, Dundee. They had two daughters and a son. 
Created CMG in 1896, Stuart-Wortley returned to Egypt to serve on the staff of the sirdar, Francis, Lord Grenfell. He served in Kitchener's reconquest of the Sudan, and at the battle of Omdurman (2 September 1898) for his spirited and successful command of 'friendly' irregulars, Stuart-Wortley was awarded the DSO. Almost immediately he was appointed assistant adjutant-general to Sir Redvers Buller and served on his staff during the South African campaign until the relief of Ladysmith (28 February 1900) when he was given command of the 2nd battalion, King's Royal Rifle Corps. 
Unusually for an officer of comparatively junior rank (major, brevet lieutenant-colonel) Stuart-Wortley was in 1901 appointed military attache in Paris. This reflected not only his successful army career but also his wealth and social and diplomatic acumen. The new king, Edward VII, who, like his mother, took a particular interest in military matters, wrote encouraging the new attache 'to devote all his good will to maintaining the most cordial relations with the French Army' (Rennell Rodd, p. 298). Edward's personal gratification with Stuart-Wortley's conduct in the successful negotiations for the Anglo-French entente was expressed by his creation as MVO in 1903. In 1906 Stuart-Wortley was made an officer of the Legion d'honneur and appointed CB. He was given the substantive rank of colonel and in April 1908 command of the 10th infantry brigade. 
In the autumn of 1908, at the height of an anti-German campaign in the British navalist press, Stuart-Wortley published in the 'Daily Telegraph' an 'interview' with the Kaiser. This, his only incursion into popular journalism, unwittingly earned Stuart-Wortley notoriety. (The choice of the 'Telegraph' was significant because, unlike the rest of the Unionist press, it treated stories on Germany and its Kaiser with restraint, even sympathy.) In December 1907, after completing an official visit to Britain, the Kaiser was for a fortnight Stuart-Wortley's private guest at his New Forest mansion, Highcliffe Castle, Christchurch, Hampshire. Stuart-Wortley had been impressed by Wilhelm's frequent and apparently heartfelt expressions of amity and respect for all things British. Stuart-Wortley supposed that if the public could be made aware of the Kaiser's true opinions, this would improve Anglo-German relations. He had proposed that the Kaiser give an interview to the journalist W. T. Stead, but Wilhelm refused. Stuart-Wortley believed he might overcome the Kaiser's aversion if he rather than a professional journalist conducted the interview, and his friend Harry Lawson, son of the 'Telegraph''s owner, encouraged this idea. Stuart-Wortley wrote down, as best he could recall, Wilhelm's conversations with him at Highcliffe, to which he added observations the Kaiser had made to him in September at the German army manoeuvres at Saarbrucken. All was dictated to J. B. Firth, a 'Daily Telegraph' journalist, and his transcript was submitted to the Kaiser for approval. 
The text was not carefully examined by German officials before it was approved, with only minor alterations. When it was published in the 'Daily Telegraph' on 28 October 1908, the interview did not create the hoped-for impression. The Kaiser's frequent interventions in diplomatic affairs, by speech or letter, not uncommonly created unintended crises. On this occasion the Kaiser's mixture of naive, boastful, and sometimes false assertions so carefully collected by Stuart-Wortley, in Germany and Britain alike, prompted embarrassment, amusement, and outrage. The anti-German scare in parliament and the press was exacerbated, while Stuart-Wortley's chagrin was only partly assuaged by the Kaiser's award of the Prussian Red Eagle and Star, second class. 
A year after being promoted major-general in March 1913, Stuart-Wortley was given command of the north midland territorial division. In March 1915 this was the first complete territorial division to cross to France, and in May it was retitled the 46th (north midland) division. It served on the western front, held a dangerous part of the Ypres salient with heavy casualties, and in October, during the battle of Loos, attacked the Hohenzollern redoubt, again with heavy losses. 
In 1916, as part of 7 corps in General Sir Edmund Allenby's Third Army, the 46th division was ordered to attack the village of Gommecourt on the extreme left (north) of the front as a diversion to the main Somme offensive, to capture the salient, and then to meet counter-attacks and inflict heavy casualties. On 1 July, after an inadequate artillery bombardment, 46th division met uncut wire and heavy fire, and their attack failed, with heavy casualties. Immediately after the battle Allenby ordered a court of inquiry into the handling of 46th division, which first sat on 4 July. Before it had completed its investigations, on the morning of 5 July, Stuart-Wortley was relieved of his command and ordered back to England, the first general to lose his command in the battle of the Somme. Most agreed that he was a poor commander. Brigadier-General Frank Lyon (chief staff officer, 7 corps) wrote that he was 'a worn-out man, who never visited his front line and was incapable of inspiring any enthusiasm' (Middlebrook, 284). According to Sir James Edmonds, he was sacked not so much for his Gommecourt failure, but because Haig was jealous of his correspondence with the king. His dismissal seems to have been the result of a combination of his poor reputation, the desire for a scapegoat, and Haig's dislike. 
Later in 1916 Stuart-Wortley was sent to Ireland to command the 65th division. This command grew heavier, more thankless, and harassing. He left Ireland in March 1918, received no further wartime employment, and retired in July 1919. Indulging his love of sport and travel, he enjoyed an energetic retirement. He died in Tangier, Morocco, on 19 March 1934. 
Stuart-Wortley, known by his friends as Eddie, reportedly enjoyed widespread popularity, both at court and in the mess and servants' hall. His army career, begun with such bright promise, faded disappointingly. Like other gallant, late-Victorian army officers brought up in quite other traditions, he apparently found life after the South African War less congenial in the reformed, more professional British army. 


@@@@@


doc= 46756


Carmichael, Mary Grant (1850/51-1935), pianist and composer, was born in Birkenhead, Cheshire, the daughter of John Carmichael of Corosal. Her youngest brother, Montague (1857-1936), entered the diplomatic service and was the author of a number of belletristic books on Italy. Mary was educated in Aix-la-Chapelle, Bonn, and Lausanne, and studied the piano with Heinrich Porges in Munich and composition and harmony with Ebenezer Prout in London. She had a successful career accompanying singers and violinists, and was the accompanist at the Monday Popular Concerts in 1884-5. She composed a considerable quantity of music, including songs, piano works, and an operetta, 'The Snow Queen'. Her song cycle 'The Stream' was performed at the Lyric Club in November 1887, while her mass in E[flat] for men's and boys' voices was considered her most ambitious project. She also composed marches for military bands, dedicated to lords Kitchener and Roberts. She was a convert to the Roman Catholic church, and retired in April 1926. She died unmarried on 17 March 1935 at her home, 18 Steele's Road, Haverstock Hill, Hampstead, at the age of eighty-four. Unexceptionable in musical terms, she is a good example of a woman who, nevertheless, sustained herself as a professional musician for some forty years. 


@@@@@


doc= 46757


Carmichael, Gershom (1672-1729), philosopher, was born in London, the son of Alexander Carmichael (died 1677), a Scottish presbyterian clergyman who had been deprived of his church in Scotland (at Pittenain) 'for keeping of conventicles' ('Reg. PCS', 3.464, 22 Feb 1672). Alexander Carmichael was transported to England where he was the first minister of the Founders' Hall congregation of Scottish presbyterians in London. He was the author of 'Believers mortification of sin by the spirit or gospel -- holiness advanced by the power of the Holy Ghost' (1677). Gershom Carmichael's mother, Christian (died 1694/5), was the daughter of John Inglis, minister of Hamilton. She subsequently married the noted Scottish theologian James Fraser of Brae. 
Gershom Carmichael enrolled at the University of Edinburgh in 1687 and graduated MA in 1691. He was appointed regent of humanity at St Andrews in March 1693 and resigned in October of the same year to obtain an MA from Glasgow, where he was appointed regent in 1694. On 19 September 1695 he married Christian Ingles; they had six sons. Carmichael remained regent or professor of philosophy at Glasgow until the termination of the regenting system in 1727. He was then elected the first professor of moral philosophy at the University of Glasgow. 
As a regent Carmichael was responsible for teaching all parts of the philosophy curriculum: logic, metaphysics, moral philosophy, and natural philosophy. His publications derive from the lectures or dictates given to his students: a short introduction to logic, 'Breviuscula introductio ad logicam' (1720, 1722), which was designed as a commentary on the Port Royal logic or 'The Art of Thinking'; a succinct exposition of Reformed theology, 'Synopsis theologiae naturalis' (1729), written to supplement and in part replace the texts he assigned students in metaphysics, the ontology and pneumatology of the Dutch metaphysician, Gerard de Vries; and his most important publication, an extended commentary on Samuel Pufendorf's work on the duty of man and citizen, 'S[amuelis] Pufendorfii de officio hominis et civis juxta legem naturalem, libri duo. Supplementis et observationibus in academicae juventutis usum auxit et illustravit Gerschomus Carmichael' (1724; first edn, 1718). Carmichael's edition of Pufendorf's work was highly regarded by jurists and moral philosophers in Europe: Jean Barbeyrac, professor of law in Groningen, acknowledged his debt to Carmichael in many passages of his translations and commentaries on the writings of Grotius, Pufendorf, and Cumberland; Everard Otto, professor of law in Utrecht, described Carmichael as a man worthy of esteem by all students of natural jurisprudence. In Scotland, Francis Hutcheson, Carmichael's successor as professor of moral philosophy in Glasgow, judged his commentary on Pufendorf's work to be 'of much more value than the text' ('A Short Introduction to Moral Philosophy', 1747, i). 
Carmichael's moral philosophy was remarkable particularly for its emphasis upon the natural rights of mankind. He argued (against Samuel Pufendorf, but in agreement with Hugo Grotius and John Locke) that every individual has a right of self-defence. He insisted (again, against Pufendorf and more unequivocally than Locke) that no man has the right to enslave another, 'for men are not among the objects which God has allowed the human race to enjoy dominion over'. He defended the theory of all the early modern natural jurists, that civil or political societies have their beginnings in an original contract, a theory which appealed to post-revolutionary Scottish thinkers, inasmuch as it excluded any claim to political power on the grounds of hereditary right. He believed that the liberty of the Scottish people had been secured by the limitations insisted on in the treaty of union and by the accession of the house of Hanover. 
Carmichael justified the natural rights of men and citizens on grounds consistent with his natural theology in which all men long for beatitude or a lasting happiness that can be found only in reverence for or veneration of God. Such reverence may be expressed directly (but also indirectly) in respect for God's creation and, more specifically, in self-respect and respect for others. And he held that there was no more appropriate way of signifying respect for persons than to acknowledge that every individual enjoys certain natural rights. His theory of moral motivation, while consistent with Reformed scholastic theology, presented problems for his successors -- Francis Hutcheson, Adam Smith, and Thomas Reid, among others. In their disagreements with Carmichael and with one another they generated those fruitful speculations concerning the moral experience of men in society that have come to be called the Scottish Enlightenment. 
Carmichael's career at the University of Glasgow was characterized by intermittent controversy. Robert Wodrow, who had been his student in the 1690s and who remained his friend, described him as 'a little warm in his temper, but a most affectionate, friendly man' (Wodrow, 4.95-6). Carmichael was inclined to be impatient with colleagues who continued to teach in accordance with the principles of scholastic Aristotelianism: 'foolish Gershom spues out much venom against me', his fellow regent, John Tran, complained to the principal, John Stirling (letter, 27 March 1704, Glasgow University Library Gen MS 205, 67). He opposed the autocratic style of the principal on different occasions. He was suspended from teaching in 1704, for protesting against the principal's administration of the finances of the university. The suspension was rescinded following interventions on his behalf by the duchess of Hamilton, the duke of Montrose, and others. In 1717 Carmichael and other masters objected to the annual renewal of the rector by the principal and faculty without vote by the students as the statutes of the university required ('Memorial for the scholars and other matriculated members of the University of Glasgow', 21 Dec 1717, NL Scot., Pamph. 1.10, 142). Their initiative failed, although the right of the students to elect the rector was confirmed by a commission of visitation in 1727. It was the termination of the regenting system by the same commission that led to the establishment of the chair in moral philosophy which Carmichael held for only two years before his death, in his house in the college of Glasgow, on 26 November 1729. 
Of Carmichael's sons, Alexander graduated MA in 1716 and was licensed university printer in 1730; James enrolled in the university in 1712 and was later appointed to administer his father's estate; and John graduated MA in 1718 and was King William's bursar in theology. Frederick Carmichael taught the humanity class at the university (1726-8) during the illness of Professor Andrew Ross; he was then a candidate for his father's chair in moral philosophy but was defeated in a very close vote by Francis Hutcheson. Gershom, MA in 1733, was librarian at the university in 1737-9 and was subsequently minister at Monomail and South Church, Dundee; he also studied at the University of Leiden. Patrick, an army surgeon in the Dutch service before returning to Scotland, is described by Dugald Stewart as 'a younger son of Professor Gershom Carmichael... who, after a long residence in Holland, where he practised medicine, retired to Glasgow'; he married the daughter of Thomas Reid. 
Gershom Carmichael died intestate. A 'testament dative' was 'faithfully made and drawn up by James Carmichael, son lawfull and Exec. dative qua nearest in kin decerned to the defunct by decret of the Commissar(y) of Glasgow' (NA Scot., CC 9/7/53, 2 June 1730). The testament dative records sums of money owing to the estate by the university; the total of these sums of money is reckoned $54 8's'. 6died The commissary of Glasgow later recorded the amount of $444 8's'. 10died made out in favour of Elizabeth Stewart, relict of John Inglis (his wife's mother) in her lifetime and to Professor Gershom Carmichael. The bond is dated 14 February 1727. Again James Carmichael is 'decerned' to be executor dative and Alexander Carmichael signs as caution or surety for his brother James. 


@@@@@


doc= 46759


Carr, Frank Osmond (1858-1916), composer, was born on 23 April 1858 in the school house, Kirkstall, Hunslet, Yorkshire, the second son of George Saxton Carr, a schoolmaster, and his wife, Margaret Durden Carr, 'nee' Painter. He matriculated at New College, Oxford, in 1877 and graduated BMus in 1884, having meanwhile been accepted at Downing College, Cambridge, in 1882 and gained a BA there in 1883. In 1885 he entered Trinity College, Cambridge, and gained an MA and BMus in 1886, before returning to Oxford, where he finally received his DMus in 1891. He made an initial foray into the London musical theatre in 1889 with the burlesque comic opera 'Faddimir', which he composed under the pseudonym Oscar Neville in collaboration with his fellow Cambridge graduate Arthur Reed Ropes (1859-1933), who was to become known as Adrian Ross, the lyricist. The work brought Carr to the attention of the impresario George Edwardes, and led to commissions for the scores of the burlesque 'Joan of Arc, or, The Merry Maid of Orleans' (1891) and the musical farce 'In Town' (1892). Part comic opera, part variety show, the latter had a score by Carr that was praised for its pretty ballads, tuneful songs, and sprightly dances. It ran for several months and came to be regarded as the first modern-dress 'musical comedy'. A successor, 'Morocco Bound' (1893), ran for even longer and resulted in Carr being selected as the collaborator of W. S. Gilbert on the more ambitious comic opera 'His Excellency' (1894). Inevitably Carr was judged no match for Sullivan, though the work achieved a fair international success. Thereafter Carr's star declined almost as rapidly as it had risen. He composed scores for several further musical shows, including 'Lord Tom Noddy' (1896) for Little Tich, but these were either unsuccessful in London or confined to the provinces. His other published compositions included songs, instrumental pieces, and the score for the ballet 'Sir Roger de Coverley', produced at the Empire Theatre in 1907. In later years he sought in vain to revise his older successes for production in the currently popular revue style. In August 1916 he left London to spend some time in the country but died suddenly of a heart attack at the Chequers Hotel, Uxbridge, on 29 August. 


@@@@@


doc= 46761


Carr, Joseph William Comyns (1849-1916), author, gallery director, and theatre manager, was born on 2 March 1849 at 47 Devonshire Street, Marylebone, Middlesex, the seventh of the ten children of Jonathan Carr, a woollen draper, and his wife, Catherine Grace Comyns. His father was from Cumberland, and his mother was Irish. His sister, Kate Comyns Carr, was a portrait artist. From 1862 to 1865 he attended Bruce Castle School, Tottenham, Middlesex, in the dining room of which, he later recalled, he had his first encounter with the wallpaper designs of William Morris. He matriculated at London University in 1870 and was called to the bar at the Inner Temple, London, on 30 April 1872. His ambition, however, was for a literary career. He established his name as a journalist, especially in the fields of dramatic and art criticism, and his appointment as art critic to the 'Pall Mall Gazette' in 1873 allowed him to retire from the law. On 15 December 1873 he married, in Dresden, Alice Laura Vansittart Strettell (1850-1927), daughter of the Revd Arthur B. Strettell, consular chaplain at Genoa. They had three children: Philip, Dorothy, and Arthur (later Sir Arthur Strettell Comyns Carr (1882-1965), barrister and Liberal MP). 
Carr was a passionate advocate of Pre-Raphaelite art and a vigorous critic of what he saw as the short-sightedness of the art establishment. A series of articles on contemporary artists in 'The Globe' in 1873 attracted attention and resulted in a friendship with Dante Gabriel Rossetti. In 1875 he became English editor of the sumptuous and influential French journal 'L'Art'; he founded and edited 'Art and Letters' in 1881-3; and he was editor of the 'English Illustrated Magazine' in 1883-6, where he launched the career of the illustrator Hugh Thomson. He published several books based on his journalism, including 'Drawings of the Old Masters' (1877), 'Examples of Contemporary Art' (1878), 'Art in Provincial France' (1883), and 'Papers on Art' (1885). 
In 1877 Sir Coutts Lindsay invited Carr and the amateur artist Charles Halle to become co-directors of the newly founded Grosvenor Gallery in Bond Street with the express intention of promoting Pre-Raphaelite painters and challenging 'the sleepy self-complacency of the dwellers in Burlington House [the Royal Academy]' (Carr, 'Some Eminent Victorians', 131). The successful opening exhibition, to which many important artists contributed, marked a turning point in the appreciation of the work of Sir Edward Burne-Jones. Carr also organized several innovative exhibitions of old master paintings and drawings. Private views at the Grosvenor Gallery quickly became fixtures in the London social calendar. 
At the end of 1886 Carr and Halle resigned from the Grosvenor Gallery after a dispute with Sir Coutts Lindsay, and in the remarkable space of barely four months they planned, built, and opened the New Gallery in Regent Street in time to compete with the spring exhibitions of the Royal Academy and the Grosvenor (which closed in 1890). Crucially, they took with them all the Grosvenor's major contributors, and the New Gallery was to remain the most important showcase for Pre-Raphaelite art until the death of Burne-Jones in 1898. Carr continued as co-director until 1908. He was chosen to write the introduction to the British section of the International Exhibition of Fine Arts at Rome in 1911 and was afterwards appointed English representative on the Art Congress. 
His gallery work did not cause Carr to neglect his interest in drama. In the early 1880s he contributed several light comedies to the 'Entertainment' of Thomas German Reed and his wife, Priscilla, at St George's Hall. He also discovered a talent for adaptation: Hugh Conway's 'Called back' in 1884 (in collaboration with the author) for the actor-manager Herbert Beerbohm Tree was a huge popular success. Many other adaptations and collaborations followed, including 'Madame Sans-Gene' by Victorien Sardou and Emile Moreau in 1897 for Sir Henry Irving; 'The Beauty Stone' in 1898, a comic opera (in collaboration with Arthur Wing Pinero and with music by Sir Arthur Sullivan); and Goethe's 'Faust' in 1908 (in collaboration with Stephen Phillips) for Tree. Of his original non-collaborative work for the theatre 'King Arthur' (1895) for Irving is noteworthy for its production; Carr persuaded his old friend Burne-Jones to design the sets and costumes (the artist's only essay in this field) and enlisted Sullivan to compose the incidental music. The result was a 'succes de spectacle' which ran for 100 performances and went on to tour the United States and Canada. Carr wrote two further pseudo-medieval dramas: 'Tristram and Iseult' (1906) and 'The Lonely Queen' (unpublished). 
Carr was Tree's literary adviser and partner at the Haymarket Theatre (1887-93); leased his own theatre, the Comedy (1893-6); and managed the Lyceum (1899-1904) after Irving transferred its control to a company. He was artistic adviser at the Covent Garden Theatre (1913-14), where he staged the first English performance of Richard Wagner's 'Parsifal' on 2 February 1914. 
Carr's two volumes of memoirs, 'Some Eminent Victorians' (1908) and 'Coasting Bohemia' (1914), provide a fascinating record of his artistic and literary friendships. His last work, 'The Ideals of Painting' (1917), was published posthumously. He died of cancer on 12 December 1916 at his home, 6 Canning Place, South Kensington, London, and was buried in Highgate cemetery. 
Carr was, in his own words, 'an impenitent Victorian'. He was a man of many talents, of boundless energy, and of unflagging confidence. He had a flair for organization and promotion; he was a great conversationalist, a renowned after-dinner speaker, and an expert fly-fisherman; he was once even offered a seat in parliament in the home-rule interest by Charles Stewart Parnell. 


@@@@@


doc= 46762


Cary, Henry, fourth Viscount Falkland (bap. 1634, d. 1663), politician, was born at Burford Priory, Oxfordshire, and baptized at Burford on 21 November 1634, the second son of Lucius Cary, second Viscount Falkland (1609/10-1643), and his wife, Lettice Cary, nee Morison (c.1612-1647). He was educated at Hayes in Middlesex by Dr Thomas Triplett. On 14 April 1653 he married Rachel ('bap'. 1637, died 1718), daughter of Anthony Hungerford of Blackbourton, Oxfordshire, and his wife, Rachel ('nee' Jones). Cary, who succeeded as fourth Viscount Falkland following the death of his older brother Lucius at Montpellier in September 1649, shared his parents' royalist sympathies: in 1650 he travelled for a while in France, and in 1654 he was secretly commissioned as a colonel with John Talbot. The council of state monitored his movements, and in July 1656 granted him a pass to travel to France with four servants. The following October William Lockhart, the ambassador in Paris, informed the secretary of state, John Thurloe, that he regarded Falkland as 'a greater enemy to himself (by reason of his extravagant debawches) then to any else' (Thurloe, 'State papers', 5.520). It is possible that such behaviour helps to explain a reference to an earlier 'miscarriage... in Hyde Park' in May 1653 ('CSP dom., 1649-63', 322). 
Nevertheless, Falkland sat as a member for Oxfordshire in the third protectorate parliament (1659). There was initially a double return for the county but this was resolved in Falkland's favour. He consistently opposed the recognition of the 'Other House' as a house of parliament, and reportedly argued on 28 March that 'if we own them as another House they will say, they are the other House, in place of the Old Peers' ('Diary of Thomas Burton', 4.281). On 5 April he was teller against a motion to include the phrase 'both Houses of Parliament' in the title of a declaration appointing 18 May as a day of public fasting and humiliation, while on 6 April he was appointed to a committee to consider 'the manner of transacting with the Other House' ('JHC', 7.627). On 14 April he was teller for an unsuccessful motion for Mr Grove to take a declaration concerning the fast to the Other House and return without waiting for an answer. On 12 April he was appointed to a committee to prepare impeachment articles against Major-General William Boteler following a complaint that the latter had illegally distrained the property of the late Sir Thomas Hatton. Falkland claimed that he had personal experience of Boteler's methods, and alleged that he 'robbed me, and keeps my goods to this day' ('Diary of Thomas Burton', 4.406). On 18 April he was appointed to a committee to prepare security measures following reports that some were arming against parliament in the City of London. 
After the parliament was dissolved in late April, Falkland became involved in plans for a royalist rising, and on 12 August 1659 he was arrested and sent to the Tower, where he remained until November. When the council of state ordered his house at Great Tew to be searched, eleven or twelve cases of pistols, six or seven swords, twenty powder horns, and a bag of bullets were discovered there. In February 1660 he was among those Oxfordshire gentry who signed a declaration to General George Monck calling for a free parliament. The following month he was appointed a justice of the peace and a commissioner for the militia for Oxfordshire. 
Following the restoration of the king, Falkland was appointed a colonel of horse in June 1660. He was also appointed to further offices in Oxfordshire, notably lord lieutenant (July 1660) and commissioner for assessment (August 1660). He became a gentleman of the privy chamber in June 1660 and a privy councillor for Ireland in July 1662. In the Convention Parliament (1660-61) he was returned for both Arundel (Sussex) and Oxford, and chose to sit for the latter. In that parliament he served on twenty-eight committees and made seventeen recorded speeches that suggest strong royalist and Anglican sympathies. On 7 May he was among the twelve members chosen to attend the king in Holland. When Falkland returned, he delivered a letter to the house from the king at Canterbury, and was appointed colonel of a regiment of horse. He took a strong line towards the regicides, and argued that any member who had sat in the high court of justice should be excluded from the house. Regarding individual parliamentarians, he wished to make William Sydenham and John Pyne liable for any penalty short of death, and he opposed the limited punishment proposed for Francis Lascelles. On 24 August he was sent to the Lords to desire a free conference on those regicides who had surrendered themselves following the proclamation of the king. On 7 December Falkland moved that estates acquired during the civil wars and interregnum should be forfeit, and he clearly resented the more magnanimous aspects of the Restoration settlement. Similarly, on religious matters, Falkland opposed the imposition of the oaths of allegiance and supremacy on Roman Catholics, and supported Sir Allen Brodrick's motion 'to leave the doctrinal part to a synod' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 4.79). Falkland supported the Worcester House declaration, with its proposal for a modified episcopacy, but was opposed to the granting of a 'liberty for tender consciences'. 
Falkland served as MP for Oxfordshire in the Cavalier Parliament that met in May 1661, and in the next two years he was appointed to a total of thirty-six committees. His royalist and Anglican attitudes continued to be clearly apparent. On 17 May 1661 he was teller for a resolution to burn the solemn league and covenant, which he then carried up to the Lords. He strongly supported the claims of the former royalist, John Paulet, fifth marquess of Winchester, for compensation from Robert Wallop's estate, and he helped to bring in the 'Militia Bill' that affirmed the crown's powers over the armed forces. Roger Morrice described Falkland as 'a most violent, indefatigable promoter of the 'Act of Uniformity'', and recorded that in the debate on the uniformity bill he caused a stir by declaring that 'popery came in with such a full torrent upon us that upon my consideration we that have all in land shall not have time left us to compound for that [e]state'. Such strong language prompted a proposal that he be called to the bar, but it was thought better to draw no further attention to a member 'that can speak excellently well and [cares] for no man'. However, Falkland was not appointed to the committee on the uniformity bill, and Morrice added that he 'was all his time after under a cloud and looked upon as a dangerous person both by those in the court and the parliament that were in the Council' (Morrice, 1.112). It was consistent with Falkland's vehement support for the 'Act of Uniformity' that, as lord lieutenant, he was energetic in his persecution of Oxfordshire nonconformists. 
Falkland was appointed colonel of foot in the Dunkirk garrison in 1661, and when his regiment was disbanded in October 1662 he was appointed captain of a troop of horse in Ireland. He was also elected to the Irish parliament in 1662, where Edward Cooke described him as 'the hornet... in the House of Commons... to sting all' those in opposition to the government. Cooke also observed that Falkland had 'grown grave as well as severe' ('Fifteenth Report', HMC, appendix, part 7, p. 165). On his return to England in October 1662 Falkland was appointed to the committees to consider the defects of the 'Act of Uniformity' and to bring in a bill to prevent the growth of popery. But before he was able to contribute further, Falkland died in London on 2 April 1663, and was buried at Great Tew on 9 April. He apparently died intestate, and the prerogative court of Canterbury granted letters of administration to his widow on 1 July 1663 (TNA: PRO, PROB 6/38, fol. 81'v'), his heir, Anthony Cary, who succeeded as fifth viscount, being still a boy. According to his father's great friend Edward Hyde, earl of Clarendon, Falkland's 'hearte was broke, with the pure despayre of his fortune... He was a worthy and a right honest man, and when a little age had worne away some heates and passyons, he would have prooved an extraordinary man' (Clarendon to Ormond, 11 April 1663, Bodl. Oxf., MS Carte 47, fol. 44'v'). 
Falkland was the author of one play, a tragedy set in Castile entitled 'The Mariage Night', which was licensed posthumously on 16 October 1663, and printed in 1664. In its treatment of the themes of tragedy and revenge, the play shows some Shakespearean influences, and may also have owed a certain debt to Cyril Tourneur's 'The Revenger's Tragedy' (1607). Pepys saw the play performed on 21 March 1667, and described it as 'a kind of a tragedy, and some things very good in it, but the whole together, I thought, not so' ('Diary of Samuel Pepys', 21 March 1667). An edition of the play was published in volume 10 of Robert Dodsley's 'Select Collection of Old Plays' (12 vols., 1744-5) and as part of an updated version of Dodsley's collection in 1876 ('Select Collection of Old English Plays', ed. Hazlitt, 15.109-83). Falkland's widow twice remarried, one of her husbands being Sir James Hayes (died 1693). She died at Bedgebury in Kent on 24 February 1718. 


@@@@@


doc= 46764


Sykes, Sir Alan John (1868-1950), industrialist and politician, was born on 11 April 1868 at Cringle House, Cheadle, Cheshire, the second son of Thomas Hardcastle Sykes (1833-1901), a bleacher, and his wife, Mary, the eldest daughter of John Platt, a machine manufacturer of Oldham and his wife, Alice. He was educated at Rugby School and Oriel College, Oxford, where he imbibed a strong sense of duty and a lasting attachment to freemasonry. Sykes served his apprenticeship in the long-established family bleachworks, Sykes & Co., at Stockport, but also occasionally visited Canada to oversee the family's farm there, the largest in Saskatchewan. He took over management of the bleachworks in 1900, when the firm joined the Bleachers' Association, one of the three large mergers which transformed the structure of the textile finishing industry. He acted as secretary of the formation committee of the Bleachers' Association and was a founder director, but in 1908 retired from the management of Sykes & Co. 
Increasingly Sykes's energies were absorbed in local political and social affairs, while he still undertook much foreign travel, including motoring to Russia. He was adopted as Conservative candidate for Knutsford in 1907 and became a leading Conservative organizer in the north-west, helping to rebuild the party in the face of the strong local challenges of Labour and the new Liberalism. A keen tariff-reformer, in January 1910 Sykes won Knutsford (ironically defeating a fellow director of the Bleachers' Association), which he retained in December 1910. In 1912 he had gained control of the Stockport-based Swain group of newspapers in order to create a reliable organ of toryism, a result secured for the next generation by the setting up of the Sir Alan Sykes Trust in 1943. 
Within parliament, Sykes's main interest lay in his vigorous support of Britain's voluntary defence forces, both before and during the First World War. He was a member of the Officers' Training Corps at Oxford and commanded the 6th battalion, the Cheshire regiment from 1911 to 1914. Although he was unfit for active service in 1914, as an influential social leader he devoted himself enthusiastically to the volunteer movement during the war. He also acted as a government commissioner reviewing alien permits. He received a baronetcy in July 1917. In the House of Commons, however, Sykes had made little mark, and although he was re-elected in 1918 he resigned his seat in 1922 on grounds of ill health. Already holding 'more offices than he can remember' ('Manchester Guardian Commercial', 17 May 1923), he continued to play an important part in the networks of regional Conservatism, as 'inter alia' chairman of the Cheshire division of the national union, treasurer of the North-West Provincial Conservative Association (1933-47), and chairman of the Knutsford Conservative Association (1922-46). 
However, in 1916 Sykes's public stature as well as his industrial experience recommended him as chairman of the Bleachers' Association, which by 1914 had succeeded in gaining control of some two-thirds of the British market in cotton bleaching and employed some 13,000 operatives in what was now a reasonably profitable modern corporate enterprise. Having been heavily engaged in munitions production, the Bleachers' Association was well placed after the war to consolidate its market share and buy up competitors (between 1918 and 1927 twenty-one firms were acquired at a cost of some $1.99 million). This enabled it to maintain high prices, to an extent which, some believed, jeopardized British exports, now facing strong overseas competition. Sykes's own industrial philosophy was perhaps best seen in the enlightened welfare policy the firm adopted, with generous pensions provision, recreational facilities, and two model villages on garden city lines. The relative success of the Bleachers' Association was also well advertised by its showpiece headquarters, Blackfriars House, Manchester, opened in 1926. 
From 1926 the firm's fortunes were steadily eroded, especially after 1929 as the market for British exports of bleached white goods plummeted. This required a new strategy for survival, which owed most to the firm's managing director Sir William Clare Lees. As chairman, however, Sykes supported within the firm the need for cost-cutting rationalization of production, technological modernization, overseas investment (in partnership with the Calico Printers and Bradford Dyers), and diversification beyond bleaching. Outside the firm he urged the importance of imperial trade and industrial protection, and was gradually won over to the need for governmental intervention in the cotton trade; he supported the 'Cotton Industry (Reorganization) Act' of 1939. After 1945, while a critic of some aspects of planning, he welcomed the Labour government's export drive as the means to restore profits and dividends. Sykes remained chairman of the firm until his death, three weeks short of its fiftieth anniversary. He was also a director of Williams and Glyn's Bank (1918-48), an early supporter of the Federation of British Industries, and president for many years of the Lancashire and Cheshire Economic League. 
Following family tradition, Sykes was a pre-eminent leader in the local community. He was a county magistrate from 1897 until 1950, the first chairman of the Cheshire police authority, and mayor of Stockport in 1910. He contributed largely to the success of Stockport grammar school as chairman of its governors (1921-50) and perhaps above all to Stockport Infirmary, the board of which he joined in 1897 and which he chaired between 1918 and 1948. Among other offices, he was chairman of the Manchester Northern Hospital (1928-48), of the Ephraim Hallam Trust in Stockport, and of the Oldham Blue Coat School. He thus well exemplified the voluntary ethic whose undermining he regretted with the growing welfare provision by the state after 1945. 
Even so this public face concealed a shy, retiring man, whose main satisfaction, one suspects, may well have been derived from the hidden world of the freemasons. Here Sykes held a panoply of offices, ranging from grand deacon in the grand lodge of England in 1907 to that (in which he succeeded in 1948 the seventeenth earl of Derby) of grand superintendent of the Lancashire (east division) provincial grand chapter of the Royal Arch masons. Most at home in the mess, the boardroom, and the lodge, Sykes was a confirmed bachelor with a taste for yellow Rolls-Royces and annual gastronomic tours of France. At his home, South View, Cheadle, in suburban south Manchester, he lived with an excellent cook, a well-stocked cellar, and a number of loyal retainers. He died there on 21 May 1950. 


@@@@@


doc= 46765


Cadogan, William Bromley (1751-1797), religious writer, was born on 22 January 1751 in Bruton Street, London, the second son of Charles Sloane Cadogan, third Earl Cadogan (1728-1807), landowner, and his first wife, Frances Bromley (died 1768), the only daughter of Henry Bromley, first Baron Montford. He began his education at Westminster School, then matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, in 1769, whence he proceeded BA in 1773 and MA in 1776. Henry Bathurst, later second Earl Bathurst, who was at the time lord chancellor, presented him to the vicarage of St Giles, Reading, in 1774, when the previous evangelical vicar, William Talbot, died. Cadogan was then collated to the rectory of Chelsea in 1775, which was in his father's gift. In 1782 he married Mrs Bradshaw, formerly Graham (died 1827), the widow of Captain Bradshaw, private secretary and aide-de-camp to General Vaughan. From his letters to her, it appears that their marriage was a happy one -- he always addressed her as 'my dear life'; they had no children. 
When Cadogan first arrived in the parish of St Giles, he had the reputation of being a haughty pastor and a stern opponent of Methodism; he threatened to sue proprietors who opened for business on Sundays, he dismissed his evangelical curate, and he castigated his parishioners for going to hear Methodist preachers. He proved, however, to be an attentive pastor and an earnest seeker of truth. John Wesley heard of his zeal, and sent him a set of his writings, but Cadogan responded by burning the books in his own kitchen, because he vowed that he would learn the truth from scripture alone. Some time during the first few years of his tenure at Reading, he fell under the influence of Mrs Talbot, the late vicar's wife. The Talbots had been close friends of the evangelical Calvinist William Romaine, rector of St Ann Blackfriars, and Romaine was careful to keep in touch with Mrs Talbot after her husband's death. Cadogan acknowledged her influence on him when he preached at her funeral in 1785. She was, he said, not only 'the best friend I ever had in my life, but... a Mother to me in love, in every good office, and in continual prayers for my person and ministry' ('The Love of Christ the Portion and Principle of the Children of God', 1785, 6). Largely because of her encouragement and through his subsequent contact with William Romaine, Cadogan developed an evangelical fervour in his ministry. He offered to reinstate his old curate, who, however, declined, and began preaching extemporaneously on 'experimental' religion. By taking such an evangelical stand, he seems to have forfeited further preferment, despite the fact that he was respected by and an intimate of Robert Lowth, the bishop of London. He became very popular in Reading and Chelsea on account of his preaching and his cure of souls: his biographer, Richard Cecil, reported that he attracted large crowds to his services and that he garnered much respect because of his diligent care for his parishioners and his charity and benevolence to all. 
Cadogan was, according to Cecil, a high-churchman and a Calvinist. He never could appreciate Wesley's Arminianism, which he complained was a system that was 'founded in ignorance, supported by pride' and would 'end in delusion' (Rogal). Although he resisted Wesley's influence, Romaine's influence was evidently potent: Cadogan remained very close to the rector of St Anne's for the rest of the latter's life. Romaine's letters indicate that he often went to Reading, and that he gave a Thursday evening lecture there with some regularity. Cadogan often officiated in Romaine's parish; he preached the funeral sermon when the latter died in 1795, and wrote a short biography of the rector, published in 1796. He had other evangelical friends -- his letters indicate that he was well known to John Newton and Richard Cecil, and that he occasionally preached in the latter's parish -- but none was as close as Romaine. 
Cadogan published a number of individual sermons as well as collections of his works which demonstrate the attractive nature of his theology and the power of his preaching. In 'Liberty and Equality: Two Sermons' (1792), for example, he gushes with emotion about the joy of salvation: true believers 'shall be ranging at large in the bright regions of eternal day, they shall be singing hallelujahs to the Lord God omnipotent, and rejoicing in Him who hath saved them with an everlasting salvation: in a word, for ever released from shame and sorrow, and for ever crowned with glory and righteousness, they are 'free indeed'. (pp. 25-6)' His florid language led the reviewer in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' to call these two sermons 'nothing more nor less than the ranting effusions of methodistical orthodoxy' ('GM', 63/1, 1793, 246). He produced a hymnal in a style very similar to that of his friend John Newton, entitled 'Psalms and Hymns Collected by W. B. Cadogan' (1785), which was reprinted in 1787, 1793, and 1803. It was divided into two parts, as indicated by the title -- psalms put to metre and hymns -- and was full of effusive praise. 
Cadogan died in Reading on 18 January 1797, aged forty-five, and was buried at St Giles's, Reading. A monument was erected to him in St Giles's, on which his 'mourning flock' expressed their admiration and respect for their late pastor because of his abilities, labour, and piety ('GM', 67/2, 1797, 796). A few of his discourses and letters, together with a short memoir of his life, were published in Richard Cecil, 'Discourses of the honourable and reverend William Bromley Cadogan, A.M.... to which are now added short observations on the Lord's prayer, and letters to several of his friends' (1798). 


@@@@@


doc= 46766


Callcott, John Wall (1766-1821), composer and music teacher, was born on 20 November 1766 at The Mall, Kensington Gravel Pits, London, the son of Thomas Callcott, builder, and his second wife, Charlotte, 'nee' Wall; his brother was the painter Sir Augustus Wall Callcott. From the age of seven John Callcott was a pupil at a school near his home run by William Young, where he was said to have been a brilliant student of the classics, Hebrew, and philosophy. He was obliged to leave at the age of twelve because of family circumstances and was subsequently self-taught. 
Callcott's early musical education, from 1778, was with Henry Whitney, organist of Kensington parish church. His father bought a spinet for him in 1779, and he later took up the clarinet and the oboe. In 1780 he wrote music for a Christmas play at Young's school. In 1782, through his attendance at Westminster Abbey, he became acquainted with Benjamin Cooke and Samuel Arnold, who encouraged him to enter the musical profession. From 1782 he occasionally played in the orchestra of the Academy of Ancient Music as a 'supernumerary hautboy', and sang in the chorus of the oratorio concerts at Drury Lane Theatre. In 1783, on the recommendation of Thomas Attwood, he became deputy organist under Rheinhold of St George the Martyr, Queen Square, Bloomsbury, a post he held until 1785. 
Most of Callcott's early compositions were glees. For much of the 1780s he dominated the annual Catch Club competitions, gaining fame for the number of his entries which won gold medals and notoriety for the single-mindedness of his approach to the competition. His first glee, 'O sovereign of the willing soul', which he entered in 1784, was unsuccessful, but he won three out of the four prizes in 1785, and two prizes in each of the two following years. In 1787 he submitted no fewer than 120 entries, and the club subsequently passed a resolution limiting the number of entries by any competitor to twelve. Offended by this change in the rules, Callcott refused to compete in 1788, but he entered again in 1789 and won all four prizes. Between 1790 and 1793, after which the competition was abolished altogether, he entered each year and won a further nine prizes. 
Callcott took the Oxford BMus degree on 4 July 1785. In 1787 he was involved with Arnold in the formation of the Glee Club. On 2 November 1788 he was elected to membership of the Royal Society of Musicians. In 1789 he was appointed joint organist with C. S. Evans of St Paul's, Covent Garden. In 1793 he was appointed organist to the Asylum for Female Orphans in Lambeth, a post which he held until 1802, when he resigned it to his future son-in-law and memorialist William Horsley. On 18 June 1800 he took the Oxford DMus degree. 
Callcott married Elizabeth Mary Hutchins at St Paul's, Covent Garden, on 14 July 1791. They had eleven children, all of whom had Hutchins as their second forename. Elizabeth (1793-1875), their eldest daughter, married Horsley in 1813. Sophia ('b'. 1794) was a piano teacher and organist of St Mary Abbots, Kensington. William Hutchins Callcott was a prolific composer, organist, and teacher of music. Maria Hutchins Callcott (1798-1859) was the author of a number of 'improving' works, most of them published by the SPCK. They included 'The Singer's Alphabet' (1849), 'Daily Charity' and 'The Power of Meekness' (both 1853), and 'A Few Household Hints, and Lessons of Conduct for Female Servants' (1856). She died of liver disease on 3 April 1859 at 10 Campden Grove, Kensington, London. 
As he grew older, Callcott's interests increasingly turned from composition to questions of theory. His interest developed through his friendship with Marmaduke Overend, organist of Isleworth. On Overend's death in 1790 Callcott bought all his manuscripts, including all his compositions and the manuscript writings on harmony of William Boyce, which Overend had acquired after Boyce's death in 1779. Callcott's ambitious plans for a comprehensive dictionary of music, for which he issued a prospectus in 1797 but which he never completed, involved him in many years of study of theoretical writings and mathematical and philosophical treatises relating to music, all undertaken in addition to his heavy teaching and other commitments. He also worked on an alphabetical dictionary of composers, which he was able to complete only as far as the letter O. Work on these projects ceased in 1808, when Callcott suffered a breakdown, but Horsley in his 'Memoir' doubted if he would in any case ever have completed them, remarking that 'habit had rendered the accumulation of materials a pleasing task for him, but he always appeared to shrink from the labour of arranging them' (Horsley, 11). 
Callcott's activities around the turn of the century were many and varied. About 1799 he published 'The Sentences, Psalms, Hymns, and Anthems, as Sung at the Asylum Chapel' and in 1801, anonymously, an elementary English grammar and dictionary, 'The Way to Speak Well, Made Easy for Youth'. In 1802 he wrote the anthem 'I heard a voice from heaven', which was sung at the funeral of Samuel Arnold on 29 October; soon afterwards he applied unsuccessfully for Arnold's post as composer to George III. In 1806, 'thinking that the public would be led to expect something from him, on the Theory of Music' (Horsley, 10), he published his 'Musical Grammar'. This became his best-known work, and went into two further editions in 1809 and 1817, the first revised by Samuel Wesley and the second by Horsley; it broke no new ground in its approach or contents, but was a valuable instruction manual on harmony and counterpoint and continued to be used for many years. He also found time to be active in the local militia: he had taken a commission in the Kensington volunteer corps in 1795, and in 1801 founded a military band, buying instruments, composing, compiling, and arranging the music, and teaching the musicians. 
In early 1808 Callcott began to give a course of lectures on music at the Royal Institution. In April that year, however, he suffered a serious nervous collapse, possibly brought on by overwork, and on 30 May he was admitted to the asylum of Dr Joseph Mason Cox (1763-1818) at Fishponds, near Bristol. By 1813 he had recovered sufficiently to resume some of his former activities, but he gave up any plans to complete his dictionary of music. He suffered another collapse in 1816 and was once more confined to the Fishponds Asylum, where he spent the remaining years of his life. He died there on 15 May 1821, and was buried in Kensington churchyard on 23 May. 
Callcott's significance is twofold: as one of the greatest and most prolific English glee composers, and as a musical theorist. In addition, as is clear from all contemporary accounts, he was held in high esteem and regarded with great affection by all who knew him. The benefit concert organized by his professional colleagues on 7 April 1809 was so well supported that it had to be moved from the Hanover Square Rooms to the King's Theatre; on this occasion nearly 4000 tickets were sold, and 1500 guineas were raised for Callcott's family. Further well-supported benefit concerts were held on 22 February 1813 and 3 May 1819. Three years after his death a lavish three-volume selection of his principal vocal works was published by subscription by Horsley for the benefit of his widow and family. The subscription list, headed by the duke of Cambridge and the duchess of Gloucester, included over 360 names, bearing witness to the strength of Callcott's continuing posthumous reputation. 


@@@@@


doc= 46769


Campbell, Sir Alexander, first baronet (1760-1824), army officer, was born on 20 August 1760, the fourth son of John Campbell of Baleed, Perthshire, of a branch of the Breadalbane Campbells, and his wife, Isabella, daughter of John Campbell of Barcaldine. He entered the army by purchasing an ensign's commission in the 1/1st (Royal) regiment on 1 November 1776, became a lieutenant in the same regiment on 25 December 1778, and then became a captain (by purchase) in the newly raised 97th foot on 13 April 1780. He embarked with the 97th as a marine officer on board the Channel Fleet under Vice-Admiral George Darby in September 1780, was at the first relief of Gibraltar in May 1781, and afterwards again served as a marine in Hyde Parker's fleet at the battle of the Dogger Bank on 5 August 1781. In March 1782 the 97th foot returned to Gibraltar, to reinforce the garrison, whence it eventually returned after the end of the 'great siege' in July 1783 and was disbanded at Hilsea barracks on 23 September. Campbell was placed on half pay. In 1783 he married Olympia Elizabeth Morshead (died 24 Dec 1794), eldest daughter of William Morshead of Cartuther, Cornwall, and sister of Sir John Morshead, baronet, of Trenant Park, Cornwall. They had three daughters (Olympia, Charlotte, and Amelia) and two sons, both of whom predeceased him. In 1787 four new regiments were raised specifically for service in India and Campbell was appointed a captain in the 74th (Argyll) highlanders with effect from 25 December 1787, and in 1793 went to India. He was promoted lieutenant-colonel of the regiment on 4 December 1795, and commanded it with distinction at the storming of Srirangapatnam on 4 May 1799. He held important commands in southern India, finally succeeding Sir Arthur Wellesley (later duke of Wellington) as governor of Srirangapatnam in 1805. He left India at the end of 1807. 
On his return to the United Kingdom in 1808 Campbell was initially appointed a brigadier-general and placed on the staff in Ireland; then in January 1809 he went to Portugal as a brigade commander. Slightly wounded by grapeshot in the thigh at Talavera on 28 July 1809, while temporarily commanding the 4th division, he briefly returned home on sick leave and was appointed colonel of a penal unit incongruously called the York light infantry volunteers. Returning to the Peninsula in January 1810, he was promoted major-general on 25 July and transferred to the command of the new 6th division. He commanded the division at Fuentes d'Onoro on 5 May 1811, but poor health compelled him to return home in December 1811. So he was fortuitously placed to stand proxy for Wellington at the latter's installation as a knight of the Bath and as such was himself knighted in 1812. On 9 March 1812 he was nominated commander-in-chief of the forces on the Indian Ocean islands of Mauritius and Bourbon, with the local rank of lieutenant-general, and he served there from January 1813 to August 1816. He was promoted substantive lieutenant-general on 4 June 1814. On 6 May 1815 he was created a baronet, and transferred to the more prestigious colonelcy of the 80th foot on 28 December 1815. On 6 December 1820 he was appointed commander-in-chief of the king's and East India Company's troops in the Madras presidency. He married, secondly, Elizabeth Anne (died 20 Jan 1870), daughter of the Revd Thomas Pemberton; they had a son who died in infancy and a daughter, Flora Elizabeth ('b'. 1824). On 3 July 1821 Campbell obtained a renewed patent to the baronetcy, extending the limitation to his grandson, Alexander Cockburn, and after him to the male issue of his second daughter Isabella, Lady Malcolm. Campbell died on 11 December 1824 at Madras and was buried there. His elder son, Lieutenant John Morshead Campbell, was killed in action at Assaye in 1804, and the younger, Major Allan William Campbell, was fatally wounded at Sorauren, while temporarily attached to the Portuguese army, and died at Pamplona on 9 October 1813. He was succeeded by his grandson Alexander Thomas Cockburn, who in 1825 took the additional surname Campbell (making Cockburn-Campbell) and he and his descendants resided in Australia. 


@@@@@


doc= 46771


Bowie, James Alexander (1888-1949), economist and educationist, was born at 42 Holburn Road, Aberdeen, on 30 November 1888, the fourth son of William Bowie, a foreman mason, and his wife, Jane Lumsden, who also had four daughters. He attended Central School, Aberdeen, as a pupil teacher and passed first in the king's scholarship for teachers in 1908. He subsequently read philosophy and economic science at Aberdeen University, where he won the Hutton prize for the best student in philosophy, and graduated MA in 1914 with double honours and later DLitt. During the war he rose from gunner to the rank of lieutenant in the Royal Artillery, and saw service in Egypt, Palestine, Greece, and Bulgaria. Two of his elder brothers, Albert Campbell and John Lumsden Bowie, were killed in France. 
In 1919 Bowie joined the staff of the department of industrial administration, Manchester College of Technology, and became its director in 1926. On 26 July 1922 he married Rosa ('b'. 1900/01), daughter of William Henry Tatham of Manchester. In 1931 he was invited by the University of Pennsylvania to deliver a series of lectures there, and later that same year was appointed director of the newly created Dundee School of Economics and Commerce. The school owed its origin to the generous donation of George Bonar, a prominent Dundee industrialist, for the purpose of setting up a school of commerce in Dundee either independent of, or as a faculty of, the University of St Andrews. Bowie was director of the school (apart from when it was closed during the Second World War) until his death. 
Bowie was well respected, and was appointed director on the recommendation of Josiah Stamp, who delivered the school's inaugural address, which was also attended by William Beveridge. Three works in particular had established Bowie's reputation prior to his appointment. These were 'Sharing Profits with Employees' (1922), 'Education for Business Management' (1930), and 'Rationalisation' (1930). These works addressed the severe economic problems faced by Britain after the First World War, with respect to both labour relations and the industrial structure. Bowie was much concerned with the antagonism between capital and labour, and called for schemes that would result in co-partnership in industry, where labour had equity stake and shared organizational responsibility. His views were radical and progressive, but he was against violent change, much as he recognized the rights of labour for a greater degree of control -- there can be little doubt that the experience of the war and its aftermath played a large part in his attitudes. Additional factors that influenced him were the increasing scale of firms and conglomerates, and the divorce of ownership from control, which implied that the traditional 'laissez-faire' doctrine was no longer appropriate as an unquestioned policy guide. Rather, 'rationalization' and 'planning' were advocated, both in production and marketing, and involvement by the state was desirable to encourage change and to protect the community against exploitation. 
The new industrial structure that Bowie envisaged would require a well-trained management profession, and it was hoped that the Dundee school would play its part in such professionalization. This goal was clearly enunciated in Stamp's inaugural lecture, and reflected a not uncommon aspiration of the time. Bowie seemed well suited to the task, but the requirement for university status (as expressed by George Bonar and also in broad accordance with Bowie's own views), together with the insurmountable difficulties of incorporation with St Andrews, rapidly led to the school's offering external London University degrees. The connections with the London School of Economics caused recruitment of lecturers to be much influenced by that institution, and the nature of the London syllabus was such that any distinctive course structure was rapidly subordinated. The school became regarded as a mini London School of Economics in Dundee. As a result, Bowie's involvement with the actual teaching in the school became minimal, and instead he threw himself into public relations on behalf of the school and promulgated his views, via newspaper articles, speeches, and the like, on the need for the encouragement of business education and progressive change in industrial organization and labour relations. 
Bowie's belief in the importance of economic planning is emphasized in his last major work, 'The Future of Scotland' (1939), which specifically addressed problems in regional economics. A Scottish development commission and related state-sponsored institutions, new towns, relocation of industry, rationalization of old industries, and encouragement of new are all trenchantly discussed. Bowie argued for greater Scottish autonomy, but fell short of recommending a separate Scottish parliament in the 'near future' though he did not rule it out for the longer term. These policy goals were reiterated after the war in more popular venues. 
Bowie died on 1 September 1949 in Dundee, and was cremated in the city; he was survived by his widow and their daughter and son. With his death support for the school dwindled, and in 1955 it was finally absorbed by Queen's College of St Andrews in Dundee. Though his educational goals did not flourish in Dundee's unfavourable environment, many of them came to fruition in the late twentieth century. On a general level business management courses are now commonplace and the regions are obtaining greater power, and at a specific level road bridges have been built across the Forth and Tay estuaries, as Bowie recommended. 


@@@@@


doc= 46773


Braithwaite, Sir John Bevan (1884-1973), stockbroker, was born on 22 November 1884 at Islington, London, the younger son of Joseph Bevan Braithwaite (1855-1934), a stockbroker, and his wife, Anna Sophia Gillett. Both parents belonged to long-established and well-connected Quaker families. John was educated at Leighton Park School, Reading, and at Owens College, Manchester (later Manchester University). He then followed his elder brother into the stockbroking firm of Foster and Braithwaite, of which their father was, from 1888 until 1922, the senior partner. He became a member of the stock exchange in 1907, and in the following year he was made a partner in the firm. 
Braithwaite married in 1908 Martha Janette Baker (died 1972), the daughter of Joseph Allen Baker (1852-1918), an engineer, a member of the London county council from 1895 to 1906, and Liberal MP for Eastern Finsbury from 1905 until his death. The couple had two sons and a daughter, and lived for most of their married life in Hampstead Garden Suburb. 
Soon after Braithwaite became a partner in Foster and Braithwaite, it became apparent that the firm was facing severe financial problems. Losses had been made as a result of the firm's activities in company promotion and in trading on the stock exchange on its own account. Deeply shocked by these discoveries, Braithwaite told his father that he considered such activities to be 'nothing less than dangerous gambling' and inappropriate for a 'strong ancient & honoured & impregnable City House' (Reader, 'A House in the City', 126-7). They had brought the firm, he said, close to 'the possibility of failure.... it has been before my mind like a nightmare day & night more or less continually' (ibid., 127). The remedy he advocated was 'hard work & self-denial' (ibid., 131), which in the event contributed to the salvation of Foster and Braithwaite and provided Braithwaite with his own guideline through life. 
During the First World War, Braithwaite served with the Friends' Ambulance Unit. Afterwards he returned to the firm, where, in the 1920s, the new direction in which its policy took it, eschewing speculation, met with the approval of his 'somewhat austere cast of mind' (Reader, 'A House in the City', 133). In the inter-war years he began to take a greater interest and participate in the affairs of the stock exchange. In 1937 he was elected to its governing body, the committee for general purposes. 
Braithwaite's view of the role and function of the stock exchange, shaped by his formative experiences with Foster and Braithwaite, gained wider support, particularly after the Second World War. He considered that the stock exchange could not continue to act as a private club but that it had a public duty, and therefore should be publicly accountable. When the new council of the stock exchange was formed in 1949, Braithwaite was elected as its chairman, a post he held for ten years. During that time it was largely due to him that the visitors' gallery was opened, that the stock exchange employed an advertising agency, and that, in 1950, a compensation fund for members' clients was established. In all of these he faced considerable opposition, but his powerful personality won the day. He was knighted in 1953. 
Sir John continued to press for wider shareholding among the public. Not untypical of his views was a speech he made in 1956: 'If only some of the hundreds of millions that are poured down the drain each year on betting on horses, dogs and football could be attracted into investment in British industry, what a fine start could be made' (Reader, 'A House in the City', 173). 
Braithwaite was a director of the London Electric Lighting Company (the firm with which his father had had a long connection) from 1934 to 1948, and its chairman from 1943 to 1948. He was a governor of the London School of Economics from 1953 to 1964. Although his influence had long been paramount at Foster and Braithwaite, he did not become its senior partner in name until 1963. He held the office until he retired in 1971. Braithwaite's retirement, and the time to indulge more fully his lifetime interests in literature, music, and photography, was short. He died at his home, 85 Hampstead Way, Hampstead Garden Suburb, London, on 5 April 1973. 


@@@@@


doc= 46774


Braithwaite, Joseph Bevan (1855-1934), stockbroker, was born on 5 October 1855 at 65 Mornington Road, Regent's Park, London, one of the three sons and six daughters of Joseph Bevan Braithwaite (1818-1905), barrister, and his wife, Martha Gillett (1823-1895), daughter of a Banbury banker. Both the Braithwaite and the Gillett families belonged to the Society of Friends which, over the century or so before Joseph's birth, had many members whose dedication to business enterprise, combined with marriages made almost exclusively within the group, gave them an influence far outweighing their numerical strength. Quaker families, to many of whom young Joseph was related, held dominant positions in financial institutions in the City of London, as well as in the banking, brewing, railway, iron and steel, and confectionery industries. 
Joseph Braithwaite was educated at Quaker schools in Kendal (the Braithwaites had long been established there) and at Grove House, Tottenham, in north London, and he then began to read for the bar. However, in 1876 he changed direction and joined the City stockbroking firm of Foster and Braithwaite. Founded by Quakers in 1825, it was by the 1870s largely owned by its senior partner, Joseph's uncle, Isaac Braithwaite (1810-1890). Isaac had provided for his succession within the firm, with the introduction of two of his sons, so that Joseph cannot have had great hopes of advancement when he joined; but the death of Alfred Braithwaite, one of Isaac's sons, created an opening in 1880 and Joseph became a partner at the age of twenty-five. In 1881 he married Anna Sophia Gillett, daughter of the banker Jonathon Gillett, a connection through his mother's family; they had two sons, Jonathon Frederick (1883-1962) and John Bevan Braithwaite (1884-1973). 
In the 1880s Isaac Braithwaite's plans for the future direction of Foster and Braithwaite were blighted by what the firm's historian has described as a 'concatenation of death and dereliction of duty' (Reader, 'A House in the City', 92) -- that is, the premature death of Isaac's second son in the business in 1885 and the sudden departure of another partner, apparently guilty of embezzlement. As a result, when Isaac Braithwaite retired in 1888, Joseph Braithwaite succeeded him as senior partner. 
Braithwaite's principal interests did not lie in stockbroking; indeed his obituarist in the 'Financial Times' noted that he 'seldom entered the Stock Exchange' (1 Dec 1934). His skills lay rather with finance and its provision, and these were applied particularly in the last two decades of the nineteenth century, to the advantage of the new and rapidly developing electricity industry. Braithwaite's interest in electricity reflected a strong technical bent and an enthusiasm for engineering and scientific matters which lasted all his life; he had an astronomical observatory built on his house at Muswell Hill in north London. 
It was on Braithwaite's recommendation that Foster and Braithwaite played a major part in the launch on the stock exchange in the early 1880s of the first electric-lighting companies, in the shape of the Anglo-American Brush Electric Light Corporation and its various satellite companies. Investing in electricity was at that time highly speculative, as the collapse after the stock market boom of 1882 -- and the drop in Foster and Braithwaite's profits -- clearly evidenced. Joseph Braithwaite himself became chairman in 1882 of the Great Western Electric Power and Light Company, and he devoted considerable time to the development of generating stations at Bristol and Cardiff. 
In the 1890s as head of the firm Braithwaite, assisted by his two partner cousins, Cecil Braithwaite and Ronald Savory, led the firm into company promotion on a much larger scale than ever before. Prominent among the companies that the firm promoted on the stock exchange, either by placing their shares or by underwriting them, were electrical undertakings. Braithwaite became a director of several companies which were financially and contractually linked, and he formed a connection which lasted for the rest of his life with the Electric and General Investment Corporation (established in 1890) and the City of London Electric Lighting Company (established in 1891); he became chairman of both of these in 1906 and remained so until 1934. 
Braithwaite was elected a member of the Institution of Electrical Engineers in 1893 and he became a close associate of Emile Garcke (1856-1930), an electrical engineer who played a significant part in the creation of the electricity supply industry. Equally significant was the role played by Braithwaite in providing finance for the new industry, and his ability to do so was underpinned by his position in Foster and Braithwaite. 
The firm's activities in company promotion in other areas were less successful, and in the years leading up to 1914 unwise investments in such doubtful enterprises as the Piccadilly Hotel and the Kansas City, Mexico, and Orient Railway Company took Foster and Braithwaite close to disaster. Its survival was due to changes introduced by Braithwaite's younger son, John, who had become a partner in 1908, rather than to any initiative taken by the senior partner himself. Joseph Braithwaite remained the titular head of Foster and Braithwaite until he retired in 1922. He died on 30 November 1934 at his Somerset home, Blencathara, Sea View Road, Burnham-on-Sea. 


@@@@@


doc= 46779


Brinsmead, John (1814-1908), piano manufacturer, was born at Weare Gifford, Devon, on 13 October 1814, the seventh son of Henry Brinsmead, an innkeeper and lime-burner, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Beer. He had left school by 1826 and at the age of thirteen was apprenticed for seven years as a cabinet-maker in Torrington, Devon. As his more famous forerunner, John Broadwood, had done in 1761, Brinsmead set out for London in 1835, walking the whole way. After a year as a journeyman piano case maker, he had saved sufficient capital in 1836 to set up his own piano making business in partnership with his elder brother Henry (died 1880) on the top floor of 35 Windmill Street, off Tottenham Court Road. This was not a fruitful relationship, however, and by 1837 John Brinsmead was running his own firm with the help of one man and a boy. He married on 3 June 1837 Susan Ann, 'nee' Browne (1814/15-1907), daughter of an officer in the 92nd Highlanders. They had four daughters and five sons. In 1841 the firm moved to Charlotte Street, and in 1863 to Wigmore Street. After 1870 Brinsmead constructed a large piano factory at Grafton Road, Kentish Town. He took two of his sons into partnership: Thomas James Brinsmead (1844-1906) and Edgar William Brinsmead (1848-1907). The latter wrote 'The History of the Pianoforte' (1889). 
In the last quarter of the nineteenth century, Brinsmead introduced and patented several improvements in the piano. Aware of the need for active advertisement and marketing of his products, which he exported as far afield as Australia, he showed them, often with success, at the various international exhibitions. In 1878, following the display of his instruments at the Paris Exhibition, he was awarded the French Legion d'honneur. He had also by then been noted in the 'Royal Blue Book', and in 1884 his biography was recorded in 'Fortunes Made in Business: a Series of Original Sketches'. 
Such acclaim had its reward in the mounting sales of Brinsmead pianos, but also a fraudulent attempt by some family members to trade on the name, which resulted in litigation and criminal proceedings in 1898. By the turn of the century the firm had become a limited company, employing more than 200 men, and producing more pianos per year than the Broadwood company. The firm had also acquired the smaller piano making business set up in Rathbone Place by John Brinsmead's brother and former partner, Henry. Opinion is still divided on whether at this time the quality of the Brinsmead piano was better than the Broadwood, but it seems that there was little to choose between them. 
John Brinsmead died on 17 February 1908 at his home, 16 Albert Road, Regent's Park, London, and was buried in Highgate cemetery. As the two sons whom he had taken into the business predeceased him the firm thereafter was in the hands of Brinsmead's grandson, the managing director Henry Billinghurst (1874-1955). The new management 'demonstrated both acute xenophobia and puritanical attitudes' towards the firm's workers (Ord-Hume, 54-5). As a result, the business declined, and after the First World War, in January 1920, in the face of mounting competition, general industrial unrest, a shortage of skilled labour, and poor management, the firm went bankrupt. The firm of Cramer subsequently acquired the business, and pianos were once more made under the company name of John Brinsmead Ltd, production continuing until 1960. In that year the business was taken over by Kemble Pianos, later Yamaha-Kemble, which produced pianos with the brand name of Brinsmead. 
Charles Mould', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 46780


Broadhurst, Sir Edward Tootal, baronet (1858-1922), cotton manufacturer, was born on 19 August 1858 at Bury Old Road, Broughton, near Manchester, the second son of Henry Tootal Broadhurst (1822-1896), cotton manufacturer, and his first wife, Mary Margaret, 'nee' Brooks. He attended Dr Hungerford's Eagle House School at Wimbledon, and Winchester College, and joined the family firm in 1876. Charlotte Jane ('b'. 1861/2), the youngest daughter of the prominent Hyde cotton manufacturer Thomas Ashton, became Broadhurst's wife on 18 June 1887. They had no children. 
Edward Tootal Broadhurst was a third-generation cotton manufacturer. Such men, particularly those with experience of Winchester or other elite establishments, are often accused of preferring the grouse moor to the counting house. It cannot be denied that Broadhurst shot grouse and lived in a manor house, but he was also a conscientious worker who took good care of his fortune. 
Broadhurst's father, together with Henry and Joseph Lee, and Robert Scott, were business partners who later formed a limited company, Tootal Broadhurst Lee (Tootals). Tootals was a vertically integrated firm, combining spinning and power-loom weaving, at a time when there was a tendency for firms to specialize in a single process. A further distinctive feature was Tootals's marketing network, including offices and warehouses in Bradford, Belfast, and Paris, and agencies further afield. Tootals employed about 5000 workers in 1887, and operated 172,000 spindles and 3500 looms, making it the third largest vertically integrated cotton firm in Lancashire. 
Broadhurst's main responsibility during the 1880s and 1890s was for the financial side of the business, leaving management of the mills to Harold Lee, son of Henry Lee. The 1890s were difficult times for the cotton industry because of growing overseas competition. Chairmanship of the finance committee passed to Broadhurst in 1900, and he represented the firm on the board of the British Northrop Loom Company, which made advanced American 'automatic' looms, and on the council of the British Cotton Growing Association. Improved trade boosted the firm's profits in the early 1900s. Following a weavers' strike, Broadhurst replaced Harold Lee as chairman of the company in 1907, but retained a conciliatory style and continued to work from a very modest office. His strategy was to concentrate production in the best mills: Sunnyside at Bolton, and Ten Acres and Hemming Works near Manchester. Sunnyside was converted from steam to electric power in 1912, and two new weaving sheds were built. The First World War, and the boom of 1918-20, brought Tootals even higher profits. 
In 1919, the market value of Tootals's shares was $1,700,000. Using this measure, Tootals ranked fourteenth among textile producers in the UK, and one hundred and fifteenth among all British industrial enterprises. Tootals was among the top ten firms in the Lancashire cotton industry, although it was much smaller than the largest combines, such as the Fine Cotton Spinners' and Doublers' Association, which had been created by merger at the end of the Victorian period. It would be fair to say that, under Broadhurst's leadership, the company held its own by the standards of the time. 
Broadhurst was a moderately important political figure in Lancashire, especially in the Manchester North West constituency. He was president of the Prestwich Conservative Association. During the 1900s, as an ardent free-trader, he found himself at odds with the protectionist stance of the Conservative Party. Broadhurst believed that the introduction of a tariff would be disastrous, because other countries would retaliate against Britain's export industries, including cotton. Broadhurst chaired Manchester's Free Trade League, and the Manchester Free Trade Unionist Association, and was a member of the Unionist Free Trade Club. In 1906 he defied his party in order to campaign for the Liberal candidate in Manchester North West, Winston Churchill. Broadhurst chaired an election meeting for Churchill, and gave him a rousing introduction: 'For Free Trade or against it! There is no halfway house for timid retaliators to shelter in' (Churchill, 116). He served as high sheriff of Lancashire in 1906-7. At the 1908 election he supported Churchill again, and was one of the 'Mugwump Millionaires' abused by the Conservative candidate for betraying the party. Declining to allow his name to be put forward as a rebel Conservative candidate in 1908, Broadhurst began to realize that the next election would be about more than free trade versus protection. He deplored the radicalism of Lloyd George and the new Liberals, and feared that they would reduce the country to socialism, or worse. At the first 1910 election Broadhurst promised to vote conservative, but could not bring himself to take an active part in the campaign. Between 1910 and 1912 Broadhurst suffered lengthy bouts of nervous illness. 
In 1914 Broadhurst and other businessmen formed a committee which raised the Manchester City battalions (Manchester Pals), a volunteer formation including staff from offices, warehouses, and mills. He contributed $1000 to the cost of equipment and uniforms. In 1917 he was appointed to the Cotton Control Board, which rationed the dwindling supply of cotton by placing restrictions on the operation of machinery. Firms working on government orders were given permission to run more machinery for longer hours. Tootals was caught red-handed in October 1918, working flat out on normal civilian orders, while claiming to be engaged on war contracts. 
Despite this violation, Broadhurst received a baronetcy for his war work in 1918. An Anglican by persuasion, he was involved in the usual round of good works: he was president of an orphan school, a governor of the Whitworth Institute, chairman of the Manchester and Salford Lifeboat Fund, and member of the council of Manchester University. He sat on committees to find work for ex-servicemen after the war, and gave Manchester some playing fields, as a thank-offering for victory and a tribute to Manchester's contribution to the war. 
Broadhurst's home was the Manor House, North Rode, Congleton, in rural Cheshire; he died of cancer at 9 Hyde Terrace, Leeds, on 2 February 1922. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 46781


Broadwood, Henry Fowler (1811-1893), piano manufacturer, was born in London in June 1811, the fifth child of James Shudi Broadwood (1772-1851), piano manufacturer, and his second wife, Margaret Schaw Stewart (1778-1849). The founder of the firm was his grandfather, John Broadwood (1732-1812), whose eldest son, James Shudi Broadwood, together with his half-brother, Thomas Broadwood (1786-1861), from 1812 carried on and developed the business. John Broadwood had been a pioneer in the development and popularization of the piano, both in the 'square' form and in the more traditionally shaped 'grand' form, in the last quarter of the eighteenth century. James Shudi Broadwood and Thomas Broadwood continued this development into the early nineteenth century with such success that by 1840 the company was one of the twelve largest employers of labour in London, with the factory at Horseferry Road, Westminster, producing 3000 instruments a year at its peak. 
Henry Fowler Broadwood had not expected to take over the firm, since he had two older brothers, the sons of their father's first marriage to Sophia Bridget Colville. However, the eldest son, John (1798-1864), took holy orders and became a scholar and collector of folk-songs, and the second son died before he could take any active part in the firm. Henry Fowler, talented at sport in his youth, was educated at Harrow School and at Heidelberg. He matriculated at St John's College, Oxford, but a few months later was admitted to Trinity College, Cambridge (on 24 May 1830), though it would appear that he did not take a degree. In 1840 he married Juliana Maria Birch (1816-1898), daughter of Wyrley Birch, gentleman. They had two sons and nine daughters, one of whom was Lucy Etheldred Broadwood, the musician and folk-song collector. In 1861, when his uncle Thomas Broadwood died, Henry Fowler Broadwood became a partner in the firm, and he then took charge of the business until his death. 
In 1862 Broadwood contributed a particularly valuable document to the study of the harpsichord in England: 'Some notes made by J. S. Broadwood, 1838, with observations and elucidations by H. F. Broadwood'. In the section concerning the harpsichord he quotes from his father that: 'Tabel, a Fleming, who had learned his business in the house of the successor of Ruckers, at Antwerp, was, it is believed, the first person who made harpsichords in London, where he resided between 1680 and 1720.' Although Broadwood was quoting an earlier document, from 1838, it seems that either this was never published or that copies of it are extremely rare, as are copies of the 1862 pamphlet. In fact Broadwood was wrong in stating that Tabel was the first person to make harpsichords in London, but the significance of the observation concerning him is to show how his harpsichords (on which those of Burkat Shudi and Jacob Kirkman were clearly based) were derived from the Flemish school of the Counchets, and through them, the famous Ruckers family. The 1862 pamphlet is also very useful for the study of the early piano in England, and is particularly relevant to the study of Broadwood pianos. 
Despite the excellence of Broadwood pianos, which brought about a great demand for them in both home and export markets (Broadwood pianos were used by Beethoven, Chopin, and Mendelssohn, and there are numerous examples of their use by the British royal family), under Henry Fowler Broadwood the firm did not move with the times. It is thought that he was sceptical of the abilities of British founders to make reliable castings and was therefore reluctant to use the single cast-iron frame and the technique of overstringing, both of which were adopted by his competitors and are still universally employed in piano design. Accordingly the fortunes of the firm declined, and though members of the family accumulated considerable personal wealth it was only through the intervention of C. E. Heath, brother of Ada Randolph Heath, the wife of Broadwood's younger son Henry John Tschudi Broadwood (1856-1911), that the firm received the financial help which restored its stability; it was then reformed with the name John Broadwood & Sons Ltd. Pianos bearing this name were still being made under licence by Whelpdale, Maxwell, and Codd in the late 1990s. 
Broadwood died on 8 July 1893 at Lyne House, Newdigate, Surrey, on the country estate bought by his father in 1799. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 46785


Brown, Sidney George (1873-1948), electrical engineer and inventor, was born in Chicago, USA, on 6 July 1873, the eldest son of English parents, Sidney Brown and his wife, Clara, 'nee' Napier. The family returned to England in 1879, and Brown attended a private school in Parkstone, near Bournemouth. He was subsequently educated at Harrogate College, Yorkshire, and, in 1894-6, at University College, London. From 1892 to 1897 he was a paying pupil at Crompton's electrical engineering works in Chelmsford. After completing his pupillage, he was employed for a further six months by Cromptons; his father's illness then obliged him to return to the family business in Bournemouth. He continued to work at his electrical interests and in 1899 he patented the first of many inventions for improving telegraph cables. At about the same time he was assisting Sir Henry Hozier, secretary of Lloyds, to develop a radio telegraph system. He formed the Telegraph Condenser Company in 1906 to manufacture and market his inventions. 
Brown married Alice Mary Herbert Russell, only daughter of the Revd Charles John Stower, of Sudbury, Suffolk, on 15 January 1908. She took a keen interest in his work. In later years she was largely responsible for the administration and financial control of his companies. He formed a new company, S. G. Brown Ltd, in 1911, to manufacture telephone equipment. With his wife's assistance, he designed a telephone relay, an improved receiver, and an effective loudspeaker (the Browns being first to use this name for the device). By 1914 his businesses had expanded to employ over a thousand people. Already a member of the Institution of Electrical Engineers and a fellow of the Institute of Physics, he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1916. 
At the outbreak of war in 1914 there was no British manufacturer of gyro compasses, which had been imported from Germany. Brown set out to remedy the deficiency. During this work, he also devised a new method -- called 'liquid ballistic control' -- of damping the oscillation set up in a compass by a change in course. He supplied two compasses to the Admiralty for tests in 1916; the time taken to evaluate and put them into production meant they were not available for service during the war. However, his compasses were later adopted for use in both ships and aircraft. Brown also served as a member of the Admiralty's inventions board during the First World War. 
Despite the severe depression of the inter-war years, there was still a lucrative market for electrical equipment. The electrical power network was spreading out over the country; the BBC had started its radio broadcasting service. Brown's companies provided components for both power and radio applications, as well as for their established telegraph and telephone businesses. There appears to have been little difficulty in raising new capital to expand the Telegraph Condenser Company in 1933, which involved turning the organization from a private into a public company; Alice Brown made sure that she and her husband retained full financial and managerial control. During the Second World War the Admiralty took charge of S. G. Brown Ltd, replacing the Browns with its nominated directors. Brown retired in 1943. He sold his interest in the Telegraph Condenser Company to a syndicate, and S. G. Brown Ltd, including all gyro compass and radio telegraphy rights, to the Admiralty. In retirement, he devoted time mainly to cultivating orchids. 
Brown's professional and business success was offset by tragedy in his private life; he and Alice had three children, but they all died young. He was a modest man, interested mainly in his electrical studies. Where possible, he preferred experimenting, lecturing, and writing technical papers to business administration. He depended largely on his wife to ensure that he had an adequate income to pursue these more congenial activities. He died at his home, Brownlands, Salcombe Regis, Sidmouth, Devon, on 7 August 1948, survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 46786


Browne, Sir Benjamin Chapman (1839-1917), engineer and shipbuilder, was born on 26 August 1839 at Stouts Hill, Uley, Gloucestershire, the youngest of the three sons of Colonel Benjamin Chapman Browne (died 'c'.1853) of the 9th lancers and later of the Gloucestershire yeomanry, and his wife, Mary Anne Lloyd, 'nee' Baker, of Hardwicke Court, Gloucestershire. He grew up in the Cotswolds, and went on to Westminster School. Although none of his family had any connection with engineering or business, he decided to study applied science and spent a year at King's College, London, before starting a mechanical engineering apprenticeship with William Armstrong at the Elswick works in Newcastle upon Tyne in 1856. In 1861 he married Annie Buddle, daughter of Robert Thomas Atkinson (1807-1845), a mining engineer, of High Cross House, Benwell, Newcastle. They had nine children, two of whom died in early childhood; three sons and four daughters survived him. His eldest son, Edward Granville Browne (1862-1926), became professor of Arabic at the University of Cambridge in 1902. 
For nearly ten years Browne worked as a civil engineer, first with James Abernoethy at Falmouth harbour, from 1861 to 1862, then with the Tyne Commission, working on the Tyne pier, from 1863 to 1865, and finally on the staff of Sir John Coode on the Isle of Man, where he was employed at the Port Erin works and also worked on the landing pier at Douglas. 
In 1870, with the help of his friend Thomas Hodgkin, the Newcastle banker, of Hodgkin, Barnett & Co., Browne became senior partner in the group which bought the Forth Banks Engine works of R. and W. Hawthorn in Newcastle, set up in 1817. Intending to concentrate on the manufacture of marine engines, in 1871 the firm acquired the site of a former shipyard and built the St Peter's works, a new marine-engine works, while modernizing the antiquated Forth Banks works and installing new machinery, in order to continue to make locomotives, because of demand from the North Eastern Railway Company. The marine engineer Francis Carr Marshall (1831-1903) was in charge of the St Peter's works, and it was he who was responsible for the growing reputation of Hawthorns' marine engines. In 1874 orders for gunboat engines began to come in, and Hawthorns went on to supply engines to governments all over the world, including Austria, France, Italy, Chile, China, and Japan. Marine engines became increasingly important to the success of the business, and in 1882 the St Peter's works was enlarged: by 1885 marine engines accounted for more than 80 per cent of the firm's output. Browne was responsible for starting the manufacture of a steam tram at Forth Banks, which he described in a paper to the Institute of Mechanical Engineers in 1880: it was not a commercial success, and only eight trams were made. 
In 1876 Browne became a trustee of his wife's family's estates, which included several large collieries, and in the early 1880s he considered withdrawing from Hawthorns in order to devote more time to their administration. But after the retirement of the iron shipbuilder Andrew Leslie from Andrew Leslie & Co., Leslie's partner, Arthur Coote, anxious to acquire a machine engine works, approached Hawthorns about the possibility of a merger and, despite Browne's opposition to the idea, in 1886 R. and W. Hawthorn amalgamated with Leslie & Co. to form R. and W. Hawthorn, Leslie & Co. Ltd. Browne agreed to become chairman of the new company, and remained until 1916. In the late 1880s the company began to build torpedo boats and destroyers at the Hebburn yard, and under Herbert Rowell, shipyard manager from 1891, became a major supplier of marine engines, steam turbines, and destroyers to the Admiralty. It continued the strong links with Russia built up by Andrew Leslie from the 1860s, supplying naval ships for the Russian volunteer fleet. Hawthorn Leslie also built refrigerated ships, beginning its connection with the New Zealand frozen meat trade. The marine-engine works at St Peter's continued to prosper, and although the Forth Banks works was never as successful it continued to manufacture locomotives and also added water-tube boilers. By 1914 the total workforce was over 5250, and the annual turnover was more than $1.5 million. Browne's other business interests included the Newcastle and District Electric Light Company. 
Browne was interested in economic and social questions, and was a member of the Newcastle Economic Society. His first experience of industrial unrest, the 20 week strike on Tyneside in 1871 in support of a nine-hour day, when the inflexibility of the employers prolonged the strike and led to victory for the workers, convinced him of the importance of good relations between employers and their employees. He joined the Iron Trades Employers' Association, and worked hard to improve his relations with his own workers. He publicly supported trade unionism, and as a member of the Engineering Employers' Federation, which he had helped to found in 1896, he played a crucial role in the great lock-out of 1897, following the demand by the Amalgamated Society of Engineers for an eight-hour day. Although he was opposed to strike action, he was willing to compromise, and believed in personal contact with the trade-union leaders. Browne was regarded as an authority on industrial relations, and was often asked to give evidence to royal commissions, including the 1904 royal commission on trade disputes and trade combinations. He wrote articles in 'The Times' and elsewhere on questions relating to capital and labour, and contributed a chapter, 'The relations between capital and labour: the standpoint of capital', to 'After-War Problems' (1917), edited by William Harbutt Dawson. 
A JP in Newcastle, Northumberland, and Gloucestershire, Browne was elected to Newcastle town council in 1879 and served as mayor of Newcastle from 1885 to 1887. He was responsible for the success of the Royal Jubilee Exhibition and the Royal Agricultural Show in Newcastle. He was knighted in 1887. He played an important part in the founding of the North East Coast Institution of Engineers and Shipbuilders, serving as president from 1898 to 1900, and he was closely involved in setting up the Durham College of Physical Science (later Armstrong College, which became part of the University of Newcastle in 1963). The University of Durham made him an honorary DCL in 1887. 
Like his mother Browne was a devout member of the Church of England and a disciple of the Oxford Movement. He died on 1 March 1917 at Westacres, Benwell, Newcastle upon Tyne, his home since 1887. 


@@@@@


doc= 46787


Bryant, Wilberforce (1837-1906), match manufacturer, was born in Plymouth on 25 January 1837, the eldest of four sons (there was also a daughter) of William Bryant (1804-1874) and his wife, Elizabeth Carkeet. William Bryant, who had become a Quaker on his marriage, ran a malodorous business making tallow, candles, blacking, sugar, and locomotive lubricants. In 1844 he teamed up with a fellow Quaker, Francis May, as general merchants in the City of London. Eleven years later they bought from a Swedish firm the patent rights for the newly invented safety matches; in 1861 they began match manufacture in Bow, east London, and the following year they were awarded a gold medal at the 1862 International Exhibition. 
After education at a Quaker school, Wilberforce Bryant in the mid-1850s joined the Plymouth business, and then became manager of the match factory in 1861, later with the assistance of his three brothers. Father and sons were already contriving to ease out May, who refused to go quietly; he did not finally depart until 1875, shortly after William Bryant's death. A year later Wilberforce made a good marriage, to Margaret, second daughter of William Lowson, deputy lieutenant of Perth. She presented him with an estate in Gloucestershire, a son who died in infancy, and three daughters. 
As senior partner Bryant strove hard to make his firm the leading match manufacturer in Britain. He introduced mechanization and promoted new specialities, such as wax vestas and decorated metal containers. Overseas, in the 1880s the firm began to build up its export markets, especially in the British empire and the Far East. High American tariffs thwarted an attempt to enter that market via an agreement with the Diamond Match Company there. 
In 1884 Bryant and the one brother remaining in the firm, Frederick Carkeet Bryant, registered Bryant and May Ltd, with a large capital. The financial press was soon condemning the firm for its annual reports -- 'the most cynically meagre and imperfect documents published by any board in the country' -- and for its insider dealings to rig the share prices for its own ends ('Financial News'). This widespread mistrust of the company was fanned by the celebrated matchgirls' strike of 1888, when the implacable Bryants crossed swords with the equally tenacious Annie Besant. The matchgirls had their main grievance -- concerning arbitrary fines and deductions -- remedied, and secured the right to a trade union which proved short-lived, collapsing after a wildcat strike in 1903. They were also given a women's club with subsidized canteen, recreation rooms, and a library. 
By the 1890s Bryant was losing his touch, letting slip the opportunity to acquire the rights to Diamond Match's latest match-making technology. Instead, he spent much time as a magistrate and high sheriff of Buckinghamshire in 1892, as a keen gardener and amateur photographer, and in hosting at his Stoke Poges home local agricultural and horticultural shows. Diamond Match lost no time in erecting a very modern works in Liverpool, which so eroded its rival's sales that in 1901 Bryant and May was forced to join Diamond Match as a minority partner. The considerable autonomy granted to the British directors (Bryant by then being no more than a titular chairman) allowed them to expand overseas sales further and to open up branches in parts of the empire. 
Bryant lacked entrepreneurial flair, sacrificing the goodwill of the outside world to short-term advantage and driving the matchgirls into a strike which irredeemably tarnished the name of Bryant and May. He embodied too much of Quakerism's darker side -- a narrow-minded exclusiveness and a dogged refusal to let go -- yet was in some ways generous to the workforce, as no doubt to his local community. While remaining nominally a Quaker, he became a staunch Anglican and patron of the Church of England Temperance Society. He was a conservative in politics, fond of driving, and an excellent whip. He died at home at Stoke Park, Stoke Poges, on 3 February 1906, and was buried in the parish churchyard at Stoke Poges on 7 February. 


@@@@@


doc= 46788


Bullock, William Edward (1877-1968), motor car manufacturer, was born on 14 March 1877 at Crockett Road, Handsworth, Birmingham, the son of William Bullock, smith, and his wife, Beatrice Caroline, 'nee' Barnett. He was educated at Smethwick Technical School, leaving at the age of fourteen for a job as a toolmaker's assistant with Denison and Wigley, of Handsworth. He went on to work for an electrical engineer for two years, and another toolmaker in the Birmingham area for a further two years, before joining the newly formed Wigley-Mulliner Engineering Company as foreman about 1897. After two years he became works manager. During the South African War the firm expanded, producing munitions. Bullock designed gun carriages, and when the firm became the nucleus of the Coventry ordnance works he moved to Coventry. In 1902 he married Nellie Elizabeth Parsons, moulder; they had one son ('b'. 1903) and one daughter. In 1907 Bullock was elected a member of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers. 
In 1909 Bullock became works manager at Singer & Co., originally a cycle manufacturer founded in Coventry in 1876 by George Singer (died 1909); the firm made its first motor cars in 1905, and by 1909 employed 600 workers producing four models of car. Following a brief vogue for cycle cars, Singer became the first British manufacturer to produce a small economy car, the Singer 10, launched at the 1912 Motor Show. Earlier, on the continent, small cars with limited engines had been produced: the Baby Peugeot had appeared in 1900, and the 41/2 horsepower De Dion Bouton in 1901, but Singer was the first to produce a small car with a four-cylinder engine, a replica of a large car, with 10 horsepower, and to prove that a baby car was a practical proposition. Other motor manufacturers soon followed suit, and the Singer 10 had to face competition from the Morris Oxford and the Ford Model T, among others, but its success at the Brooklands trials 1912-14, where it reached 72 m.p.h., helped to publicize it. At $185 the Singer 10 appealed to those who could not afford a large car, and it became a best-seller. William Rootes was so impressed that he contracted to sell the whole first year's supply, and by 1913 the firm was making 1350 cars a year. During the First World War the factory concentrated on munitions production, but also supplied the armed forces with Singer 10s for the transport of junior army officers, and production continued after the war. 
Bullock was appointed Singer's managing director in 1919 and in that year he was also a member of Coventry city council. After the war there was great demand for cars and the British motor manufacturing industry boomed, helped by the McKenna duties, first imposed in 1915, which protected British manufacturers from foreign competition, especially from the United States, which dominated the world market. Singer benefited from this and Bullock, advocating mass production for the popular market, began to acquire other companies in order to increase factory space, as the original factory site was hemmed in by housing and could not be expanded. In 1920 the firm acquired Coventry Premier Company Ltd, in 1922 Coventry Repetition Company, in 1925 Sparkbrook Manufacturing Company, and in 1926 the Calcott factory. In 1926 Singer was producing 9000 cars a year, 80 per cent of them Singer 10s. In 1927 a new car, the Singer Junior, was introduced to challenge the Austin 7, to be produced in Birmingham in an old BSA factory on the Coventry Road which had been bought by Singer the previous year. Despite additional competition from the Morris Minor, launched in 1928, the Singer Junior was very successful, with eight models listed in 1932. In 1929 Singer was one of the top three motor manufacturers in Britain, with 8000 employees and seven factories, producing 28,000 cars, but it was well behind Austin and Morris, which were responsible for 60 per cent of British car output whereas Singer had only 15 per cent of the market. 
The fortunes of Singer nevertheless declined in the 1930s. Bullock had made some unwise purchases, including the acquisition of the large Hay Mills factory at Small Heath, Birmingham, bought from Daimler in 1928, into which he introduced new machinery and a moving assembly line, transferring assembly work from Coventry. The acquisition of the two Birmingham factories was a financial burden, despite the growth in popularity of small cars during the slump following the market collapse of 1929. In the 1930s the company struggled to survive: its rivals won the 10 horsepower market with the Hillman Minx and the Austin 10, while the Singer Junior was eclipsed not only by the Morris Minor and the Austin 7 but also, after 1932, by the Ford Model Y, which by 1934 had captured 56 per cent of the British market for cars of that class. In 1935 the Ford Popular, introduced at $100, went on to sell more than any other car in the United Kingdom before the outbreak of the Second World War. 
A final blow came in 1935. In 1933 Singer had introduced its first sports car, the Singer 9, which finished thirteenth at Le Mans that year and was a serious rival to the MG, but in the 1935 Le Mans Tourist Trophy three of the four Singers crashed as a result of steering failures, and the fourth immediately withdrew. Singer never entered a team again, and the disaster did the company a great deal of harm. At the annual general meeting in May 1936 a loss of $129,292 was reported. Dividends had not been paid since 1931-2, and following criticism from the shareholders Bullock was not re-elected to the board. He resigned from the company shortly afterwards, together with his son, who had been general manager since 1931 and who had been in charge of the Birmingham factory. 
From the beginning of his years with Singer, Bullock dominated the company, and as a vice-president of the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders in the 1920s was a leading figure in the motor industry. An advocate of mass production, he visited the United States in the 1920s to study ways of increasing production, and embarked on the acquisition of other factory sites to house the expanding moving assembly lines. His interest in technical and design improvements was wide-ranging: he was one of the first to introduce safety glass as standard equipment, low pressure tyres, and rear-mounted petrol tanks to reduce the risk of fire. However, he did not have a good grasp of financial matters: in the end the company was over-committed, and by the end of the 1930s Singer was no longer one of the top six motor manufacturers. In 1955 it was taken over by Rootes. 
Bullock was small and energetic, with a prominent chin. He was always in the office by 8 a.m., and his main relaxation was gardening. After the death of his wife in 1934 he married, in 1936, Margaret F. Van Driest, 'nee' Whynant, a divorcee and daughter of a veterinary surgeon. This marriage ended in divorce. His third wife was Mrs Parsons, the widow of his first wife's brother. 
After leaving Singer in 1936, Bullock worked for a time on the development of fire pumps. He left Coventry at the start of the blitz and spent the rest of the Second World War working on the farm in Warwickshire belonging to his daughter. He died on 17 March 1968 at Wootton Court, Leek Wootton, Kenilworth, Warwickshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 46789


Sir George Bullough, baronet (1870-1939), was born at Accrington on 28 February 1870 and was educated at Harrow School. As a young man he sailed round the world in his steam yacht, buying works of art, on one occasion outbidding the emperor of Japan for an ivory figure. His treasures found a home in Kinloch Castle, which he built on Rum in 1900-01 at a cost of $250,000. On the outbreak of the South African War Bullough converted his yacht into a floating hospital and sailed to South Africa, a service rewarded with a knighthood in 1901. He married in 1903 Monica Lilly, the eldest daughter of the fourth marquis de la Pasture. They had one daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 46790


Bullough, John (1836/7-1891), textile machinery manufacturer, was baptized at Blackburn on 10 December 1837, the third son of 
John Bullough studied at Queenwood College, Hampshire, and Glasgow University before joining his father's firm in 1859. Though he took out more than twenty patents, of which the electric stop motion, used in numerous machines, was the most important, he is best remembered for promoting the ring frame at a time when British spinners preferred the slower-moving mule. The machine, which had been developed in the United States, was a more efficient version of the throstle, itself an improvement on Sir Richard Arkwright's water frame. Bullough acquired the rights to a new type, the Rabbeth spindle, in 1879, and in the succeeding years kept the machines in the firm's expanding Globe Works running night and day to meet international demand. A technical school started by Bullough in 1881 was among the first of its kind. 
The appointment of skilled managers to oversee the 2000 workpeople enabled Bullough to spend more time on his estate at Castle Meggernie, Perthshire, and on the island of Rum in the Inner Hebrides, both of which he bought in the 1880s. Throughout his life Bullough was an active Conservative and spoke regularly in support of self-help, 'laissez-faire' capitalism, and union with Ireland. He married in 1868 Bertha Schmidlin, daughter of a Swiss cotton manufacturer. They had two children, George ['see below'] and Bertha. The marriage ended in divorce, after which, in 1884, Bullough married Alexandra Marion McKenzie, daughter of a Stornaway banker. The children of this marriage were John and Gladys. Bullough died at the Hotel Metropole, Westminster, aged fifty-three, on 25 February 1891, and was buried on Rum. 
John Bullough's son 
On his father's death George inherited half the equity of Howard and Bullough, of which he was chairman until his death. The setting up of a United States subsidiary in 1893 and the introduction of profit sharing in 1906 were highlights of his early years with the company. In 1931 the company took part in the merger that led to the formation of Textile Machinery Makers. Bullough left the day-to-day running of the business to others, preferring the racetrack and the hunting field to the board room, and in compiling his entry for 'Who's Who' he made no reference to his business interests. 
In 1908-11 Bullough served in the Scottish Horse imperial yeomanry and during the First World War he was superintendent of the remount department with the rank of major. He also made an interest-free loan of $50,000 to the government. For these services, he received a baronetcy in 1916. For fourteen years from 1908 he was master of Ledbury hounds. He served both the Jockey Club and the National Hunt Committee, and in 1917 his horse Ballymacad won the 'war' Grand National at Gatwick. Bullough died at the Chateau de Courcet in the Pas-de-Calais, France, on 26 July 1939; he was buried in the family mausoleum on Rum. 


@@@@@


doc= 46791


Edward Frederick Bulmer (1865-1941), cider maker, born on 26 May 1865, at the rectory, Credenhill, lent a hand with the manual labour in the long vacations. Unlike Percy, Fred Bulmer went from Hereford Cathedral school to Shrewsbury School, and thence to King's College, Cambridge, with an exhibition in classics. On graduation in 1889, he joined his brother in the cider business. The brothers only had one employee at first, but, small though the firm was, it produced cider of excellent quality, winning prizes in Paris in 1888 and at the Royal Agricultural Show in 1889. These successes almost certainly reflected not only the rector's skill and experience, but also his financial support, as the brothers had little capital. They borrowed from some of Fred's Cambridge friends and from the local bank; the rector, by pledging his life insurance policy, raised a further $1760. With these funds they bought land, erected some buildings, and invested in equipment typical of the industrial age -- a steam engine, hydraulic presses and pumps, and some large vats. 


@@@@@


doc= 46792


Bunting, John (1839-1923), sharebroker and cotton spinner, was born on 28 December 1839 at Carrington Field, Stockport, the son of John Bunting (1806-1853), a brick maker, and his wife, Kerenhappuch, 'nee' Hill. He grew up in the new railway town of Crewe, attended a private school in the village of Bunbury, and began work at the age of eleven. After the sudden death of his father in 1853 he migrated to Oldham, his mother's former home. The staple trades of Oldham were cotton spinning and engineering, in which the town established its world leadership during the 1850s and 1860s. Bunting became a blacksmith and engineer, and acquired a large practical knowledge of machinery. He was twice married and had two sons and two daughters. He first married, on 10 February 1862, Mary (1839-1865?), daughter of James Shaw, a cotton carder. After her death he married on 10 April 1871 Sarah (1844-1928), a dressmaker, and the daughter of James Jackson, a cotton spinner. 
During the joint-stock boom of 1873-5 Bunting changed his trade from one of the oldest in the world to one of the newest. He became a sharebroker, and published his first advertisement for shares in 1875 ('Oldham Chronicle', 14 Aug 1875, 4). He began his new career as one broker among many others in the town's new share market, but he succeeded in breaking out of the ruck, and became a mill owner in his own right. He began to compile a regular weekly survey of the share market, first for private circulation among his clients and then for public consumption in the local press, where it appeared for more than forty years (in the Saturday issues of the 'Oldham Chronicle', 13 December 1879-31 July 1920). In 1877 he became a member of the Manchester Royal Exchange, 'the parliament house of the lords of cotton' (W. C. Taylor, 'Notes of a Tour in the Manufacturing Districts of Lancashire', 1842, 9), and in 1880 he was a founder member of the Lancashire Sharebrokers' Association, of which he later became vice-president. In 1882 he extended his operations from the passive dealing in shares to their active promotion by undertaking his first independent issue of stock on behalf of a new spinning company. He also extended prudent loans against mortgage to mills in financial straits. From 1884 he began a new career as a company promoter and company director, extending his interests outside Oldham to Rochdale in 1890 and to Middleton in 1898. By then he had become a director of eight companies. From 1904 he established his primacy as the leading mill magnate of Lancashire by paying higher than average dividends and by embarking upon the construction of new first-class mills -- the Bell Mill in 1904 and the Iris Mill in 1907. The latter was the first ring mill within his group and was built in the record time of four months, or one-third of the normal period, reputedly with a bricklayer working in every window-bottom of the multi-storeyed mill. In 1906 he decided to build Lancashire's largest mill, the Mammoth Mill (of 250,000 spindles, at a time when the newest mills averaged 100,000 spindles), at Hathershaw next to the Bell Mill, but he changed his mind about its location and instead built it (in 1907-8) at Middleton, as the Times Mill no. 2, with 160,000 spindles (by comparison, Arkwright's first mill at Cromford in 1771 had housed only 1000 spindles). The Times Mill was the largest single-unit mill ever built, driven by engines generating 2750 hp, and the Times Mill Company became the industry's most financially successful firm. 
From 1910 Bunting achieved new success as a 'company doctor', and undertook the rescue of enterprises in difficulty, especially contractors' companies floated by firms with a direct material interest in the building and equipping of new mills. He bought up such companies cheaply at auction and then restored them to financial health by the issue of preference shares, so extending the range of financial techniques available to the industry. From 1912 he increasingly favoured the technique of high-speed ring spinning over the traditional Lancashire mule. In 1915 he established the Neva Mills Ltd at Middleton and re-equipped them with 99,600 ring spindles, so transforming the company into one of the largest of ring spinners. Thus he completed the construction of one of the earliest groups of mills within the industry. Such groups followed the example set from 1881 by the pioneer James Heap (1828-1892) of Rochdale and imitated by T. E. Gartside (1857-1941) of Royton. They began the process of rationalizing the structure of the industry, paving the way for the formal amalgamation of individual firms into large multi-unit corporations. Bunting had become the biggest individual mill owner in Lancashire and controlled, through separate companies united by the person of the chairman, twenty of the finest and most profitable firms in the industry. In 1916 his companies mustered in the aggregate 1.8 million spindles, or 8 per cent of the spindleage of the Oldham, Middleton, and Rochdale districts, and employed an estimated 7000 hands: 'No man was better known in the Lancashire cotton trade and no man played a bigger part in it during the last forty years... Almost everything he touched changed to gold' ('Oldham Standard', 24 Feb 1923). 
The secret of Bunting's success was to maintain high productivity and to exploit to the full the potential advantages offered by the use of loan capital, upon which most Oldham limited companies relied. An active director and chairman, Bunting reinforced his technical and financial ability by energy, industry, pertinacity, and shrewdness. In a town created by working men, he was reputed to work harder than any other person. He kept capital costs low by using large-scale units of production, by buying existing mills (or 'turnover' concerns), by re-equipping mills with the newest machinery, and by depreciating plant at the high annual rate of 6 per cent. By 1916 he employed more than double the proportion of ring spindleage than was customary in Oldham. He recruited good managers, employed the best operatives, paid the highest wages, and offered the best working conditions. He remained a stubborn opponent of employers' associations and a constant threat to their plans for united action. He always ran his mills full time so that he benefited by the competition of hands for employment and was rarely afflicted by strikes. He insisted that profits should be made only at the mill and avoided risky speculation in the raw cotton market. Above all, he became a master financier with a profound and permanent commitment to his client-investors, regarding himself simply as the steward or trustee of their capital. He sought to maximize the returns received by his shareholders while ensuring that loans retained a gilt-edged status, so that they might be serviced with a lower rate of interest than that paid by other companies. His fixed policy was never to accumulate large reserves for the benefit of posterity but always to pay out the maximum possible amount in dividends. Thus he won and maintained the confidence of both large capitalists and small loanholders. In particular he established close links with a clientele of wealthy investors, including a fellow Primitive Methodist, the jam manufacturer W. P. Hartley (1846-1922) in Aintree, and Hartley's son-in-law, the Congregationalist J. S. Higham (1857-1932), a cotton spinner and manufacturer in Accrington, who served with him as co-directors. From 1911 onwards Bunting perfected the financial management of his group; he no longer published balance sheets and used a very high ratio of loan to ordinary (or equity) capital in order to maximize the dividend paid on the ordinary shares. From 1912 his mills regularly paid out dividends which were almost double the Oldham average -- 22 per cent compared to 12 per cent. One company, the Iris, paid an average annual dividend of 86 per cent for eight years (1912-20). Another, the Bell, paid a dividend of 81 per cent for ten years (1910-20). The secret of those enormous dividends lay in the small proportion of ordinary capital upon which they were paid. Thus before 1919 Bunting called up only 5 per cent of the ordinary capital of the Times and Neva, only 15 per cent of that of the Bell, and only 20 per cent of that of the Iris. The Bell's true rate of profit was 17.5 per cent, but it could pay dividends fivefold that proportion by the extensive use of loan capital earning only a low fixed interest ('Oldham Chronicle', 7 Aug 1920; 9 Oct 1920). 
The post-war boom of 1919-20 carried the Bunting group to the heights of its success and fame. Bunting invested $150,000 in the 'victory loan' of 1919 on behalf of his mills, but avoided participating in the contemporary mania for recapitalization. Indeed, he condemned mill sales and company reconstructions because such operations could do nothing to increase dividends. He did, however, declare generous bonuses, preserving the reputation of his mills as the most profitable within the industry. During the climactic year of 1920 an average dividend of 86 per cent was declared by fourteen of his mills. Some began to announce dividends of 100, 200, and 400 per cent, while the Times Mill declared one of 600 per cent and the Bell one of 666.66 per cent ('Oldham Chronicle', 7 Feb 1920, 14; 8 May 1920, 14; 7 Aug 1920, 14). Such dividends 'must make the mouths of the uninitiated water': inevitably they were misunderstood and provoked questions in the House of Commons ('Hansard 5C', 129, 1920, 13-14; 138, 1921, 590). Such questions did not disconcert Bunting, whose group continued to declare spectacularly high dividends. His basic financial technique remained viable during his own lifetime and for three years thereafter, until 1926-7, when the industry reached its climacteric and loan capital began to flow out of the coffers of the Oldham limited companies on a large scale. 
A staunch Conservative and a devout Primitive Methodist, Bunting dedicated himself to the work of his church, holding that it 'existed to make character, not merely to gather money' ('Oldham Evening Chronicle', 25 Nov 1909, 7). He remained a lifelong supporter of the cause of temperance. He led the most frugal of lives, and controlled a vast industrial empire from a small terraced house at 115 Union Street, Oldham. His career was most unusual, insofar as he was born outside the ranks of the cotton trade but nevertheless made a fortune within it. He died at his home at the age of eighty-three on 22 February 1923 after a fall in Manchester while running to catch a tramcar, and was buried at Chadderton cemetery, Oldham. He left an estate of $658,190 -- one of the largest fortunes ever left by an Oldham cotton magnate. On his death his widow, Sarah, became one of the richest women in Lancashire. 


@@@@@


doc= 46793


Sir Richard Burbidge, first baronet (1847-1917), born on 2 March 1847 at Manor Farm, South Wraxhall, Wiltshire, the fifth of ten children of George Bishop Burbidge (1795-1861), farmer, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Clarke (1808/9-1873). Burbidge attended schools in Devizes, then spent two years at Dr Gilchrist's Spa Villa Academy in Melksham. On his father's death Burbidge was apprenticed to Jonathan Puckeridge, a grocer and wine merchant originally from Wiltshire then trading in Oxford Street, London. After his apprenticeship and a year as an assistant, Burbidge established his own successful grocery business in Marylebone. Burbidge's association with Wiltshire continued and he was president for many years of the Wiltshiremen in London society. 
On 9 May 1868 Burbidge married Emily (died 1905), youngest daughter of Jeremiah Woodman of Melksham, Wiltshire; they had two sons and four daughters. Burbidge enjoyed her help and support until her death. On 22 August 1910 he married his second wife, Lilian, youngest daughter of James Ambrose Preece, of Bartestree Court, Herefordshire. In his private life Burbidge was a devoted husband and father, and he kept in regular contact with his mother and siblings. 
When Burbidge became aware that large department stores were coming into favour he worked for several, taking a post as superintendent for the Army and Navy Auxiliary, and as manager at Whiteleys and at the West Kensington Stores, before being appointed general manager at Harrods Stores Ltd in 1891, two years after its flotation on Charles Digby Harrod's retirement from his thriving family business in 1889. 
Burbidge was appointed managing director of Harrods in 1893. The minutes of a board meeting held on 6 June 1917, immediately after his death, record that: 'It was resolved to record the Directors' very high appreciation of his uprightness of character and outstanding commercial ability during his many years with the Company... Under his Managing Directorship the trade has enormously expanded, until it now reaches to all parts of the world, while during this period the annual profit has increased from $16,071 to $309,227 before the War. The staff has increased from 200 to 6000, and the hours of employment have been substantially reduced and the working conditions improved all round. His was an attractive and charming personality; he endeared himself to all with whom he came into daily contact. His loss will be felt not only at Harrods but in wider circles outside.' Burbidge pioneered benefits for shop assistants. The store closed at 6 p.m., not 9, 10, or even 11 p.m. as was common. He instituted one day early closing long before the 'Shops Act' came into force, set up a well-appointed staff sports club, organized training schemes, and established both provident and pension funds for staff. Burbidge himself, however, worked long hours. He rose at 5.30 a.m., rode in nearby Hyde Park from 6 to 6.45, left for Harrods at 6.55, and after a gruelling schedule of work, meetings, and decision making, returned home about 7 p.m. 
Burbidge's success lay in anticipating and developing demand for services and products in Harrods. He had objected to lifts as 'new machines', but in 1898 he allowed a French company to install the first escalator in Britain. It attracted enormous publicity, and was a great convenience for customers. His refreshment rooms, with food at reasonable prices, encouraged ladies to linger shopping in the store, and 'retiring or dressing rooms' were provided for their comfort. The lavish decoration created between 1894 and 1911 was unrivalled. Burbidge held directorships in other stores including Dickins and Jones Ltd, the Hudson Bay Company, and Harrods (Buenos Aires) Ltd, which he founded in 1913. 
Burbidge sat on government and charitable committees which benefited from his skills for organization and business. He was honorary treasurer of the tariff commission; a member of the commission looking into the wages of Post Office workers; one of the Crystal Palace trustees, a group that made possible the purchase of the Crystal Palace for the nation in 1913 (Burbidge donated $2500 publicly and $30,000 anonymously to the fund); and he served on the committees of the Discharged Soldiers' and Sailors' Association and the National Association for the Employment of ex-Soldiers. He gave aid, both personally and through his association with Harrods, to the Ministry of Munitions, and was chairman of the committee on the Royal Aircraft Factory and of the executive and war emergency committees for the provision of invalid kitchens. Burbidge provided premises and organized operations for Queen Alexandra's Field Fund Force, King Albert's Civilian Hospital Fund, and Lady French's Fund. He set up a successful scheme for training women, in reduced circumstances because of the war, to take up business careers. He was a religious man and had been a churchwarden. He was also a justice of the peace for London county. In 1916 he was awarded a baronetcy in the new year's honours list. He died at his London home, 51 Hans Mansions, Knightsbridge, after a full day at work on 31 May 1917 and was buried on 5 June at Littleton Park, Shepperton. He was survived by his second wife. 
Burbidge was succeeded by his eldest son, 


@@@@@


doc= 46795


Charles Burrell (1817-1906), who was to play a key role in the transformation of the firm. He changed the name of the business to Charles Burrell, engineers and agricultural machinists, and later to Charles Burrell & Sons. 
Charles Burrell had an engineer's mind that was inventive and ready to explore new ideas. His was one of the earliest firms to make portable steam engines, the first device being made in 1846, and in 1848 he produced the first threshing machine that also dressed the grain. This type of combined threshing and dressing machine soon became the standard in farming, except where the smallest machines were required. 
In the 1850s Burrell concentrated his technical abilities on the development of self-moving steam engines. In particular he collaborated with James Boydell, patentee of an 'endless railway' mechanism. This consisted of a series of flat feet attached to the outside of the engine's wheels. They were hinged in such a way that as the wheel revolved each succeeding foot would lie flat in contact with the ground, thus spreading the weight of the engine. The idea was that this arrangement would be more efficient for road-haulage engines, enabling them to deal with poor road surfaces. Burrell became the licensed manufacturer of Boydell engines in 1855, and from 1856 to 1862 he made several types of machine for use on the roads and for ploughing by direct traction. 
Boydell engines proved to be unsuccessful, both technically and commercially, and Burrell turned instead to the development of conventional wheeled traction engines. In this he had considerable achievements, and his firm came to be known mainly for its traction engines and road locomotives. In the 1870s he worked with R. W. Thompson in the production of his road steamers -- steam tractors designed to haul passenger and goods vehicles on the roads. A number of these were built for export. Burrell improved and adapted the design. 
In 1846 Charles Burrell married Elizabeth Cowen (died 'c'.1895), daughter of Robert Cowen, owner of Beck Foundry, Nottingham. The couple had five sons and two daughters. Charles Burrell served on Thetford council's navigation committee for the River Ouse. He was a justice of the peace for the county, appointed in 1877. In 1884 the family business was incorporated as Charles Burrell & Sons Ltd. Charles Burrell remained as chairman, though by now he was not so actively engaged in day-to-day management. In 1904 he retired completely. He died at Thetford on 28 June 1906. 
Burrell was succeeded as chairman of the company in 1904 by his eldest son, 


@@@@@


doc= 46796


Sir George Mowlem Burt (1884-1964), contractor and civil engineer, made still greater advances. Born in Grosvenor Road, Westminster, on 10 January 1884, he was the elder son of George Burt (1851-1919) -- younger son of George Burt (1816-1894) and a governing director of the firm -- and his wife and cousin, Emily, daughter of James Arbon and his wife, Susannah Manwell, John Mowlem's favourite. George Mowlem Burt was educated at Clifton College and followed his father's and uncle's path into the family firm in 1902, becoming an apprentice in the joiners' shop. His progress was rapid. Promoted assistant foreman on the Admiralty Arch in 1906 and an outside superintendent in 1911, he was appointed to the board in 1913 at a salary of $600. On his father's death he became supervising director. In 1911 he married Olave Charlotte Sortain, daughter of Frederich E. Hulbert of Rotherfield, Sussex; they had one son. 
A rich crop of contracts immediately after the First World War included the Port of London Authority (PLA) offices at Tower Hill, the Star and Garter Home at Richmond, and Bush House, Aldwych (1929 and 1934), followed by a great deal of dock reconstruction for the Port of London Authority; dock, jetty, and factory for Fords at Dagenham; and the King George V graving dock, Southampton. Other major London contracts included the Peter Robinson department store, the new Lloyds building, titanic office-blocks on Millbank for Imperial Chemical Industries (1927-8), power stations (Fulham and Battersea), and hospitals (St Mary's, Paddington, and the Royal Masonic). 
Such a scale of operations called for a wider capital base: George Mowlem Burt took the company public in 1925 with a capital of $500,000 ($350,000 issued), paying a 7.5 per cent dividend. The annual turnover rose from an average of $1,530,000 in the 1920s to $3,470,000 in the 1930s. Rearmament and war brought yet greater increases: construction of the Royal Ordnance Factory, Swynnerton (1939-42), alone cost $4 million. From 1940 to 1945 Mowlems won over $29 million worth of contracts, including airfield runways and concrete units for Mulberry harbours. Similarly, Mowlems played an important role in post-war reconstruction, notably power stations and refineries. When Burt retired as chairman in 1961 (becoming president), his company ranked eleventh in the British construction industry. 
Knighted in 1942, and appointed KBE in 1955, Sir George Mowlem Burt actively promoted the interests of the construction industry. A notable committee man, he was a founding member of the Federation of Civil Engineering Contractors, serving as chairman in 1932-3 and president in 1946-8 and 1951-6. He also served as president of the London Master Builders Association (1921), and of the International Federation of Building and Public Works (1930). On the board of the Building Research Station from about 1936 to 1956, he was chairman for ten years. In addition he served on several important committees under the ministries of Health and Works, accompanied Lord Portal to the USA in 1942 to study building methods, and chaired the interdepartmental committee on alternative forms of house construction. He was an Olympic fencer (1920 and 1924) and British epee champion in 1922. Enthusiastic for traditional country gentry sports, from 1931 to 1937 he was master of the Old Surrey and Burstow hunt. He died at his home, Comforts Place, Tandridge Lane, Lingfield, Surrey, on 1 September 1964. 
For several generations the Burt family exemplified the characteristics of the founder of their firm. Self-educated, John Mowlem had slowly built up a considerable and profitable contracting business with a high degree of vertical integration, largely confined to a particular sector, on the basis of small unit profits on a steadily increasing turnover. The Burts further expanded the firm, and seized an opportunity afforded by their conservative financial policy to break into major public building contracting. They, like Mowlem, made an enduring impact on their native Swanage, but although they established estates they remained primarily public-works contractors. After the First World War the enormous cost of public works demanded a widening of their capital base to be obtained only by a public flotation, but the family's predominance in the company was maintained for nearly half a century longer. 


@@@@@


doc= 46798


Butler, Sir William Waters, first baronet (1866-1939), brewer, was born on 14 December 1866 in his father's newly acquired public house, the London Works tavern, in Smethwick, near Birmingham. He was the eldest son of William Butler, a publican and brewer, and his wife, Mary Jane, 'nee' Ewing. His rise from these comparatively modest beginnings was assisted by his father's success as a full-scale commercial brewer, following a move in 1876 to The Crown, 36/7 Broad Street, Birmingham, and the purchase of several public houses. He was educated at the city's King Edward VI School and at the Birmingham and Midland Institute, where he qualified as a chemist. He then joined the family brewery and was head brewer and partner by the age of twenty-one. In 1893 he married Emily Mary, daughter of John Brown of Smethwick. They had a son, William Owen Butler, captain in the Royal Warwickshire regiment, who died in 1935, and two daughters. 
Butler encouraged an expansionist business strategy which culminated in an agreed merger with Henry Mitchell & Co. of Cape Hill, Smethwick, to form Mitchells and Butlers in 1898. Butler immediately joined the board, became deputy chairman in 1907, and was chairman and managing director from 1914 until his death in 1939. Sound and conservative management kept the company free of the excesses of the property mania of the 1890s and 1900s. Mitchells and Butlers had an impressive growth and profit record, its ordinary dividends averaging 13.6 per cent, excluding bonuses, in 1914-39. The labour force increased from under 300 in 1898 to over 1500 by 1930. 
Butler's company distinguished itself by its emphasis on 'fewer and better' public houses, a rationalization strategy in which large outlets, run on efficient lines by managers instead of tenants, were designed to replace several smaller premises. In 1897 Butler was prominent in a consortium of Birmingham brewers which was formed to administer a voluntary 'surrender scheme'. The Birmingham Property Company was established to administer a fund to compensate brewers who agreed to surrender licences on run-down pubs affected by slum clearance schemes. This acted as a model for a national statutory compensation scheme, which was introduced in 1904. Butler and his colleagues went further than merely reducing the number of pubs. They established an informal quid pro quo arrangement with the local licensing magistrates, by which licences were given up in return for new licences on a smaller number of larger, newly built pubs. Mitchells and Butlers, which had given up about three hundred licences by 1925, led the way in Birmingham in building fine new pubs, architecturally impressive, with a whole series of amenities, including gardens, meeting rooms, bowling greens, family rooms, and restaurants. The strategy, which was taken up by brewers and licensing magistrates all over England, did much to divert the hostility of temperance lobbying and to present a more respectable and responsible image of brewing. 
Butler was also prominent nationally in the brewing industry. In 1901, as a delegate of the Birmingham and Midland Counties Brewers' Association, he attended his first meeting of the Country Brewers' Society (from 1904 the Brewers' Society), the trade association representing English brewers, and was elected president of the Institute of Brewing in 1906. He acted as chairman of the Brewers' Society in 1907-8, at a critical period for the industry, which was under attack from the temperance and teetotaller interests in the Liberal government. Butler led the defence against the hostile and wide-ranging licensing bill of 1908, which was eventually defeated in the Lords. The First World War increased the pressure on the brewers, adding output and trading restrictions to the general climate of hostility fostered by Lloyd George. Butler was prominent in deflecting opposition. He agreed to serve as a member of the central control board (liquor traffic), a body constituted in 1915 to regulate the trade in wartime, and, more specifically, to manage the state-owned assets of those breweries nationalized in munitions areas. He threw himself into the task with characteristic enthusiasm, helping to transform the Carlisle State Brewery and its tied estate, applying the same 'fewer and better' principles which had served him well in Birmingham. Then, he was prominent with Sir George Younger and Colonel John Gretton in presenting the brewers' response to government proposals to nationalize the whole of the drinks trade. Butler's surprising but disarming reaction -- he declared himself happy to accept state purchase provided the compensation terms were adequate -- did much to expose the inadequacies of Lloyd George's assault on the industry. Butler was perceived to be one of brewing's staunchest and most able champions. 
Butler's other business interests included chairmanship of Birmingham Cold Storage Ltd, but he was also known for his contribution to higher education and training in brewing. In Birmingham, he did much to encourage the fledgeling university, which gained its charter in 1900. His generous benefactions helped to establish the university's school of brewing and malting in 1900, an endowed chair (the Adrian Brown professorship of brewing), and the new biology block of 1927 (Butler personally contributing $50,000). In 1938 he established the Brewers' Society brewing scholarships at the Birmingham Brewing School. He became a member of the council of Birmingham University in 1917, and was also a life governor. Hospitals and a miscellany of charities also benefited from his generosity. 
Butler was a genial, kindly man; he loved orchids, and not only attended business meetings with one in his buttonhole, but frequently took prize blooms to distribute at public functions. His many friends included the Birmingham family of Joseph Chamberlain. A baronetcy was conferred on him, in recognition of his philanthropic, national, and political services, in 1926. Butler died suddenly on 5 April 1939, at his home, Southfield, Norfolk Road, Edgbaston, Birmingham, aged seventy-two. He left $552,615 gross and was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 46800


Bythell, John Kenworthy (1840-1916), businessman, was born on 20 April 1840 at 83 Great Jackson Street, Hulme, Manchester, the son of James Bythell, a calenderer and maker-up employed in the city's shipping trade, and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Southell. He joined the merchant firm of Gaddum & Co. and served from 1864 as resident partner in Bombay during the cotton boom induced by the American Civil War. There he acquired a thorough knowledge of the links between commerce, shipping, railways, and ports. He became a prime mover in the construction of the great harbour works of the port and was elected chairman of the Bombay chamber of commerce in 1872, returning home in 1875. 
In 1886 Bythell became a founder member of the Manchester Ship Canal consultative committee and was converted by a study of the evidence from disbelief in the project to faith in its practicality. He agreed to join the board of the canal company if Daniel Adamson, the original promoter whose financial competence was now being questioned, ceased to be chairman. On 19 February 1887 Adamson resigned, and Bythell became a director, as well as chairman of the finance committee. On 20 July 1894 he was elected chairman in succession to Lord Egerton of Tatton (1832-1909). As such he became the first paid, resident, and full-time chief executive officer in the history of the company, which was the largest business firm in the region. Bythell assumed office six months after the opening of the canal to traffic and did so at a critical juncture in its affairs, created by the bitter opposition of Liverpool, by the formation of hostile shipping conferences, by the unanticipated reduction of railway rates, and by the lack of essential warehousing facilities. He averted bankruptcy by using the revenues generated by the Bridgwater Canal and by persuading Manchester corporation to levy from 1896 a special ship canal rate. He attracted trade by extending the port's facilities, by encouraging their use by means of a special 'promotional tariff', and by avoiding conflict with potential clients. Through negotiation with his friends among the Hindu merchants of Bombay he secured the conclusion of the vital contract of 29 December 1894 for the shipment of piece-goods direct from Manchester to Bombay. He extended the functions of the ship canal company far outside the normal range of a port authority. In particular he encouraged the formation of a clutch of companies intended to provide the necessary facilities and to attract traffic to the port, especially the Manchester Cotton Association (1894), the Manchester Ship Canal Warehousing Company Ltd (1895), and Manchester Liners Ltd (1898). 
Bythell's talents were primarily those of a merchant, a financier, and a diplomat. His unresting activity helped to raise Manchester from the status of the sixteenth port of the kingdom in 1894 to that of the fourth in 1906. Manchester ranked second in the export of cotton yarn from 1894 and second in the export of piece-goods from 1895. It became the second largest importer of raw cotton from 1896 and the second largest importer of petroleum from 1903. Bythell established a permanent partnership with the local corporation in 1904 at the price of conceding to it a perpetual majority upon the board of directors. He was primarily responsible for the development of the Port of Manchester, translating a legal concept and an engineering achievement into a commercial reality. He shattered Liverpool's historic monopoly and crowned his career by paying a first dividend, for the year 1915, to his loyal ordinary shareholders. 
A Manchester Scot by origin, a Liberal in politics, and a Presbyterian in religion, Bythell devoted all his energies to business and lived entirely for the ship canal, becoming its 'second founder' ('Manchester Guardian', 19 Aug 1916, 6). He did not become a director of other companies save as a representative of the canal company, serving from 1889 on the board of the Manchester chamber of commerce and from 1897 on that of the Manchester Dry Docks Company Ltd, established in 1891. He guided the destiny of the company for twenty-two years and retired in 1916, having throughout his life shunned all personal publicity and declined all national honours. His wife, Elizabeth, died in 1909, aged seventy-six. Bythell died at Fernhill, Singleton Road, Broughton, Salford, on 18 August 1916 and was buried at Kensal church, Salford, on 22 August. 


@@@@@


doc= 46801


Cadbury, Laurence John (1889-1982), chocolate and food manufacturer, was born at Woodbrook, Northfield, King's Norton, Birmingham, on 30 March 1889, the first son of George Cadbury (1839-1922), chocolate and food manufacturer, and his second wife, Elizabeth Mary, 'nee' Taylor (1858-1951) ['see 'Cadbury, Dame Elizabeth Mary]. He was educated at Leighton Park, Reading, a Quaker public school, and studied at Trinity College, Cambridge (1908-11), where he graduated with a degree in economics. As a young man his sporting interests included sculling, skiing, and motor racing. He then joined the family business in Birmingham, Cadbury Brothers, and three years later served in the Friends' Ambulance Unit in France; he was presented with the Croix de Guerre, as well as the Mons medal and the 1914 star. In 1919 he was appointed OBE, and was also appointed managing director of Cadbury Brothers and associated companies, with special responsibility for engineering, production, and factory development. It was a post he held for forty years. 
Cadbury also oversaw wage and employment policies at the company. He actively supported the industry's National Joint Industrial Council, becoming a trustee of the firm's pension fund in 1920 and its chairman in 1932, a position he retained until his retirement. In 1921 he was appointed a director of the British Cocoa and Chocolate Company, the holding company which linked Cadburys and Frys until their formal merger in 1936; he was also active in the formation of overseas subsidiaries in Canada, Australia, Germany, New Zealand, Ireland, and South Africa between 1920 and 1937. On 10 November 1925 he married Joyce ('b'. 1905/6), the daughter of Lewis Oster Mathews, an estate agent of Birmingham; they had two daughters and four sons. 
Cadbury was a key figure in the expansion of the family business during the inter-war years, and improvements in production and work organization underpinned marketing and strategic objectives which successfully exploited the firm's competitive advantages. In response to the depressed conditions and falling sales prices of the time, improvements in machinery and plant layout, mostly implemented between 1926 and 1932, increased productivity. The company additionally accrued the returns to scale which were to be found in the rising popularity of milk chocolate bars, and specifically Cadbury's Dairy Milk. Alongside new power plant and other innovations, automatic chocolate moulding machines were introduced in 1927; larger buildings were erected, including the cocoa block in 1929; and throughput was improved. The per unit labour and overhead costs of milk chocolate fell by 56 per cent between 1924 and 1936, and the continuous reduction in the sales price of Cadbury's Dairy Milk, beginning in 1920, reached in 1933 the level of '2oz for 2d', a competitive advantage that was turned into a famous advertising slogan. The brand was established as the industry's leader, and helped Cadburys achieve the powerful combination of efficiency, size, and consumer loyalty. Unrivalled positive cash flows created a virtuous circle of capital investment, heavy advertising, and price reductions. Output per employee grew significantly between 1922 and 1936; overall output even increased after 1928 and especially after 1933. Although the number of employees fell in the short term as a result of mechanization and enhanced factory organization, the upward trend in demand for confectionery had by 1934 restored employment levels at the company. In 1935 approximately 11,700 people worked for British Cocoa and Chocolate, making it the twenty-ninth largest manufacturing employer in Britain. 
During the Second World War parts of the main factory came under the control of the Ministry of Supply, and Cadbury chaired Bournville Utilities, which produced gas masks, aeroplane wings, petrol cans, and machine tools. He went with Lord Beaverbrook's mission to the USSR in 1941 as head of its economic section. In 1944 he succeeded his brother Edward as chairman of both Cadbury Brothers and British Cocoa and Chocolate; he resigned from the Cadbury board and as chairman of British Cocoa and Chocolate in 1959. He chaired the finance committee of the main company until 1962, when its ordinary shares were traded on the stock exchange for the first time, and he finally retired as a director of British Cocoa and Chocolate in 1964. From 1910 until 1978 Cadbury was a trustee of the Bournville Village Trust, which acquired responsibility for some 7000 dwellings, and he served as its chairman from 1954 to 1974. He was also a member of the University of Birmingham's council, which awarded him an honorary doctorate in law in 1970. 
In 1922 Cadbury was appointed to the board of the Daily News Trust, established by his father to protect the independence of several Liberal, reforming newspapers, most of which were merged into a single title in 1930. He became its chairman in 1950, and between 1958 and 1967 he also served as a director of Tyne-Tees Television, part owned by the Daily News. In 1960 he was much criticized for secretly selling the 'News Chronicle' to Associated Newspapers, owners of the Conservative-inclined 'Daily Mail', and for the subsequent loss of 3500 jobs. The circulation of the 'News Chronicle' had declined for over a decade, and Cadbury was blamed for failing to appoint a successor more attuned to the requirements of modern journalism. 
In the inter-war period, Laurence and Edward Cadbury had effected a business policy which established their chocolate manufacturing business as the industry leader; and, as company chairman, Laurence Cadbury oversaw the end of rationing and the expansion of demand in the 1950s. The next generation of directors, in the 1960s, responded to a new market and new marketing demands and sought to convert Cadburys into a global food and drinks enterprise. Although not a key player in this transformation, Cadbury did employ his expertise within the City of London to supervise the associated conversion to a public company. In 1969, the business merged to form Cadbury Schweppes. 
Although deeply involved in the confectionery business and the Daily News Trust for most of his life, Cadbury showed little commitment to his family's Quaker connections. He became concerned chiefly with matters of economics and finance and with issues of population, and regularly offered his views and analysis in a range of journals. He was a director of the Bank of England in 1936-8 and from 1941 to 1961, and high sheriff of the county of London in 1947-8 and 1959-60. He acted as treasurer of the populations investigation committee for forty years (1936-76), and he also served as a trustee of the historic churches preservation committee. In contrast to his background, Cadbury in the post-war years tended to support Conservative policies, although he was neither interested in politics nor directly associated with any political party. Reserved by nature, he had no inclination to enter public life, preferring his home, family, and collections of antique furniture, guns, and books. He died at his home, The Davids, Hole Lane, Northfield, Birmingham, on 5 November 1982, survived by his wife. Their eldest son, Sir Adrian Cadbury, was chairman of Cadbury Schweppes from 1975 to 1989. 


@@@@@


doc= 46802


Callender, Sir Thomas Octavius (1855-1938), electrical engineer, was born on 9 April 1855 at Clydeview, Partick, Lanarkshire, Scotland, the eldest of the ten children (five boys and five girls) of William Ormiston Callender (1827-1908), a commission merchant, and his wife, Jean, 'nee' Marshall, the daughter of a Greenock tanner, whom he had married in 1854. In 1859 the family moved to Hammersmith, London, a decision most likely prompted by the collapse of the Western Bank of Glasgow, which resulted in Thomas's grandfather losing all his money. After some years, Thomas's father, then an agent for a number of Scottish textile mills, established the connection that was to make Callenders pioneers in the manufacture and laying of cables worldwide. 
Thomas was sent to school in Boulogne but returned to London to continue his education at the outbreak of the Franco-Prussian War in 1870. In that same year his father returned from Switzerland after visiting the asphalt deposits at Val de Travers, and set up Callender and Amos to act as agents for the Val de Travers Company of Neuchatel to import asphalt for the extensive road-making schemes that were taking place in the City of London. In 1877, in the wake of this successful venture, William Callender obtained an interest in the import of bitumen from Trinidad for road-making and other waterproofing purposes, and decided it would be timely to take on his two eldest sons, Thomas and William, to form the firm of Callender & Sons for the refining of bitumen and for asphalt paving. The company's first offices were at 150 Leadenhall Street, London, with a small refinery at Millwall, where the bitumen was landed. Thomas Callender quickly realized that importing unrefined bitumen halfway across the world was costly and a potential drag on the efficiency of the company, and he arranged that all impurities be eliminated at source. This undoubtedly contributed to the growing success of the company, which was developing numerous overseas road-making contracts. While on a business trip to St Petersburg in 1880, Callender was hugely impressed by the opera house, which was lit by Jablochoff candles, a primitive form of electric lighting. This, together with the simultaneous discovery of the incandescent lamp by Edison and Swan, persuaded Callender of the need to turn the business towards the production of large-capacity insulated cables if the revolution in electric lighting was to be exploited. His younger brother William had already successfully produced vulcanized bitumen (VB); the waterproofing and insulant technology was therefore already familiar to the company, and this prompted the elder William Callender to patent the new material in 1881, in order to begin tests on the production of insulated wire at their new factory on a 4.5 acre site in Erith, Kent. 
In 1882 Callender's Bitumen Telegraph and Waterproof Company was formed to finance the development of VB, with the original firm continuing alongside, providing the management for a further two years. Although the new company had only minimal experience of telegraph cables, it nevertheless managed to secure the services of Sir Samuel Canning of the Telegraph Construction and Maintenance Company, who had successfully laid the Atlantic telegraph cables in 1866, to make good any disadvantage. Over the following fourteen years the business of consolidating successes was due in large part to Callender's vision, his business acumen, and his indefatigable search for fresh orders, both at home and overseas. His skills, though, were not confined simply to commercial matters, for in the early 1880s he had invented the Callender solid system, whereby cables were laid in wooden troughs and embedded in bitumen, a development which was later used extensively for the laying of mains cables. 
The period between 1882 and the eventual reorganization of the company in 1896 saw the development of most of Callenders' pioneering projects. The management of the Erith works became Callender's responsibility, and under his direction many important early contracts were secured. The company supplied the VB cables for the electric lighting of the new law courts in the Strand and for the Covent Garden Opera House in 1883, as well as mains cables for the growing number of electricity supply companies. In 1891 the firm introduced an underground electric haulage system at the Abercannaid colliery, Merthyr, and in the same year received its first tramways order. It was also closely associated with the first electrified underground railway. By the late 1880s it was becoming clear that the company's activities required a much broader financial base to accommodate the increased demand for electric power. In 1896 the firm of Callender's Cable and Construction Company was created and within two years the number of contracts had grown from thirty-one to seventy, and total sales over the same period had increased from $95,764 to $296,946. With Callender as managing director (a position he held until his death), the company was well placed to profit from the huge expansion of the many applications of the electricity industry, from the early days of electric lighting to the creation of the national grid following the 1926 'Electricity (Supply) Act'. Indeed, the national grid was to provide Callenders with valuable business during the lean years of the depression. 
The number of overseas contracts increased dramatically in the period following reorganization, and in February 1904 the first of a number of major cabling projects was undertaken in India for electricity supply and tramways. India was to become one of Callenders' most important markets, and Callender, eager to maintain personal contact with important operations wherever possible, proposed setting up permanent headquarters there. At home the company undertook the electrification of London's metropolitan tramways, a seven-year scheme, which was completed in 1909. The General Post Office, meanwhile, was in the process of negotiating large telephone cable contracts, and the first of many large orders was placed with Callenders in 1913. The years 1914-18 were given over to the war effort, and orders from the Admiralty went some way to compensate for the interruption to Callenders' usual supply lines from Trinidad. 
Callender was knighted in June 1918, and he continued to play a very active part in the management of the company over the following two decades. Even when in poor physical health he remained alert to all business opportunities. In 1930 he began discussions with the directors of British Insulated Cables on prospects for closer co-operation between the two companies, but it was not until June 1945 that the Callender board met for the last time before British Insulated Callender Cables began operations as a truly international company. 
Callender was a JP for the county of Kent, a member of the Institution of Electrical Engineers, and a director of a number of power companies. He died at his home, Bidborough Court, Bidborough, Tunbridge Wells, Kent, on 2 December 1938, surviving his wife, Bessie Emmeline, 'nee' Pinnock, whom he had married on 19 March 1885, by just six months. He was buried on 8 December at Erith cemetery, and a memorial service was held at St Clement Danes, Strand. His estate was shared between his only child, Thomas Ormiston Callender (1896-1941), and other members of his family. 


@@@@@


doc= 46803


Calvert, James (bap. 1631, d. 1698), nonconformist minister, was baptized at Allhallows Pavement, York, on 23 May 1631, the eldest son and second of the nine children of Robert Calvert, merchant and sheriff of York, and his wife, Judith Taylor. He was named after his grandfather, James Calvert. His uncle was Thomas Calvert (1605/6-1679), the York presbyterian minister and Hebraist in whose footsteps Calvert would follow. Calvert was admitted pensioner at Clare College, Cambridge, on 9 June 1646. He graduated BA in 1650 and proceeded MA in 1653. He was appointed vicar of Boynton, Yorkshire, on 20 July 1652, curate of Kirkdale on 30 May 1654, and vicar of Topcliffe on 12 March 1656, from which post he had resigned by 26 March 1661, when his successor was installed. After his resignation Calvert may have supported himself through commerce: he was identified as a 'merchant' when he was admitted to the freedom of the city of York in 1664. According to Calamy, Calvert 'lived privately but not idly; for he studied hard' (Calamy, 'Abridgement', 2.472). He was licensed to preach as a presbyterian at his house in York on 25 July 1672. 
Calvert was a moderate presbyterian who maintained good relations with some Anglicans, including his cousin Thomas Harrison, a fellow of Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, to whom Calvert left most of his library of books and manuscripts. Calvert's one publication, 'Napthali' (1672), a Latin work on the ten tribes of Israel and the conversion of the Jews, was dedicated to the bishop of Chester, John Wilkins. He waited on Wilkins in company with another York presbyterian minister, Peter Williams, at Scarborough-Spaw, when Wilkins received them cordially and expressed hopes for religious comprehension. A letter Calvert addressed to the Anglican Hebraist Dr John Lightfoot in August 1669 asked for assistance in interpreting the prophecy of Ezekiel. Calvert's interpretation of 'Ezekiel' 48 differed from mainstream Christian and Jewish prophetic interpretation in that he believed that the division of the Holy Land among the twelve tribes was a literal description of the situation after the end of the Babylonian captivity rather than an apocalyptic prophecy or an allegory. Thus, the supposedly 'lost' ten tribes were not lost at all -- they had long ago returned to the Holy Land, either with the two tribes of Benjamin and Judah at the end of the Babylonian captivity or shortly thereafter, and presumably had simply been reabsorbed into the Jewish people. 
Despite Calvert's friendships with individual Anglicans and the entreaties of conformists who admired his learning, he refused to conform because he continued to object to some aspects of the Anglican liturgy and because it would have required an episcopal reordination. About 1675 Calvert became a chaplain to Sir Thomas Strickland of Boynton, whose sons he also tutored. Calvert was not usually politically active but while at Boynton he became mixed up in the aftermath of the Rye House plot. Along with another member of Strickland's household, the gardener Marmaduke Baine, Calvert went to Bridlington in late June 1683 to arrange a boat to the Netherlands for the plotter Sir John Cochrane of Ochiltree and his son. Cochrane was the husband of Sir Thomas Strickland's sister. Calvert was charged with treason for the action and briefly imprisoned in York Castle, but the charge seems to have come to nothing. Sir Thomas Strickland seems to have approved of Calvert's actions -- in his will written that August he left him $20. 
Later Calvert moved to Hull, and afterwards became chaplain to Sir William Middleton, bt, of Belsay Castle, Northumberland, and tutor to Middleton's only son, John. Calvert died at Belsay Castle in December 1698, 'an ingenious and pious man, of a meek and quiet temper' (Calamy, 'Abridgement', 2.472). 


@@@@@


doc= 46804


Cammell, Charles (1810-1879), steelmaker, was born on 8 January 1810 in Sculcoates, Hull, the fourth son of George Cammell, a shipmaster with Scottish connections, and his wife, Hannah (died 1825). A self-made man, he was apprenticed to a local ironmonger before moving to Sheffield in 1830, where he joined the steel and tool firm of Ibbotson Brothers. Like John Brown, Cammell made his mark as a salesman -- a career in which he demonstrated great ability. A crisis in the American market, however, led Cammell in 1837 to start his own business, with the help of Thomas and Henry Johnson (the former the head bookkeeper from Ibbotsons). Johnson, Cammell & Co., based in Furnival Street, made and merchanted tool steel and files, though by the 1840s the firm was becoming increasingly involved with the expanding market for heavy steel goods, such as railway materials. In 1845 Cammell moved his operations from the centre of Sheffield to the Don valley, where he erected the Cyclops works. 
By 1855 Cammell's early partners had either died or retired and the company became Charles Cammell & Co. However, from 1846 Cammell was helped by George Wilson (1829-1885), a scientifically trained Scot, who was to become an important influence at the company. Under the two men -- Cammell the salesman and Wilson the works manager -- the firm expanded rapidly in the 1850s and 1860s, exploiting new tonnage steel technologies, especially the Bessemer process. Cammell followed John Brown's lead by installing Bessemer converters for steel rail production in 1861, with the firm supplying not only the British market, but also America, Canada, and South America. 
In 1864 -- in another parallel move to Brown -- Cammells became a limited liability company, with a paid-up capital of $800,000. Charles Cammell (who was paid $200,000 for the goodwill) became the chairman, with George Wilson as managing director. The company employed over 3000 workers and, alongside Browns, was the largest steelworks in Sheffield. It continued to grow through the 1870s, when such was the demand for rails that the Cammell steelworks, despite major plant extensions at Grimesthorpe, had difficulty in producing enough ingots to feed its mills. This demand, combined with orders for armour-plate -- which Cammells began rolling in 1863 -- resulted in the company expanding outside Sheffield. Having already extended its Bessemer operations by taking over a works at Penistone, Cammells purchased the Oaks colliery in 1874 to gain access to the rich Barnsley coal seam. Charles Cammell and his board were also shareholders and directors in the Wilson-Cammell Patent Wheel Company Ltd, built in 1873 at Dronfield to further exploit the market for steel rails. 
To what extent was Cammell personally responsible for this success? According to one reporter, Cammell 'used often to say that Sheffield owed much to him' -- though the same report quickly added that his success was 'almost as much due to those associated with him as to himself. He possessed in special degree the power of finding out those who could assist him in his work, and of attaching them to himself' ('Sheffield and Rotherham Independent', 14 Jan 1879). Chief among these was George Wilson, the managing director between 1864 and 1885. Cammell was chairman until his death and usually attended board and annual company meetings; however, it is clear that after 1864 Wilson was the driving force. 
Outside his business, Cammell was a gentrified industrialist. On 23 October 1845 he married a widow, Marianne Wright, daughter of Thomas Rollinson; they had six sons and one daughter. In 1851 he purchased the Norton Hall estate on the southern outskirts of Sheffield, and eventually became lord of the manor of Norton. He also owned the Brookfield Hall estate at Hathersage in Derbyshire and Ditcham Park in Hampshire. Although Cammell served as a JP and Conservative member of the Sheffield council, he eschewed public life and does not appear to have had any philanthropic interests. 
Cammell died at 7 Southwick Crescent, London, on 12 January 1879 and was buried five days later at Hathersage church. He was survived by his wife. One of his sons, Bernard, later took a seat on the board of the Cammell company. In 1903 the company merged with the Birkenhead shipbuilders Laird Brothers to create Cammell Laird, based on the River Mersey. 


@@@@@


doc= 46807


Candlish, John (1816-1874), glass bottle manufacturer and politician, was born at Tarset, near Bellingham in Northumberland, and baptized on 28 April 1816, the eldest son of John Candlish ('b'. 1793), farmer, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Robson. Following the death of his wife about 1820, the elder John Candlish moved to Sunderland, where his brother Robert was the manager of Ayres Quay bottle works. Here he found work as a labourer. 
The family was Presbyterian, of Scottish descent. Candlish received an education at dissenting schools, first locally, but then at the well-regarded Dr Dodd's academy in North Shields, before returning to Sunderland at the age of eleven to work in the bottle works. When he was fourteen his uncle's influence secured him an apprenticeship with a draper, Robert Tate, a position that gave him opportunities to continue his education by studying French and joining a debating society. During this period Candlish joined the Baptists with whom he continued to worship throughout his life. In 1836 he began his commercial career as a partner in a drapery business. 
Candlish's early career was varied. He moved from enterprise to enterprise with a restlessness that seems to bear out one contemporary verdict which named his only failing as ambition. Various drapery undertakings were followed in 1836 by the purchase of a newspaper, the 'Sunderland Beacon', which failed within six months; this was followed by other short-lived ventures into coal exporting, and, in 1844, shipbuilding. Candlish's yard at Southwick was said to have produced some fine ships but few profits. In 1845 he married his cousin Elizabeth Candlish, of Ayres Quay, and in July 1851 returned to publishing by founding the 'Sunderland News', a move which reflected his growing political ambitions. Other interests in the early 1850s included the Sunderland Gas Company and a small glassworks. 
The turning point of Candlish's commercial career came in 1855 when he acquired the lease of a glass bottle works at Seaham harbour on the co. Durham coast. This coal-fired works manufactured the traditional black bottles used for wine and beer under the name the Londonderry Bottle Works. Under Candlish's ownership production expanded and large contracts were secured with brewers and government departments. In 1858 Candlish purchased a second site, at Diamond Hall in Sunderland, and by 1872 had six glasshouses at Seaham and four at Diamond Hall, making him one of the largest manufacturers of black bottles in Europe. The Londonderry Bottle Works was justly celebrated in its day for its good labour relations. 
Candlish entered public life in 1848 when he was elected to Sunderland council, representing the west ward. By upbringing and early inclination he was Conservative but transferred his loyalties to the twin causes of radicalism and free trade during the campaign against the corn laws. He was an energetic advocate of reforms in sanitary and financial administration, became mayor in 1858 and 1861, and filled a number of other public offices in Sunderland, notably chairman of the board of guardians. He was made a JP in 1862 and subsequently a county magistrate and deputy lieutenant of the county. During the early 1860s he extended his business interests to a Middlesbrough iron shipbuilding firm, Candlish, Fox & Co., and the Thornleigh Colliery Company. Both these ventures failed and for the last ten years of his life Candlish's energies were taken up by national politics. 
Candlish's first attempt to secure one of Sunderland's two parliamentary seats ended in disappointment when in 1865 he was beaten into third place by two tory candidates. The following year a by-election brought success, which was consolidated in the general election of 1868 when the newly enfranchised electorate of Sunderland threw its weight firmly behind the radicals. In parliament Candlish had a high attendance rate and a record of interventions in most of the discussions on major legislation of the period. The activity which brought him most public attention was his criticism of the cost and management of the Abyssinian expedition, which led to his chairmanship of two select committees on the subject between 1868 and 1870. Candlish's record in national politics attracted some criticism in Sunderland for not being sufficiently radical and in April 1871 a meeting in his home town passed a vote of confidence in him despite, according to 'The Times', 'considerable opposition'. His parliamentary connections led to the marriage in 1869 of his only daughter, Elizabeth Penelope, to William Shepherd Allen, MP for Newcastle under Lyme. 
Candlish had visited India in the autumn of 1870 and this event was blamed for the subsequent breakdown of his health. He died on 17 March 1874 in Cannes, France, and was buried in Ryhope cemetery in Sunderland. He was commemorated in his home town by a statue, erected in October 1875. 


@@@@@


doc= 46808


Cargill, Sir John Traill, first baronet (1867-1954), merchant and oil industrialist, was born in Glasgow on 10 January 1867, the second of three sons (there were also two daughters) of David Sime Cargill (1826-1904) and his first wife, Margaret Traill (1840-1872). After attending Glasgow Academy (1878-83), in 1890 he entered the office of the Rangoon agents of the Burmah Oil Company, which his father had founded. He returned to the Glasgow office in 1893, and two years later married Mary Hope Walker (died 1929), daughter of George Moncrieff Grierson, a Glasgow commission merchant, and sister of Sir James Moncrieff Grierson; they had one daughter. In 1904, at the early age of thirty-seven, he succeeded his father as chairman of the Burmah Oil Company. 
Cargill had suffered a deprived childhood (his mother died when he was five, and his father was strong-willed and much preoccupied with business concerns); Cargill never overcame a diffident manner and a deeply pessimistic outlook. These attributes were a disadvantage at a time when Burmah Oil was becoming a key element in the British government's oil strategy; however, among his able advisers were Sir Boverton Redwood and (Charles) William Wallace. In 1905 Cargill contracted with the Admiralty to supply the Royal Navy with fuel oil from Rangoon. These dealings with Whitehall led to his company's being asked to acquire the important Persian oil concession, then held by William Knox D'Arcy. After three years of arduous prospecting work, Burmah Oil's resident geologist, George Bernard Reynolds, discovered oil in Persia in 1908, and a vast oilfield was subsequently proved. In the following year a new company, the Anglo-Persian Oil Company Ltd (later British Petroleum), was registered in London. 
The financial burden that Anglo-Persian began to impose on Burmah Oil soon alarmed Cargill. When in 1912 its refining and marketing problems required an injection of a further $2 million, he refused to authorize that sum. Instead, the managing director of Anglo-Persian, Charles Greenway, opened negotiations with the Admiralty for either a loan or the purchase of shares from Burmah Oil. In 1914 the government, at the instigation of Winston Churchill (then first lord of the Admiralty), acquired a controlling stake in Anglo-Persian, which in turn signed a contract to supply the Admiralty with fuel oil. 
From 1914 onwards, Robert Irving Watson was head of Burmah Oil's London office. He gradually gained Cargill's trust and took over the day-to-day decisions that the latter wished to delegate. From 1920, when he became managing director, Watson was effectively in charge of the company, and he left to Cargill only the highest policy matters and other public duties normally undertaken by a non-executive chairman. In the same year Cargill was created a baronet for public services. A director of the Glasgow chamber of commerce, Cargill also held directorships of Scottish and other oil and investment companies. He was deputy lieutenant of Glasgow and on the court of Glasgow University, which awarded him an honorary LLD in 1929. 
Cargill was tall, with an impressive nose, and despite his reserve he played well his symbolic role as 'father' of Burmah Oil. He made periodic visits to Burma and to Persia, and came almost to enjoy the annual general meetings of the company in Glasgow. Having been an accomplished sportsman in his youth, he encouraged sporting and other recreational events in the East with trophies and donations. His great personal integrity made him a trusted figure in Whitehall and in Glasgow alike. He refused to lobby governments on his company's behalf, and angrily condemned underhand dealings by others. He also had a large fund of common sense, successfully arguing that because women had real influence in Burma they should be given the vote. 
In 1942, while Cargill was still chairman of Burmah Oil, much of what he had worked for during his life was destroyed when the Japanese invaded Burma: on his orders, the company employees made an end of all its productive assets in Burma, to deny them to the invading armies. In 1943 Cargill handed over the chairmanship to Watson, and retired to the comfort of a nursing home at 19 Great King Street, Edinburgh, where he died on 24 January 1954. He was buried at Hillfoot cemetery, Glasgow. Before his death he had given large benefactions, including donations to universities in both Glasgow and Rangoon. 


@@@@@


doc= 46810


Carr, Arthur (1855-1947), biscuit manufacturer, was born at Bowerbank, Barton, Westmorland, on 16 August 1855, the younger son of John Carr (1824-1912) and his wife, Harriet Ellis. John Carr's elder brother was Jonathan Dodgson Carr, who in 1831 founded the milling and biscuit making firm of Carr & Co. in Carlisle. After completing his apprenticeship, John Carr became a farmer and occasionally travelled for the firm. Having visited the rival biscuit manufacturing firm of Peek Frean & Co. (established in 1857 at Bermondsey), Carr joined that business in 1860 and subsequently moved with his family to London. 
The Carrs being Quakers, Arthur probably attended a Friends' day school near his Clapham home. After he and his elder brother Ellis (1852-1930) had spent a year in Germany, in 1872 he became an apprentice in Peek Frean at $3 a week, initially employed to open each morning's post. He nevertheless made rapid progress and was made a partner in 1877, two years after his brother. On 2 June 1881 he married Marie Georgette Baumann ('b'. 1855/6); they had two sons. About this time he left the Quakers to join the Church of England. 
In the 1880s and 1890s Peek Frean's progress was only slow: turnover fluctuated, while profits were inadequate. The Carrs had to cope with three unprogressive senior partners on the Peek side. Even so, after a visit to the United States, where he was impressed by their employment, Arthur Carr was able to recruit female clerks into the office. In 1901, with the disappearance of the obstructive partners, the Carrs registered Peek Frean & Co. Ltd as a limited company. Since John Carr was now elderly and the diffident Ellis immersed himself in production, Arthur Carr thereafter dominated the company. At first a joint managing director with his brother, in 1904 he became chairman and sole managing director. He used his organizing talents and energies not only to build the company up into an industry leader, but also to create contacts with the rest of the biscuit industry. 
In particular, Carr launched important new varieties of biscuit, and backed them with innovative advertising and publicity schemes. These included the enduringly successful Pat-a-Cake of 1902, of the novel shortcake type. The first ever cream sandwich biscuit, the Bourbon, followed in 1910 and the Custard Cream in 1913. A range of the company's assortments also caught the public's fancy. 
Realizing the importance of marketing, Carr spent freely on newspaper and display advertising, which featured catchy slogans such as 'For goodness sake, eat Pat-a-Cake'. Among his ingenious publicity stunts, he treated some 20,000 London grocers to a free outing at the Crystal Palace, and sent 200,000 picture postcards to housewives up and down the country, with alluring (and frequently misinterpreted) messages which turned out to be about gift schemes. A 33-minute film of the company's activities (1904) was one of the earliest of its kind to be made in Britain. Deplored by rivals, such wheezes helped to double the company's sales between 1900 and 1913 and almost quadrupled profits. 
Carr tirelessly strove for closer co-operation with similar companies in spite of remaining outside the Association of Biscuit Manufacturers, set up in 1903 to counter the increasing power of grocers. He had more ambitious plans for the industry: to corral member firms into a huge biscuit combine, like those in soap and tobacco. His idea was both to end cut-throat competition and to improve the low wages in the industry. In 1912 Carr unavailingly wooed Huntley and Palmers, the potential leader in any combine; and he was no more successful in discussions with the Scottish and Irish firms manufacturing 'quality' biscuits. 
The post-war problems of high income tax and death duties persuaded the directors of Huntley and Palmers in 1921 to merge with Peek Frean into the Associated Biscuit Manufacturers Ltd. Within this holding company both units maintained their own production and marketing strategies. Carr was first vice-chairman, becoming chairman in 1923. No other company joined them. Carr retired in 1927, when turnover of Peek Frean was nearly $2 million, with profits of $230,000: both greater than those of Huntley and Palmers. He nevertheless continued to go into the office, declaring that he 'would be seen as before' ('DBB'). 
In appearance, his gold pince-nez and high collar stamped Carr as essentially Victorian in habit and outlook. As a youngster, he had ridden into work from Clapham on horseback; later he could be seen boarding a London bus just like any ordinary commuter. He found the intrusions of the telephone and unheralded visitors distasteful. Like his father before him, he concerned himself with all aspects of his employees' lives. From 1889 the company had in-house medical facilities, justified by him as 'a business proposition'. In 1905 free dental and optician's services were added. He organized an evening school for the younger hands. A keen cricketer until well into the 1890s, he also established a sports club in 1905 and became chairman. In 1922 he and his brother jointly gave $10,000 to set up an employees' benevolent club. Seven years later they introduced a pensions scheme with donations totalling $130,000. 
Carr kept free of public commitments, and therefore remained unknown to the wider world. His many outside benefactions were either anonymous or made unobtrusively. When he died at his home, 10 The Downs, Wimbledon, on 23 May 1947, neither the local nor national press seems to have noticed his passing. 


@@@@@


doc= 46811


Chadwick, David (1821-1895), accountant and company promoter, was born on 23 December 1821 at Macclesfield, Cheshire, the youngest of the nine children of John Chadwick, accountant, and his wife, Rebecca. His schooling was only brief and was terminated at an early age by employment in a warehouse. By attending evening classes, however, Chadwick eventually took up his father's occupation, and in 1843 he began to practise as an accountant. Between 1844 and 1860 he was treasurer to the corporation of Salford, and he also undertook that office for the town's gasworks, waterworks, and magistrates. In 1844 he married Louisa (died 1877), youngest daughter of William Bow of Boughton, Manchester. The couple had a son and two daughters. 
Chadwick's employment stimulated his interest in sanitary and educational questions. He began to publish widely in this field, and in a large number of papers and pamphlets he frequently combined a new and growing interest in statistics with the investigation of urban problems and conditions. In addition he also registered a series of patents for water meters, between 1853 and 1860. Chadwick's best-known statistical publication was 'On the rate of wages in 200 trades and branches of labour in... the manufacturing district of Lancashire' (1859), which was first read as a paper to the Statistical Society of London. A member of the council of that society from 1865 to 1867, he also served as president of the Manchester Statistical Society. 
Chadwick played a prominent role in the establishment of both the Salford Royal Free Library and Museum and the Salford Working Men's College. He subsequently served as treasurer of both institutions. His expertise was such that he advised the promoters of the act which enabled local authorities to establish public libraries and museums. One of his most important public achievements in Manchester occurred in 1868, when the city first appointed a medical officer of health. As an officer of local government it would seem that Chadwick became well acquainted with the middle classes of the industrial north-west; for when he returned to private accounting practice in Manchester, in 1860, all the evidence points to him providing a conduit for the savings of this social group to pass into the shares of industrial companies. 
During the 1860s Chadwick's partnership was titled Chadwick, Adamson McKenna & Co.; and a London office was opened in 1864 or 1865. However, the frequent change of partner -- Chadwick had ten associates between 1860 and 1892 and from seven he was separated by lawsuits -- suggests he was not an easy man to work with. Indeed, it was later noted that he 'found excitement in litigiousness' rather than in the stock exchange, racing, betting, or gambling (Cottrell, 'DBB', 626). Notwithstanding such difficulties, between 1862 and 1874 Chadwick was responsible for the 'promotion' of at least forty-seven limited companies, transforming them from private partnerships to publicly owned companies. Many of these were already household names, such as Charles Cammell & Co., the Ebbw Vale Steel, Iron, and Coal Company, John Brown & Co., and Bolckow, Vaughan & Co. Chadwick's first industrial promotion concerned the Ashbury Carriage Company, a Manchester firm, but during the mid-1860s most of his energies were absorbed in the conversion of Sheffield and Cleveland manufacturing and mining companies. Generally these were private affairs, with large proportions of the shares being acquired by Chadwick's 'friends' in Manchester and Salford, while Chadwick charged the vendors a commission of 1 per cent for his services. He was also linked, increasingly, with a group of financiers associated with the private bank of Glyn Mills, as well as with the International Financial Society. 
In his approach to company promotion Chadwick set the highest of standards by employing professional valuers; nor did he inflate the value of the assets in question through having them sold initially to 'dummy' vendors. By the 1870s his activities encompassed a wider range of financial securities; these included domestic and American railway shares and bonds, American land sales, shares of overseas mining, telegraph, and tramway companies, and domestic commercial and public utility companies. This broadening of his business interests led to a greater resort to the publication of prospectuses in order to attract subscriptions to his conversions, and between 1870 and 1875 he produced his own 'Investment Circular'. 
Chadwick's national importance as an industrial financier resulted in his giving evidence before a parliamentary committee in 1867 concerned with the operation of company law. In that year he was called before the select committee on the 'Limited Liability Acts', which met following the financial crisis of 1866. In the aftermath of the crash Chadwick's firm was involved in the rescue of four banks which had stopped trading: the Agra and Masterman's, the Bank of London, the Consolidated Bank, and the Preston Bank. 
In 1868 Chadwick entered the Commons as the Liberal member for Macclesfield, and he acted there as a knowledgeable commentator on government measures to reform company law. He played a prominent role in 1876 when he introduced his own legislation in an attempt to place the legal framework for company conversions on a more satisfactory basis. 'Chadwick's concerns were to make the details of company flotation public knowledge, to ensure that companies had sufficient capital with which to commence business and to see that every company published uniform profit and loss accounts, balance sheets and annual reports. (Cottrell, 'DBB', 629)' Although his bill failed, his ideas were to be taken up by others in 1884 and again in 1887. However, Chadwick was unseated as an MP in 1880 following a successful petition, from a Conservative agent, which had alleged bribery and other electoral malpractices. 
Chadwick remained an accountant throughout his life and during the 1880s acted largely for the companies that he had converted over the two previous decades. He also took a leading part in the professionalization of accountancy, being a founder member and fellow of the Institute of Accountants (London) and first president of the Manchester Institute of Chartered Accountants, established in 1871. A decade later Chadwick was one of the first council members of the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales. This interest was matched by his concern to provide public education, which in turn reflected his own, possibly bitter, experience of self-improvement through evening classes. In 1876 Chadwick gave a library of 10,000 books to his home town of Macclesfield. In addition he was involved with the creation of Royal Holloway College, London, and he later became a trustee of the estate and a governor of the college. 
Chadwick was a busy 'high Victorian' with a wide range of interests in public affairs. Privately he had little time for leisure, apart from the occasional game of billiards, and it was noted by his contemporaries that he gained the greatest excitement from his relentless pursuit of law cases. Chadwick's first wife died in 1877, and he then married, in 1878, Ursula, eldest daughter of Thomas Sopwith FRS. Ursula Chadwick may have had a difficult time as during the last ten years of his life her husband became increasingly self-opinionated. This character trait certainly led him to dramatic public clashes, as with the boards of the companies that he had promoted, and the author of an obituary later discussed his character in terms of an 'aversion to criticism, advice or opposition, or even to listen to caution' (quoted in Cottrell, 'DBB', 630). 
From the late 1870s the number of company flotations began to fall, and Chadwick was increasingly involved with his proposed company law reforms. He also fought a long series of actions arising from his promotion of the Blochairn Iron Company in 1873. In the event the action against him was dismissed, and he was awarded full costs. Although Chadwick continued to act as accountant for the companies he had floated, the 1880s witnessed a gradual decline of his entrepreneurial energy. He continued to write and publish occasional pamphlets on economic and financial matters, his final paper in 1890 being concerned with profit sharing. 
Chadwick suffered from increasing deafness and blindness, and he finally died on 19 September 1895 at his home, The Poplars, 6 Herne Hill, London. He was survived by his second wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 46812


Chamberlain, Arthur (1842-1913), industrialist, was born on 11 April 1842 at 3 Grove Hill Terrace, Camberwell, Surrey, the third of six sons of Joseph Chamberlain (1796-1874), a wholesale shoe manufacturer, and Caroline, 'nee' Harben (1808-1875), daughter of a wealthy provision merchant. His eldest brother was Joseph Chamberlain (1836-1914), the politician and tariff reformer; the other brothers were Richard, Herbert, Walter, and Frank, who died early. There were also three sisters. 
Arthur and Joseph Chamberlain both spent two years at University College School in London. On leaving school at the age of sixteen, Arthur followed Joseph into the wood-screw business of Nettlefold and Chamberlain in Birmingham, in which, in 1854, his father, Nettlefold's brother-in-law, had invested an initial $10,000 and then more, adding his name to that of the firm. The family sold out in 1874, soon after Joseph entered politics in the late 1860s. Like others in his family Arthur Chamberlain married a Kenrick, namely Louisa, daughter of Timothy Kenrick, on 3 June 1870. They had two sons, Arthur (1880-1941) and John (1881-1917), who was killed in Flanders, and seven daughters, before Louisa died in 1892. 
Arthur Chamberlain, while helping his brother in his political campaigns, remained a businessman all his life, building up a series of major Birmingham metal concerns. His arrival was not welcomed by Nettlefold and, in 1863, his father put him in charge of another of his interests in Birmingham, Smith and Chamberlain, brassfounders, which Arthur took into electric fittings. In 1883 Arthur himself (with partner George Hookham) developed Chamberlain and Hookham, next door in New Bartholomew Street. In 1886 the latter firm won the contract to install electric light in Birmingham Art Gallery but subsequently concentrated on the manufacture of meters, later becoming part of GEC. By 1891, when it was registered as a company, Chamberlain had entered the tube trade through the firm next door, Endurance Seamless Tube and Vial Company. As Endurance Tube and Engineering, this opened a factory in King's Norton in 1896. His co-directors were his son-in-law John Sutton Nettlefold and George Hookham, while his son John worked for Chamberlain and Hookham. 
The big step in Chamberlain's expanding career was his rescue of Kynoch, a cartridge manufacturer, in Witton and Stirchley in Birmingham. Called in by the shareholders in 1888, he became chairman in 1889, remaining so for the rest of his life, and was succeeded by his son John. Chamberlain now showed his restructuring genius, making many redundant but sorting out the works, costs, stock, and purchasing, selling off operations not considered 'core' but also buying new rolling mills to ensure supplies. In eight years he doubled capacity in existing products and added many new lines, pushing into the munitions business in explosives and taking over several other firms. Employment rose from 2000 in 1892 to 6000 in 1904 in nine works scattered round the UK. 
But expansion was too rapid and 1906-12 saw reduced profits, lost contracts, and redundancies and the tide turned in 1913, at the time of Chamberlain's death. However, he had laid the foundations of the metals and explosives division of what became ICI and survives, hived off, as Imperial Metal Industries (IMI). 
Chamberlain was also director or chairman of other concerns, some bought through the Birmingham Investment Trust, in which the family were influential. In the mid-1890s he took over another ailing Birmingham firm, Weldless Tube, and merged it with others, only to be hit by the collapse of the cycle boom. These firms were reconstructed into Tubes in 1898, to form the nucleus of Tube Investments in 1919. His son and grandson, both called Arthur, were involved in the management into the 1950s. Other investments were made in Hoskins & Son, makers of ships' berths, though this was managed by his nephew Neville Chamberlain, and Elliotts Metal, makers of ships' sheathing. 
In December 1900, when Joseph Chamberlain was advocating war, Lloyd George attacked the Chamberlains for holding shares in companies with government munitions contracts. Joseph defended the right of his family, not involved in political careers, to normal business ventures (Marsh, 569). 
Arthur Chamberlain was also a business leader in the Birmingham chamber of commerce and the Association of UK Chambers of Commerce and the Empire in the 1900s. He became a JP in 1884 and was chairman of the licensing committee in Birmingham from 1893 to 1903, working to reduce drunkenness. His approach clashed with Joseph's views. Arthur Chamberlain was a free trader. After 1900 he also publicly opposed his brother's views on protection, a rift between them emerging from 1903 to 1906. Chamberlain preached to his employees and wrote in articles in the 'Manchester Guardian' and 'Birmingham Post' that competition promoted invention. He disliked state controls or indeed any red tape, and opposed both trade unions and employers' associations. 
Two other activities make him an interesting man in a wider frame. First, he wrote 'The Book of Business' (printed privately in 1899) for the confidential use of his children. This reveals his personal views on business management. Only a flavour of its wisdom can be included here. He wrote that 'the real interest of business... consists, not in money making, but its variety, and the constant call it makes on your courage, your judgement, your energy, or your patience, at uncertain, and unexpected, but very frequent intervals' (Chamberlain, 1). A well-managed business was one that 'can support the unexpected absence of the principal'. His children were advised not to sit on 'addled eggs' (or lame ducks) but to expect 10 or 20 per cent return on capital. 
The second activity was Chamberlain's interest in education and his involvement, with his brother Joseph (though more briefly), in the establishment of the faculty of commerce in the new University of Birmingham. In his 'Book of Business' he recommended that commercial managers should pass the professional examinations in accountancy and master two languages (French and Spanish rather than German, as the Germans controlled no colonies), residing in each country for three months. They should spend six months in a machine shop to learn 'about the British workman, his habits and customs, his strengths and weaknesses, his vices and virtues' as he is 'the most important of all the machines' in the works (Chamberlain, 9, 16). 
For the university, Arthur Chamberlain provided a practical business syllabus for a three-year course which may have influenced the faculty's first dean, William Ashley. He advised Ashley that 'if Tommy goes home and talks about balance sheets, father will think there is something' in the new courses (Chamberlain, 20n.). 
He was himself a fair, strict, paternalist employer, putting wages up to 22's'. a week for male workers in 1903, after the Rowntree inquiry showed that 21's'. 8died was a minimum living wage for a man, wife, and three children. He was one of the first to reduce the working week from sixty to forty-eight hours in 1890, and he gave clerks and foremen fourteen days paid holiday and a pension after ten years' service. 
Chamberlain was a Unitarian like his brother and attended the church of the Messiah in Broad Street, Birmingham. He lived at Moor Green Hall in Moseley in Birmingham, his garden in those days adjoining that of his brother Joseph in Highbury Hall. After three or four years confined to a wheelchair, he died of cancer on 19 October 1913 at Cadhay House, Ottery St Mary, Devon, where he lived during the winter. 


@@@@@


doc= 46815


Chivers, John (1857-1929), jam manufacturer, was born on 27 June 1857 at Histon, near Cambridge, the third son of Stephen Chivers and his wife, Rebecca Frohock, from nearby Waterbeach. The Chivers family, active as farmers and fruit growers at Histon since 1806, had latterly built up a substantial trade in fruit deliveries to outside markets, assisted by the arrival of the railway in 1847. They established a wholesale depot at Bradford in Yorkshire in 1871, supplying the town's markets and local jam manufacturers with fruit. Two years later they began making jam in an unoccupied barn, using the recipe of a relative who was the chef at Pembroke College, Cambridge. A friendly grocer offered to dispose of their entire output. 
John Chivers, after being educated locally and helping out during school holidays, took over the Bradford depot, but in 1875 was recalled to Histon. There he and his elder brother William ran the firm jointly, as their father moved towards retirement. In 1891 John married Emily Ann, daughter of Ephraim Barker Batterson, a farmer; they had four children. By the end of the century, the firm had diversified into jellies, tinned fruit, and custard powders, thus providing employment throughout the year. When William Chivers died prematurely in 1902, John became sole manager. 
Under Chivers's control the firm grew from 1000 employees in 1902 to 3000 in 1929, the output of jams and jellies rising from just under 2800 tons in 1906 to 4600 tons in 1929. With the aid of a research laboratory, he steadily improved the quality of his products. In 1925 he opened a factory in Montrose, Scotland, for canning raspberries. While he paternalistically discouraged trade union activity, he set up a profit-sharing scheme for male employees as early as 1891, later allowing workers to buy shares in Chivers & Sons Ltd. He also provided medical and nursing facilities, a subsidized canteen, and some housing. In common with many progressive firms at that date, in 1918 he formed a workers' committee to meet regularly with management. 
Of modest stature, Chivers had a kindly, moustached face, with clear blue eyes and a fresh, outdoor complexion. An unobtrusive man, he revealed his mental gifts only in conversation, being able to make business problems interesting even to lay people. In his private life he strongly held that health could be improved by the daily consumption of some raw food. His principal interest outside his business lay in religious affairs, and he attended and supported Histon Baptist Church, which his father had founded in 1858; in the wider sphere he was treasurer of the Cambridgeshire Baptist Association, and for a time was on the council of the Baptist Union in London. 
Among Chivers's benefactions, in 1903 he set up the Histon Social Institute and provided a field for the village's football and cricket clubs. He later paid for a building where evening classes were held for local people as well as employees. He was president of the Liberal associations of Histon and Impington, and of the county, and served as a JP. After a long illness, he died at his home, Homefield, Histon, on 15 March 1929. 


@@@@@


doc= 46816


Clark, Alfred Corning (1873-1950), record and electrical goods manufacturer, was born in New York, USA, on 19 December 1873, the elder son of Walter Lowry Clark, a chocolate manufacturer, and his wife, Mary Rowe. His parents' families were both of English extraction and his background was distinctly patrician -- his great-uncle had been a United States senator. Alfred Clark was educated at the Franklin School, Washington, DC, public school number 60 in the Bronx, the College of the City of New York, and later at Cooper Union College in New York. He was absorbed in the study of electricity from an early age, according to his contemporary Fred Gaisberg, and, although a brilliant and popular scholar, decided at the age of sixteen to forgo the completion of his formal education and become engaged in the exploitation of sound recording, an invention then beginning to be marketed commercially. 
In September 1889 Clark joined the North American Phonograph Company of New York, a business marketing both Thomas Edison's phonograph and its rival Bell Tainter graphophone as office dictating machines. By 1894 North American had collapsed because of problems with the technology, poor management, and a major trade depression. However, the experience taught Clark much about business and technology, and he made useful contacts. For a while after, he was employed by Edison at his film studios in West Orange, New Jersey. At this time Edison's film output consisted principally of vaudeville acts and boxing matches. Clark changed all this, writing the first film scenarios, such as 'The Beheading of Mary Queen of Scots', and films of a lynching and of an Indian scalping scene. 
Although Clark became manager of Edison film production and sales, his future did not lie in motion pictures. Already interested in 1896 in the possibilities of the gramophone with its flat disc record, he took the opportunity to work with its inventor, Emile Berliner. He recognized immediately the potential of the gramophone, which by playing discs reproduced from a zinc master made possible the production of many thousands of copies. Clark himself made two valuable improvements to the gramophone. First he devised a governor, which reduced the tremor produced by hand cranking the turntable, and then, with Eldridge R. Johnson, later the inventor of other important gramophone innovations, he developed a much improved reproducing soundbox. Clark described Johnson as a mechanical genius, and the improved soundbox, together with Johnson's other later inventions, proved vital in making the gramophone commercially successful. Clark and Johnson became close associates, in a relationship that laid the basis for their later partition and domination of the worldwide gramophone business, with Clark as head of the Gramophone Company and Johnson of its American counterpart, the Victor Talking Machine Company. 
Clark would have thrown his lot in with the gramophone immediately, but until Johnson's improvements were perfected it was not ready for commercial exploitation. In 1897 he joined Edison United States Phonograph Company of Newark, New Jersey, and in 1898 moved to that company's overseas sales office in New York city. During this period Clark made up for the education he had lost by enrolling for evening classes at New York's Cooper Union School of Art and Science. Clark also watched with interest the attempts of the American William Barry Owen to find backers for the gramophone business he had started in Britain. Prior to Owen's departure for London in 1897, he and Clark had worked together during his time with Berliner, and in 1898 helped him out with a small loan when he pursued his eventual partner Edmund Trevor Lloyd Williams to America in order to convince him of the gramophone's merits. 
In 1899 Clark, together with a sound engineer, Cleveland Walcott, left New York for France as accredited agents for both the Berliner and Edison interests. Unfortunately, the Edison side of the business failed to take off, but, in partnership with Owen and Williams's newly formed Gramophone Company Ltd, Clark formed the Compagnie de Gramophone Francaise, of which he became general manager. Within a very short time Clark had developed a highly successful business -- in 1904 he sold his holding to the Gramophone Company for $23,000 in cash and shares -- creating important catalogues of recorded music by popular and classical artists. Among the great performers Walcott recorded in Clark's Paris studio were the composers Claude Debussy and Edvard Grieg. 
Clark greatly enjoyed his time in France; within six months he had acquired mastery of the language through a disciplined programme of instruction, a sign, according to Fred Gaisberg, of his industry and orderliness of mind. He had been much taken with the stage and performers when the Berliner Company had recorded them in America. Now he became friendly with the composers Jules Massenet and Camille Saint-Saens and many of the great names from the Paris opera. He also indulged his passion for gourmet food. In 1907 Clark became the moving force behind the Musee de la Voix, an institution founded to preserve for posterity the voices of great singers in the archives of the National Opera House, Paris. For this work he was awarded the French Legion d'honneur. Shortly after, following disagreements with the then managing director, he left the employ of the Gramophone Company. 
In 1908, however, Clark came to Britain, where, with Sidney Wentworth Dixon (who stepped down in 1912 to become sales director), he became joint managing director of the Gramophone Company. At that time the company was in financial straits in consequence of poor organizational structures, intense competition, and corruption in Russia, then its largest market. Clark transformed the situation and presided over the company's expansion on a new greenfield site at Hayes, Middlesex. With advice from accountant Colin Cooper and City lawyer John Broad, he set about rebuilding the company along modern business lines. He streamlined the organization and asserted direct control of overseas branches, and, a decade ahead of most other British businesses, he created internal markets, which had the effect of stabilizing profits and identifying cost and profit centres, information he used as an aid to developing investment and other policies. Furthermore, he focused power within the organization away from the board of directors and the selling branches and onto himself. 
By 1914 Clark's reforms were working and the Gramophone Company seemed poised to expand. That summer his latest project, a new light engineering factory on the Hayes site to manufacture clockwork gramophone motors and other metal parts, was due to begin production. However, the unexpected outbreak of the First World War intervened, causing production to be deferred for the duration. The war resulted in the loss of important markets in central Europe and, initially, a collapse of sales at home. Responding to this wholly unexpected crisis, Clark quickly converted the company's Hayes factories to war production. As confidence returned, British record sales and market share grew. However, the war crisis brought into sharp relief growing boardroom tensions between Clark and the Gramophone Company's founding chairman, Trevor Williams, and other Williams family members who between them comprised the board. In 1916, at the height of the war, these directors, whose incomes were almost entirely dependent on Gramophone Company dividends and fees, which had been badly hit by the war, attempted to dismiss Clark and take over the business themselves. Their plan failed, however, as the banks, which had loaned the company large sums to retool for war work, would not permit amateurs such as these to take over such a complex manufacturing business. In a deal brokered by Cooper and Broad, Clark was reinstated and the board reconstructed (with Cooper and Broad becoming directors). Thereafter, with the power of the Williams family broken, Clark became the Gramophone Company's unchallenged master. 
Another consequence of the war was the seizure in 1917 of the Gramophone Company's German and Russian branches, which between them accounted for about one-third of the company's total assets. The German assets, which included rights to the HMV trademark in Germany and various other states, together with record matrices and plant, were sold to competitors by the German state. Although the matrices were returned after the war, the company failed to recover the rest of its assets, despite protracted legal struggles which resulted in a final unsatisfactory financial judgment in 1930. By this time, however, Clark had established Electrola as the company's new German manufacturing and sales organization. It was not until after the Second World War that the company regained rights to use its HMV trademark in Germany. 
From its earliest days the Gramophone Company's business benefited greatly from the licensing and know-how agreements with the American Victor Talking Machine Company, a co-operation that became the cornerstone of Clark's business career. Despite the hostility of the US department of justice which successfully prosecuted Victor for anti-trust violations in 1917, the friendship between Clark and Victor's president, Eldridge R. Johnson, ensured the continuance of the close relationship between the two businesses. In 1920, desperately short of capital to rebuild its business, the Gramophone Company created a large block of new shares which it sold to Victor, making it the largest shareholder, and thus effective controller of the company. Both Clark (whom Johnson saw as his eventual successor at Victor) and Colin Cooper became directors of Victor, while Johnson joined the Gramophone Company's board. 
By the late 1920s the Gramophone Company's hold on the burgeoning market of home entertainment was coming under threat from the development of radio. Clark responded in 1929, when, under pressure from David Sarnoff, president of RCA (which had bought Victor after Johnson's retirement), he acquired the Marconiphone Company, important manufacturers of broadcasting equipment and radios in Britain, joint owners of the MOV valve factory, and part of a valuable cross-industry radio patent pool. This move transformed the company into one of Britain's leading electrical manufacturers. 
In 1930 Clark succeeded Trevor Williams as Gramophone Company chairman. The following year, in the midst of the great depression, he merged the business with Louis Sterling's Columbia Graphophone Company (in the 1920s his chief competitor), to form Electric and Musical Industries Ltd (EMI). Clark had not sought the merger, but had been forced into it by Sarnoff and the American banks which controlled Columbia's shares. Clark, who became EMI's founding chairman, and Sterling, who became managing director, enjoyed poor personal relations. However, for EMI to survive the great depression, they were forced to work together. With sales in free fall, rationalization of the business proved essential. Production was focused on the Hayes factories with wholesale closure of other factories and sales offices. By 1934 the company had turned in its first profit, and two years later, with the introduction of BBC television broadcasts using EMI's own 405 lines system, its investment in television (which had begun in the mid-1920s) began to bear fruit. 
Just before the Second World War a serious board-room rift occurred between Clark and Sterling, at the core of which was Clark's determination that Sterling would not succeed him as chairman. As a consequence of this rift, Sterling left the business. During the war EMI manufactured radar navigation aids and other important defence-related electronics. Clark remained chairman until 1945, and was for a time managing director. On retiring in April 1946 he accepted the honorary position of president. However, six months later, in the wake of a blistering board-room row, he flung his papers across the table and walked out. 
Clark married twice. His first wife, whom he married in London on 17 July 1900, was Florence Beecher ('b'. 1879/80), daughter of George Nellis Crouse, a wholesale grocer; they divorced in 1920. Clark married his second wife, Gertrude Ivy ('b'. 1890/91), daughter of Heydon Sanders, on 21 July 1921; she was a well-known author and former secretary to Lord Northcliffe, who was a close friend of Clark. There were no children from either marriage. Although he became a naturalized British subject in 1928, Clark never achieved the knighthood he coveted and which was bestowed on Sterling. As recreation, Clark collected jade, and was considered a major expert in this field. He was also interested in photography, played tennis, and was a member of the MCC. In business matters Clark was a single-minded man; he had no business interests outside the company he did so much to create. He died at his home, Black Firs, Fulmer, Buckinghamshire, of a cerebral haemorrhage and arteriosclerosis on 16 June 1950. He was survived by his second wife. 
Clark was one of the central figures who pioneered the gramophone record business in Britain, Europe, and the British empire. The first chairman of EMI Ltd, he helped lay the foundations of the British radio, television, and defence-related electronics industries. In his unpublished memoirs Clark surprisingly described his life as 'a drab, plugging career, nothing spectacular, a business of laying one brick upon another'. This was a humble assessment by a man who was probably the most important figure in the development of the recording industry outside the United States. A controversial figure, he was once described by Eldridge Johnson as the most selfish man he had ever known. Writing of Clark on his seventieth birthday, his colleague Fred Gaisberg described him, however, as 'the fine thread running through the very fabric of HMV history' ('Emile Berliner Picks a Winner', 'The Gramophone', December 1943). Whatever the truth, Alfred Clark's single-minded dedication to the businesses he controlled undoubtedly saved them from the depredations of two world wars and the great depression and made EMI one of the most important record companies in the world. 


@@@@@


doc= 46818


Clark, Sir George Smith, first baronet (1861-1935), shipbuilder and politician, was born on 8 November 1861 in Paisley, the second of three children of James Clark (1830-1910), thread manufacturer, and his first wife, Jane, daughter of George Smith, a Glasgow shipowner. His parents were both Scottish. Raised as a Presbyterian, George Clark was educated at Merchiston Castle School, Edinburgh. He then trained in the Belfast shipyard of Harland and Wolff, where he met Frank Workman, who had established a small shipyard on the Lagan in 1877. In 1880 they entered into a partnership. The incentives for Workman were the infusion of new capital and the establishment of an advantageous connection with a prominent shipowning family. This relationship yielded benefits quickly: Clark's uncle, George Smith, furnished many of the initial orders, especially for the larger ships. 
An important step in the firm's growth was taken in 1891, when the partnership became Workman, Clark & Co. Ltd. At this time Charles Allan, a relative of Clark, joined the company. Allan belonged to the Scottish family who owned the Allan Line. His arrival not only created further links with shipowners, but also led, under his directorship, to the establishment of an engineering department to produce engines which previously had been imported. From this point Workman Clark progressed rapidly. By 1902 its yards covered 50 acres. It launched more tonnage that year than any other shipbuilder in the world, a performance repeated in 1909. It pioneered two areas: the development of the turbine engine and the construction of insulated and refrigerated fruit carriers. The firm specialized in medium-sized cargo boats or passenger-cargo combined, establishing useful connections with many of the leading lines in this area, including Alfred Holt & Co. and Ellerman Lines. 
During the First World War the firm concentrated on Admiralty work and in 1917 Clark received a baronetcy for his services. By 1920 the company's workforce had risen to 10,000. Clark contributed significantly to this progress as, until its takeover in 1920 by the Northumberland Shipping Company, the firm remained a private limited company and control lay largely with the Workman and Clark families. It is true that the business was operating in an environment of expanding world trade and, consequently, a growing demand for new tonnage, but Workman Clark fared better than most of its competitors, steadily increasing its share of the world market. Considering the briefer timespan of its operations, the company's success bore comparison with that of Harland and Wolff, and in early 1920 it seemed set to achieve greater expansion. By 1927, though, it was practically bankrupt. Its problems stemmed partly from the emergence in the 1920s of the overcapacity which affected all shipbuilding firms, but it was also the result of a financial operation in February 1920 involving Workman Clark's takeover by the Northumberland Shipping Company. A debenture loan for $3 million was floated, professedly to advance the enterprises of Workman Clark in Belfast. Instead the proceeds were used partly to compensate the former shareholders of Workman Clark, and partly to purchase the shares of other companies which the Northumberland Shipping Company had acquired. Clark initially opposed this move and, together with his son, resigned, though the latter rejoined the board between 1924 and 1927. As a result the firm was saddled with huge debts without receiving the injection of capital that the debenture loan had promised. In 1927 the directors, including Clark, who had all been made very rich by the financial manoeuvres which had taken place seven years earlier, were sued on the grounds that the prospectus they had issued in 1920 was fraudulent. The case progressed to the Northern Ireland Court of Appeal. Effectively the company lost and went into temporary liquidation. It briefly revived as Workman Clark (1928) Ltd, but it could not survive the 1929 world depression, closing in 1935. 
Clark's business interests were not confined to shipbuilding. In 1881, through his marriage to Frances Elisabeth Matier (died 1929), he became a director of Henry Matier & Co., linen manufacturers. He and his wife had two sons. A director of the Bank of Ireland and several shipping companies, he was an active Belfast harbour commissioner. 
Clark was also involved politically. Like many Ulster businessmen he was drawn into politics by the home rule question. In 1907 he became MP for North Belfast, retiring in 1910 to devote more attention to his business affairs. He remained, though, a committed unionist. In 1913 he chaired the committee established in Ulster to smuggle guns, using his shipyard as a cover. With Workman and Allan, he helped to finance the Ulster Volunteer Force. Although the war put the 'national question' on hold, it re-emerged with increased violence in 1919. Murders of members of the security forces by the IRA were followed by reprisals, and in 1920 the employees of Workman Clark were prominent in the expulsion of Catholics from the shipyards and other major factories in the city. In 1925 Clark became a unionist senator in the Northern Ireland parliament. He retained this position until his death at his home, Dunlambert, Fortwilliam Park, Belfast, on 23 March 1935. He was buried on 26 March in Belfast city cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 46819


Clark, William Stephens (1839-1925), shoe manufacturer and retailer, was born on 22 February 1839 at Street in Somerset, the third of fourteen children of James C. Clark (1811-1906), rug and shoe manufacturer of Street, and Eleanor, 'nee' Stephens (1812-1879), of Bridport. He was educated at Sidcot School in Somerset (1848-50), and then at Bootham's School, the Quaker foundation in York, until 1854. 
William joined the family business in 1856 as an apprentice, quickly gaining a good understanding of the trade. Organized as a partnership between his father and his uncle, Cyrus, the company specialized in producing and marketing quality ready-made shoes at a time when much of the industry was still on a bespoke basis. With an output of 234,000 pairs in 1857, produced by a small factory workforce and a large number of outworkers, it was already one of the largest shoe manufacturing concerns in the country. Within a few years, however, poor financial practice put the company in serious difficulties and in 1863 Clark took control, successfully rescuing it and becoming a full partner in 1873. Between 1863 and 1903 Clark guided the fortunes of the C. and J. Clark business, saving it from bankruptcy to become a major company in the shoe industry in a location distant from the main midland centres of production. By 1903, when Clark retired, the company was employing some 1400 workers producing 870,000 pairs with a sales value of $150,000, nearly a fivefold increase in production and a fourfold increase in money values since 1863. 
As a businessman Clark was distinguished by his financial ability, working with others to establish proper accounting procedures. He established a separate company, Clark, Morland & Son Ltd, for the remaining rug making business in 1870, under the direction of John Morland, the husband of his sister Mary. In 1877 he also created the Avalon Leather Board Company. Clark oversaw the gradual mechanization of shoe production in the main firm, starting with stitching and riveting, and leading to the almost complete elimination of outwork in favour of factory production at the start of the new century. In marketing terms he saw the continued advantage of an insistence on quality, durability, and solidity, and aimed to sell shoes to the more expensive end of the home market. 
Foreign competition became fiercer towards the end of the nineteenth century and Clark, despite earlier misgivings, encouraged a proliferation of the product range as a strategy to defend market share. This policy was largely successful, although there were long-term disadvantages, and it allowed the company a production share of just under one per cent of British output -- a respectable size in a notoriously fragmented industry. In the light of problems created by his own father's and uncle's increasing rigidity in business he perhaps made a timely decision to relinquish control in favour of his son, John Bright Clark (1867-1933), and to see the company acquire limited liability status. 
Clark came from a strong Quaker family, and his connections helped him at a number of points in his career. In 1866 he married Helen Priestman Bright (1840-1927), the daughter of John Bright; they had two sons and four daughters, including Alice Clark (1874-1934), and Hilda Clark (1881-1955). His religious views led him to emphasize his direct social responsibilities to his workforce as an employer, and his indirect ones as a leading figure in the local community and county government. He encouraged home ownership among his workers and various local improvements including a library, and Crispin Hall for the local inhabitants to meet in. Such paternalism also had an economic benefit in a low-wage area where production was sometimes threatened by labour turnover and out-migration. However, he opposed trade union recognition for his workers during the period that he was in charge of the firm. 
In politics Clark was a Liberal. Although he refused to stand for parliament, he and his wife supported Josephine Butler in her campaign against the 'Contagious Diseases Acts', and later they worked for women's suffrage. He was continuously active in local government from 1878 to 1922 as a leading councillor, alderman, and magistrate; he was also an important figure in the west of England temperance movement. As a Quaker he had a special interest in education, and became chairman of the central education committee of the Society of Friends. Clark died of a heart attack at his home, Millfield, Street, on 20 November 1925, and was buried at the burial-ground of the Friends' meeting-house in Street three days later. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 46820


Clayton, Nathaniel (1811-1890), engineer and manufacturer of steam engines, was born on 25 August 1811 at Lincoln, the second son of Nathaniel Clayton (died 1827), of Lincoln. His father was the proprietor of a horse-drawn packet boat that plied the River Witham between Boston and Lincoln. Clayton junior went to work at the Butterley ironworks in Derbyshire, but after his father died in 1827 he returned to Lincoln to be packet captain for his mother, who continued with the business. A few years later he bought the steam packet 'Celerity' on his own account. 
Clayton had not lost touch with the world of engineering, one of his contacts being William Howden, of Boston, who was one of the pioneers in the manufacture of portable steam engines. Clayton started a small iron foundry in Lincoln, next to the boat-building yard of Shuttleworth and Godwin, in which his brother-in-law, Joseph Shuttleworth, was a partner. In 1842 Shuttleworth formed a partnership with Clayton as Clayton, Shuttleworth & Co., and they established the Stamp End foundry, Lincoln. At first they undertook small contracts, making pipes, bridges, and railway equipment. The firm's first portable steam engine was made in 1845, and further ones were made in the following few years. Shortage of capital hampered development, causing Clayton and Shuttleworth to seek extra support. Coupland, Keyworth, and Seely, millers and leaders of Lincoln's business establishment at this time, became sleeping partners. Seely, the last of these, was finally bought out in 1869. 
The Great Exhibition of 1851 helped to establish the firm's national reputation as the leading British manufacturer of portable steam engines and threshing machines: Clayton and Shuttleworth showed a 6 horsepower portable engine, a threshing machine, and a grinding mill. Their output of steam engines that year exceeded 100. By 1854, when the Royal Agricultural Society of England show was held in Lincoln, the company employed 520 men and 80 boys. Exports were already becoming a major part of the firm's trade, principally to central and eastern Europe. One branch establishment was opened in Vienna in 1857, and others followed at Pest, Prague, Cracow, and Lemberg (Lwow). In later years exports to South America also became important. More than two-thirds of the products were commonly exported every year. By 1890 the firm had made about 26,000 steam engines in total. Most were portable, in which market Clayton, Shuttleworth & Co. had an unassailable lead, but the firm's traction engines and fixed steam engines also had a good reputation. The manufacture of threshing machines was on a similar scale: about 24,000 had been made by 1890. 
In 1837 Clayton married Hannah Shortcliffe, and they had three daughters, one of whom married Alfred Shuttleworth, the son of his partner. Clayton served on Lincoln city council and was mayor of the city for the year 1856-7. He served as a magistrate there, and later also for the county. He was a deputy lieutenant, and in 1881 he was high sheriff for the county. In 1884 he was asked to stand as Liberal candidate in a parliamentary by-election, but he declined on grounds of ill health and age. The seat was won instead by Joseph Ruston (1835-1897). Clayton was a great supporter of the improvements to the city of Lincoln, especially in education, health, and sanitation. He did this partly through his position on the council, but also through philanthropy, of which one of the most important examples was his provision for the rebuilding of Lincoln County Hospital between 1876 and 1878. 
In 1875 Clayton bought the Withcall estate, near Louth. His main residence in Lincoln was Eastcliffe House, built in 1877, but he had another house on the Isle of Wight. He was a member of the Royal Yacht Squadron, and also served as a volunteer lieutenant in the 2nd company, Lincoln rifle corps. Clayton died from heart disease, at the church of St Peter in Eastgate, Lincoln, on 21 December 1890. 


@@@@@


doc= 46822


Clutton, John (1809-1896), surveyor, was born at Hartswood, Reigate, Surrey, the third of the four sons and six daughters of William Clutton (1745/6-1839) of Hartswood and his second wife. 
John Clutton's grandfather, also William Clutton (1740-1826), was the third son of Ralph Clutton (1695-1761), vicar of Horsted Keynes, Sussex. This grandfather married Sarah, only surviving child of Robert Chatfield (1698-1780), of Cuckfield, Sussex, surveyor, and later took over his father-in-law's practice, which included the agency for the Sussex estates of Henry Smith's Charity. This business was conducted from William Clutton's home, the Jacobean house Ockenden, Cuckfield, which he leased from the Burrell family, one of the trustees of the charity; in the next generation it was moved to Hartswood, an estate of several hundred acres purchased by John Clutton's father. 
John Clutton was educated at Cuckfield grammar school, of which he remarked in later life 'at this place I learnt little good' (Clutton, 3); it was intended that he should be articled to a solicitor but in 1826 he was called home to join his father's firm, whose affairs had fallen into confusion. His elder brother Robert (1801-1877), who had been formally articled to a surveyor in Maidenhead, was called back at the same time; he sorted out the muddled accounts, put the practice back on its feet, and remained in charge of the original family business for the rest of his life. John's next brother, Ralph (1804-1886), became vicar of Saffron Walden, Essex; his younger brother, Henry (1814-1895), was articled to the architect Decimus Burton, but his tastes were more agricultural than architectural and about 1856 he gave up his architecture in order to join John's independent surveying business. 
In 1837 John Clutton married Elizabeth, daughter of George Spencer Smith, and moved to London to set up in practice on his own account. The move was helped by the legacy of $3000 which he received on his father's death, but it was prompted, and indeed necessitated, by the sudden growth of a large volume of surveying business negotiating land purchases for railway construction, business in which a location close to parliament where railway bills were determined was most desirable. His introduction to railway land purchasing came from the South Eastern Railway, whose line originally started from Reigate; eventually he was responsible, as chief land agent, for acquiring all the land and house property for the entire 120 miles of its route. Similar work for the London, Brighton, and South Coast Railway, which also passed through Reigate, followed, but by this time he and his wife had set up house in Parliament Street, London, which also served as his office. By the late 1830s his reputation as a skilful valuer, negotiator, and arbitrator in railway business was growing. He acted for other companies, notably the Eastern Counties Railway, and in 1845 was a key expert witness before the select committee of the House of Lords on compensation for lands taken by railways, from which stemmed the important procedural legislation of the 'Land Clauses Consolidation Act' and the 'Railway Clauses Consolidation Act' in 1845. 
Two strokes of good fortune enabled Clutton to diversify. In 1845 he became agent for the Kensington estate of Henry Smith's Charity on the death of the architect George Basevi, who had been the surveyor appointed to lay out that estate for building development (the agency of the country estate remaining with Robert and the Reigate office). Two years earlier Decimus Burton had introduced him to Charles Knight Murray, secretary to the newly established ecclesiastical commissioners, who commissioned Clutton to handle the first case under the 'Ecclesiastical Leases Act' of 1842 of a proposal to grant a building lease of church land. From this followed, in 1845, the commission to conduct a survey, valuation, and report on all the lands and properties of the ecclesiastical commissioners in the southern half of England and Wales. When completed over the next decade this survey formed the first systematic and comprehensive description and account of church lands since the interregnum. It also made Clutton the obvious choice as regular agent for the southern estates of the church, an agency retained by the firm into the 1990s. The work quickly assumed a gigantic character, so that Clutton took on a staff of assistants (one of them Edward James Smith, who later became principal agent for the northern estates of the ecclesiastical commissioners, and president of the Institution of Surveyors, 1876-8) and clerks. His greatly enlarged office moved from Parliament Street to 8 Whitehall Place. The new premises, to which the adjoining no. 9 was soon added, for a time served as the family home as well, but in 1859 the family took a house in fashionable Bayswater, at 3 Sussex Square. Clutton found the daily walk to the office and back very good for his health, while saying that the house 'is rather too expensive, for it is not probable that I shall have such continued success' (Clutton, 5). 
The 'continued success' referred to the addition of crown estate business to that of the ecclesiastical commissioners. Clutton seems to have owed his connection with the crown estate to the influence of James White Higgins, with whom he had formed a close friendship when they were both engaged in land purchase negotiations for the South Eastern Railway. Higgins introduced Clutton to Alexander Milne, second commissioner of woods and forests, in 1848 when a select committee on woods, forests, and the land revenues of the crown was being set up. Clutton was at once commissioned to report on the condition of New Forest and the Forest of Dean, and gave evidence to the select committee. His grasp of the intricacies of rights and encroachments in royal forests, and of the business of woodland management, was impressive. In 1850 he was appointed crown receiver (agent) for Surrey, and this extended the following year to the receivership for all the midland and southern English counties, to which Norfolk and Suffolk were later added. Clutton thus became the reigning woodland expert of the day, with the agency for 47,000 acres of crown lands which he held until 1889; his last public act was to give evidence to the 1890 select committee on woods, forests, and land revenues of the crown. On his advice the disafforestations of Hainault (1852), Whittlewood (1856), and Wychwood (1857) were carried out, policies which were strongly criticized with the hindsight of the 1880s and 1890s for creating unwanted extra agricultural acreage at great expense, although at the time grubbing up neglected and mismanaged woodland seemed the best course. 
Coupled with some large commissions for acquiring land for camp sites and training areas for the War Office, Clutton's career was thus largely in the public service, although he was always remunerated by percentage commissions and never became a salaried civil servant. He kept some private clients and these became relatively more important to the firm of Cluttons, as it was styled from the 1850s, after his retirement. With an income approaching $20,000 a year by the early 1870s John Clutton was a wealthy man, at the head of his profession in wealth as well as in reputation. He became a member of the Royal Agricultural Society in 1838, was elected to the exclusive Land Surveyors' Club in 1839, and was recruited as an associate of the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1848. In March 1868 he took the lead in arranging a meeting of influential surveyors at the Westminster Palace Hotel, favourite rendezvous of railway valuers and arbitrators, which led to the foundation of the Institution of Surveyors, of which he was elected first president. 
Clutton recorded little about his wife beyond writing that 'my marriage has been one of unvaried good, and my good wife is a pattern to all women' (Clutton, 5). He was wealthy enough to send all his four sons to Harrow. The youngest, Hubert (1850-1905), became a solicitor, while the other three entered the firm. The eldest, Robert George (1839-1907), more or less gave up going to the office after his father died, and retired to the south of France, but the other two, Ralph (1843-1912) and John Henry (1844-1927), were competent and diligent surveyors who maintained the family business as one of the leading firms in the country. John Henry, who was in charge of the country estates of both church and crown, unfortunately fell out with the Liberal president of the Board of Agriculture and Fisheries, Lord Carrington, in 1906, by telling him to his face that he had a misguided enthusiasm for smallholdings. As a result the crown receivership for the southern agricultural estates was taken away from Cluttons and given to Carter Jonas, Lord Carrington's own agent. Later one of John Clutton's grandsons, Brian Clutton (1884-1938), more than made amends by securing the firm's appointment as surveyors for the crown's London estates in 1927. John Clutton's only daughter, Katherine, also helped to sustain the continuity of the family firm, as her grandson Bernard Marr-Johnson (1871-1945), was articled to Cluttons in 1892 and became a partner in 1901, to be followed into the firm in turn by his own son, Kenneth Marr-Johnson. In the 1990s several of Clutton's direct descendants were partners in the firm, including two of his great-grandsons. 
Clutton was an unassuming, unpretentious, but firm-willed man. Lacking in eloquence himself, and neither speaking nor writing with fluency or ease, he paid scant attention to the rhetoric of expert witnesses or counsel when acting in arbitration cases. He disliked the atmosphere of parliamentary committee rooms, where he frequently appeared, because of the dominance of rhetoric over reason, and sometimes showed his impatience. The story runs that on one occasion in cross-examination (although this cannot be traced in any of the printed proceedings of the select committees to which he gave evidence) he was asked: 'Are you infallible, Mr Clutton? Do you never make mistakes?' 'Oh yes,' he replied, 'more than most men.' And, after a pause, 'but then, I do more business than most men' (Rogers, 495). 'What he did possess, and that to an extraordinary degree, was the solid practical business faculty, in union with a calm temperament, great sobriety of judgment, a firm will, and a large amount of natural caution; these were the principal qualities which he brought to the building up of his vast business. (Rogers, 495)' Clutton told the 1845 select committee on compensation for lands taken by railways: 'I do not know of any process by which you can prevent a rich man taking advantage of his position' ('Select committee... public railways', 124-7). He himself took little advantage of his own position as a rich man until he was into his sixties, when he eased up on work and took to renting some of the best shooting in Scotland, and at other times sporting seats and large residential houses in England, notably Tyringham House, Newport Pagnell. He acquired a farm at Flanchford, on the River Mole near Reigate, and was at his happiest in these rural surroundings walking over his land and going round his farm buildings. He died there, at his home, Woodhatch House, on 1 March 1896. 


@@@@@


doc= 46823


Charlotte Nasmyth (1804-1884) was born on 17 February 1804 in York Place, St Andrew's parish, Edinburgh. Apart from her portrait by Andrew Geddes and the titles of her works, there is little trace of her life. A letter home from her brother Patrick records that she first went to London in 1816 with Margaret and Barbara to visit the exhibitions and the theatre and to see the shops and Napoleon's carriage. Of all the sisters her style is the most recognizable: wilder, more rugged and flamboyant, and less picturesque. Sometimes her work is close to that of her father, for example in 'Highland Pass' (repro. in Johnson and Money), but she developed her own unique style, and worked with a greater freedom and panache than her sisters. Her colouring is natural. She loved painting whitish gnarled tree trunks with an array of broken branches and large-leaved foreground plants, and she depicted wide open spaces without framing trees to either side. She was skilled at figures, animals, and boats, and she painted glorious windy skies. Her own personality comes through in 'Hampstead Heath' and 'Musselburgh' (both repro. in Johnson and Money). Her exhibited work shows that she also travelled afield, painting views in Cumberland, the Lake District, Yorkshire, north Wales, Essex, and Surrey, and she painted one foreign view, 'The Bay of Naples' (exh. Royal Manchester Institution, 1848). She painted a wide variety of subjects including cottages and castles, mountain views and landscapes that appealed to her. She signed her work 'Charlotte Nasmyth' or 'C Nasmyth' with the date in a tidy copperplate hand. She died on 26 July 1884 at Wood Hall, Putney, Surrey, and was buried in the family plot in Putney Lower Common cemetery. 
Their wills indicate that the Nasmyth girls lived comfortably. A few exhibition catalogues from the 1850s which include prices record that most of the sisters received 8 or 10 guineas for their pictures. This would have given them ample income. They were also provided for by their father in his will, dated 1839. James Nasmyth amassed a large fortune and by 1856 had made his unmarried sisters completely independent. As part of a closely knit artistic family, the Nasmyth daughters were a gifted group of women artists. Though they lived, worked, exhibited, and prospered in England, they continued to draw inspiration from their Scottish origins and the landscape of Scotland. 


@@@@@


doc= 46826


Stevenson, Flora Clift (1839-1905), philanthropist and educationist, was born at West George Street, Glasgow, on 30 October 1839, the youngest of the numerous children of James Stevenson (1786-1866), a managing partner of the Jarrow Chemical Company, and his wife, Jane Stewart Shannan. The architect John James Stevenson was her brother. With her three unmarried sisters she spent most of her adult life at 13 Randolph Crescent, Edinburgh, where their father set up house on his retirement from business. 
While her elder sister Louisa Stevenson was best-known for her work in promoting women's higher education, Flora Stevenson's main work was in the field of social reform and local government. She was educated at a private school and while still a young girl she undertook her first philanthropic work when she started a class in her home for messenger girls, drilling them in the three Rs. Her public work dated from 1868, when she joined the Edinburgh Association for Improving the Condition of the Poor (which later became the Edinburgh Charity Organization Society). She was active as a district visitor for the society, investigating the circumstances of claimants for charity and distributing tickets for provisions to the deserving needy. She was also a member of the committee of the United Industrial Schools of Edinburgh, a voluntary body which organized ragged schools for neglected children. With her sisters she was among the founder members of the Edinburgh Ladies' Educational Association, and was among the first class of 265 women to enrol in David Masson's first lecture course in 1868. 
In 1873 Flora Stevenson and Phoebe Blyth were elected members of the first Edinburgh school board. Created under the 1872 'Education (Scotland) Act', the school boards were the first public bodies in Scotland to be opened to women. She remained on the board until her death. As a result of her experience with ragged schools she was immediately placed on the destitute children's committee, where she was particularly responsible for a charitable scheme which offered food and clothing to destitute children on condition that they regularly attended school. In 1876 she became convener of the school attendance committee -- her grand manner, enhanced by the careful attention she always paid to her attire, overawing 'defaulting parents' who failed to send their children to school. In this capacity she gave evidence to the select committee on education in Scotland (1887), drawing attention to the insufficient powers which existed to compel neglected children to attend school. She urged the foundation of day industrial schools for truants and juvenile delinquents. Chiefly through her efforts the Edinburgh board erected a day industrial school at St John's Hill, Edinburgh, the first school of its kind in Scotland under the management of a school board. She also helped bring about the passing of the 'Day Industrial Schools Act' of 1893. Her expertise in these fields was recognized when she was appointed in 1894 a member of the Scottish Office departmental committee on habitual offenders and juvenile delinquents. In 1898 she was appointed a member of the committee set up to advise the Scottish Office on reformatories for inebriates. 
In contemporary educational debates Flora Stevenson insisted that girls should be able to compete on equal terms with boys. Although one of the promoters of the Edinburgh School of Cookery and Domestic Economy, she criticized the practice whereby girls in board schools had five hours' a week less teaching than boys to enable them to spend time on needlework. Her enthusiasm for teaching domestic economy to girls was more qualified than some of her contemporaries, and she debated the subject with the school's founder, Christian Guthrie Wright, who believed it was 'natural' that girls should be taught to cook, knit, and sew. Arguing that boys should also be trained in household management, she commented, 'By all means let the girls of this generation be trained to be good 'housemothers' but let it not be forgotten that the well being of the family depends equally on the 'housefather'' ('The Scotsman', 28 Sept 1876). On the school board itself she advocated equal pay for unmarried women teachers, and when she appeared before the educational endowments (Scotland) commission in 1883 she urged the opening of endowments to enable girls from board schools to compete for them. She subsequently represented the board on the Edinburgh Educational Trust and as a governor of George Heriot's Trust. 
Like her sisters, Flora Stevenson was active in the women's suffrage movement. Her own politics were Liberal Unionist after the Irish home-rule split in 1886 (her eldest brother, James Cochran Stevenson, a Liberal MP, was a supporter of Irish home rule), serving as a vice-president of the Women's Liberal Unionist Association. She was also a vice-president of the Women's Free Trade Union, founded during the early-twentieth-century debates on tariff reform. She opposed state-provided welfare, attacking proposals to place a duty on school boards to provide free school meals paid for out of the rates, which she viewed as undermining the responsibilities of parents. Instead, she wanted charities to co-ordinate their efforts to support needy children by investigating family circumstances and co-operating with the school authorities. She believed that enforced attendance at school was crucial to improving the condition of deprived children in large cities. 
In 1900 Flora Stevenson was unanimously elected chair of the Edinburgh school board. In the previous year the board's new school at Comely Bank was named the Flora Stevenson School in her honour. Edinburgh University awarded her the honorary degree of LLD in 1903. In May 1905 she received the freedom of Edinburgh in recognition of her services to the philanthropic and benevolent institutions of the city, as well as her work on the school board. She accepted the honour as acknowledgement 'that there is administrative work on public boards which can be, and is, fittingly and successfully carried on by hundreds of women in all parts of the kingdom' ('Englishwoman's Review', 15 July 1905, 201-2). Flora Clift Stevenson died at the Marine Hotel, St Andrews, on 28 September 1905, and was buried in the Dean cemetery, Edinburgh, on 30 September. Between two and three thousand children from the public schools to which she had devoted so much of her life lined the route of her funeral. 


@@@@@


doc= 46828


Lamont, Sir James, first baronet (1828-1913), Arctic yachtsman, was born at Knockdow on 28 April 1828, the only son of Lieutenant-Colonel Alexander Lamont (1784-1861) of Knockdow, Toward, Argyll, and his wife, Jane (1793/4-1880), daughter of Alexander Chrystie of Balchrystie, Fife. He was proud that his family was the senior cadet branch of the clan Lamont and was later president of the Clan Lamont Society. He was educated at Rugby School and the Edinburgh military academy. In 1846 he became ensign and second lieutenant in the 91st Argyllshire regiment of foot serving at the Cape of Good Hope, but resigned in 1849 when his uncle left him a fortune. He then gave his time to managing his Scottish and West Indian estates and to travelling, mainly in the Arctic; between his travels he lived in London. 
Lamont took his Board of Trade certificate as master to enable him to command his own ship. In 1858 he took the yacht 'Ginevra', 142 tons, to Svalbard, Edge Island (where he had to winter), Kelihau Bay, and Kalvpunter -- all poorly charted. There he caught seals, walrus, and grouse. In 1859 he chartered the walrus hunter 'Anna Louisa' for a sporting voyage to Edge Island, Bell Sound, Ice Fjord, Green Harbour, Thousand Islands, and Hope Island. In 1862 he went to Nova Scotia and Labrador. He also went on pleasure and sporting trips to the Mediterranean (in 1863-4) and to South Africa. In 1869 Lamont took the 'Diana', 179/230 tons, to Novaya Zemlya, Matochkin Shar, the Kara Sea, the west of Svalbard, the east coast of Spitsbergen, Fairhaven, and Bell Sound, charting a reef. The next season he took the 'Diana' to Kolguyev, Novaya Zemlya, Vaigach Island, Matochkin Shar, and Jan Mayen. In 1871 he went to Edge Island, Barents Island, Cape Mitra Smeerenburg and Prince Charles Foreland, and to lat. 80 degree 50' N, long. 17 degree E. He sailed thousands of miles in Arctic waters, recording his voyages in 'Seasons with the Sea-Horse' (1861) and 'Yachting in the Arctic Seas' (1876), both of which contain information about land and marine natural history and about navigation, tides, currents, and meteorology. They also contain maps and views by an artist taken by Lamont to record the landscapes. Two of the views have long remained in the 'Arctic Pilot', published by the hydrographic office to help pilots recognize the coast. 
Lamont was a fellow of the Royal Geographical Society, from 1861 until 1887 when he resigned because he was out of sympathy with it, and of the Geological Society. After unsuccessfully contesting Paisley as a Liberal in 1857, he was Liberal MP for Buteshire in 1865-8. He favoured reducing property qualifications for voters and the relief of dissenters from all tests and disabilities. In 1868 he married Adelaide Eliza (died 1925), second daughter of Sir George William Denys, second baronet, and they had two sons (one of whom died young) and a daughter. He was created baronet on 16 July 1910. As well as his travel books he published 'A Lecture on the Civil War in America' (1864) and wrote for the 'Scottish Field' on natural history and country life. After a year bedridden he died at Knockdow on 29 July 1913. He was survived by his widow and was succeeded by his son Norman (1869-1949), who was Liberal MP for Buteshire (1905-10), and a member of the Legislative Council of Trinidad (1915-23). His attractively written books brought knowledge of the Arctic to a wide audience. 


@@@@@


doc= 46829


Augusta, princess of Wales (1719-1772), consort of Frederick Lewis, prince of Wales, was born in Gotha, capital of the German principality of Saxe-Gotha, in Thuringia, on 19 November 1719 OS, the fourth (but second surviving) daughter and thirteenth child of Friedrich II, duke of Saxe-Gotha (1676-1732), and his wife, Magdalena Augusta (1679-1740), daughter of Karl Wilhelm, prince of Anhalt-Zerbst. 
Augusta was brought up alongside her younger siblings in Gotha. Following the death of her father in 1732, she moved with her mother to a country house outside the ducal capital. Her elder sister Friederike married her kinsman Johann Adolf, duke of Saxe-Weissenfels, in 1734, and few would have rated Augusta's prospects any higher, coming as she did from a backwater German court. 
Augusta's circumstances changed in 1735 when she was summoned to meet George II of Great Britain, who was passing the summer in his electorate of Hanover. George was under pressure from his eldest son, Frederick Lewis, prince of Wales (1707-1751), and Frederick's advocates in the parliamentary opposition, to find a bride for the prince. After interviewing Augusta he was so impressed by her deference to him, her affability, her apparent good sense and innocence that he quickly decided she was the perfect match for his contentious son. Her mother and her brother Friedrich III readily approved the marriage. The dowager duchess was so unaware of the world outside Saxe-Gotha that she imagined that two decades of Hanoverian monarchs had compelled most of the British court to learn German, and decided that there was no reason for Augusta to study English. 
Ill-prepared for her new role, Augusta arrived in Britain on 25 April 1736, and was introduced to Frederick at Greenwich the next day. At their first meeting Augusta pledged total deference to the prince and his wishes, promising only to ask one favour from him -- that her governess, whom George II had forbidden to come to Britain, be permitted to join her. Frederick granted the request, and delighted in contrasting his generosity with his father's mean-spirited behaviour. Augusta's decision to share the prince's priorities and be visibly obedient to her husband -- so that anyone could see he was no George dominated by a Caroline -- made her an ideal consort. 
Augusta met George II, and for the first time Caroline, on 27 April 1736, and married Frederick that evening at St James's. Her obvious lack of preparation for life at the royal court, and her inability to communicate with those around her, won her widespread sympathy, including from Caroline, who translated the wedding service for her and prompted her when she had to repeat her vows. Private letters and newspaper paragraphs were full of praise for her conduct. Soon afterwards correspondents to London papers were applauding her graciously condescending behaviour to Londoners she met while travelling around the capital with Frederick to plays, fairs, parades, and banquets. 
Augusta presented herself to the king and queen as a well-meaning naif who should be pitied, not censured, for falling under Frederick's sway. No one at court was allowed to see beneath her air of innocence. Some mistakenly tried to take advantage of it. Sir Robert Walpole told Caroline that he could see 'no way of keeping the Prince within any tolerable bounds but by the Princess' (Hervey, 2.121) and advised that she be carefully and patiently cultivated. Outside St James's, Augusta's popularity was increased by her rapid mastery of colloquial and formal English. By 1738, when Frederick was praising the spirit and practice of commerce to much applause at a Bristol banquet, Augusta was able to 'talk freely to the Ladies in good English, which entirely won their Hearts' ('GM', 1st ser., 8, 1738, 603). 
Augusta's relationship with the king and queen was threatened by the political breach between Frederick and his parents over George II's refusal to double his subsidy to the $100,000 p.a. George II had enjoyed while a married prince of Wales. She remained on good terms with them by claiming plausibly -- if highly improbably -- that she had no idea of the divisions in the family. The argument occurred during her first pregnancy, and both reached crisis point at the same time. The prince and princess were at Hampton Court when Augusta suddenly went into labour on 31 July 1737. Determined that their first child would not be born under his parents' roof and would also be a Londoner by birth, Frederick thrust his wife into a coach, and raced over rough roads to St James's. No one had prepared for a royal birth there. It was nearly miraculous that Augusta and her daughter, also Augusta, survived. Enraged, George II expelled Frederick and his family from the royal residences, barred him from court, and informed the world that appearing at the prince's levees would close doors at St James's. Augusta now became one of Frederick's principal assets in the contest for popularity. She received Caroline, who was treated with ostentatious dignity when she visited her, while George II's acts were painted by Frederick as a cruel overreaction that punished a blameless mother and baby. 
In their own households at last, Augusta and Frederick settled into a domestic routine at Carlton House in London, Cliveden in Buckinghamshire, and Kew in Surrey, that they followed until the prince's death in 1751. During those fourteen years they had eight more children. Only two of the births were difficult. The future George III was born two or three weeks prematurely on 24 May 1738; his survival was so despaired of that he was privately baptized the same day. Augusta's sixth child, Louisa, was delivered stillborn on 8 May 1748. Her portraits during this period invariably present her surrounded by her children. 
That was no accident. The Waleses carefully staged these sittings to portray themselves in perfect domesticity, a striking contrast to a widowed monarch who was publicly depicted as keeping a mistress at the nation's expense and travelled to Hanover whenever he could manage it. Augusta's popular image was that of the good mother and supportive wife. She never missed an opportunity to burnish it. Thus she was careful to make public her encounter with a Scottish noblewoman who brought her young children with her to plead with the princess for her husband's life after the Jacobite rising in 1745. After listening, 'with tenderness and politeness', to the countess of Cromarty, Augusta left the room briefly, then returned with her own children. ''See, Madam,' she remarked, 'what your Lord was trying to do -- to rob these innocents of their birthright.'... 'If he had succeeded..., what kind of treatment could their father expect at your hands?'' ('Morning Chronicle and London Advertiser', 28 Feb 1772). Her point made, the princess mercifully helped spare Cromarty's life. The story was published at her death, but almost certainly circulated earlier. 
The political usefulness of such vignettes is obvious. Part of their impact stemmed from their basis in observable fact. Frederick and Augusta did try to be solicitous parents who supervised their children's activities and educations closely. Only one note of mild concern was sounded about the Waleses' relationship with their children. Witnesses to the family's life agreed that Edward Augustus (1739-1767), their second son, was his parents' favourite, and that George was stringently criticized and corrected. It went unremarked that this may have been the act of concerned parents who were aware that their less promising child had to be carefully prepared to rule Britain. 
Augusta used her public appearances between 1737 and 1751 to assert her attachment to all things British. The most obvious, and easiest, way of accomplishing this was her clothing. People high and low paid close attention to royal fashion, and Augusta always appeared in domestic fabrics. At the celebration of the king's birthday in 1749, 'the Prince and Princess of Wales were observed, with great pleasure, by the lovers of their country, to be richly dressed in our own manufacture' ('GM', 1st ser., 19, 1749, 519), as was Augusta's established custom. During the next year the Waleses went beyond mere fashion statements. With their two eldest children, they visited weavers in Spitalfields and wool-combers in Cirencester, expressing admiration for their products and promising to encourage their sale. The contrast with the king's court, where French suits and dresses were the rage, could hardly have been greater. Frederick and Augusta underlined it even more by forbidding the wearing of ''French' stuffs' in their presence ('GM', 1st ser., 18, 1748, 521). 
Frederick was active politically throughout the 1740s. Following the fall of Walpole, in which he had a share, in 1742, he was tugged in opposite directions by his two most prominent supporters, John Perceval, second earl of Egmont, and George Dodington. The diaries and memoranda of Egmont and Dodington reveal that Augusta was fully informed about Frederick's activities and plans. Each man tried to recruit her to his tactics and strategy; both used her on occasion as a go-between in discussions with Frederick. The behaviour of Egmont and Dodington reveals that they shared Walpole's opinion, that the best chance of influencing Frederick was to approach him via his wife. They did not realize that, in her role as sympathetic listener and friendly intercessor, she boosted their morale and encouraged their ambitions, thereby helping keep them attached to their always mercurial and often indecisive leader. 
George II also guessed that Augusta had achieved considerable sway over her husband and, like Frederick's political friends, sought to use her influence. In February 1742, the king took the extraordinary step of meeting privately with his daughter-in-law to ask a favour. Wishing to spare Walpole a parliamentary inquiry into his handling of secret service funds, he told Augusta that the recent removal of his longtime servant from office should be sufficient victory for the opposition, and requested her aid in persuading Frederick to oppose any investigation. She respectfully declined acting as George's advocate, while promising to convey his appeal to the prince. Unappeased, Frederick continued to press for an inquiry. Nevertheless, the king approved of the princess's 'most decent & and prudent behaviour' on this and other occasions, and 'notwithstanding his aversion to his Son, behaved to her not only with great Politeness, but with the appearance of cordiality and Affection' ('Memoirs and Speeches of... Waldegrave', 162). Her skill at winning and retaining George II's affection stood her in good stead between 1751 and 1756. 
Frederick suddenly and unexpectedly died on 20 March 1751. Mastering her shock, Augusta immediately sent for Egmont and ordered him to bring compromising political papers from Carlton House to her. When he did, she burnt documents in Frederick's handwriting. With this act the princess destroyed any evidence of her past participation in opposition politics, and unmistakably signalled her own determination to steer clear of any involvement in them in the future. When rumours about Egmont's errand immediately spread in political circles, she even hinted that the earl had been principally concerned to protect himself. She drove her point home further by refusing to see him publicly or privately. 
At the same time as Augusta cut herself off from opposition politics, she threw herself on the mercy of the king. He obliged by telling the new heir apparent that his mother was 'the best of women'. Then he 'embraced the Princess, desired nobody might come between him and her, and [said] he would do everything for her' (Newman, 207). Augusta enjoyed the annual income of $50,000, guaranteed by parliament in 1737, unmolested, and true to his promise George II vigorously supported legislation to make Augusta regent in the event of his death before her eldest son was eighteen. He also allowed the young prince and his brother Edward to continue living within her household. 
These were considerable and crucial victories for the princess dowager of Wales. They did not, however, make her feel perfectly secure about the future. The 'Regency Act' of 1751 denied the most important prerogatives of a reigning monarch to Augusta. It established an advisory council, and forbade her from making any major decisions without this body's consent. Most notably, the princess dowager could not dissolve parliament or declare war without its approval. 
Had Augusta been permitted to appoint some of Frederick's political allies to the council, its existence would have been comforting to her, but George II and his ministers would not agree to that, nor would they let her suggest candidates or argue against those she did not want. Predictably no friends of her late husband were named in the 'Regency Act' as members of the council. Particularly ominous to her was the presence on it of the man she and Frederick had regarded as his greatest enemy, his brother William, duke of Cumberland, who represented to Augusta the threat of military dictatorship, and had consistently opposed Frederick's allies inside and outside parliament. It was easy for Augusta to believe that, if her brother-in-law could manage it, he would take advantage of a regency to usurp the throne. 
The goals of Augusta's politics from 1751 until George came of age in 1756 were to diminish Cumberland's power at Whitehall and Westminster and to prevent her son from falling under his control. To hope to achieve this, she had to keep the young prince of Wales in her household. Equally crucial to her design was raising her son to be what her husband had aimed at being, the patriotic monarch described in Viscount Bolingbroke's 1749 book, 'Idea of a Patriot King'. Convinced that only she would train him to be sufficiently moral to achieve that ideal, she had to anticipate and prevent any attempts to move him to St James's. 
Augusta had to hide her contempt for what she felt was George II's undue subservience to his ministers and her anger at his penny-pinching frugality with funds for the prince of Wales's establishment. She also had to conceal her hatred for Thomas Pelham-Holles, duke of Newcastle, whom she believed to be too timid in dealing with Cumberland and his parliamentary supporters. Finally, she left unspoken her concern about the pedagogical and moral shortcomings of the prince's tutors and governors. Some -- Thomas Hayter, bishop of Norwich, for example -- she disdained for their latitudinarianism. Others -- Simon, first Earl Harcourt, and James, second Earl Waldegrave -- she scorned for their cynical emphasis on worldly knowledge and behaviour and their total failure to inspire in George closer attention to his studies. And she was troubled by disputes in the press and in parliament in 1752-3 about the alleged Jacobitism of some of the prince's tutors. Although she gave these baseless charges far more credence than they deserved, she correctly recognized the more serious threat this controversy posed. If she were to intervene in it, there was reason to believe some politicians might stigmatize that intervention as improper, and use that pretext to convince the king to take her sons away from her. 
To guard George's morality Augusta kept him as isolated as she possibly could from court society and, indeed, most of life outside the narrow confines of his residence at Leicester House. In her opinion the young people he would come in contact with were vice-ridden and ill-educated. In particular she took care to keep her son apart from women, reasoning that sexual attraction and temptation posed the greatest dangers to her own instruction and example. On the positive side Augusta stressed the necessity of a rigorous obedience to protestant morality. It pleased her deeply to note that her strategy was working, and he had become 'not a wild, dissipated boy, but good natur'd, and cheerful, but with a serious cast' ('Political Journal of... Dodington', 318). Still, 'she wish'd he were a little more forward, and less childish, at his age' (ibid., 178). George's lack of progress at his schoolwork worried her too. Most importantly for Augusta, she was aware she did not have the knowledge or experience to teach her son the business of being king and believed that her sex disqualified her from initiating him into the intensely masculine worlds of politics and government. She did at least have the chance to choose the man who would undertake these tasks. 
Augusta realized there were only two possible candidates. Dodington knew the prince, and had even discussed public finance with him. The two had not, however, established any rapport, and without that there was no prospect that George would respond to even the soundest lessons from the finest of politicians, any more than he responded to the less able men who were presently failing to instruct him. Augusta doubted Dodington would reinforce her ideals of public and private morality, and she distrusted his political motives so much that she never confided her own manoeuvres to him. This left John Stuart, third earl of Bute. 
Had Frederick lived to become king, in all likelihood Bute would have played an important role in handling Scottish patronage, taking the duke of Argyll's place as manager of the king's business in Scotland. Bute had spent considerable time at Frederick's court, and Augusta recalled that the three had shared the same political ideas. More importantly, she appreciated his loyalty to her and her children after Frederick's death. Sure of his loyalty, confident in his discretion, Augusta asked the earl in 1755 to tutor the prince of Wales in secret. 
At that time this was a perfect choice. Bute won the confidence of the young man, and inspired him both to study hard and to believe in himself. The two became mentor and protege. To borrow George's own words, they were the dearest of friends. Augusta was ecstatic. She had found the perfect man to mould her son into a 'patriot king'. So happy was she that she dropped her usually reserved demeanour, and glowed with obvious delight when she saw Bute at court. Her unguarded expressions of joy, plus the subterfuge she and he adopted that the earl was visiting her, not George, when he went up the back stairs to tutor the prince, led to speculation that the two were lovers. Rumours about them spread rapidly at court. Then, when the prince stunned the political world by announcing when he became eighteen in 1756 that he wanted an obscure Scottish lord named as his groom of the stole, gossip exploded beyond the court into the wider political world. Politicians, Grub Street hacks, and caricaturists explained Bute's apparently unmerited ascent into the first rank of politicians as the result of sleeping with the mother and using her influence to dominate the son. The political alliance centred at Leicester House should not, insisted the wit George Selwyn, be called a faction. Rather, it was a 'fuction' (Bullion, 'Augusta and Bute', 247). 
No one but Augusta and Bute will ever know the true nature of their friendship. George furiously defended his mother's chastity and his dearest friend's honour during the 1750s, and nursed grudges against their accusers as late as 1802. Modern scholars of the period unanimously believe he was correct when he denied they committed adultery. However compelling this conclusion seems today, enough people disagreed during Augusta's lifetime to blacken her reputation from the mid-1750s until well after her death in 1772. Did she know she was risking this fate when she hid Bute's contacts with the future George III by pretending he was spending hours alone with her? If she did, hers was a remarkable act of maternal courage and commitment to her son's future. 
After George came of age in 1756 Augusta led a relatively secluded and frugal life at Carlton House and at Kew. The ironies of her situation must have struck her, though there is no indication she ever commented on them, let alone complained. Once a favourite of Londoners, now she rarely attended the theatre and infrequently journeyed around the metropolis, thus avoiding vociferous insult if not outright attack from a populace who regarded her as a scandalous woman who sought to rule the country by secret influence. Under these circumstances Augusta preferred to keep her charitable donations to the poor anonymous. When the extent and generosity of her gifts became known after her death, London newspapers remarked that the recipients of her charity would be surprised to learn their benefactress's name and dismayed to discover that the payments were at an end. The remainder of her disposable income went to improve the buildings and grounds of the botanical garden at Kew, begun by Frederick and Augusta. After the prince's death Bute encouraged Augusta and her eldest son to develop them further. In her last years the princess continued this tradition. 
The extent and quality of Augusta's involvement in the lives of her other children after 1756 went mostly unnoticed and unrecorded. Of the eight, only George's fate could have pleased her. Three died young: Louisa at birth, Elizabeth (1740-1759) at eighteen, and Frederick (1750-1765) at fifteen. No son, other than George III, adopted the moral standards she tried to teach them all. Perhaps tellingly, all of George's brothers disliked Bute, which may point to suspicions they had about their mother's morality. Edward grieved her by plunging into sexual adventures with whores and married women as soon as he could, embracing latitudinarianism in opposition to her strict Anglicanism, and estranging himself from George III as rapidly as possible. Before he died he had become openly a part of the parliamentary opposition to the king's ministers. William Henry (1743-1805) and Henry Frederick (1745-1790) survived their mother. Before her death both were publicly leading dissolute lives and, in defiance of long practice and good politics, had secretly married British commoners. Augusta refused to see Henry on her death bed in 1772; William was abroad and his marriage had not been disclosed. 
The sadness and frustration the princess dowager felt as a result of her sons' behaviour were not allayed by her two adult daughters' experiences. The marriages that George III arranged for them were extremely unhappy. Augusta (1737-1813) wed Charles, duke of Brunswick, in 1764, but he proved erratic, demanding, and unfaithful, making his wife miserable. The husband of Caroline Matilda (1751-1775), the insane Christian VII of Denmark, was worse. Concerned for her daughters, Augusta travelled to the continent in 1770. Ostensibly this was a social visit; in reality she wanted to assess their situations for herself, listen to their reactions, and then counsel them to behave prudently and with dignity. Augusta took her mother's lessons to heart, but Caroline, who had begun an affair with the court physician Struensee, did not. 
The princess's return to England touched off a renewal of accusations in and out of parliament that she 'was the real cause of all the calamities which had befallen this country for these last ten unfortunate years' and calls for inquiries into her conduct (Brooke, 266). In fact she had played no direct role in politics since Bute became her son's 'dearest Friend' in 1755. This did not distress George III, who preferred that his mother stay out of politics, and in 1765 had intended to exclude her from the terms of a new regency bill. Cumberland had also been excluded, as George reasoned his uncle and mother would renew their bitter struggles of the early 1750s, leading to the creation of factions at court and parliament supporting each of the opposed members of the royal family. When Cumberland and George III became reconciled in a bid to replace the ministry of George Grenville, George relented and instructed government supporters in the Commons to help pass an amendment to the 'Regency Bill' proposed by John Morton, a former member of Frederick's party, which would include Augusta on the regency council. Augusta appreciated Morton's mark of respect for her and her late husband, the more so because she had not asked their old supporter to make his motion. She had no illusions about the reason for her son's decision and Morton's success. It was not due to any meaningful softening of opinions about her. The king had moved her around the board like a pawn, ready to sacrifice her whenever it suited his overall strategy in the match, and uncaring how this exposed her own political impotence. The majority had simply realized that in the unlikely event of a regency, Queen Charlotte's elevation to regent and Cumberland's return to the royal family's fold meant the princess dowager would be powerless to affect either the rearing of an infant monarch or the ruling of Britain. 
By the autumn of 1771 it was obvious that Augusta was terminally ill with cancer of the throat. George III steeled himself in November against the possibility that she could die any day, and philosophized that 'it is almost cruel to wish to see her long continue' (Brooke, 267) in this condition. The princess wanted the duchess of Brunswick to come and be with her at the end, and because George was convinced this would not be 'a thing of long duration', he agreed to the request (ibid.). Perhaps fortified by her eldest child's presence, the dowager princess of Wales stoically fought off death until February. During the last week she could not eat or speak. Despite great weakness and pain, the evening before she died she gallantly signalled that she be dressed and seated in a chair so that she could receive the king and queen properly. Convinced that death was imminent, they spent that night at Carlton House. Early in the morning of 8 February 1772 an attendant discovered that Augusta had died. On 15 February her remains were interred at Westminster Abbey. 
Augusta's funeral was the final irony of her political life. Pickpockets swarmed through the onlookers, and took advantage of the darkness in the Henry VII chapel to prey upon the official mourners. Others in the crowd tore the black bunting from the scaffolding and the bier. They were motivated not merely by hatred of Bute's presumed lover, but also by anger at George III. London's textile workers feared that the lengthy deep mourning the king had imposed on the court and society to honour his mother would drastically reduce the sale of British-made suits and dresses for the winter and spring seasons. With her husband Augusta had been the most famous champion of British manufactures, gaining popularity as a consequence. After her death she was scorned as the cause of misery for the same interest. Her last rites became the final reminders of her fall in the public's mind from a patriotic queen-in-waiting to an immoral, power-hungry, and sinister princess dowager. 
Many of Augusta's contemporaries would have deprecated her impact: by raising Bute to power she had supposedly set in motion events that confused British politics, diminished the prestige and popularity of an attractive young man who was born in Britain and gloried in its name, and wounded the constitution. Some would have added that she exercised, with Bute, a tight control over George III and a malign influence on the nation's politics until her death. But these interpretations miss two important points. 
First, Augusta's career vividly displays how fascinated the public was with royal lives. When she was a public figure, assessing the people's desires and presenting herself, her husband, and her family accordingly, she and they were gratifyingly popular. An important part of their appeal was their moral and peaceful domestic life. When Augusta felt compelled to isolate Prince George and herself from the world, and behaved in a way that suggested an immoral private life, her reputation plummeted. To be popular, royalty had to be public figures who led exemplary private lives. 
This insight points to Augusta's most consequential contribution to her adopted country. She convinced her eldest son to be chaste before marriage and faithful during it. She taught him how important it was to involve his spouse and his children in the public rituals of monarchy. She instilled in him a deep commitment to Anglican morality and faith. All of these domestic virtues -- many of them scorned by the worldly during the 1740s and 1750s as womanish in nature -- substantially increased his popularity during the 1780s and 1790s. They helped him become the national symbol of resistance to revolution and Bonapartism. Augusta did not simply teach her son how to be a king. Her example and morality ultimately ensured he would remain one. Subsequent monarchs either profited from this example, or ignored it at the peril of their crowns. 


@@@@@


doc= 46831


Cockshut, John (1837-1912), wallpaper manufacturer, was born on 4 November 1837 at Tong with Haulgh, near Bolton, Lancashire, the eldest son of John Cockshut, plumber and glazier, and his wife, Alice ('nee' Bromiley). 
Cockshut is known largely for his contribution to the British wallpaper industry. His involvement began when, aged eight, he went to work for C. H. and E. Potter of Darwen, where mechanization was pioneered. Details of any formal education and of the nature of his work at Potters remain unknown but he was probably employed initially in the production of handblock-printed wallpapers. Apart from a short break at a cotton mill, Cockshut, joined later by his brother, James, remained there until he was about twenty, when they joined their uncle (formerly cashier at Potters) in his own firm, Lightbown, Aspinall & Co., at Pendleton, near Manchester. 
Under Lightbown's direction, John Cockshut's commercial acumen and genial but shrewd salesmanship, and his brother's talents as a designer and colourist made them a formidable team. The firm grew dramatically, warehouses were opened in Manchester, Leeds, Glasgow, London, and Leipzig, and Cockshut became Lightbown's first manager at the Cannon Street warehouse in London, although he continued to collaborate with his brother on special machine-printed collections for overseas markets and new ranges for the home trade. Under his regime, a large export trade was established, particularly with Australia and other colonies. Subsequently he was joined by his son, Harry. 
In 1888 the Cockshuts left Lightbowns, having acquired John Allan & Sons, an established wallpaper firm with a factory at Old Ford, east London. It became Allan, Cockshut & Co. and, determined to expand, Cockshut extended the premises substantially, subsuming the original mill in a new factory 400 feet long. Under his direction, the business flourished: within a few years the workforce had increased from 140 to 600, turnover had quadrupled, and output rivalled that of major manufacturers. In 1896 Cockshut embarked on the development of a range of raised decorations for walls and ceilings, a venture which proved highly successful despite intense competition. 
In 1899 Cockshut played a major role in the amalgamation of thirty-one firms into the Wall Paper Manufacturers Ltd, which controlled more than 98 per cent of the UK wallpaper trade and rapidly became one of the largest firms in the British economy, with capital of $14.14 million and, by 1903, 3400 employees. John, James, and Harry Cockshut joined the board and John served as chairman from 1901 to 1903. 
By 1904 Allan, Cockshut & Co. was producing 10 million rolls of wallpaper annually, largely as a result of the entrepreneurial flair and vigour of John Cockshut. He had a talent for selecting staff and maintaining good relations with the workforce, and emphasized the importance of establishing good relationships with customers, which paid off when his son returned from Australia with the biggest single order for wallpaper recorded. But it was his ability to make use of new technology and ideas, and his experience both of manufacturing and worldwide distribution, which enabled him to increase his firm's share when market conditions became difficult. However, his brother's death in 1905, followed by that of Harry, his only son, in 1909, were severe personal blows and, although he continued to direct the business, aided by his two nephews, he never fully recovered from Harry's death. 
Both brothers were dedicated to wallpaper manufacture, regarding it as their hobby as well as their business, but they were also avid collectors of pictures, 'objets d'art', and, in particular, Sevres, Chelsea, and Worcester porcelain. John Cockshut's was considered to be one of the finest private collections in existence and parts of it were displayed in several international exhibitions, including the Louisiana Purchase Exposition (1904) -- for which the items in his display were valued at $30,000 -- and the Franco-British Exhibition (1908). Four watercolours were presented by him to the Atkinson Art Gallery, Southport, which he visited frequently, and his reputation as a generous benefactor extended to his local Presbyterian church in Willesden, which he helped to found and where he was an elder and deacon. He donated the organ and a house in Craven Park, which he presented as a manse. He was made a JP in 1895. 
John Cockshut married his first wife, Alice Cheetham, before 1865 and was survived by his second, Leah. In addition to Harry, there were five daughters. Cockshut died at Glenmore, 243 Willesden Lane, London, on 11 November 1912. His funeral took place at Willesden on 14 November 1912. 


@@@@@


doc= 46833


Cole, Eric Kirkham (1901-1966), radio engineer, was born at 14 Windsor Road, Prittlewell, Southend-on-Sea, Essex, on 4 July 1901, the only child of Henry Cole, a dairyman, and his wife, Alice Laura, 'nee' Kirkham. He was educated at Southend Day Technical School and, after serving a three-year apprenticeship, went into partnership with his father as an electrical engineer. He set up his own business in 1922, making radio receivers to take advantage of the demand following the foundation of the BBC. His first premises were a single rented room in Westcliff-on-Sea, where, assisted by Muriel Bradshaw (1904/5-1965), he made on average six sets a week. These were conventional sets for the period, using headphones for the output and powered from batteries. 
However, Cole was soon engaged in the production of less conventional apparatus. This was the result of reading an article written by William Verrels, a war casualty and semi-invalid, in a local newspaper. Verrels wrote of his dependence on his radio set for entertainment and of the inconvenience and expense of getting batteries recharged. Cole contacted Verrels, and eventually went into partnership with him to design and manufacture a 'battery eliminator', which would enable sets to be operated from the mains supply. This was still only a small-scale local operation: Cole, Bradshaw, and Verrels made their initial sales by calling at every house in Westcliff and Southend which displayed an external radio aerial. Their energy and commitment was such that their company expanded during a minor slump in 1924, when many small radio firms went out of business. Cole married Muriel Bradshaw on 15 July 1925; they had two children, a son, Derek, and a daughter, Anne. 
In October 1926 Cole reorganized his business as a private company, E. K. Cole Ltd (Ekco), with an authorized capital of $2500. Verrels became chairman, Cole was vice-chairman, and three local businessmen joined them on the board. A new factory was built at Leigh-on-Sea in 1927, employing about fifty people. This business was converted into a public limited company on 25 April 1930. 
By this time technical developments had made Cole's battery eliminators obsolete; the public now wanted all-mains radio receivers. Anticipating a substantial increase in business, Cole and Verrels decided that they needed additional technical expertise and more manufacturing capacity. They recruited John Wyborn (then twenty-six years old) from Marconiphone as their chief engineer and Michael Lipman as production engineer, they built a new factory at Southend-on-Sea -- the first large factory in Britain intended specifically for manufacturing radio receivers -- and they introduced Bakelite (an early plastic) in place of the wooden cabinets preferred by all other British manufacturers. This was something of a gamble in 1930: Bakelite moulding required considerable capital investment in machinery that could be used economically only for very large production runs. In the event, the gamble paid off. Ekco suffered a severe financial crisis after a factory fire in 1932; the firm survived by introducing a new range of receivers in attractive cabinets that could not have been made in more traditional materials. These new cabinets became a pattern for the rest of the industry and helped increase Ekco's turnover to more than a million pounds in 1934. 
By the late 1930s Ekco had established an enviable reputation for the reliability of its products. This reputation must, obviously, be credited mainly to the quality control practices introduced by Wyborn and his staff. However, some acknowledgement is due to Cole's own standards and to the example which he set to his employees. During the Second World War Ekco was engaged in the production of portable radios, airborne radar sets, plastic practice bombs, and the T1154/R1155 radio sets for bombers. In 1943 Sir Stafford Cripps, then minister of aircraft production, described Ekco as 'one of the best, if not the best, units in the country producing wireless apparatus' (Geddes and Bussey, 263). 
The post-war years brought a boom in demand for domestic television receivers, followed after a few years by a severe slump -- very like the changes in the market for radio receivers after the First World War. Cole now controlled a large company. Profiting from his experiences three decades earlier, he appeared for a time to strengthen his own position within the radio industry. Ekco took over the television interests of Dynatron in 1955 and Ferranti in 1957, and also invested in overseas manufacturers. Cole was appointed CBE in 1958. But in fact all was not well with Ekco; its senior management generally was described as being 'woefully weak' (Lipman, 173). The company faced serious financial problems, and its overseas ventures, on the whole, were failures. In 1960 Ekco merged with Pye to form British Electronic Industries Ltd. Cole himself was appointed vice-chairman of the new organization, but retired in 1961 following a boardroom disagreement. 
Cole could spare little time for hobbies while working, but was able in retirement to develop his interests in shooting and photography. His wife died in 1965, and he did not survive her for long. He died in a bathing accident at Fitts Village, St James, Barbados, on 18 November 1966. 


@@@@@


doc= 46836


Colls, (John) Howard (1846-1910), builder and employers' leader, was born on 30 August 1846 at Camberwell, Surrey, the second son of Benjamin Colls (1813-1878), housepainter and builder, and Elizabeth Jackson. Early in life he acquired practical skills in his father's joinery workshop. In 1867 he married Annie M. McMillan, daughter of shipbuilder Archibald McMillan; they had one son and at least seven daughters. Colls's father, who had been active in local government, ultimately becoming chairman of the City lands committee and thus 'first commoner' of the corporation of London, left an estate of less than $18,000 and a relatively small building business. The business passed to Colls and his elder brother William (1842-1893), and thereafter Colls & Sons specialized in building City offices, banks, and similar premises. It retained workshops at 240 Camberwell Road and established premises at Dorking in Surrey from which prepared joinery was brought to be fixed on jobs in the City. As wage costs in Dorking were lower than in London, this was one of the foundations of Colls's business success. 
The bulk of Colls & Sons' building work after 1880 was undertaken in the City of London. Its finest City building was probably that for the Institute of Chartered Accountants, constructed in 1889-92. The firm did, however, execute other work, including projects at Stratfield Saye for the duke of Wellington. 
Colls was also active in industrial politics. He was vice-president of the National Association of Master Builders of Great Britain, 1885-9, and its president in 1889-90. As president he served on the association's committee on the difficult matter of the form of contract between builder and architect. It has been suggested that he deserves much of the credit for the standard form of building contract agreed in 1903. He was also president of the Institute of Builders, 1887-8. He was president of the Central Association of Master Builders of London in 1890-91. His presidential term was dominated by the eight-hour-day dispute with the London United Trade Committee of Carpenters and Joiners. This dispute was particularly hard-fought and brought building in London to a virtual standstill between May and November 1891. In the main, the master builders were successful: the hours of work were reduced but the rate of payment remained unchanged. For Colls & Sons, however, the decision to increase overtime rates was a setback. Most of its business consisted of alterations and extensions to City offices and many of the contracts could only be carried on outside the working hours of City businesses. 
William, Colls's elder brother and subordinate partner, died in 1893. That there was no ill feeling on the part of the elder man is demonstrated by his will, which ensured the continuance of the family firm under Colls's control. Following his brother's death Colls seems to have given up active involvement in the affairs of employers' associations. 
Arguably Colls's greatest service to the building industry was in his conduct of the celebrated case of 'Colls v. Home and Colonial Stores Ltd' which went to the House of Lords in 1904. The issue turned on the legal definition of 'ancient lights', the rights of the proprietor of an existing building over light and air and (by implication) against new buildings. The new building in question was erected in Worship Street, Finsbury, by Colls & Sons. The final ruling was that the Home and Colonial Stores was entitled to sufficient air and light for ordinary purposes, but did not have a perpetual right to the same amount as it had previously enjoyed. In effect the law was substantially modified, by means of a judicial review. Previously many of those who had lodged claims and sought injunctions had done so in order to extort compensation. Few of them were genuinely concerned about ventilation or daylight. 
Colls became a member of Joseph Chamberlain's tariff commission of which his son-in-law, Francis Elgar, managing director of the Fairfield Engineering and Shipbuilding Company, was also a member. At the end of 1903 the firm of Colls & Sons ceased to exist and was incorporated in the new firm of Trollope and Colls. Colls became joint chairman with George Haward Trollope. The merger of the two firms was probably facilitated by the shared experience of industrial strife which these two key figures had in common, and their complementary political opinions. Both held Conservative views, although neither sought public office in the Conservative cause. The agreement for the sale of the assets of Colls & Sons to Trollope and Colls, excluding freehold and leasehold property, stipulated a purchase price of $165,375 10's'. By comparison the assets of George Trollope & Sons were valued at $234,624 10's'., so clearly the Trollopes were the dominant partners in the new firm. 
Colls died of a heart attack at or near Buenos Aires, Argentina, on 29 December 1910, while on a sea cruise for his health's sake. 


@@@@@


doc= 46837


Colman, Cecil (1878-1954), shoe manufacturer and retailer, was born on 30 May 1878 in Bournemouth, one of nine children of the Revd Robert Colman, Baptist minister, and his wife, Sophia ('nee' Allen). His father was the son of a partner in the mustard firm of J. and J. Colman, and became involved in a number of civic and business enterprises. After an unexceptional school career at Christchurch School, Hampshire, Colman was educated privately before taking his first job at seventeen in a small Bournemouth shoe manufacturing and retailing company of which his father was a director. In 1897 the company failed and Colman set up a short-lived shoe factoring partnership with his brother, Robert. This widened his experience in the wholesaling and retailing of shoes. 
In 1901, aged only twenty-two, Colman joined Howlett and White, a leading firm of shoe manufacturers, founded in Norwich in 1846. He became the London sales manager and export agent. In 1903 he married Florence Beatrice Laws; they had four sons and one daughter. In 1912 he was appointed to the board of Howlett and White and he played an increasingly important role in its affairs thereafter. Appointed deputy chairman and joint managing director of the expanded company in 1935, he served as chairman from 1947. By this stage the restructured company employed some 1700 employees in two Norwich factories, over 1000 in a Northampton subsidiary and several hundred more in its Mansfield subsidiary. Colman retired in June 1953. 
Colman was the central figure in a managerial team responsible for the company's growth. His precise role is not always easy to distinguish from that of others in the team, but he was highly regarded by his colleagues for his innovative methods and organizational ability in finance and marketing. He was responsible for organizing the process of expansion by merger, which led to the acquisition of a number of important rivals: the Mansfield Shoe Co. in 1919, Oakeshott and Finnemore, a large Northampton firm, in 1922, and S. L. Witton of Norwich, which specialized in children's shoes, in 1934. The company was restructured in 1935 as the Norvic Shoe Co. Ltd and in 1946 it further expanded by acquiring the old Northampton house of John Marlow & Son. 
The development of new marketing strategies also owed a lot to Colman. In 1911 the Norvic trade mark was adopted, and an advertising department was created in order that national advertising campaigns could be organized. Impressed by American experience, Colman pioneered the Norvic concentration plan, an early form of franchising which involved over fifty shops. Colman was also involved in the development of a company pension scheme and the expansion of wider welfare provisions, building on a paternalistic tradition in Howlett and White, which had recognized relatively early the rights of its workforce to organize. At the end of the Second World War he supervised the shift of the firm's headquarters to London and its reorganization. The importance of the group in the British shoe industry meant that Colman's influence was able to extend more widely. He was a president of the Boot and Shoe Manufacturers' Association of Great Britain and chaired the Branded Retailers' Association. 
After the First World War Colman made his home in Sutton and Cheam where he was first elected councillor in 1929, alderman in 1934, and mayor in 1935. He was also a magistrate and was involved in various local charitable activities as well as the chamber of trade and the Rotarians. A Liberal in politics he was for a long period the president of the Epsom division Liberal Association. 
An important figure in the manufacturing and retailing of shoes, Colman played a vital role in the transformation of the industry in the inter-war period. Under his leadership, merger of a number of small businesses led to the emergence of the Norvic Shoe Co. Ltd as the largest manufacturer of shoes in Britain. Colman died at 32 The Avenue, Cheam, on 11 March 1954, and was buried at the South London crematorium on 15 March. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 46839


Combe, Simon Harvey (1903-1965), brewer, was born at Frensham, Surrey, on 4 May 1903, the second son of Major Boyce Combe of Great Holt, near Farnham, Surrey, and his wife, Katherine Mabel, 'nee' Tombs. Educated at Eton College, he spent a year in France before joining the family brewery, Watney Combe Reid & Co., in 1922. During the Second World War he served as a captain in the Irish Guards, winning the Military Cross at Anzio in 1943. 
Combe was an archetypal representative of British 'family capitalism'. He stayed with Watneys all his working life, being appointed an 'annual' director in 1926 and a full director in 1931. In 1950 he succeeded Major Arthur Bonsor as chairman, a position he retained until his death. Combe's years at the top were crucial ones for both the company and the industry. The early 1950s saw the acquisition of Charles Hammerton & Co. of Stockwell (1951), Tamplin's of Brighton (1953), and Henty and Constable of Chichester (1955). In 1955 Watneys came close to effecting an ambitious merger with Bass before merging with Mann Crossman and Paulin three years later to form Watney Mann. The move was designed to give effect to a long contemplated strategy: to obtain additional brewing capacity in London so that the company's valuable Pimlico site, on which the Stag brewery stood, could be developed. 
Elected chairman of the enlarged company, Combe helped it weather the storm created by the hostile takeover bid for the company by Charles Clore of Sears Holdings in 1959. Property development was something which Watneys, unlike many of its rivals, fully appreciated at an early stage. In May 1959, just before Clore's bid, it announced the formation of a separate property company to exploit the development potential of properties no longer required as licensed premises. However, exploitation of the company's development potential had to wait for Combe and his colleagues to beat off the biggest threat to Watneys' independent existence since the financial problems caused by the famous Watney Combe Reid merger of 1898. 
The story of the Clore takeover bid for Watneys has been told many times. Suffice it to say that Combe proved every bit as stubborn a battler as his rival. This was no brewing lamb for the slaughter. Under Combe's direction the company had already shown considerable enterprise in all aspects of modern brewing -- production, retailing, and property development. Unfortunately, as with many established breweries, the book value of its assets did not reflect their current market value, making it vulnerable to a bid. The share price rose during the contest to the point where Clore deemed it prudent to withdraw. Combe then led Watney Mann to national status through the acquisition of several more companies in the period from 1960 to 1965. This included substantial brewing concerns in Northampton (Phipps), Trowbridge (Ushers), Manchester (Wilson and Walker), Norwich (Steward and Patteson, and Bullard), and Edinburgh (Drybrough). The three acquisitions of 1960 -- Phipps, Wilsons, and Ushers -- added 3200 public houses to Watneys' retail estate, making a total of just under 7000 pubs. The Norwich breweries taken over in 1963 added another 2000. 
The 1960s were very much Watneys' golden age. Combe encouraged the establishment and consolidation of leading brands such as Draught Red Barrel and bottled Stingo, which were marketed on a national basis. The company also entered into important product exchange agreements with United and Allied (for lager) and Guinness (stout), and diversified into wines, spirits, and soft drinks (the company acquired the lucrative Coca Cola franchise for southern England in 1956, and a similar franchise for the eastern counties following the purchase of Morgan's brewery in Norwich in 1961). The company also made diversified investments in motels and garages through Watney Lyon Motels and Swift Garages. Combe was also a director of South African Breweries, Rhodesian Breweries, and Wiley & Co. 
Despite being a shrewd business leader, Combe played the part of traditional brewer with aristocratic pretensions. He was a keen farmer, gardener, and golfer. On 15 October 1932 he married Lady Silvia Beatrice Coke ('b'. 1909/10), elder daughter of the fourth earl of Leicester, and they lived at the Manor House, Burnham Thorpe, Norfolk. They had one son and one daughter. 
Combe was a prominent figure in the brewing lobby. In 1945 he was elected a member of the Brewers' Society council, serving on its parliamentary committee for twenty years, and acting as chairman of its hop committee from 1947 to 1956, during which time he helped to develop the industry's hop marketing scheme. He became vice-chairman of the society in 1953 and chairman in 1955-6, and was subsequently a vice-president. He was also master of the Brewers' Company in 1954. Noted for his wide experience, leadership, firmness, and wise counsel, he turned Watneys into a major brewing company, but was also loyal to a tradition of family brewing. But this did not mean that he was either conservative or unadventurous. The scheme he drew up with Bass in 1954-5 was extremely bold. If it had succeeded it would have created a mega-brewery thirty years ahead of its time. 
Combe died at Watney House, Stag Place, London, on 1 April 1965 aged sixty-one. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 46842


Arthur Cooper (1833-1892), chartered accountant; 


@@@@@


doc= 46843


Ernest Cooper (1847-1926), chartered accountant. It also appears that the other three brothers and two or three of the sisters occasionally helped out in the early days. 
William and Arthur started off as clerks in London in the office of Quilter, Ball & Co., which is thought to have had the largest accountancy practice in England in the middle of the nineteenth century. William left to set up a practice in his own name at 13 George Street, London, in 1854. The firm's name was changed to W. and A. Cooper in 1858, soon after the admission of Arthur to the partnership in 1857, and Cooper Brothers & Co. in 1860. Francis was probably admitted to partnership in 1871 and Ernest a year later, having each initially trained with the family firm. 
William died in 1871, seventeen years after founding the firm, and was succeeded as senior partner by Arthur. Arthur was privately regarded by the family as the ablest of the four brothers, followed by Francis, who suffered from diabetes and died in 1893 at the age of forty-seven. In 1910 two of the second-generation Coopers were admitted to the partnership: Arthur's son Harold Arthur Cooper (resigned in 1913 and killed in action in France in 1916), and Francis's son (Francis) D'Arcy Cooper, son of Francis and his wife Ada Frances, daughter of Henry Power, surgeon. Ernest's son Stuart Ranson Cooper became a partner in 1921 and retired in 1946. 
The original Cooper brothers had well-earned reputations for uprightness and honesty in their business dealings; and this may have stemmed from a religious commitment instilled in them by their Quaker parents. They were initially active in the days prior to the formation of professional accounting bodies in England and Wales. Ernest, who was a colourful writer, made the following often quoted characterization (some might say caricature) in relation to the accountant's position in 1864: 'We could hardly, South of the Tweed, claim to be a profession. There was absolutely no organisation or co-operation, no Institute or Society, no examinations, very few articled clerks, no newspaper, no library, no benevolent fund, and not even a dining club or golf club.... Our social position was not enviable. We may disregard the then current gibes, that if an accountant were required, he would be found at the bar of the nearest tavern to the Bankruptcy Court in Basinghall Street, and that an accountant was a man who had failed in everything else... but an accountant was regarded as associated with and dependent upon insolvency, and I well remember that to be seen talking to or having your office entered by an accountant, was to be avoided, particularly in the stressful times of 1866. (Cooper, 554)' This has been one of the cornerstones of the conventional view of late Victorian accountants: as being almost entirely reliant on fraud and liquidation work, until the more widespread growth of the limited liability company requiring audit towards the end of the nineteenth century. Recent research, however, suggests that, while some firms were heavily reliant on liquidation and fraud, others, including Cooper Brothers itself, had a much wider portfolio. 
Liquidation work was clearly of importance to the company, however, with Arthur, for example, liquidating the Oriental Commercial Bank and acting as receiver of the Swedish and Norwegian Railway Company. Indeed, his obituary in 'The Accountant' suggested that as trustee in bankruptcy he probably had more and larger estates than any other London accountant. In focusing on this area, Arthur was undoubtedly playing to his strength. Sir John Hollams (considered one of the finest lawyers of this period), who worked a great deal with Arthur, judged him to have a remarkable legal brain 'honed on and critical in insolvency work' (Jones, 'Cooper, Arthur', 777). 
Arthur died in 1892 and Ernest, who is known to have been in part educated abroad at a Roman Catholic school, took over as senior partner. This change in due course released an important constraint on the firm's development: Arthur had insisted that partners must be able personally to supervise all the firm's work. Under the new regime branches were opened, beginning with Liverpool in 1920 and an overseas office in Brussels in 1921. With the growth of professional firms reflecting the success of their clients, the introduction of William Hesketh Lever to Ernest Cooper by the District Bank was a key event, and it is thought that Ernest prepared the 'Accountants' report' for the prospectus issued by Lever Brothers Ltd on becoming a public company in 1894. 
Ernest's experience as an accountant had its lighter and its darker sides. When he was on a visit to Hamburg to carry out an investigation in 1874, an attempt was made to bribe him (he was invited to 'name his price'); and in 1892 he won $2000 in damages from a newspaper (resulting in its bankruptcy) for unjustified criticism of his role as special manager and trustee of Barker's Bank. In 1927 the firm was sacked as auditors of Marconi's Wireless Telegraph Company amid public controversy. Cooper Brothers had qualified the company's accounts commencing 1920 with respect to the value placed by the directors on the shares held in associated companies and patents. It may be that the wording of their audit report was insufficiently clear-cut, a criticism which has been levelled against the accountancy profession on numerous occasions over the years. It is certainly known that, when Marconi's financial position deteriorated and reorganization proposals were under consideration in 1927, a group of shareholders demonstrated against the auditors and opposed their reappointment. The resignation of Cooper Brothers drew the following comment from the leader writer of 'The Accountant' (2 April 1927) which also has a perennial ring about it: 'In the present case, we say roundly, the ultimate blame lies on shareholders who year after year have slumbered while their watch dog dutifully barked. They have now roused themselves to find that the house has been burgled, and it does them little credit that their only action is to buy two new watch dogs.' Of the four brothers, it was Arthur and Ernest who were active in the establishment of professional accounting organizations. A member of the elite Institute of Accountants in London, formed in 1870, Ernest wrote a letter to its officers in 1877 criticizing the lack of technical facilities and its poor performance in attracting new membership relative to the Society of Accountants in England (formed in 1872). Arthur had been a council member of the Institute of Accountants since 1876, and the firm's official history suggests that the concerted efforts of these two brothers probably played a significant part in the formation of the most important accountancy body outside Scotland. This was the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales (ICAEW), which was formed from the merger of five accountancy bodies already established south of the border, including the Institute of Accountants. 
Arthur Cooper was a member of the ICAEW's first council, vice-president in 1882-3, and president in 1883-4. His proficiency in legal matters enabled him to devise by-laws designed to regulate members' conduct at a time when this fledgeling profession was struggling to raise its status, and he was a member of an institute committee appointed to make recommendations to the Board of Trade about the 'Bankruptcy Bill' which finally resulted in the act of 1883. Ernest was elected to the council in 1891, was president from 1899 to 1901, and remained on the council for a total of thirty-three years. Indeed, ever since the ICAEW was formed, at least one of the firm's partners has been a council member. 
In 1869 Arthur Cooper married Maria, daughter of Edward Joseph Cole, a merchant; they had three sons and three daughters. He died on 22 August 1892 at Cuorabelle, Westgate-on-Sea, during a short break from the office. Ernest married Edith Isabella Henderson and they had a son and a daughter. Ernest died on 4 January 1926 at East Court, East Grinstead. 
There is some evidence that Cooper Brothers suffered more than most accountancy firms 'by the calls of the Services' during the First World War, and the key figure in their early post-war revival was the highly talented Sir (Francis) D'Arcy Cooper (1882-1941), whose resignation as senior partner in 1923 to become vice-chairman of the soap manufacturers Lever Brothers was a major set-back and judged to be an important contributory factor to the firm's slow rate of growth in the inter-war period. The last partner to bear the Cooper name was Vivian Rupert Vaughan, son of Harold Arthur Cooper and grandson of Arthur, who was admitted to partnership in 1935, retired in 1973, and died in 1994. 
The partnership founded by the Cooper brothers has been one of the leading firms of accountants since the early days of the profession. It was in the vanguard undertaking insolvency work and, in 1886, it was the seventh largest firm in terms of the number of quoted company audits. Its success probably owes much to Emanuel's injunction to his family to hold together like a bundle of sticks which cannot be broken. The most significant partner in the years after the Second World War was Henry Alexander Benson, Baron Benson. The nephew of Sir (Francis) D'Arcy and grandson of Francis Cooper, Benson was admitted to partnership in 1934 and became joint senior partner in 1946 following the retirement of Stuart Cooper who, although able, was not in favour of rapid growth. The firm was subsequently the subject of a whirlwind expansion, sometimes attracting criticism and envy from competitors directed at what were considered to be overtly commercial practices. The firm was renamed Coopers and Lybrand following merger with the American firm of Lybrand, Ross Bros. and Montgomery in 1973 and became one of the largest such firms in the world. It merged with Price Waterhouse in 1998 to form PriceWaterhouseCoopers. 


@@@@@


doc= 46846


Cossor, Alfred Charles (1861-1922), manufacturer of electronic and medical equipment, was born in Islington, London, on 8 July 1861, the elder son of Alfred Charles Cossor and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Freeman. He joined his father's business making thermometers and barometers, in 1875, but left in 1890 to set up his own business as a scientific glass-blower in Clerkenwell. Cossor was then able to take advantage of the expansion in electrical studies during the final decade of the nineteenth century; colleges and research laboratories were a ready market for his sealed vacuum tubes. His customers included Sir William Crookes, who was investigating the properties of electrical discharges in a vacuum. 
Crookes's researches were followed up by physicists in several countries. Rontgen, in Vienna, discovered the short-wavelength X-rays in 1895. The subsequent demand for X-ray tubes, both for research and for medical diagnosis, created a profitable market for Cossor's products; he later claimed, in his company's advertisements, that he was the first to make these tubes in Britain. Another important development from Crookes's work was Braun's invention of the cathode ray tube in Germany; here, again, Cossor claimed that his own cathode ray tubes were, in 1902, the first to be produced in Britain. 
In 1892 Cossor married Alice, the daughter of George Parker, an estate bailiff. After her death he married Elsie Mary, 'nee' Vincent, in 1919. 
All the devices produced by Cossor in the nineteenth century had been intended for medical or scientific research laboratories. But during the first decade of the twentieth century he started making apparatus for the rapidly growing commercial market. He supplemented his output of X-ray tubes with miniature electric light bulbs for surgical probes; he later marketed similar, but somewhat larger bulbs for miners' lamps and motor-car headlamps. He also made his first thermionic radio valve in 1907, but mainly as an experiment, for such valves had limited practical application while their use was the subject of patent litigation between the leading radio companies. 
In 1908 Cossor formed a new limited company, A. C. Cossor. He was joined by a young Australian engineer, W. R. Bullimore, who took over the day-to-day running of the business. Cossor himself performed the less onerous duties of company chairman. By the outbreak of the First World War he had retired to Fawley in Hampshire, leaving Bullimore virtually in charge. The change in management came at about the same time as a large increase in orders for radio valves from the armed services, obliging the company to move to larger premises at Highbury in north London, where extra production capacity could be installed. Bullimore expanded radio component production after the war, and in 1922 launched a new range of high quality valves to coincide with the formation of the BBC. Expansion continued after Cossor's death with the manufacture of radio receivers and, in the late 1930s and 1940s, of television sets and radar equipment based on the company's valves and cathode ray tubes. 
When he founded his business, Cossor was regarded by the few scientists who knew him as one of the country's best glass-blowers. At and after his death his name was recognized nationwide as a manufacturer of radio equipment for a large domestic market. Ironically, this increasing fame had been brought about mainly by Bullimore's enterprise rather than by Cossor himself! 
Relieved of his business responsibilities, Cossor took an active part in local affairs at Fawley, serving as churchwarden and as harbour master. He was interested in the conservation of Fawley, and particularly in the restoration of the parish church. He was a member of the London lodge of freemasons. He died at his home, Fawley Cottage, Fawley, on 27 May 1922, survived by his second wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 46847


Courtauld, Samuel (1793-1881), silk manufacturer, was born in Albany, New York, USA, on 1 June 1793, the eldest son of George Courtauld (1761-1823) and Ruth, daughter of Stephen Minton of Cork. The Courtaulds had come to England as Huguenot refugees at the end of the seventeenth century where for three generations they worked and prospered as silversmiths in London. George Courtauld was apprenticed to a Spitalfields silk weaver in 1775 and set up as a silk throwster. In 1785, however, he made the first of a number of trips to America where, in 1789, he married Ruth Minton. Shortly after Samuel's birth his parents returned to England and to the silk industry. For some years Samuel worked for his father, who had become an ardent Unitarian with politically radical sympathies, but who proved to be a remarkably incompetent businessman. By 1816 his position, and that of his family, was financially perilous. In that year, the ambitious Samuel, intent upon rescuing the family and restoring it to what he saw as its rightful social position, set up in business on his own account as a silk throwster in a small mill at Bocking, Essex. His father went back to America, where he died in 1823. 
The family returned to England and became dependent upon Samuel Courtauld's success. After acquiring the lease of a larger water-powered mill at Bocking, he then converted an old corn mill in the neighbouring town of Halstead. In 1828 he established a long-enduring partnership with his younger brother George (1802-1861) and with his cousin and brother-in-law, Peter Alfred Taylor. In 1822 Courtauld had married Taylor's sister Ellen (1801-1872), daughter of William Taylor and Catherine Courtauld. This quintessentially family firm, by that time known as Samuel Courtauld & Co., then began a period of striking success. To silk throwing was added hand-loom weaving and, about 1830, the first foundation of the family's real wealth: the power-loom weaving, dyeing, and finishing of black silk mourning crape. A remarkable boom in black crape developed in Victorian England as the ancient ritual of mourning was formalized, publicized, and commercialized. Samuel Courtauld & Co. did very well out of it, becoming the country's biggest manufacturer of mourning crape. Until crape began to fall from fashion in the 1880s, the partners were regularly earning well over 30 per cent on their capital. During the last decade of his life Samuel, as the senior partner, was drawing an income from the business alone of about $46,000 per annum. 
The partnership retained its family character as a new generation of Courtaulds and Taylors, together with members of related Unitarian families, came into the business after the mid-century. But family and firm alike were totally dominated by Samuel Courtauld. His prime contribution to the business consisted of his organizing ability and his driving ambition, allied to a shrewd practical intelligence and an immense capacity for hard work. A difficult colleague, his letters often reveal paranoid tendencies as he fluctuated between euphoria and highly autocratic behaviour on the one hand, and gloom and self-deprecation on the other. His attitude to his workers (over 3000 were employed by the firm in the 1880s) was characteristic of the day: a benevolent despotism informed by a profound belief in the merits of free enterprise; a concern to instil 'orderly and industrious habits' among the working poor by a system of fines and rewards; and a ruthless determination to stamp out incipient strikes or other symptoms of insubordination. The partners, aided by their wives, pursued an active local welfare policy, building workers' cottages, a coffee house, and a reading-room. In his younger days Samuel Courtauld had taken some part in local radical activities; and he later played an important role in the celebrated Braintree church rates case, which led ultimately to the abolition of church rates and was a notable victory for the principle of religious freedom. But his other attempts at political involvement bore little fruit. Stiff and domineering in manner, yet sensitive to insult, he lacked the resilience necessary for politics. As 'The Times' observed in its obituary, 'had the death of Mr. Courtauld happened some 30 or 40 years ago a popular hero would have passed away' but he lived on 'to be almost forgotten' (24 March 1881, 10e). 
In 1854 Courtauld bought the substantial mansion of Gosfield Hall, between Halstead and Bocking, in Essex, with 2000 acres, an estate augmented by further purchases. He had a London house and a yacht. At his death, on 21 March 1881, at Gosfield Hall, he was worth about $700,000. His wife had died in 1872; their only child died in infancy. Apart from legacies of between $30,000 and $35,000 apiece to two nephews, and sundry lesser bequests, he left the bulk of his estate to two adopted children. 


