@@@@@


doc= 46849


Cowlin, Sir Francis Nicholas (1868-1945), building contractor, was born on 23 September 1868 in Bristol, the second eldest of ten children of William Henry Cowlin (1841-1890), building contractor, and Annie ('b'. 1844), said to be the daughter of a plumbing contractor. He was educated privately and at nineteen joined his father's firm. In 1889 he enrolled at University College, Bristol, while remaining in the firm. Upon William Cowlin's death in 1890, control of the firm passed to the sons, of whom the eldest died in 1896. 
Frank Cowlin, as he was known, was the senior of two partners and brothers (a third joined later) running a substantial business. Under their management the firm, William Cowlin & Son, enhanced its local reputation for progressiveness, and it carried out a succession of prestigious works including the 1892 restoration of Bristol Cathedral. In 1889 Cowlin diversified by acquiring an estate agency. He became a member, and sometime chairman, of the local branch of the Building Employers' Federation. Despite the Edwardian building recession the firm expanded in 1906 and began building a series of technically innovative reinforced concrete buildings. Cowlin's liberal political outlook found expression in 1908 in founder membership of Bristol Garden Suburb Association, and again in 1910 in the instigation of a small pension fund for some employees. The following year he was appointed a director (later he became chairman) of what was to become the Bristol and West Building Society. He further extended his firm in 1915 with decorating and warehousing services. 
Important building works included numerous churches and prominent public and commercial buildings, largely in the Bristol area. Overseas works included the treasury in Kingston, Jamaica (after earthquake damage), and buildings in Toronto, Moose Jaw, and Winnipeg, Canada, and in Brazil. From presidency of the local commercial rooms in 1917, Cowlin progressed to the local chamber of commerce and, in 1921, he became sheriff of Bristol. In 1924, following ventures in housebuilding and quarrying, his firm became a private limited company, with Cowlin as chairman of the board. During his lifetime he transformed the business -- its working capital multiplied nearly sixfold between 1900 ($36,000) and 1946 ($212,000). He was also chairman of the Bristol Waterworks Company and in 1929 became a director of the local gas company. Widening business interests contrasted with more geographically confined building works, although their scale and diversity remained undiminished. With his career at its peak, he was knighted in 1935. He was elected to the board of Eagle Star Insurance in 1940. He was also elected a fellow of the Institute of Builders, and FRSA. 
Cowlin contributed unstintingly to a great variety of local concerns in sport, philanthropy, and the arts. In 1904 he was granted honorary life membership of Bristol Rugby Football Club, and his generous patronage led to its presidency, and, late in life, recognition as the 'grand old man of Bristol rugby'. He acted as president of three local charities, chairman of the local branch of the National Playing Fields Association and the council of the Royal West of England Academy, was a director of the local YMCA, and served on two hospital boards. A contemporary caricature depicted him in his mid-fifties as a handsome, warm, and open-looking golf player with moustache and pipe. Although a widely popular character, flourishing in public and civic life, he appears to have disliked publicity. A rare trait was his balance of high business acumen, sociability, public spiritedness, and appreciation of the arts. For his last thirty-five years he lived at Rodborough House, Ivywell Road, Sneyd Park, Bristol. He died a bachelor, aged seventy-six, on 26 July 1945 at Park Cottage, Cleeve, Somerset, and his ashes were buried on 30 July at Stoke Bishop parish church, Bristol, after a funeral service in Bristol Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 46850


Crawford, Sir William (1840-1922), industrialist and philanthropist, was born on 19 May 1840 at Maine Mount, Randalstown, co. Antrim in Ulster, the youngest of the ten children of the Revd Alexander Crawford (1790-1856), missionary and Presbyterian clergyman, and his wife, Anna, 'nee' Gardner (1803-1882). His parents were both Scottish, but settled in Ireland in 1836, after spending seven years in India, where Alexander was a missionary, and a further four years in England. Alexander took up the position of minister of the First Randalstown Presbyterian Church in January 1837. 
Crawford was educated privately and at the Royal Belfast Academical Institution. In 1856, the year his father died, he began work as an apprentice at the York Street Flax Spinning Company Ltd in Belfast, the world's leading linen producer at that time. He remained with this firm for the rest of his working life. During his apprenticeship Crawford showed exceptional aptitude, initiative, and diligence, so much so that in 1862, when he was just twenty-two, he was given the task of reorganizing the Paris branch of the firm. Having successfully completed this task, he remained in Paris as the firm's representative there until 1887, when he was appointed as a managing director of the company. During his period in Paris, Crawford was elected president of the Paris British chamber of commerce in two consecutive years. In 1866 he married Annie Coulson, 'nee' Glasgow, daughter of a Presbyterian missionary to India. They had four sons and a daughter. 
On his return to Belfast to take up his new position of managing director of the York Street firm, William Crawford made his home at Mount Randal, off the Malone Road. He remained managing director of the York Street Flax Spinning Company Ltd for thirty years. In carrying out his duties he not only exhibited 'great business ability' and a 'unique knowledge of the linen trade' but also worked with 'untiring energy and perseverance'. He was renowned for working long hours, being at the York Street Mill early and late. Furthermore, in all his business dealings he acted with transparent honesty and uprightness of character. As one commentator pointed out, 'Everyone who knew him realised that his word was as good as his bond' ('Belfast News-Letter', and 'Northern Whig', 13 May 1922). On the death of R. H. Reade, the chairman of the company, in 1913, Crawford was appointed chairman. He retained this position until 1918, when poor health forced him to retire. 
Throughout his working life Crawford had been an active member of many of the commercial associations connected with the linen industry and had held office in the Linen Merchants' Association, the Flax Supply Association, and the linen section of the Textile Institute. In 1910 he was the president of the Belfast chamber of commerce. In that year he published a pamphlet, 'Irish Linen and some Features of its Production', in which he warned of the increasing threat of cotton to the linen industry and emphasized the need to develop new uses for linen. He himself suggested that it could be used in mesh underwear. 
As well as being a very busy and effective businessman, William Crawford was a particularly active supporter of the Presbyterian church and held office on numerous church committees. He was particularly interested in the home and foreign missions and supported them liberally. He was also one of the founders and first chairman of the Central Presbyterian Association and was a member of the general assembly. 
However, perhaps Crawford's greatest contribution to society, and the reason for his knighthood in 1906, was his involvement in the development of the new Belfast Royal Victoria Hospital. He had a long and prominent association with the old hospital in Frederick Street, and was very active in promoting the building of the new hospital on the Grosvenor Road. It was 'one of the largest and best equipped hospitals of its kind' at the time ('Belfast News-Letter', 13 May 1922). 
Crawford's health deteriorated after 1918 and he died at his home, Mount Randal, Malone Road, Belfast, on 12 May 1922, a week before his eighty-second birthday. He was buried in the city cemetery in Belfast. 


@@@@@


doc= 46851


Crawshay, George (1821-1896), ironmaster and politician, was born on 5 February 1821 in Russell Square, London, the eldest son of George Crawshay (1794-1873), iron merchant, of Stoke Newington, and his wife, Josephe Louise Dufaud (1802-1883) from Paris. He was the grandson of William Crawshay (1764-1834), the 'Iron King' of south Wales, from whom he inherited both wealth and entrepreneurial skill. His mother's family owned the largest ironworks in France at Fourchambault. He studied classics at Trinity College, Cambridge, 1839-42, and although he never graduated (possibly because he may have been a dissenter), he subsequently read for the bar at the Inner Temple. However, in 1843 the sudden death of his brother-in-law Francis William Stanley disrupted his promising legal career. 
Crawshay and his younger brother Edmund were obliged to take over the management of Hawks, Stanley & Co., an established ironworks at Gateshead on the Tyne previously run by members of the Hawks family (per. c.1750-1863). The senior partner, George Hawks, retired soon afterwards and the rapid expansion that followed can be largely attributed to the Crawshays' expertise in securing government contracts. By the mid-1840s the ironworks of Hawks, Crawshay & Sons had become the largest on Tyneside, employing more than one thousand workers. It produced a vast range of iron goods, including anchors, chains, and boiler plates, but its growing reputation primarily accrued from lucrative contracts to supply quality ironwork for bridges and lighthouses. Among the most notable of these was the commission for Newcastle upon Tyne's High Level Bridge in 1849, an ambitious structure requiring some 5050 tons of ironwork. The firm also worked on the Iron Bridge at Sunderland and the Lendel Bridge, which spans the Ouse at York. Foreign contracts quickly followed, and impressive bridges were constructed in Constantinople and Burma, and for the India State Railway. By mid-century, Crawshay's enterprises had earned him the popular nickname King of Gateshead. 
Crawshay's stature as a local businessman inevitably drew him into the realms of municipal government, not least because George Hawks had been Gateshead's first mayor in 1836. Moreover, marriage on 25 February 1847 to Elizabeth (1826-1889), the youngest daughter of Sir John Fife, greatly enhanced Crawshay's already powerful political and social connections. The couple had two sons and one daughter. Crawshay was elected town councillor for West Gateshead in 1854 and appointed mayor three times, in 1856, 1859, and 1863. 
Crawshay's political interests, however, stretched far beyond the boundaries of the municipality. Shortly after settling in the north Crawshay involved himself in the Anti-Corn Law League and, by 1845, had become the leading spokesman of the local branch. As an avowed radical he supported the Chartists in 1848 and took an active interest in the nationalist struggles of the Poles, the Italians, and the Danes. As a result, he became a close associate of the Russophobic politician David Urquhart (1805-1877) and, as the Crimean War escalated, Crawshay helped to promote the establishment of foreign affairs committees in numerous towns and cities. In 1854 the Newcastle foreign affairs committee, with Crawshay as a major subscriber and leading spokesman, was one of the first to be set up. Although his outspoken defence of the oppressed Turkish people placed him increasingly at odds with W. E. Gladstone and official Liberal policy, especially during the Eastern crisis of the mid-1870s, nevertheless he continued to support their cause. Midhat Pasha became a personal friend and was a frequent visitor at the family home, Haughton Castle, North Tyne. Crawshay was so highly regarded that he later acted as Turkish consul in Newcastle and, interestingly enough, is thought to have been the first person to introduce Turkish baths into England, installing a bath at his Northumberland home, Tynemouth House. 
Crawshay firmly believed in the principle of religious toleration, and his beliefs led to membership of the Anti-State Church Association, his vociferous defence of the Muslim Turks, and denunciation of the mischievous 'greased cartridge' affair, which precipitated the Indian mutiny (1857-9). His business and political interests nevertheless collided over India in the late 1850s. Although a principal stock holder, Crawshay vehemently opposed ministerial plans to usurp the power of the East India Company. A number of his speeches were published separately. 
A man of eclectic interests, Crawshay was an able mathematician and scientist with an acknowledged flair for foreign languages. He also exhibited considerable literary talents, and wrote poetry and romantic drama as well as critical prose, some of which was published in the 'Newcastle Chronicle'. The manuscript of a semi-autobiographical romance, 'A Silver Shape', was finally published in 1980. 
His extensive involvement in political affairs, general ill health, and old age all eventually exacted their toll on Crawshay. By the 1870s and 1880s the overcrowded Gateshead site, home to a great diversity of processes and product lines, compared unfavourably with the more streamlined and specialized engineering yards established along the Tyne by entrepreneurs such as Sir William Armstrong. A crisis was reached in 1889, when the 'New Greenwich' ironworks of Hawks, Crawshay & Sons at Gateshead was suddenly closed. Crawshay was accused of incompetence and neglect in investing too heavily in new plant and failing to specialize, but the circumstances of the collapse remain somewhat mysterious. Having paid off all his creditors he retired to his daughter's home at Hazelwood, Horsted Keynes, Sussex, where he died on 13 March 1896. Crawshay's estate at the time of his death was valued at just $25. 


@@@@@


doc= 46852


Creed, Frederick George (1871-1957), inventor and manufacturer of telegraph equipment, was born on 6 October 1871 in Mill Village, Nova Scotia, one of six sons of John R. Creed, a poor Scottish emigre, and attended school in the village. At fourteen he became a telegraph operator, working in Canada, the USA, Peru, and Chile. In 1896 Creed married Jane (Jeannie) Russell (1868/9-1945), a missionary in Chile; they had three sons and three daughters. In 1897 he moved to Glasgow, and worked for the 'Glasgow Herald' until 1904. The constant laborious operation of the Morse three-key tape perforator permanently deformed his right hand, and he became convinced that he could design a more efficient system. By late 1897 he had produced a perforator utilizing a typewriter keyboard instead of three plungers to punch dots and dashes into the outgoing signal tape. He then developed a reperforator which recorded incoming signals as tape perforations, and a printer which translated the tape into letters. These machines formed his 'high speed automatic printing telegraph system'. In 1902 the Post Office bought twelve perforators, and Creed became obsessed with winning further large orders for them. In 1906 the 'Glasgow Herald' adopted the system, pronouncing it three times faster than the Morse apparatus. 
In 1909, partly to be closer to the Post Office, Creed and his partner, Harald Bille, a talented Danish engineer who died in a train crash in 1916, moved their business from Glasgow to Croydon, near London. Orders from the 'Daily Mail' in 1912 and the Press Association in 1920 were the company's major successes, prompting numerous sales. In 1923, responding to the American Morkrum Teletyper, Creed developed his teleprinter, which directly printed incoming signals as letters, initially working on a five-unit signalling code. In 1925 he acquired the patents for the more efficient Murray code, which became the standard signalling code. Creed's system significantly increased news transmission speeds for the newspapers and press bureaux who bought it, and telegraph rooms became known as 'Creed rooms'. In 1928, seeking an order for the Post Office's new public telegraph system, he produced the Model 3 Tape Teleprinter, combining a transmitter with the earlier teleprinter. However, large Post Office orders came only after Creed & Co. had been bought by the International Telephone and Telegraph Corporation (ITT) for $250,000 in 1928. Creed resigned from the board in 1931 over the use of company sports fields on Sundays, his strict religious values at odds with those of ITT's American directors. 
Deeply devout, Creed hated smoking, abuses of the Sabbath, and particularly drink. He insisted that employees sign a pledge of abstinence, and he would sometimes visit Croydon pubs and remove any staff he found there. Over 6 feet tall, often dressed in black, he could be intimidating, but he had a genuine concern for his workforce, and personally visited sick employees. He was not a natural businessman -- in 1916 he expressed a wish to be relieved of financial responsibilities, and his relationships within the industry were often difficult. Following his resignation he poured resources into designs for giant catamarans and floating platforms, called 'seadromes', and other unsuccessful projects, which brought him close to bankruptcy in his final years. In 1947 Creed married Valerie Leopoldine Gisella Layton, 'nee' Franzky (1906-1994). He died at his home, 20 Outram Road, Addiscombe, Croydon, on 11 December 1957. He was cremated at Croydon on 18 December. 


@@@@@


doc= 46853


Crisp, (Charles) Birch (1867-1958), financier, was born on 5 September 1867 at Dove Street, Bristol, the son of Charles Birch Crisp, common-law clerk, and his second wife, Clara Isabella, daughter of James Peterkin, solicitor. His paternal grandfather, Charles Crisp, was a corn merchant. He was raised in Bristol and initially worked as a journalist. He was a newspaper manager in London by 1893, the year in which he married Beatrice Marion, daughter of Edwin Chapple. They had at least two sons, Charles Birch and Christopher Norman Birch, and at least one daughter, Phyllis Crowhurst, later Mrs Archer. He was a self-styled 'Tory Democrat' who stood unsuccessfully as Unionist candidate at Oldham in the general elections of 1900 and 1906. 
Known usually as Birch Crisp, he became a member of the London stock exchange in 1897, and was active as a company promoter for several years. His most important domestic transaction was the acquisition in 1917 of the Siemens electrical factory at Stafford, which had been confiscated from German ownership under the trading with the enemy acts. Crisp and his long-term associate Almeric Paget MP (created Lord Queenborough in 1918) superintended an elaborate capital reconstruction of Siemens, which was merged with the English Electric Company in 1919. 
Crisp had ambitions as an international financier. After visiting St Petersburg in 1909, he was instrumental in placing on the London market $3.5 million of railway bonds, and he made contacts at this time with other financiers interested in Russia. He became chairman in 1910 of the Anglo-Russian Trust which had a 30 per cent holding in the Russian Commercial and Industrial Bank (Russki Torgovi Promishlenni Bank), of which he also became London director. In 1911 he launched the Anglo-Russian Bank, the name of which was changed to the British Bank for Foreign Trade (BBFT) in 1912; he was its chairman until 1927. He intended his BBFT to imitate the French and German practice of making 'tied loans' whereby in return for British investment the Russians would place industrial orders in Britain. Between 1908 and 1914 Crisp's banking interests placed $20 million of Russian bonds and other securities in London, and at the outbreak of the world war BBFT held over $1 million of Russian government and municipal bonds. 
In 1910 an international consortium of bankers, supported by their respective governments, had agreed a system to regulate the haphazardly expanding indebtedness of the Chinese government. The Hongkong and Shanghai Bank was initially the sole British bank in this concern until Barings joined in 1912, and the consortium enjoyed the British government's exclusive support. Crisp however assailed this monopoly with a syndicate which in 1912 agreed to loan $10 million to China in defiance of consortium policy. After public acrimony and Foreign Office hindrance of the flotation of the first instalment of $5 million, the Chinese paid $150,000 to Crisp for surrendering his right to issue a second instalment and for waiving his option to handle a $25 million reorganization loan. He thus received $150,000 of the loan's proceeds for the privilege of breaking his own contractual obligations. Crisp made other attempts to break the consortium policy, notably in 1918 when he organized the so-called Marconi loan of $600,000 to be spent on erecting wireless stations. The Chinese predictably defaulted on interest payments. 
Crisp in his prosperity bought Moor Close, an imposing red-bricked house built in 1881 at Binfield, a village on the edge of Windsor Park, with easy rail links to the City and convenient for racing. A 'Spy' cartoon of him published in 'Mayfair' in 1911 shows a sharp, self-assured, resilient-looking man with glossy tailoring but no physical distinction. He sat several times for this portrait, 'in spite of the fact that he is an extremely busy man and rarely to be found out of his office', wrote Sir Leslie Ward, of whose work Crisp 'made a representative collection... which hangs in his beautiful house near Ascot' (Ward, 338). 
After the revolution in 1917, the BBFT bought Russian securities on the open market in an attempt to protect the value of its own holdings. By the early 1920s Crisp's stockbroking firm was the largest individual holder of Russian securities in Britain. He was a member of the Russian committee of the Foreign Bondholders Council until 1924, when he was forced to resign on the discovery that he had been negotiating privately with Soviet officials. Crisp saw the Conservative Party's anti-Bolshevism as an obstacle to debt settlement, and therefore contested Windsor unsuccessfully as a Liberal in the general elections of 1922 and 1923. After a minority Labour government took office under Ramsay MacDonald in 1924, he visited Russia, and discussed Anglo-Soviet settlement and the abandonment of the Chinese consortium policy with MacDonald and other Labour leaders. When a general election was called before the Anglo-Russian commercial treaty was signed, Crisp's bank lent $5000 to the Labour Party, and he personally paid $750 for Labour to fight the three parliamentary seats in Berkshire. These were the first Labour candidacies in the county: his son Christopher stood at Windsor, also unsuccessfully. Crisp wrote to Hugh Dalton on 21 July 1930, 'When I resigned from the Carlton Club my firm lost many clients, and when I fought the Windsor Division as a Liberal Free Trader more clients fell away, and when my son stood... as a Labour candidate my business suffered an eclipse which led me later to leave the Stock Exchange' (TNA: PRO, PRO 30/69/676). 
Crisp retired in 1927 and went to Australia for a few years. His supporters turned away in his misfortune, and such was his obscurity that his entry was deleted from 'Who's Who' in 1948. He died of coronary disease on 7 November 1958 at Tooting Bec Hospital, London, and was cremated at Streatham Vale. 


@@@@@


doc= 46854


Critchley, Alfred Cecil (1890-1963), greyhound racing promoter and aviation administrator, was born at Stapleton ranch, near Calgary, Alberta, Canada, the first of the two sons of Oswald Assheton Critchley (died 1935), ranch owner, and his first wife, Maria Cecil, 'nee' Newbolt (died 1891). Following his early boyhood in Canada, Critchley was privately educated at St Bees Boys' School in Cumberland. In 1908 Critchley was commissioned into Lord Strathcona's Horse, after training at the Royal Military College at Kingston, Ontario. He served on the western front from 1914 with the 7th Canadian infantry brigade. Wounded at Ypres in 1916 while acting brigade major, Critchley was subsequently awarded the DSO. On his return to active service he was put in charge of basic training for new Canadian troops. He undertook this role so successfully that in February 1918 he was seconded to the Royal Flying Corps to undertake a similar training role. 
By the end of the war Critchley had the rank of brigadier-general, but then left the army. He spent the years from 1919 to 1923 in South America, involved in a number of commercial activities: in his memoirs he described how he unsuccessfully prospected for oil in Mexico, and was almost kidnapped by the bandit Pancho Villa in 1920. Returning to England in 1922, he and his friend Henry Horne were convinced of the investment potential of the cement industry, and borrowed $300,000 from the Guaranty Trust to begin Associated and British Portland Cement Manufactures, which soon amalgamated almost sixty companies. Critchley and Horne held 600,000 shares between them, and through the directors they nominated to the board played an important role in the affairs of the cement giant. Critchley later claimed to be responsible for first suggesting that a blue circle should be put around all the company's products for advertising purposes, and as a seal of quality. 'Blue Circle' was subsequently adopted as the company's name. 
In 1926 Critchley actively helped defeat the general strike by co-ordinating the distribution of Winston Churchill's 'British Gazette'. Critchley later claimed credit for the effective circulation of the 'Gazette', which grew from 232,000 on 5 May to over 2,200,000 by 12 May. The same year also saw the introduction of the electric hare into Britain, thanks to the efforts of Critchley and his business associates who grouped together to form the Greyhound Racing Association Limited (GRA). They built the first electric greyhound stadium in Britain at Belle Vue, Manchester, and the GRA's operations soon expanded to White City in London, and to other tracks in Birmingham, Leeds, Liverpool, and London. Although the new sport was greeted with popular enthusiasm, Critchley had to contend with disapproval, if not hostility, from the middle and upper classes, and in order to obviate the latter he shrewdly 'gathered round him figures of standing in other spheres of sport' ('The Times', 11 Feb 1963). Much of the later integrity of the sport's controlling body, the National Greyhound Racing Society of Great Britain, 'owes much to his early influence' (ibid.). 
Critchley attempted a political career, and stood unsuccessfully as a Conservative candidate at Gorton, Manchester, in 1929. In 1930, he unsuccessfully contested the Islington by-election for Max Aitken's United Empire Party. In a 1934 by-election, however, he was elected as the Conservative MP for Twickenham. However, 'his explosive manner in debate did not make him a good parliamentarian' ('The Times', 11 Feb 1963). He did not stand as a candidate in the 1935 general election, instead choosing to concentrate on the business of cement and dogs. 
Between 1939 and 1943 Critchley resumed his role as trainer of air crew for the RAF with the rank of air commodore. He was again very effective in this role: many of his staff were sporting personalities, and he created training centres at empty seaside resorts. In 1943, having built up an adequate reserve of trained men, he was appointed director-general of the British Overseas Airways Corporation (BOAC) at the suggestion of Lord Beaverbrook. His dynamic energy soon made itself felt: while commuting to London from his home at Sunningdale, Berkshire, he had the idea of converting thousands of acres of flat land near Staines into a major airport for London which he intended to name 'Churchill Field'. Labour members of the national government objected to this, but he was given clearance for his project, and by mid-1944 the national press was excited about the now public plans for a London airport. 
By early 1946 the new London airport was established at what subsequently became better known as Heathrow, and the corporation had also become profitable. However, it was clear that the Labour government was determined to split BOAC into a number of nationalized corporations. This prompted Critchley's resignation in January 1946. He then moved back into the commercial sector and established a private airline, Skyways, with Captain Ronald Ashley. They bought a number of York aircraft from A. V. Roe, and operated scheduled services to Asia and Africa, but the business did not prove to be long-lasting. Critchley later blamed the restrictive effect of the civil aviation legislation of the 1940s, arguing that it was intended to crush private enterprise by removing licences, and thus profitable routes, from private operators. 'The death of Skyways', he wrote, was due to 'nothing else but socialist dogma practised by the Labour Government. All that is left is the glory of the pioneering work we did' ('Critch!', 234). 
Critchley married three times. His first wife, whom he married on 19 January 1916, was Maryon, daughter of John Galt, president of the Union Bank of Canada; they had a daughter and a son (killed on active service in Libya in 1941). On 22 December 1927 he married Joan Kathleen Welsh Lee, daughter of Mrs Reginald Foster, and this marriage produced a further son and daughter. Critchley married his third wife, Diana Fishwick, in 1938; with her he had another son and daughter. A celebrated golfer, Critchley won a number of amateur championships, including the French (1933) and the Belgian (1938). His third wife, Diana, was also his golfing partner, and they jointly won a number of contests. One of Critchley's other passions was hunting chamois in the Austrian Alps. 
In April 1953 Critchley went blind, a tragedy against which he fought bravely. He maintained his roles as a director of the Greyhound Racing Association, and of Associated Portland Cement. He became president of the British Golf Foundation in 1953, and was captain of Wentworth Golf Club from 1953 to 1956. 
Critchley died aged seventy-three on 9 February 1963, at Cherry Garth, Firwood Road, Wentworth, Surrey, of a cerebral thrombosis and of arteriosclerosis; his third wife survived him. A well-attended memorial service was held for him at St Martin-in-the-Fields, London, on 21 February 1963. 


@@@@@


doc= 46855


Cronshaw, Cecil John Turrell (1889-1961), industrial chemist and businessman, was born on 13 June 1889 at Heywood in Lancashire, the son of William Robert Cronshaw, a commercial traveller, and his wife, Anne Elizabeth, 'nee' Turrell. He was educated at Bury grammar school and apprenticed for a time to J. H. Leicester at the Manchester chamber of commerce testing house. He subsequently attended the Victoria University of Manchester and in 1913 graduated with first-class honours in chemistry. After a short spell with the synthetic rubber manufacturers, Strange and Graham, in 1915 he joined the dyestuff firm of Levinstein Ltd, based at Blackley, Manchester. There he acted as assistant to James Baddiley, who was developing a research team at the firm. On 1 December 1917 he married Annie, the daughter of John Downham, a consulting engineer; they had two sons. 
Cronshaw worked first on oleum manufacture, but his most important achievements were connected with organic chemicals, notably dyestuffs and pharmaceuticals. He was one of the generation of industrial chemists educated in Britain who rebuilt the country's synthetic dyestuff industry during and after the First World War, following its earlier eclipse by Germany. Only a handful of small British dyestuff firms had survived and Levinsteins was perhaps the leader of these. Cronshaw undertook some chemical work himself, at Levinsteins and later, but his major contribution was in management, and the promotion and organization of research. In 1916 he was placed in charge of the synthetic indigo plant at Ellesmere Port which had been appropriated from the German firm of Meister, Lucius and Bruning, and with his colleagues brought it into operation in three months. The main focus of his work was the production of intermediaries required for the process, notably phenylglycine, which had previously been imported from Germany. The range of his activities soon widened. He was involved in technical negotiations with the American firm of Du Pont for the purchase of manufacturing processes from Levinstein. After the armistice he was, for a year, controller of chemical factories in the Rhineland area. When he returned to Britain in 1919 he became assistant to Herbert Levinstein, managing director of the newly formed British Dyestuffs Corporation, which incorporated the two major companies, Levinstein and British Dyes Ltd, of Huddersfield. Cronshaw was quickly appointed head of production control and then works manager at Blackley, and by 1924 he was technical manager of the company. 
British Dyestuffs Corporation was one of the four main firms which merged to form ICI in 1926. Cronshaw's acknowledged range of experience led to his appointment as technical director of ICI's Dyestuffs Group, which represented the major organic element in the company's business. From this position and, later, as managing director on its delegate board, he widened the group's technical interests into synthetic rubber and pharmaceuticals. The latter area was eventually constituted as a separate division (groups were renamed divisions in ICI in 1943). The growth of the Dyestuffs Group was influenced by Cronshaw's emphasis on research and his recruitment of high-calibre graduates, an approach which was met with scepticism in some quarters, but supported elsewhere in ICI, notably by F. A. Freeth of the Alkali Group. During the mid-1930s Cronshaw promoted the exploitation of a major new chromogen (that is, a chemical structure common to numerous dyestuffs) based on phthalocyanine. For this work, twenty-five years later, he received the Perkin medal of the Society of Dyers and Colourists. Outside the technical domain Cronshaw negotiated the entry into Dyestuffs Group of such firms as the British Alizarine Company, and the group's administrative structure was largely his creation. From 1939 until 1943 he was chairman of the delegate board. He joined the main board of ICI in 1939 and remained a member until his retirement in 1952. During this time he promoted new technical initiatives of many kinds, extending from new drugs to the development of plant for the cracking of oil fractions on Teesside. 
Despite increasing administrative and commercial responsibilities, Cronshaw retained a strong professional and technical involvement in the industry. He acted as president of the Society of Dyers and Colourists from 1939 to 1946 and received a variety of honours, including an honorary DSc. from the University of Leeds (1938), and the silver medal of the Royal Society of Arts (1940). He was a small man, of mercurial disposition and quick wit, with interests in music, cricket, and yachting. Indeed, his wit was said to be too barbed for the taste of some of his junior colleagues, though he was not intentionally unkind. He had an interest in and respect for young people and was a governor of his old school and university. For most of his life he lived at Prestwich, Manchester, and latterly at Alnwick, Prestwich Park. After a prolonged illness, he died in Cheadle Royal Infirmary on 5 January 1961. 


@@@@@


doc= 46857


Cross, Herbert Shepherd (1847-1916), bleacher and landowner, was born on 1 January 1847, at Mortfield, Halliwell, Bolton, Lancashire, the third surviving son of Thomas Cross (1805-1879), a bleacher, cotton spinner, and banker, of Bolton, and his first wife, Ellen, the daughter of Joseph Mann of Liverpool. He was educated at Worksop and Harrow schools and Exeter College, Oxford, and entered the Inner Temple in 1867; however, illness ended his law studies, and he later joined the family business. On 22 June 1870 he married Lucy Mary, the only child of the Revd Shepherd Birley, of the Birleys of Kirkham, Lancashire; the adoption of the name Shepherd in 1884 was a requirement of his father-in-law's will, and concerned his wife's inheritance. Following Lucy's death, in 1891, he married, on 23 January 1895, Patty Penelope, the daughter of James Hortor, gentleman, of Edinburgh. 
The three Cross brothers inherited their father's personal estate of nearly $350,000 and formed a partnership to run the Mortfield bleaching interests. Illness removed Alfred (1849-1886), leaving control to Herbert and, principally, James Percival Cross (1843-1906). The Crosses were known for their paternalism, the development of an extensive area of alcohol-free working-class housing, and the provision of public buildings. The bleaching process, with its heavy demand for water, inevitably meant the family had extensive landed interests. In 1884 Herbert added to the land he owned in Bolton the large Hertfordshire estate of Hamel's Park, Buntingford. Later he owned land at Sheen in Surrey. 
Behind Cross's move to Hertfordshire -- he also acquired a house in Kensington -- lay politics. He served on the Bolton school board (1873-81), became a JP (1874) and a major in the Duke of Lancaster's Own yeomanry, and actively supported the Anglican church's education and temperance movements. The Crosses ranked among Bolton's leading tory families, and in 1884 Cross was nominated for one of the town's seats. He was elected in 1885 and remained in parliament until illness -- some said differences with his supporters over Chamberlain's programme -- led to his retirement in 1906. He spoke in the house seven times, supported his party in the division lobbies, and whiled away parliamentary tedium by playing chess. He was also a member of the Carlton and Junior Carlton clubs. He was reputedly a good constituency member and he did not neglect his base; the Crosses' strength as employers and landlords, particularly in the Victory and Chorley Old Road districts of Bolton, where street names reflected his influence, was combined with generous gifts to the town. Cross's wife, Lucy, was a founder of the Adult Deaf and Dumb Society, and in 1885 she was influential in establishing the Bolton Habitation of the Primrose League. His second wife was also active in the league. 
Cross, described at the time of his first marriage as a 'gentleman', and at his death as a 'landowner and JP', illustrates the attraction of rural society to industrialists of the period. At Hamel's Park -- purchased from Charles Frederic Villiers MP -- he brought up two families, enjoyed farming, fishing, and shooting, and entered into country life. He took an interest in agriculture and the management of his home farm, was a member of Hertfordshire county council, chairman of the Buntingford magistrates' bench, the Braughing council school, and the parish council, and president of the Braughing, Standen, and Puckeridge Nursing Association. On one occasion he arranged for more than a thousand of his Bolton constituents to attend an immense picnic at his Hertfordshire home. 
Politics did not end Cross's business career. His participation as chairman in two small mining ventures, on the Gold Coast (1896-1902) and in British Columbia (1898-1901), suggests other interests. However, he was best known as a bleacher. In 1900 Thomas Cross & Co. was the third largest of the fifty-three concerns which merged to form Bleachers Association Ltd, one of Britain's largest industrial companies. A family account credits Cross with the association's inception. To the trade's members the new combine offered reduced competition, less risk, and the opportunity to convert some of their assets. Cross became the first chairman. He was resented for interfering in matters which were the concern of the general managers and, following reorganization in 1904 and 1906, became a nominal chairman, a post he retained until his death. 
Cross died from cancer at Hamel's Park on 9 January 1916, and was buried at Braughing parish church on 13 January. In a complex will he settled his estate on his wife, the two sons and a daughter of his first marriage, and the son and two daughters of the second. 


@@@@@


doc= 46858


Crossley, Francis William (1839-1897), engine manufacturer and philanthropist, and his brother, 
In 1866 the two brothers formed a partnership and with financial help from an uncle, Hastings Irwin, purchased a small engineering business in Great Marlborough Street, Manchester, which manufactured products for the rubber industry. Frank proved to have excellent design as well as technical skills and one of his inventions revolutionized the manufacture of indiarubber thread. Later, his patent thread lathe was adopted by every rubber manufacturer in Britain. William played a part in the technical development of the small firm but was more involved with management matters. The manufacture of internal combustion engines, meanwhile, had gathered pace in Germany. This was largely due to the work of Nikolaus August Otto and his partner, Eugen Langen. In 1867 their engine, referred to as an atmospheric gas engine, was awarded a gold medal at the Paris Exhibition. Following agreements with N. A. Otto & Co., the Crossley brothers began manufacturing gas engines in 1869. 
Industry was badly in need of a small power source as an alternative to steam engines that could be used to drive machinery, but the engine was a noisy, cumbersome contraption and Frank immediately instigated improvements in design and operation. An estimated 1300 of these engines, ranging from 0.5 to 3 horsepower, were manufactured and sold to a wide range of industries. The Crossley Gas Engine quickly became a household name. Otto's invention in 1876 of the four-stroke cycle engine -- the principle of all modern internal combustion engines -- was a major turning-point in the history of the Crossley firm. More efficient and quieter in operation than its predecessor, the atmospheric engine, it was more economical in use and capable of producing much higher power. As a consequence, demand for the new engine increased rapidly. Larger premises were obtained in Pottery Lane, Openshaw, in 1881, where the firm remained throughout the twentieth century. Engine sales rose from a few hundred in 1869 to over 25,000 in 1897. A wide variety of industries benefited from their use including printing, food, textiles, and engineering. 
The private lives of the Crossley brothers were somewhat different. Both, however, had a seemingly overwhelming desire to be of service to others, helping in whatever capacity they could. Frank was a man of deep religious convictions. Work at the factory often started with a service in the specially built chapel which his workers were invited to attend. Away from the works he did much to help the poor and needy of Manchester. William, on the other hand, was very public-spirited and active on numerous committees throughout Manchester and Cheshire. 
Frank Crossley's sincere religious belief led him to prevent the sales of engines to breweries and to theatres and public houses, where they could be used to generate electricity. He later softened his views, allowing engines to be sold, but his profits were donated to various charities. His marriage on 1 June 1871 to Emily Kerr (1849-1928) served to strengthen his charitable nature. Her views, so similar to his own, enabled both of them to become even more active in social work. Frank was particularly involved in the work of the Salvation Army movement and General Booth was a frequent visitor to the Crossleys' home in Bowdon, Cheshire. Frank became affectionately known in Salvation Army circles as 'the Paymaster', his gifts to the movement being estimated at over $100,000. 
With the help of his wife, Frank Crossley's work continued in earnest throughout the poorer areas of Manchester. An old and disreputable music hall in Ancoats, known as the Star, was pulled down and a new hall erected for meetings. It included bathrooms, dining rooms, and residences attached for the workers. The cost, paid for by the Crossleys, was $20,000. After a few months their home in Bowdon was sold. The Crossleys moved into the new building in Ancoats soon after its opening in 1889 to be nearer 'his people'. Various similar halls were built with Frank bearing the cost in all cases. His unstinting devotion and desire to help others earned him the title St Francis of Ancoats. 
Frank Crossley died at a comparatively young age on 25 March 1897, many would say of exhaustion. On the day of his funeral, a crowd of 15,000 people turned out to pay tribute to someone they had come to love dearly. Some people came from Ireland, some from Scotland and other distant parts of Britain. True to his nature, he asked to be buried among the poor people of Ancoats, in Phillips Park cemetery. He was survived by his wife and four of his five children, Helen (1872-1966), Alan Hastings (1878-1917), Erskine Alick (1880-1918), and Francis Marshall (1884-1938); Richard Frank, born in 1873, died in 1884. 
William Crossley was no less sparing in his efforts to be of service to the community. He became a highly respected and successful businessman and was of immense help to his brother in steering the firm through difficult times -- in particular, the numerous High Court actions against infringers of the Otto patent for the four-stroke engine. Such actions went totally beyond the principles and beliefs of the Crossleys and were initiated only as a last resort to ensure the continued growth of the firm and the employment of many hundreds of workers. His marriage on 20 April 1876 to Mabel Gordon (died 1943), daughter of Francis Anderson, produced five children: Kenneth Irwin (1877-1951), Eric (1883-1889), Brian (1886-1915), Lettice (1879-1889), and Ciceley ('b'. 1880). 
In 1901, William Crossley was elected a member of the Cheshire county council and served on numerous committees. He was chairman of the Manchester Hospital for Consumption and Diseases of the Throat and the Crossley Sanatorium, which he founded at Delamere in Cheshire. He also became chairman of the Boys' and Girls' Refuges, at Strangeways, Manchester, president of the Young Men's Christian Association, and founder of the Crossley Lads' Club and Openshaw Lads' Club. In 1902 he became a director of the Manchester Ship Canal Company. 
In recognition of his public service, the corporation of Manchester conferred upon William Crossley the freedom of the city in 1903. He became a member of parliament for the Altrincham division of Cheshire in 1908 and was made a justice of the peace in 1907. In 1909 he received a baronetcy but had little time to enjoy the honour. He died at his home, Elmfield, Anson Road, Rusholme, south Manchester, on 12 October 1911. 


@@@@@


doc= 46859


Sir William John Crossley, first baronet (1844-1911), were born in Antrim, the sons of Major Francis Crossley (1787-1846) of Glenburn, Dunmurry, Antrim, and his second wife, Elizabeth Helen Irwin, whom he married in 1837. William, and probably Francis, more affectionately known as Frank, attended the Royal School, Dungannon, from where William went to Bonn for his further education -- later to prove of great value in the brothers' association with their German partners. Both trained as engineers, Frank at the works of Robert Stephenson in Newcastle and later working as a draughtsman in Liverpool, and William at the works of W. G. Armstrong & Co., Elswick. 


@@@@@


doc= 46861


Owen, Sir Hugo von Reitzenstein Cunliffe-, first baronet (1870-1947), tobacco industrialist, was born at Kensington on 16 August 1870, the fourth and youngest son of Sir Francis Philip Cunliffe-Owen (1828-1894), of Lowestoft, sometime secretary of the Colonial Institute and director of the Victoria and Albert Museum, and his wife, Jenny (died 1894), eldest daughter of Baron Fritz von Reitzenstein, aide-de-camp to King Friedrich Wilhelm IV of Prussia. He was educated at Clifton College for a few months in 1885, and at Brighton College. He was then articled to the civil engineer John Wolfe Barry in London. 
In 1886 the second of his six sisters married Henry Herbert Wills, who in the 1890s recruited Cunliffe-Owen to assist him at the Virginia Cavendish works of his family's tobacco business, W. D. and H. O. Wills. He later worked in the Wills export department, and was sent as an emissary to the USA after James Buchanan Duke initiated the American Tobacco Company's attack on British markets. The Wills family retaliated by leading the formation of the Imperial Tobacco Company, and in 1902 negotiated a truce: world tobacco markets were divided by agreement and the joint British American Tobacco (BAT) Company was formed. Cunliffe-Owen was appointed as secretary of BAT, with a seat on its board, in 1902. Thereafter, he made frequent visits to the United States. He succeeded Duke as chairman of BAT in 1923, when its world sales amounted to 50,000 million cigarettes annually. He was an autocratic, self-reliant, and bold capitalist who centralized control and inculcated a strong company culture. His strategies and risks were often vindicated by events. His decision to cut profit margins in order to secure higher sales volumes was crucially successful. So too was his insistence on entering the American market by purchasing the North Carolina based Brown and Williamson Tobacco Company in 1927. The USA accounted for 13 per cent of BAT's total sales by 1939. One of BAT's main markets was China, which Cunliffe-Owen first visited in 1904; he maintained contacts with several Chinese politicians and financiers. He retired as chairman of BAT in 1945, retaining the honorific title of president until his death. 
Cunliffe-Owen was a director of the Midland Bank from 1925, and in 1928 recruited its chairman, Reginald McKenna (1863-1943), to serve as chairman of the Tobacco Securities Trust, which he formed to buy and hold shares in associated and subsidiary companies of BAT, and to act as his own investment operation. An early deal was to buy control of Boots, the retail chemist chain, from the American combine Drug Inc. in 1933; an attempt to corner the British pepper market in 1934 was, however, an expensive failure. Cunliffe-Owen's American contacts were an important component in his success. He was also a director of Eagle Star Insurance from 1941. 
His knowledge of the Orient led his friend Lord Beaverbrook to appoint him as controller of eastern propaganda at the Ministry of Information in 1918; he received a baronetcy in 1920, ostensibly for his wartime services. This friendship also led him to serve as a director of Beaverbrook's Colonial Bank in 1917-19, and of Provincial Cinematographic Theatres in 1920-21. He was later treasurer of Beaverbrook's Empire Crusade (to which he donated $5000 in 1930). His opinions on fiscal matters were summarized in his pamphlet, 'Industry and the Empire Crusade: a Statement to Manufacturers' (1930). 
In the late 1930s Cunliffe-Owen bought the British manufacturing rights of the American twin-engined Burnelli aircraft, and set up the Cunliffe-Owen Aircraft Company at Eastleigh, near Southampton. It undertook government contracts during the Second World War, and in peacetime developed a fourteen-seater passenger aircraft called the Concordia. Production was suspended in November 1947 after it became clear that there was no possibility of sales of the Concordia in sufficient numbers. The company was wound up after his death a month later. 
Cunliffe-Owen was plutocratic in his friendships and interests. His horses won the Derby in 1928 and the One Thousand Guineas and the Oaks in 1938. He kept a yacht, and was attracted to pretty young women. There were unsubstantiated stories of an early first marriage. In Massachusetts in 1918 he married Helen Elizabeth (1896-1934), daughter of James Oliver of New York. They had two daughters and two sons, of whom the eldest (his namesake) was killed in action in 1942. He married in 1935 Mauricia Martha, daughter of Herbert Shaw of San Francisco, but was judicially separated from her in 1946. He was by then devoted to a dancer called Marjorie Daw, who changed her surname to Cunliffe-Owen in 1947; three weeks later he made a will leaving her half of his fortune. Nineteen days afterwards, on 14 December 1947, he died of heart failure at his house, Sunningdale Park, near Ascot, his estate being sworn at $1,353,744 gross. His funeral was at Sunningdale parish church on 17 December. 


@@@@@


doc= 46862


Czarnikow, (Julius) Caesar (1838-1909), sugar broker, was born at Sondershausen, Germany, the third son in a family of seven sons and two daughters of Moritz Czarnikow ('b'. 1795), agent and commissioner of commerce to the prince of Sondershausen, and of his wife, Johanne Bar ('b'. 1812), who had married in 1828. The family origins were probably Polish-Jewish, and Johanne was certainly Jewish. 
Little is known of Czarnikow before 1854, when he joined a London sugar broker as a clerk. Early on he was especially connected with the broker firm of Weber and Biddulph, which provided him with useful introductions to the Biddulph and Martin banking families. In 1861 he took British nationality and became a 'sworn broker' by licence of the corporation of London; both were essential preliminaries to establishing in March 1861 his own business of Czarnikow & Co., colonial brokers. In 1863 he married Louisa, daughter of the late Revd Spencer Ashlin, a Scottish nonconformist minister; they had a son, Horace, later of Cranford Hall, Northampton, and a daughter, Ada Louisa, later the wife of Colonel Charles Jenkinson. His wife, for long an invalid following a carriage accident, died in 1911. 
Czarnikow specialized in the raw sugar trade when sugar consumption was rising rapidly and when beet sugar was replacing cane. He dealt in beet sugar from when it was first exported from Germany and in this presumably enjoyed a competitive advantage, though his rivals reckoned that 'an almost uncanny' ability to 'foreshadow market movements' was the real secret of his success (Janes and Sayers, 53). 
In 1871 and 1881 Czarnikow established agencies in the major refining centres of Glasgow (Czarnikow and Boog) and Liverpool (Czarnikow and Cox), and in 1891 he opened a New York business (Czarnikow, MacDougall & Co.). His firm became especially known for its weekly market circular, known generally as 'Czarnikow's Circular', first published in 1863. 'Probably everyone in the European and TransAtlantic sugar trade would agree that in many respects the Circular is second to none', reckoned one observer (Hutcheson, 127). By then Czarnikow had emerged as a major figure in the international sugar trade and he enjoyed excellent contacts in the City, especially with German houses such as Schroders and Kleinworts. His firm maintained a distinctive German character: two English employees named Smith were differentiated as 'Grosser Smith' and 'Kleiner Smith', and his partners at the time of his death were all continental migrants to the City of London. 
In 1888, in an attempt to win back to London trade lost to new continental futures exchanges and in the face of fierce opposition from London's established brokers, Czarnikow was the leader in forming the London Produce Clearing House, the forerunner of the International Commodities Clearing House and the City's first futures market. He was its deputy chairman (1888-1907) and later its chairman (1907-9). He also chaired Sena Sugar Factory Ltd, formed in 1906 and owner of sugar estates in Mozambique. He opposed sugar bounties and favoured empire preference. 
Caesar Czarnikow was short and stocky, had unflagging energy, and smoked large cigars. His leadership was autocratic and he was impulsive and short-tempered; he was capable of sacking and re-employing the same person on the same day. He was also penny-pinching, but his generosity was referred to and his most noted charitable act appears as a $1000 donation to the Zoological Society of London for the construction of an aviary at London Zoo. Possessing a passion for flowers and animals, Czarnikow once owned, 'inter alia', monkeys, emus, eagles, and, briefly, a bear. 
In 1901 Czarnikow acquired a country estate at Effingham Hill, Surrey, and he lived at 103 Eaton Square, London, where he died suddenly from a heart attack on 17 April 1909; he had done a full day's work the day before. He was buried at Effingham on 21 April 1909. His leadership in the international sugar trade was then without dispute. His obituary in 'The Times' described his business as 'the largest of its kind in the world'; three years earlier a leading City banker had observed that 'he seems to be known as a sort of king of the sugar market... & to be the best judge of the sugar market going' (Kynaston, 337). His son never joined the Czarnikow partnership and his family's connection with the firm ended soon after his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 46863


Davidson, Sir Samuel Cleland (1846-1921), inventor of tea processing machinery and manufacturer, was born on 18 November 1846 at Ballymachan Farm, near Belfast, the youngest of the seven children of James Davidson (1799-1869), corn miller, and his wife, Mary Taylor (1808-1896), also of Irish stock. Until the age of fifteen Samuel was educated at the Royal Academical Institution, Belfast. Then, after two years of private tuition, he entered the offices of William Hastings, a Belfast surveyor and civil engineer, where he acquired his lifelong love of scientific experimentation. As a younger son, he could not hope to inherit the family business. Therefore, in 1864, through a cousin's influence, he found employment on an Indian tea plantation. Later, helped by his father, he purchased the estate. 
Thereby enjoying independence and financial security, Davidson spent the rest of his life gratifying his taste and talent for mechanical invention. From 1869 until 1881 he lived in India mapping tea plantations and investigating ways of improving the processing and packaging of tea, becoming a consultant in tea production to the Indian government. He took a leave in Belfast to marry Clara Mary Coleman (1851-1918) on 30 January 1873. Together they had five children; three predeceased their parents. In 1881 Davidson returned permanently to Ireland and established a small engineering business. The demand for quality tea was rising rapidly at this time. The main difficulty in bulk production lay at the drying stage. The old method, using charcoal fires, was slow, and frequently produced inferior tea. Most of Davidson's inventive activity after 1864 was devoted to solving that problem by perfecting the use of fans. In 1898 he finally achieved success, and made the business a limited company trading under the name of Sirocco, called after the hot east wind that blows north from Africa. By 1914 the firm employed over a thousand people. Although Davidson's work on fans was his most enduring contribution, he also revolutionized other aspects of tea manufacture, from the receiving of the leaf at the factory to the packaging of the final product. The fan he had initially invented for drying tea proved adaptable for other purposes such as ventilating mines and ships, and later, after Davidson's death, for use in air-raid shelters, power stations, meat and vegetable dehydration plants, and aircraft. 
By the time Davidson died he had registered more than 120 patents. Most were for tea processing machinery and fans, but he also invented the hand howitzer, a predecessor of the anti-tank bazooka. In addition, he held patents for belt rivets, steam engines, the manufacture of peat briquettes, and machinery for processing rubber. Although Davidson never held political office, he was a staunch loyalist and a generous supporter of the Ulster Volunteer Force. But his devotion to unionism did not prevent his fierce opposition to the expulsion of Roman Catholic workers from his factory during rioting in 1912 and 1920. On 22 June 1921 he was made a KBE and on 18 August of the same year he died at his home, Seacourt, Bangor, co. Down. He was buried in Belfast city cemetery two days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 46865


Dawson, Sir (Arthur) Trevor, first baronet (1866-1931), armaments manufacturer, was born on 1 May 1866 at Dalkeith House, Richmond, Surrey, son of Hugh Dawson (1836-1884), landowner and barrister, and his wife, formerly Mary Ann Chaffer. Trevor Dawson (as he was always known) became a naval cadet in 1879 and was educated at the Royal Academy, Gosport, and on the training ship 'Britannia'. He became a midshipman of the channel squadron in 1881 and subsequently trained at the Royal Naval colleges at Portsmouth and Greenwich, the Royal Artillery College at Woolwich, and the torpedo school on HMS 'Vernon'. He was gazetted lieutenant in 1887 (serving on a cruiser in the Mediterranean) and appointed in 1892 as experimental officer at Woolwich arsenal. In that year, he married Louise (1870-1935), daughter of John Miller Grant. They had two sons and two daughters. 
Dawson's service career ended in 1896, when he was recruited as ordnance superintendent of the private armaments manufacturers Vickers. In 1898 he was elected to the company's board. He soon familiarized himself with every aspect of its business, and mastered the daily running of each department. Tall, athletic, and dominant, he worked with ferocious energy; the pace and intensity of his life would have broken most men. Appointed managing director of Vickers in 1906, he was involved in general administration, commercial negotiations, production, and design as well as liaison with the Admiralty, Foreign Office, War Office, and overseas buyers. He had expert knowledge of naval shipbuilding, land and sea guns of all sizes and types, explosives, mines, and other weaponry. The management of Vickers' submarine business after 1902 was a success particularly associated with him. Only two areas of the company were not stamped with his influence: the steelworks (managed by members of the Vickers family) and finance, controlled by Sir Vincent Caillard (1856-1930). 
From 1900 Dawson was chairman of Chilworth Gunpowder, a British company set up under the Anglo-German pooling agreement of the explosives trade. He was a director of many of Vickers' overseas companies, such as Canadian-Vickers, Vickers-Terni in Italy, and the Placencias arsenal in Spain. He had numerous associated directorships, notably of Wolseley Motors and of William Beardmore & Co. (both until 1926). 
Dawson's knowledge of service needs and contacts with officials were invaluable. His name was restored to the navy list in 1902, by which date he was an important individual in British war preparations. He testified to several government enquiries, sat on departmental committees, was a frequent visitor to the service ministries, and undertook confidential intelligence work. On one occasion he collected evidence for the Admiralty on German naval shipbuilding by skating round the ice-bound dockyards at Kiel to see the ships under construction. He travelled extensively on business and was an adept in all the arcane influences of the international arms trade. Oakeley Arnold-Forster, then secretary of state for war, described him in 1904 as 'this clever but somewhat slippery gentleman' (diary, BL, Add. MS 50342). He was inveterate and ingenious in his efforts to maintain orders. At the height of the Anglo-American naval rivalry Dawson sent Walter Long, first lord of the Admiralty, data 'very secretly obtained from absolutely reliable sources' on US government orders for armour plate, intended to strengthen Long's case in cabinet for large naval spending (T. Dawson to W. Long, 1 Nov 1920, Wilts. & Swindon HC, Long MS 716/1). 
Dawson was at the centre of the munitions crisis of 1914-18. 'This Is A Big War! so send Sir Trevor Dawson... [to] New York with carte blanche', Lord Fisher urged Winston Churchill on 2 March 1915. 'You want a 'pusher' like Dawson who will go everywhere and buy everything!' (Gilbert, 608). Dawson had the trust of many officials and politicians, and tried to serve the national interest as he perceived it; but the expansion of Vickers' armaments output was so great and conditions so disrupted that misjudgments were inevitable. There were many accusations of overpricing. As Christopher Addison, minister of munitions, noted of a meeting in 1916, 'Trevor Dawson metaphorically shrouded himself in the Union Jack and almost wept as I expostulated that these great patriotic firms were charging too much' (Bodl. Oxf., Addison diary, 8 Feb 1916). 
Dawson was a decisive force in Vickers during the company's financial and managerial crisis in 1920-26, and remained a director until his death. Nevertheless the appointment of the ordnance specialist Sir George Buckham to the Vickers board after the war, followed after 1925 by the rise on the naval side of Dawson's protege Charles Craven and the appointment of Sir J. F. Noel Birch (1865-1939) to take charge of land armaments in 1928, were signs of Dawson's declining powers at Vickers. Several incidents contributed to this decline. In 1915-16 he was involved with the Canadian speculator Grant Morden MP in launching the British Cellulose and Chemical Manufacturing Company. After unscrupulous 'bulling', the company's 6died shares of 1916 were worth $14 10's'. in 1918. This profiteering became notorious as the 'dope scandal' investigated by the select committee on national expenditure in 1918 and by an official enquiry chaired by Lord Sumner in 1919. Dawson's standing was further injured by litigation in 1920 between Admiral Sir Percy Scott and Vickers, caused by Dawson's careless dealings with Scott over royalty payments on his patented naval gun-sights. At one stage the judge, Lord Coleridge, interrupted Dawson's evidence to comment, 'that will not do: I was not born yesterday', and after judgment was given in the admiral's favour, Dawson offered to resign from the Vickers board. His interests continued to seem suspect: the colonial secretary Leo Amery recorded in 1924, 'Trevor Dawson came to see me about oil in Mosul -- evidently in connexion with Inverforth's most shady and unpatriotic negotiations with the Turks' (Barnes and Nicholson, 391). 
Dawson was a forceful proponent of airships from the inception of Vickers' airship building programme in 1908. He wrote a paper on the subject for 'Engineering' (22 October 1920), a letter in 'The Times' (11 July 1921), and an article in 'Brassey's Naval Annual, 1921-22'. In 1924 he persuaded Vickers to collaborate with Dennistoun Burney's companies in constructing the R100 airship. It was a technical success during flights in 1929-30, but as the British government contributed only $350,000 towards building costs of $460,000 and a base charge of $110,000, Vickers lost $220,000. Dawson was an expansive, ebullient man, and his rumbustiousness, which had so well suited the Edwardian arms race and wartime production crisis, was a liability in the conditions of disarmament and worldwide arms surpluses prevailing in the 1920s. 
Dawson received medals from the Royal Society of Arts and the Junior Institution of Engineers (of which he was president in 1912-13). He was prime warden of the Fishmongers' Company in 1920-21 and held decorations from Spain and Japan. He was a strong imperialist. For twenty years he was a knight (latterly knight-president) of the Round Table Club, which fostered inter-imperial trade and held banquets for visiting dominion leaders in London. In 1916 he formed a pressure group called the London Imperialists, intended to secure the election of business-minded MPs for London constituencies; it was later reorganized and expanded as the British Commonwealth Union, on whose executive committee he sat in 1918-25. 
Knighted on 9 November 1909, Dawson was listed to receive a barony in the new year's honours of 1917, but his name was deleted at the last moment (possibly because of the political unpopularity of the big armaments companies). He was consoled with a baronetcy on 5 February 1920. Dawson died very abruptly, of heart failure, on 19 May 1931, at his country home, Edgewarebury House, Elstree, Hertfordshire, and was buried on 21 May in Elstree churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 46866


Schonfeld, Solomon (1912-1984), rabbi and rescuer of persecuted Jews, was born on 21 February 1912 at 125 Green Lanes, Stoke Newington, London, the second of seven children (six boys and one girl) of Victor (Avigdor) Schonfeld (1880-1930), rabbi and teacher, and his wife, Ella (Rachel-Leah) Sternberg (1890-1971). Schonfeld was educated at the Highbury county school (1923-7), and studied at the 'yeshiva' in Tyrnau (Trnava), Czechoslovakia (1927-9), with Rabbi Michael-Ber Weissmandl (his distant relative, mentor, and inspiration for rescue efforts). Schonfeld returned to London in December 1929 intending to study law but, as a consequence of his father's sudden death in January 1930 and his being chosen to assume his father's role, he went back to rabbinical school, subsequently transferring to the 'yeshiva' of Slobodka, Lithuania, simultaneously studying for a doctorate at the University of Konigsberg. 
In 1933, at the age of twenty-one, Schonfeld returned to London with a beard, ordination, and a PhD to assume his father's positions as rabbi of the Adath Yisroel Synagogue and presiding rabbi of the Union of Orthodox Hebrew Congregations. He greatly expanded both the union and his father's Jewish secondary school (renamed the Avigdor School after his father), the first Jewish Orthodox day school in England. Later he founded the Hasmonean Grammar Schools. He eventually established four Jewish primary schools, whose goal was to instil in the students a pride as Orthodox Jews, comfortable in both Jewish and general society. This reflected the deep-seated commitment by father and son to the Hirschian ideology (so called after Rabbi Samson Raphael Hirsch) of combining strict, independent Orthodoxy with secular education. 
Beginning in 1933 the massive refugee problem caused by Hitler's antisemitism resulted in large-scale immigration of German and later Austrian Jewish refugees, for whom the Anglo-Jewish establishment provided a guarantee to the British government to prevent their becoming a public charge. Since the ultimate destination for these refugees was re-emigration elsewhere, including Palestine, the organizations gave priority to the young and the Zionist orientated. This resulted in discrimination against the Orthodox, especially against rabbis, teachers, and other religious functionaries, who were deemed most unassimilable by the secular Jewish organizations, with whom they feared to be identified. Prompted by pleas from Weissmandl to aid those forsaken, Schonfeld changed his focus to rescue. To gain access to governmental agencies and important non-Jewish personalities Schonfeld associated with the chief rabbi, Joseph H. Hertz, in early 1938, creating the Chief Rabbi's Religious Emergency Council (known as the Chief Rabbi's Council or the CRREC). The chief rabbi publicly supported Schonfeld despite the vehement opposition of the Anglo-Jewish establishment, Hertz's natural constituency, which considered Schonfeld a loose cannon. Their refusal to support his rescue efforts necessitated Schonfeld's personal guarantee for every refugee. Since he eventually had full personal responsibility for the physical and spiritual well-being of more than 2000 people, including children and rabbis, he had to raise funds and intercede with the government and non-Jewish leadership. Although the council had a formal secretary, close associates, and a volunteer staff, it was essentially a one-man operation. The chief rabbi gave Schonfeld complete freedom in matters of rescue, and lent Schonfeld the full prestige of his office. One result of Schonfeld's frequent contact with Hertz was meeting his eldest daughter, Judith (1913-1987), whom he married on 16 January 1940; they spent their honeymoon in Palestine. They had three sons, Victor ('b'. 1940), Jonathan Benedict ('b'. 1944), and Jeremy ('b'. 1951). 
In addition to his creative approach Rabbi Schonfeld was blessed with a dynamic personality and an awesome physical presence. He was described by Rabbi Hertz, his newly acquired father-in-law, as 'an exceptionally handsome man, six-foot high, blue eyes, a renowned 'shnorrer' [fund-raiser]', persuasive and affable, willing to do everything in his power, including bending rules, and displaying 'fearlessness toward the assimilated [Jewish] aristocracy' (private information), to save Jewish lives. Raising half a million pounds for relief and rescue while living solely on the meagre salary paid by his congregation he earned the respect and admiration of both government officials and lay leaders. He mobilized all his incredible strengths to meet his greatest challenge: saving Jewish lives. 
During the year and a half before war broke out Schonfeld obtained permission from the Home Office, which was most co-operative, to bring more than 1300 rabbis, teachers, and their families from Germany. He also organized a transport of 300 children from Vienna, whom he placed in Jewish homes or kosher hostels. In order to bring out about 200 rabbinic students aged sixteen to eighteen he created and staffed a 'yeshiva' (Ohr Yisroel). At the same time he helped Weissmandl and the Revisionist Zionists organize an illegal transport from Vienna to Palestine. He also obtained 340 Mauritius visas that served as protective papers for many Jews in Nazi-occupied territories. 
During the war his efforts shifted back to Britain. When in 1940, due to fear of a German invasion, 25,000 aliens, mostly Jewish refugees, were interned Schonfeld was the first, and for a long time the only person to tour the camps and obtain physical and spiritual improvements for all, including the release of 1000 hardship cases. When he learned that two million Jews had been murdered he devised a rescue plan in January 1943, with the help of Eleanor Rathbone MP, to convince 277 MPs to offer a rescue resolution that would provide sanctuary for Jews throughout the dominions. However, due to Zionist objections to the omission of Palestine, this resolution never materialized. He also conveyed, unsuccessfully, Weissmandl's plea for the allies to bomb the rail lines to Auschwitz. Schonfeld obtained permission for thirty rabbis and families to leave Siberia for Palestine via Tehran. He likewise provided 25,000 Jewish servicemen in Britain and abroad with free kosher food packages and religious articles. He supervised the evacuation of 550 students from the Avigdor School during the London blitz to the village of Shefford, where, throughout the war, he provided them with a complete Jewish educational programme and kosher facilities. 
The conclusion of the war presented Schonfeld with a new array of challenges. First, he fitted out twelve large mobile synagogue-ambulances with kosher food, religious articles, medicine, and clothing. They were sent to newly liberated territories including the Netherlands, Germany, France, and Czechoslovakia, and displaced persons camps. Their objective was to set up Orthodox communities and help the broken survivors regain their physical, psychological, and spiritual health, and especially a renewed pride in being Jewish. Schonfeld brought hundreds of youngsters from Prague (the last in 1948), and made five trips to post-war Poland to help returning survivors reconstruct Orthodox communities and above all, rescue 500 orphans (Orthodox and non-Orthodox) from a dangerous situation. In the process he narrowly escaped assassination. When another situation required immediate exodus, Schonfeld simply purchased a boat to take 150 children to England. In 1946 he went on a mission to Cyprus to improve the physical as well as spiritual lives of thousands of Jewish internees. By 1948 Schonfeld concluded the council's work. In all more than 3700 refugees were virtually single-handedly rescued by Rabbi Schonfeld. In addition countless thousands of others directly benefited from his efforts. He now focused on his rabbinic, education, and writing projects. During the 1960s he set up a community centre in Ashdod, Israel, complete with a synagogue and 'yeshiva'. His writings included 'Jewish Religious Education' (1943), 'The Universal Bible' (1955), 'Message to Jewry' (1959), 'Why Judaism' (1963), 'Standard Siddur-Prayer Book' (1973), and 'A New-Old Rendering of Psalms' (1980). His health deteriorated following an operation in 1965 for a benign tumour. By 1982 he was an invalid, cared for by some of those he saved. He died at the Whittington Hospital, Archway, Islington, on 6 February 1984. He was buried next day in the cemetery of the Adath Yisroel Synagogue in Cheshunt, Hertfordshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 46867


Ferranti, Sebastian Ziani de (1864-1930), electrical engineer and inventor, was born on 9 April 1864 at Havelock Buildings, Liverpool, the only son of Cesar Ziani de Ferranti (1831-1903), photographer, and his wife, Juliana, a talented concert pianist and daughter of the portrait painter William Scott. His mother had formerly been married to a Polish guitarist and revolutionary, Stanislas Szczepanowski, with whom she had three daughters and two sons, and his father's family traced its Ziani lineage back to eighth-century Italy and included in its ancestry two doges of Venice (Sebastiano Ziani in 1173 and Pietro Ziani in 1205). By the nineteenth century Marco Aurelio Ziani, who in his later years added 'de Ferranti' to his name as a result of an inheritance, had developed an extensive reputation as an innovative guitarist, and after several world tours eventually settled in Belgium as guitarist to Leopold I. It was there that his son Cesar developed an interest in the new science of photography, and after marrying Juliana Szczepanowski, he decided to establish a partnership in Liverpool with his father-in-law, William Scott. This photographic portraiture business flourished, and their son, Sebastian, was born into a comfortable household. 
During his formative years Sebastian seemed to follow in his family's footsteps by showing an interest in art, and by the time he had been sent to St Stanislas preparatory school, Hampstead in 1874 he was already an accomplished artist. While at preparatory school, encouraged by extensive conversations with his half-brother, Vincent Szczepanowski, a maritime engineer, he started experimenting with steam engines. This mechanical bent developed further when in 1877 he was sent to St Augustine's, Ramsgate, Kent, a Benedictine boarding-school, where the staff encouraged his experiments and introduced him to the emerging science of electric lighting. Apart from reading extensively, including Ganot's 'Elementary Treatise on Physics', he fixed up an electric bell for the school, and by January 1879 was informing his parents that he wanted to be a 'Manufacturing Engineer'. In September 1880 his father therefore paid for him to go to University College, London, where he enrolled for an engineering degree, but in February 1881 Cesar suffered a serious cerebral thrombosis, which plunged the family into major financial difficulties. This crisis marked a watershed in Sebastian's life; he was suddenly wrenched from a relatively comfortable life and obliged to help support his family. 
It would actually have been no great sacrifice for Ferranti to abandon his academic studies, because he had little interest in this kind of work, preferring to develop his own ideas through practical experiments. This ability secured him his first job, as a research engineer at the leading electrical engineering firm of Siemens, where he came into contact with the eminent inventor Alexander Siemens. The experience proved invaluable, especially as it allowed him the opportunity to perfect his ideas on the design of alternator armatures. He was actually in the process of developing a novel form of armature at the time that he met Alfred Thompson, a photographer who was also a family friend; and as a result of having interested a solicitor, Francis Ince, in his ideas, the electrical engineering firm of Ferranti, Thompson, and Ince Ltd had been formed by September 1882. 
Although this new firm survived for only one year -- largely because of the severe slump in electric-lighting activity arising from the dubious activities of promoters and engineers during the 'Brush Bubble' in summer 1882 -- it established the Ferranti name as a significant part of the embryonic industry. In fact, the armature design produced by Ferranti had inadvertently infringed elements of a patent recently taken out by the distinguished scientist Sir William Thomson (later Lord Kelvin), but after agreeing to pay Thomson $500 a year the firm gained access to a reliable source of technical expertise. Ferranti also worked closely with Robert Hammond, one of the industry's leading entrepreneurs, but although they operated a joint venture between 1883 and 1885, this was no more successful than the first firm. It was only when, in the summer of 1885, Ferranti created a partnership with Francis Ince (based at Hatton Garden, London), that he was able to secure greater continuity in his business activities; but the series of events leading up to this momentous deal illustrates how this dark, handsome young man with flashing bright eyes and excited oratory could instil confidence in others. In 1888 he married Gertrude Ruth Ince (1869-1959), his partner's daughter. They raised a large family, one of whom was (Gerard) Vincent Sebastian de Ferranti ['see below']. 
The infectious enthusiasm for electricity with which Ferranti impressed those around him had certainly been a positive asset up to 1885, but during the next six years it was to be even more important as he launched a series of schemes which would establish his worldwide reputation as a leading advocate of high-tension alternating-current (AC) generation and distribution. It was as a result of selling some of his revolutionary mercury-motor electricity meters to Sir Coutts Lindsay & Co. that Ferranti was to be given the chance to put these ideas into practice, as Coutts Lindsay had ambitious plans to light up London's West End. The firm had first started as a means of lighting Sir Coutts Lindsay's Grosvenor Gallery, but as a result of increased demand from neighbours an extensive system was installed, and advice was given from another member of the Lindsay family, the well-known scientist the earl of Crawford. After the first design failed to work effectively Ferranti was brought in to overhaul the station and distributing system. Experience at the Grosvenor Gallery demonstrated the practical feasibility of Ferranti's ideas, and by 1887 the London Electricity Supply Corporation (LESCo.) had been created by Lindsay and his brother, Lord Wantage. This venture, designed entirely by Ferranti, was based on an ambitious plan to light two million lamps, using the world's largest generators installed in a much larger station at Deptford. From there, the unprecedented distribution pressure of 10,000 volts would be sent along cables and transformers -- a design which challenged contemporary electric current engineering expertise. 
Although LESCo. was a commercial failure, and Ferranti struggled until the summer of 1891 to overcome the engineering difficulties, Deptford was regarded by many as the pioneer of modern electricity-supply systems: it was built where land was cheap, water was accessible, and coal could be transported economically to a station generating at high voltages along an extensive distribution system using step-up and step-down transformers. Contemporaries marvelled at the 10,000 hp generators. The mains and transformers designed to carry and distribute the 10,000 volts established the Ferranti name as the leader in its field. Unfortunately, though, when LESCo. finally dispensed with Ferranti's services in 1891, no other British customers for this kind of equipment could be found, and as a result the private limited liability company formed in 1890, S. Z. de Ferranti Ltd, with expanded premises at 57B Charterhouse Square, London, struggled for several years. It was only when demand for generating and distribution equipment increased during the mid-1890s that the firm recovered from the shock of losing the LESCo. contract, but thereafter expansion seemed assured as electric lighting and power grew in popularity. Ferranti had also been able to sell his high-pressure cable patents to the British Insulated Wire Company, providing useful collateral against the bank loans on which the firm relied. S. Z. de Ferranti Ltd was so inundated with orders that by 1896 Ferranti decided to move out of London and rent larger premises in Hollinwood, near Oldham, Lancashire, where for the next seventy years his enterprise flourished. 
Two major businesses at Hollinwood were initially set up -- one for production of meters, for which Ferranti had an extensive reputation, and one for steam alternators, or generators attached to the flywheels of reciprocating engines. The former was an extremely profitable department, providing a steady flow of funds for new projects until the 1960s, but the latter posed major financial difficulties which eventually led to a liquidity crisis in 1903. Difficulties with production of the steam alternator were exacerbated by the nature of the firm, because it was a private company, and even though in 1901 Ferranti agreed to a reconstruction which resulted in the establishment of Ferranti Ltd, little external capital could be raised for a firm dominated by family ownership and engineering instincts. Ferranti was, in fact, an incorrigible developer of ideas and machines, interfering constantly with designs as they progressed from the drawing-board into production, and while this technology-led strategy resulted in striking improvements to electrical engineering, it also diverted scarce resources. Intensifying American and German competition also precipitated severe alternator price reductions, and by 1903 the firm's bankers, Parrs, was forced to call in the liquidators after substantial losses appeared in the balance sheet. 
Ferranti was actually excluded from the Hollinwood works for much of the next eleven years, and even when Ferranti Ltd was reconstituted in 1905 the receiver-managers continued to run the business, using much more conventional accounting and commercial strategies. It was during this time that Ferranti ventured into other development projects, working with J. and P. Coats Ltd on textile machinery, with Vickers on resuperheating turbines, and with J. Hopkinson & Co. on steam stop valves. J. Hopkinson was principally responsible for providing a much enhanced income for Ferranti's expanding family; by 1913 he and Gertrude had had three sons and four daughters. Apart from the stop valve income, he exploited his reputation to act as a consultant to some of the large electricity-supply companies being formed at that time, and by 1913 this improved financial strength had provided the resources for him to buy Baslow Hall, Bakewell, in Derbyshire. It was also during this time that he became involved in industrial politics, helping to establish the British Electrical and Allied Manufacturers' Association, a powerful electrical cartel of which he was president in 1912. He was also the first person to take on the presidency of the Institution of Electrical Engineers (IEE) for two consecutive years (1910-12), which further reflected his status in the industry by that time. His presidential address in 1910, 'Coal conservation, home-grown food and the better utilisation of labour', was regarded as a clarion call for more ambitious policies in the industry, and while contemporaries regarded the scheme as outlandishly expensive, sixteen years later the Central Electricity Generating Board was working along similar lines. Confirming his reputation, the University of Manchester in 1912 bestowed an honorary degree of DSc on him for services to electrical engineering, and thereafter he was always known at the Hollinwood works as Dr Ferranti. 
At the outbreak of the First World War, Ferranti decided to commit his considerable energy to converting Ferranti Ltd into a major munitions producer. Although the new management was still mistrustful of him, and sophisticated accounting controls had been introduced as a means of preventing any repeat of the 1903 debacle, Ferranti was principally responsible for securing the munitions contracts, developing the necessary mass production techniques, and utilizing the improved flow of profits to diversify the product range. This was, indeed, the period when Ferranti Ltd evolved into the type of organization which survived intact until the 1970s. With Ferranti once again developing a highly successful technology-led strategy, and professional accountants overseeing the finances, the firm was able to flourish in the more conducive environment of the 1910s and 1920s. Over this period Ferranti Ltd diversified into radio and domestic electrical appliances and rebuilt the transformer business which had languished since 1903. 
So successful were Ferranti and his son, Vincent, in improving the fortunes of the transformer department that when the Central Electricity Generating Board was created in 1926 to construct a national supply grid, Ferranti Ltd won the largest single share of the orders for large three-phase transformers, after having persuaded the commissioners to use this type of equipment in place of the planned single-phase equipment. Ferranti did not actually become chairman of the company until 1928, but in the meantime, as technical director, he forged ahead with highly ambitious development schemes which laid a solid foundation for the future. 
Since his pioneering work at the Grosvenor Gallery and Deptford in the 1880s, Ferranti had been advocating the construction of a national grid, and while his principal role during the 1920s was as a manufacturer of crucial components in the distribution system, it was widely recognized that he had been a major voice in the movement, urging fundamental changes to what had been an outmoded pattern of electricity supply. In recognition of his achievements, the IEE in 1924 awarded him its highest distinction, the Faraday medal, and in 1927 he was given the ultimate accolade from the scientific community when he was made a fellow of the Royal Society. He also worked diligently as president of the Electrical Development Association (in 1927) and was an influence on the Electrical Association for Women, of which his wife became a leading figure. This was typical of his dedication to the cause of electricity, and at Baslow Hall he applied this form of energy to everything from egg incubators to central heating, demonstrating how in word and deed he led the industry towards his dream of an 'All Electric' age. His charming personality, dark good looks, and overwhelming enthusiasm ensured that all who heard him speak were similarly enthralled, and his Faraday lecture to the IEE in 1928, entitled 'Electricity in the service of man', was a fitting resume of his lifelong passion for the subject. 
Sebastian de Ferranti died suddenly on 13 January 1930 at the Kantonsspital, Zurich, Switzerland, following an operation on his prostate gland which resulted in fatal complications. He was buried in Hampstead cemetery. He had contributed enormously to the development of an electricity supply industry which was just beginning to haul itself out of fifty years of ill-planned development, and in pioneering high-voltage systems he was widely regarded as a major influence on how the technology evolved in the twentieth century. Over a career spanning forty-nine years he took out a total of 176 patents, most of which were applied directly to improving the competitiveness of his several businesses, and in Ferranti Ltd he left a vibrant firm with a genuine commitment to extending the frontiers of engineering knowledge. By elaborating this technology-led strategy he also encouraged many innovative engineers to work there, including H. W. Clothier, E. T. Norris, and C. E. Sparks, all of whom later went on to enjoy successful careers in their own right. 
Ferranti Ltd was an enduring legacy of Sebastian de Ferranti's career as an electrical engineer, and on his death it was passed on to his eldest surviving son, Sir (Gerard) Vincent Sebastian de Ferranti (1893-1980), more commonly known as Vincent, born on 16 February 1893 at Tedworth Square, Chelsea, London. Vincent was the second son of Dr Ferranti; the eldest, Basil, was killed in 1917 while on active service with the 24th heavy artillery group at Messines. Vincent also enlisted at the outbreak of war in 1914, serving with the 67th field company, the Royal Engineers, and returning home with the rank of captain and the award of the Military Cross, having seen action at Gallipoli and in the Middle East. By 1918 he was very much the heir apparent to Ferranti Ltd, and although he had only a limited secondary education, at Repton School, Derbyshire, his military experience equipped him with the necessary leadership qualities to build on the foundations laid by his father. Dr Ferranti also instilled in him a belief in the value of technological innovation, and by 1921 he had taken over as manager of the transformer department, helping to establish Ferranti Ltd as Britain's leading firm in the design and production of the largest units. At the same time, having witnessed the firm's 1903 crisis at first hand, Vincent recognized the need to maintain a healthy balance sheet, and throughout his career he always stressed the need to maintain a balance between technological and financial priorities. 
It was this balanced approach towards business development which Vincent brought to the position of chairman and chief executive when he succeeded his father in 1930. He presided as chairman until 1963, during which time Ferranti Ltd established a position as one of Britain's leading electronics, avionics, and electrical engineering firms. Among the most successful products developed in that period were power transformers, on-board radar equipment, computers, integrated circuits, and numerical control machines, leading to an increase in the net worth of Ferranti Ltd from $600,000 in 1930 to over $12 million by 1963. The business also expanded geographically, with factories being set up in Wythenshawe, Edinburgh, and Bracknell, but Vincent was able to maintain effective control of this empire by monitoring financial trends on a series of graphs he kept in his office, and by calling on his managers in person if matters deteriorated. 
Apart from building Ferranti Ltd into a highly innovative and successful business, Vincent also took an active role in the industry's affairs, sitting on the council of the British Electrical and Allied Manufacturers' Association from 1930, becoming its chairman in 1938, and rising to the presidency in 1957. In addition, in 1946 he became the first son to follow a father as president of the IEE, while on the international scene he was elected chairman of the World Power Conference's international executive committee in 1950. His most notable distinction, however, was the knighthood bestowed upon him in 1948 in recognition of his firm's contribution to the war effort, and this he dedicated to the thousands of employees who made up the wider Ferranti family. Although content in his own family, having married in 1919 Dorothy Hettie Wilson (1901-1985), daughter of Reginald Page Wilson, consulting engineer, and having raised two sons and three daughters, his greatest love was the firm he inherited from his father, and he jealously preserved its familial nature as an intrinsic feature of the drive for technological excellence. It was a passion he also passed on to his eldest son, Sebastian ('b'. 1928), who succeeded him as chairman in 1963. 
Vincent de Ferranti died at his home, Henbury Hall, Henbury, near Macclesfield, Cheshire, on 20 May 1980 and was buried at Henbury on the 25th. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 46868


Hartley, Henry Robinson (1777-1850), eccentric and philanthropist, was born on 12 November 1777 in Southampton, second and only surviving child of Henry Hartley (1731-1800) and his wife, Susanna, 'nee' Lavender (1742-1821). His father inherited a prosperous wine business from a childless uncle, George Robinson, and, despite intermittent service as mayor of Southampton and as a justice of the peace, appears to have been a taciturn and retiring individual. The atmosphere in the Hartley home was strict, probably reflecting a strong Calvinist faith. 
Hartley attended Southampton grammar school (from about 1787) where he exhibited pronounced intellectual talents, although he did not attend a university. Scholarly interests were to dominate his life and he showed little aptitude for other occupations. Upon leaving school, in 1794 or 1795, Hartley lived at home, chafing at its restraints. He adopted, and briefly practised, a philosophy of libertinism, possibly based on the French 'philosophes'' conception of personal liberty, fuelling an adolescent rebellion against a puritanical father (Anderson, 77). This phase of Hartley's youth left him with a distaste for the restrictions of English society and with a severe venereal infection which would cause him great suffering throughout his life and may have increased his susceptibility to depression. 
On 24 November 1798 Hartley married Celia Ann Crowcher (1779-1848), a chance acquaintance, over the objections of his parents. The failure of this marriage further encouraged him to emigrate, but ill health and a deep attachment to his native Southampton made him hesitate. The marriage was annulled in 1802, after Celia had given birth to a daughter. The child was almost certainly not Hartley's and was never acknowledged by him. 
Upon the death of his mother in 1821, Hartley inherited a considerable fortune and continued to live a reclusive and scholarly existence in his family home in Southampton. Unable to accept any change in his neighbourhood and irritated by the presence of small businesses in his district, Hartley quarrelled with his neighbours, closed his house, and travelled to Calais in 1825, where he lived until 1838. Unable to settle, he returned to England, living in Southwark, London, between 1838 and 1846. In 1842 he made a will leaving the bulk of his estate to the city of Southampton to preserve his house as a museum and to promote the study of his favourite subjects: natural history, astronomy, antiquities, classics, and oriental literature. 
In 1846 Hartley returned to Calais where his health continued to deteriorate. He died there on 24 May 1850 of cardiac ailments and complications of a stricture of the urinary tract which had afflicted him since his youth. He was buried in London in a vault in New Bunhill Fields, a burial-ground for dissenters. 
Hartley's biographer describes him as an eighteenth-century scholar and dilettante, alienated by the commercial and industrial expansion of the nineteenth century (Anderson, 202). His existence was certainly unhappy and would have remained obscure were it not for the bequest to Southampton. The estate was valued at approximately $110,000. The will was contested in chancery, principally by Celia Hartley's daughter, Sarah. The claimants eventually accepted a settlement but the sum remaining to the corporation of Southampton was less than half the original amount. 
After much debate, the city used the bequest to establish the Hartley Institution (1862) which combined a museum, library, and venue for public lectures. The institution evolved in a pattern familiar in the nineteenth century, becoming Hartley College (1896), Hartley University College (1902), University College of Southampton (1914), and the University of Southampton (1952). Notwithstanding the intentions of his bequest, Hartley's house was demolished and, except in his association with the university, Hartley has been largely forgotten, even in his native Southampton. 


@@@@@


doc= 46869


Deloitte, William Welch (1818-1898), accountant, was born in London. Although his family background is not well documented, it is known that his father was a secretary to a well-known firm of provision merchants and his mother was the daughter of a West Indies planter named Welch. Reputedly, his paternal grandfather was a Count de Loitte, who had fled from the revolutionary reign of terror in France during 1793 and found refuge in Hull. 
Having spent twelve years on the staff of the official assignee in bankruptcy, Deloitte in 1845, at the age of twenty-seven, set up his own practice. His experience proved invaluable, for at this time the most lucrative assignments that an accountant could win fell in the field of insolvency. His first office, at 11 Basinghall Street, London, was close to his former employers and, significantly, to the bankruptcy courts. Living over the premises, Deloitte gathered some eighty-seven clients (mostly individuals or partnerships) by the end of his first year in practice, and was soon employing ten clerks. Under his leadership the firm continued to grow, so that by 1897 it comprised seventy staff and, by 1900, shortly after his death, its fee income had reached $41,193, having risen from $7597 in 1874. 
A crucial event in the long-term success of the practice was the appointment in 1849 of Deloitte to assist the shareholder auditors of the Great Western Railway (GWR). Not the least advantage of this was that Deloitte could then mention the assignment as a measure of his integrity when writing to bankrupts named in the 'London Gazette', offering to prepare their statements of account prior to a court appearance. The shares of the GWR had been falling in value, and the proprietors, increasingly concerned for the company's well-being, recorded in February 1850 that 'the auditors have been assisted for the first time throughout the laborious examination of all books, accounts and documents of the company by a public account [Deloitte] whom they appointed without previous communication with any individual connected with the company' (TNA: PRO, RAIL 250/65, 166). Although surprised by this action by the shareholders, the directors concurred with the arrangement once they were satisfied, in August 1849, that the 'sole object [of the auditors] was to strengthen their hands and inspire general confidence in the management' (ibid., 250/127, 2). In the event, Deloitte continued to advise the shareholder auditors until 1887, when he was personally elected to one of these posts, which he retained until his retirement in 1897. The appointment, of considerable importance in terms of both status and fee income, then passed to his firm. 
Deloitte (who audited the Langham Hotel from 1883 and the Savoy from 1890) was said to have been the originator of a system of hotel accounting which was later widely adopted. Unlike some City practices, he built up a strong industrial base among his clientele, and audited not only railway companies (Lancashire and Yorkshire, West London Extension, and the South Wales Railway, as well as the GWR and a large number in South America) but also docks, collieries, and ironworks, including the Vulcan Foundry Company, Powell Duffryn (from 1864), and the Ocean Coal Company. Deloitte was closely associated with Sir Daniel Gooch, Sir John Pender, Sir George Elliot, and Cyrus Field and the other pioneers of submarine telegraphy, so that his firm secured the audit of almost all the large cable companies, including the Telegraph Construction and Maintenance Company. However, his practice was not exclusively industrial: from 1889 Deloittes audited the Prudential, from 1882 were joint auditors of the London Stock Bank, and had many newspaper assignments, with, among others, 'The Observer' from 1886. 
His standing within the profession led to Deloitte being called upon to investigate frauds -- one committed against the Great Northern Railway in 1857, and another at the Great Eastern Steamship Company in 1870. The inroads that financing the employment of his many staff made on his capital encouraged him to seek a partner in March 1857, and he sold a 50 per cent share in the firm to Thomas Greenwood, who was then share registrar of the GWR. When Greenwood left the partnership in 1867, his share of the capital was worth $6000. Deloitte then admitted a succession of partners, all of whom had trained in the firm: Henry Dever (1867-97), Alfred Richard Hollebone (1867-73), and John George Griffiths (1869-1902). 
An important aspect of Deloitte's career concerned his involvement with the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales, of which he served as fourth president in 1888-9, having been the vice-president from 1884. He had been an original council member of its predecessor, the Institute of Accountants in London, and on its foundation in 1880 became a council member of the English Institute. In addition he had been a member of the Manchester Society of Accountants, having joined because of his office in that city, which practised under the style of Deloitte and Halliday. Yet the partnership with James Halliday ceased in 1877 and no further branches were opened in the UK until one was established at Cardiff in 1912. 
About 1858 Deloitte settled at Hill House, Mount Pleasant, Southall, Middlesex, where he lived until his death. He was married twice and had at least one child, a daughter. A freemason for more than fifty years, he was also a benefactor of the Church of England, funding the construction of Holy Trinity Church, Southall, and six almshouses for the poor. He did not retire until 1897 when, aged seventy-nine, he was said to be the oldest practising accountant in London. One of those who had worked for his firm described him as 'an alert, decisive little man with just a touch of austerity in his manner; this, however, covered a kind heart' (Kettle, 6). He died at his home, Hill House, on 23 August 1898. 


@@@@@


doc= 46870


Dennis, John Henry Cawsey (1871-1939), engineer and motor vehicle manufacturer, was born on 20 February 1871 at Huntshaw, near Torrington, Devon, the third son of William Henry Dennis, farmer, and his wife, Susanna, 'nee' Cawsey. After education at Taunton College, he followed his early interest in machinery and became apprenticed to a repairing ironmonger in Bideford, against his parents' wishes. He then secretly took up a post as an ironmonger's assistant in Guildford in 1894, and as a sideline he began to build and sell bicycles. For a short time he gained further experience with Brown Brothers, the well-known component factors, in London. 
In early 1895 John Dennis returned to Guildford and opened his own shop, the Universal Athletic Stores, in the High Street. Here he sold cycles mainly of his own manufacture, with parts supplied by Brown Brothers. Like his contemporary William Morris (1877-1963), Dennis subsequently transferred his engineering skills from cycles to motor vehicles. Morris, however, went on to create a mass car-manufacturing concern, whereas Dennis chose to specialize in commercial vehicles. 
Later in 1895 Dennis was joined by his younger brother, 
The first commercial vehicle from the Dennis works, a van for Harrods (followed by repeat orders), was delivered in 1904. A range of commercial vehicles was then built up; fire engines were added in 1908 (and remained a Dennis speciality). Car manufacture ceased in 1913, though not before inroads had been made into the taxi market, with such users as the General Motor Cab Company. 
1913 had a double significance for Dennis Brothers, for in this year the private company of 1901, which had replaced the original partnership, with the two brothers alternating as chairman, was itself relaunched as a public company with an authorized capital of $300,000. Dennis Brothers was by then a leading lorry manufacturer. By producing vehicles under the government's subvention scheme (whereby the purchasers of lorries which were accepted as suitable for subsequent military use would receive an annual subvention in peacetime), the company further strengthened its position as a significant producer of commercial vehicles. Orders from such major Post Office contractors and carriers as McNamara and Carter Paterson had helped to establish this position in the decade between the introduction of commercial vehicles and the First World War. This expansion of production and a larger product necessitated a move to Woodbridge Hill, Guildford, where the firm had room to grow. 
John Dennis was a paternalistic employer; he established a non-contributory benevolent fund and developed extensive company housing, including 102 houses (Dennisville) built to accommodate the workforce associated with the White and Poppe engine company of Coventry, acquired in 1919 and transferred to Guildford in 1932. Lawnmower manufacture was introduced in the early 1920s as part of a diversification programme which included the production of industrial pumps (in addition to those for firefighting) and municipal vehicles. The latter proved commercially beneficial, as public expectations of local authority services grew and the physical growth of suburbia and housing estates created extra demand. Bus, coach, and ambulance designs, and new commercial vehicles, were developed in the 1920s and 1930s. It was the success of the bus, coach, and municipal vehicle ranges which provided momentum for the firm in the middle years of this period. 
The partnership of the two brothers, who were actively involved in the firm as joint managing directors, combined John's engineering aptitude with Raymond's marketing skills. (Raymond Dennis was knighted in 1920 in recognition of the firm's wartime production effort.) Less well-known than the collaboration of the Rootes brothers, the lifelong working partnership of John and Raymond Dennis, which ended only with their deaths in the same year, is an equally impressive example of sibling co-operation in the development of a business. Alfred White and Peter Poppe provided the board with further engineering expertise when the White and Poppe engine firm was absorbed in 1919. Sir Raymond Dennis died at Gratham Grange, Gratham, Surrey, on 20 May 1939. The death of John Dennis occurred on 27 August 1939, at Down Place, Compton, Guildford, Surrey, only three months later; he was survived by his second wife. Both brothers enjoyed outdoor recreational pursuits, such as fishing. John Dennis served as a JP. 


@@@@@


doc= 46871


Sir (Herbert) Raymond Dennis (1878-1939), motor vehicle manufacturer. The fourth son, Raymond was born on 25 June 1878 at Huntshaw. Educated at Wellington School, Somerset, his initial contribution to their joint venture included his success as a competitive cyclist. In 1898 production of the brothers' first motorized vehicle, a tricycle with a De Dion engine, was added to that of their Speed King and Speed Queen bicycles. Quadricycles followed, and in 1901 cycle production gave way to the manufacture of motor vehicles, initially cars. John Dennis married Dora Annie, daughter of Stephen Baker, in 1903. There was one son of the marriage. Following Dora's death in 1934, he subsequently married her sister, Julia Elizabeth. In 1922 Raymond married Sybil Margaret, daughter of Sir Leonard Llewelyn, a government minister in charge of non-ferrous metals in the First World War. They had four sons and a daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 46873


Dent, Sir Francis Henry (1866-1955), railway administrator, was born at Cerrig Domas, Holyhead, Anglesey, on 31 December 1866, the second son of Charles Bayley Calmady Dent (1832-1894), and his wife, Corinna, 'nee' Courcoumelli (or Kurkomellis) (1840-1918), who was born in Corfu. His father, who had served as an officer in the Royal Navy and held the rank of admiral, was marine superintendent of the London and North-Western Railway (LNWR) at Holyhead from 1867 to 1892. His elder brother, Charles Hastings Dent (1864-1956), also became a railway manager. 
In October 1884, at the age of seventeen, Dent began his own railway career with the LNWR, joining the general manager's office at Euston, before transferring to the superintendent's department two years later. The superintendent of the line, G. P. Neele, quickly recognized Dent's abilities, and made him outdoor assistant to the superintendent in 1889. At the end of 1893 Dent moved to Chester to become assistant district superintendent of the Chester and Holyhead district, and was promoted to district superintendent in 1899. His success in organizing the freight traffic in north Wales led to his appointment as goods traffic superintendent for the LNWR's Metropolitan district in 1901. 
Back in London, Dent was entrusted with the reorganization of Broad Street station, which at the time was handling half a million tons of merchandise per year. Through the introduction of new working practices, including a bonus payment scheme for the workers, Dent was able to improve the throughput of goods at the station and eliminate the need for Broad Street to undergo a costly enlargement. On 2 July 1902 he married Helen Janet (1876-1920), daughter of James Morten, farmer, of Denham, Buckinghamshire; they had three sons. The following year Dent travelled to the United States to observe the latest railway operating methods. 
In 1907 Dent left the LNWR to become chief goods manager of the South-Eastern and Chatham Railway (SECR), with the subsidiary title of assistant general manager. In 1909 he chaired the Goods Managers' Conference of the Railway Clearing House. He became general manager of the SECR in 1911 at a salary of $3000 per annum, a figure which rose to $4000 the following year. Prior to the outbreak of war, Dent recommended the electrification of the SECR's network and advocated the creation of a national pool of freight wagons to help reduce working expenses. In July 1911 he was commissioned in the Engineer and Railway Staff Corps, Royal Engineers, and held the rank of lieutenant-colonel until his resignation from the corps upon his retirement in April 1920. 
The SECR's position, serving both the Channel ports of Folkestone and Dover, plus the Royal Arsenal at Woolwich, meant that in May 1913 Dent was invited to join the railway executive committee (REC), the group of leading managers responsible for the operation of Britain's railways during the First World War. He continued to be responsible for running the SECR, which from the spring of 1915 contained the main port of embarkation (Folkestone) for troops heading to the western front. He chaired a sub-committee of the REC tasked with providing ambulance trains to deal with the higher-than-expected number of casualties returning from the front. In September 1914 he visited France with representatives of the Great Eastern Railway and LNWR to ascertain the modifications required to allow British rolling stock to function effectively on French rails. In December 1914 he offered the services of the SECR to the War Office to run the operations of the port of Boulogne on behalf of the British army using civilian working methods. Under the resulting 'Dent scheme', the SECR ran the unloading of ships and removal of goods from the port by rail for the military between April and October 1915. 
Dent oversaw the work of identifying, organizing and employing thousands of skilled Belgian railwaymen from among the 250,000 refugees estimated to have fled to Britain, and from April 1915 onwards was responsible for interviewing suitable applicants for commissions in the Railway Operating Division. His contribution was officially recognized with the receipt of the Legion d'honneur in 1915. Knighted in January 1916, he was chosen by Sir Eric Geddes to investigate the army's railway organization in Egypt and Salonika. When America entered the war, its military authorities also sought his advice on the most effective means of evacuation for wounded troops from the battlefield. In 1918 Dent was elected chairman of the Railway Clearing House General Managers' Conference by his peers. 
After the war Dent became a member of the advisory committee on railway subjects at the London School of Economics (LSE), and a council member of the newly formed Institute of Transport. In April 1920 his wife died and he resigned as general manager of the SECR, ending his full-time professional career. However, he continued to play a role in the formation of railway policy, by visiting Austria as president of the commission which reapportioned the rolling stock of the former Austrian State Railways, and acting as director of the Southern Railway. 
In 1923 Dent married at the British Consulate in Malaga Winifred Grace Culling (1895-1970), daughter of William Archibald Culling Fremantle, Church of England clergyman; she was the divorced wife of Captain Frederick Hamilton. From March 1929 until January 1949 Dent was chairman of the Railway Clearing House. His talents as a railway manager were widely acknowledged within and outside the industry, and his contribution between 1914 and 1918 personified the importance of effective administrative practices to the co-ordination of Britain's war effort. He died at his home, Warblington Lodge, Havant, Hampshire, on 4 June 1955. 


@@@@@


doc= 46874


Paula, Frederic Rudolph Mackley de (1882-1954), writer on accountancy and industrialist, was born on 23 July 1882 at Avenue House, Tenterden Grove, Hendon, London, one of the five children of Friedrich Mortiz Alphonse Felix de Paula, a partner in the City solicitors' practice of Carey, Warburton, and de Paula, and his wife Ellen Harriet, 'nee' Mackley. Frederic, whose grandmother was of German origin, had one brother (who became a City stockbroker) and three sisters. Following his father's death in 1902, the family lived for a time in North Finchley, and later at Netherdale, Nether Street, Church End, Finchley. De Paula attended Mill Hill School before going to work in the City of London in 1901, when he became articled to the chartered accountant Charles F. Cape at 12 Coleman Street; he qualified in 1905 and set up in practice in 1909. A year later he was joined by Edgar John Turner, and practised as De Paula, Turner & Co. until 1913, when a further partnership change resulted in the creation of De Paula, Turner, Lake & Co. 
De Paula's main contribution to accountancy was not as a practitioner but as a teacher and writer, industrialist, and champion of regulatory requirements concerning financial reporting practice. Soon after qualifying he presented auditing lectures to the finals students of the Chartered Accountants Students' Society of London. Increasingly dissatisfied with the literature available for students, he published in 1914 'The Principles of Auditing', a successful text which ran to eleven editions during his lifetime. In 1920 he joined Lawrence R. Dicksee at the London School of Economics as a part-time lecturer on the new commerce degree. De Paula continued his involvement, part time, as a reader from 1924, and as professor of accountancy and business methods (in succession to Dicksee) in 1926. This was the year he presented arguably his most important public lecture, entitled 'The place of accountancy in commerce'. The lecture aimed to raise the status of the accounts department within companies by identifying its principal functions and making businessmen fully aware of the way it could contribute to the practical management of business organizations. It was a timely intervention. Accountants were beginning to move from the profession in growing numbers, sometimes at top level (with Francis D'Arcy Cooper's move to Lever Brothers the most celebrated example), but more often in a specifically accounting capacity. There was a need for greater recognition of the contributions they could make beyond keeping the records straight and assisting in the preparation of the published accounts. The opportunity for de Paula to put his ideas into practice was not long in coming. In 1929 he resigned his chair and his partnership in order to give full attention to his new appointment as chief accountant at the Dunlop Rubber Company, where he soon became controller of finance. 
At Dunlop de Paula renewed personal links developed during the First World War, when he had joined the Ministry of Munitions and worked for Sir Eric Geddes. His immediate superior was George Beharrell, and in due course he succeeded Beharrell as director of the statistical section of the gun ammunition filling department. In 1917 he followed Geddes to France, and became the latter's assistant director-general of transportation at general headquarters, with the rank of lieutenant-colonel. With Dunlop suffering from financial problems in the late 1920s, it was perhaps natural that the company's chairman, Geddes, and managing director, Beharrell, should turn to de Paula to see what contribution an accountant could make to the resolution of their difficulties. 
It is de Paula's contribution towards the improvement of Dunlop's financial reporting practices which has perhaps received most attention. The year 1931 saw the prosecution of the chairman (Lord Kylsant) and auditor (Harold Moreland, of Price, Waterhouse & Co.) of the Royal Mail Shipping Company for publishing a balance sheet which was false and fraudulent. Although resulting in acquittal, the prosecution served to demonstrate the lamentable state of financial reporting practice among many of Britain's largest companies. The prestige of the profession slumped to an unprecedented depth. De Paula had already persuaded Dunlop to make a number of innovations in the accounts for 1929, and these were taken further in 1931, and again in 1933, drawing acclaim from the financial press and being described by the 'Daily Telegraph' as 'a joy to its own shareholders and the envy of all others'. In the aftermath of the Royal Mail case, Dunlop undoubtedly blazed a trail for other companies to follow. 
Turning to the company's management information system, de Paula placed particular emphasis on the need to develop an integrated system of budgetary planning and control covering the company's entire financial affairs. Such ideas were not unknown in the literature, but British industry had been slow to give them practical effect. De Paula provided leadership, both in terms of the reforms introduced in Dunlop, which were copied by other companies (for example, Pilkington), and in important lectures delivered in the mid-1930s, which attracted widespread attention. A serious illness then led to his retirement in 1941. Later, however, he moved on to Harding, Tilton, and Hartley Ltd, a firm of shirt manufacturers at Taunton, as vice-chairman and joint managing director. He served as chairman of this company (renamed British Van Heusen Company) and on the board of other leading public companies. 
De Paula's final major achievement was to help raise the awareness of the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales (ICAEW) concerning the need to cater for chartered accountants who had moved to industry. By the outbreak of the Second World War, about 50 per cent of all chartered accountants were working in business, but there was a tendency for the institute's leaders (drawn from public practice) to regard them as, at best, second-class citizens. Pressure from younger members in industry in the early 1940s, together with criticism in the press, helped to contribute to the establishment of the taxation and financial relations committee of the ICAEW, which dealt with the relationship of the business community with the Inland Revenue and other government departments. Also, for the first time, arrangements were made for the election of non-practising members to the institute's council. 
De Paula was the first non-practising member appointed to council, and he was also elected vice-chairman of the new committee, which is today best remembered for the twenty-nine recommendations on accounting principles issued between 1942 and 1969. These forerunners of today's financial reporting standards were guidelines on best practice, which companies were encouraged to adopt, and it is generally agreed that they succeeded in raising significantly the general standard of financial reporting. De Paula was the committee's chairman between 1943 and 1945, during which time recommendations 6 to 10 laid out the main valuation bases for published accounts. The topics covered correspond fairly closely to the list of subjects requiring attention identified by de Paula in the preface to 'The Principles of Auditing' (6th edn, 1933). De Paula was appointed CBE in the new year's honours list of 1951, partly in recognition of his work on a government committee appointed to review the organization and administrative methods of the Inland Revenue. 
De Paula married, in 1912, Agnes Smithson, the daughter of Frances Joseph Clark, of the Quaker shoemaking family of Street, Somerset. They lived for many years in Radlett, Hertfordshire, where they served, respectively, as captain and lady captain of the Porters Park Golf Club. There were two sons from the marriage, Hugh Francis Mackley and Frederic Clive. The latter edited issues of 'The Principles of Auditing' published after his father's death. De Paula died at his London home, 55 Park Mansions, Knightsbridge, on 13 December 1954. The Quaker influence was evidenced by his express wish that no mourning should be worn. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 46876


Deuchar, James (1849-1927), brewer, was born on 30 August 1849 in Guthrie, Forfar, Scotland, the son of David Deuchar, farmer, and his wife, Jane Wilson. Nothing is known of his early life until, as a young man, he moved to Tyneside with his three older brothers, Alexander, George, and Robert. Deuchar began as a publican at the Argyle Hotel, High Street, Gateshead, and in 1868, with his brother George, joined a partnership with John and James Meikle as wine, spirit, ale, and porter merchants at the Half Moon inn in Newcastle. In 1870 the firm diversified when Deuchar and Meikle purchased the Arthurs Hill brewery, Westgate Road, Newcastle. From a modest start the venture grew until it had taken over a number of other public houses on Tyneside. 
In 1872 Deuchar became the licensee of the Ridley Arms, in Pilgrim Street, Newcastle, and in 1874 he became its owner. He married Lizzie Henderson (died 1926), on 19 October 1875, in Birmingham; they had four daughters and three sons, one of whom, James Wilson Deuchar, succeeded his father as chairman of the firm. During 1875, extensions and alterations at the rear of the brewery were carried out, with further improvements being made in 1882. Deuchar rapidly built up a prosperous trade, and, benefiting from the 'brewery boom' of that decade, expanded his business to such an extent that in 1888 he was able to purchase the Monkwearmouth brewery and maltings of J. J. and W. H. Allison in Sunderland, at the same time acquiring more public houses. In 1893 the plant at the Ridley Arms was dismantled and brewing operations were concentrated in Sunderland. 
The firm adopted limited liability in July 1894 when the company's assets were valued at $227,000. The capital was restructured two years later. The authorized share capital was $350,000, but only $100,000 in debentures were sold to the public, all of the ordinary shares being retained by the Deuchar family. The assets of the company at that time were given in the prospectus as $616,000, including forty-five freehold hotels and public houses (among these, several hotels in Newcastle, Sunderland, and Tynemouth) and thirty-one leasehold pubs. Profits in the three years to 1898 had averaged over $30,000. Deuchar became chairman and managing director; his brother Robert was another of the directors. Robert had followed his younger brother into the industry by purchasing the Sandyford Stone brewery, in Newcastle. His own company of Robert Deuchar Ltd, registered in 1897, also built up a substantial trade on Tyneside and Wearside. 
While strong ale was always the mainstay of the Tyneside beer market, there was growing demand for pale ales of the kind brewed in Edinburgh and Burton upon Trent, and in 1900 this led Deuchar to acquire the Lochside brewery of William Ross & Co., Montrose. Despite this company's distance from Newcastle, it continued to do considerable trade in Scottish pale ale in that city, and maintained a large warehouse on Quayside by the Tyne, to which beer from north of the border was shipped in the firm's own steamships, 'Lochside' and 'Lochside II'. Later, in 1922, the Union mills in Montrose were purchased for use as maltings. Partly to secure his own barley supplies, Deuchar began to farm extensively and to acquire land at Middleton and Ilderton in Northumberland (a total of 7000 acres), and at Stichill, near Kelso, Roxburghshire (an estate of 6000 acres). He was more enterprising than others in his Scottish ventures, which enabled him to import Scottish ales into the Tyne area, and to make inroads into the Scottish market itself. 
From modest beginnings in the licensed trade Deuchar had, by the time of his death, built up an extensive portfolio of 150 public houses and hotels, including some of the best in Newcastle, supplied by his own breweries. Even after the end of the boom in 1902, when many breweries were struggling, the business continued to prosper, and was paying dividends of 12 per cent and upwards during most of the period before 1914. Such returns were far exceeded in the decade after 1918, when the firm declared dividends ranging from 20 to 40 per cent. 
Deuchar died at Stichill House, near Kelso, on 12 December 1927. He left an estate of over $1,200,000, a substantial sum for the time, and some measure of his acumen in the volatile business of brewing. The firm he founded was eventually taken over by Newcastle Breweries Ltd in 1956. 


@@@@@


doc= 46877


Deuchar, John James Walker (1851-1911), actuary and insurance company manager, was born on 24 September 1851 in Edinburgh, the youngest of five sons of John Deuchar (1786-1863), lecturer in chemistry at Edinburgh University, and his wife, Jane, daughter of James Walker, a publisher in Edinburgh. The family were Presbyterians who owned Morningside House, a modest mansion within its own park, and were well known in Edinburgh for their artistic and scientific talents. J. J. W. Deuchar studied at the Edinburgh Institute of Glasgow University until 1868, when he joined Standard Life Insurance Company as an actuarial trainee. After qualifying as a fellow of the Faculty of Actuaries, the professional body for Scotland, in 1876 he became assistant actuary for City of Glasgow Life. Public responsibilities followed. He took a leading part in founding the Insurance and Actuarial Society of Glasgow in 1881, and was an examiner for the city's Institute of Actuaries and Accountants. Unlike many actuaries, he became interested in business organization and also attended early morning lectures in law at Glasgow University. Wider professional recognition came with his election as fellow of the Institute of Actuaries, London, in 1883, followed by his appointment as actuary and secretary to Norwich Union Life Insurance Society in 1887. Norwich Union had previously given these responsibilities to two officials; Deuchar was their first joint appointment and he remained chief executive until 1910 when ill health forced him to retire. 
When Deuchar joined Norwich Union Life it was under threat of take-over because the sixty-year-old society was languishing in a market dominated by new sales methods. Its directors refused to accept the need for change until Deuchar spelt out the options logically for the first time. He was fortunate to have an ally in George Forrester, a director keen for change, who was the society's president from 1888 to 1898; his was clearly the influence behind Deuchar, but it remained for Deuchar to transform practices. Adopting Scottish insurance company methods, he persuaded the directors to work in subcommittees so as to focus attention on crucial issues at their main board. He then produced meticulously planned proposals for expansion. Sensitive to the directors' conservatism, he initially avoided rapid overseas growth and focused on the home market, switching from old-fashioned 'whole-life' policies to an imaginative variety of endowment schemes. These reached the key growth sector and he managed the subsequent expansion with immense skill. Tighter controls kept costs low, and he eschewed expensive press advertising, preferring to gain new business by offering better bonuses. The results proved his point. When he arrived annual new business was tottering around $200,000 insured, which barely covered what was lost through claims; by 1890 it was $1 million and it continued rising, to reach $5 million when he retired. Initial scepticism in the insurance press turned to unqualified praise. From a ranking below at least twenty other British life-insurance firms in 1887, Deuchar took Norwich Union's new business to second place behind only the massive Prudential. 
Deuchar's personal and social life remained more out of public view than was usual for such a prominent insurance official. He married and had two sons and two daughters; his wife died before him. From 1907 he reluctantly served as a Conservative councillor in Norwich, taking a special interest in local education. Other activities included golf, freemasonry, and the Norwich Scots Society, and he remained a Presbyterian. However, he was preoccupied with his heavy professional responsibilities, which probably caused the breakdown of his health (he suffered at different times from blood poisoning and pneumonia) and forced him to resign. A grateful board elected him a director, and he visited Egypt, hoping to regain his strength, but he died in Norwich on 6 June 1911. Despite his immense reputation as a financier, his annual salary never rose much above $3000, and his total estate, shared with characteristic fairness and attention to detail in his will, was a modest $14,287. 


@@@@@


doc= 46878


Deutsch, Oscar (1893-1941), cinema owner and film exhibitor, was born on 12 August 1893 at Balsall Heath, Birmingham, the son of Leopold Deutsch (died 1904), a scrap metal merchant, and his wife, Leah Cohen. His parents were both Jewish, and immigrants: his mother from Poland, and his father from Betzho, Transchener Komitat, in Hungary. Leopold Deutsch died in an accident in 1904, but the business was continued by his brother, Adolf Brenner, under the name of Deutsch and Brenner. Deutsch was educated at the King Edward VI Grammar School, Birmingham, where he developed a fascination for the cinema shared by two other pupils, Michael Balcon and Victor Saville. At the age of seventeen he joined Deutsch and Brenner, but found it dull and in 1920 he formed a local film distribution company with Balcon and Saville which acted as the midlands representative for C. M. Woolf's film company. Deutsch then provided some of the financial backing when his two friends went into film production in 1923, but stayed in Birmingham himself, continuing to work for the family firm. He now had a family of his own: in 1918 he married Lily Tanchan; they had three sons. 
In 1925 Deutsch moved into cinema ownership. In partnership with Reginald Noakes he bought three cinemas, including the Globe and Crown in Coventry. He built and opened his first cinema, the Picture House at Brierley, Staffordshire, in association with several other businessmen. This was followed in 1930 by a cinema at Perry Barr, Birmingham, which was named Odeon and introduced the distinctive, straight-edged lettering of the name that was to become a well-known trademark. By 1931 Deutsch was chairman of the midlands branch of the Cinematograph Exhibitors' Association of Great Britain and Ireland. 
In 1932 in partnership with W. G. Elcock and Stanley Bates Deutsch drew up plans to open a circuit of cinemas using the Odeon name. These were concentrated initially in south-east England and the London suburbs and set up as separate companies with a local partner who usually supplied the site or was the builder of the cinema. The first five Odeons opened in 1933, followed by another seventeen in 1934. By 1936 Deutsch's circuit comprised 142 cinemas and was the fourth largest in the country. 
The Odeon South Harrow was the first of several designed for the circuit by A. P. Starkey with simple, modern facades covered in yellow faience tiles, relieved by colour bands, which made them stand out among other buildings in the high street. The Odeon Worthing was the first to have a tower feature, while the Odeon Haverstock Hill, in north London, was the first flagship cinema. The early 1930s saw widespread new cinema construction as many circuits sought to expand, but the speed at which Deutsch enlarged the Odeon chain was phenomenal: 136 new cinemas were opened before the Second World War forced the suspension of further development. By building so many new, clearly recognizable Odeons, Deutsch cleverly established a brand image. 
Deutsch relied on the architectural practice of Harry Weedon in Birmingham and the London practices of George Coles and Andrew Mather to design most of his new Odeons, which usually followed a house style of distinctive, streamlined exteriors using yellow or cream faience tiles and slab towers, although many were schemes already in progress that could not be revised to have the same look. When work began in 1937 on the Odeon Leicester Square, a coal-black exterior was deliberately chosen to distinguish it as the new flagship cinema from the rest of the circuit. 
Deutsch also took over many existing cinemas, renaming them Odeons. By 1939 his circuit had built or planned cinemas in virtually every large city in England and had begun operating in Scotland. When Deutsch arranged to take over the small but well-placed Paramount chain just before the Second World War, he made Odeon without doubt equal to the two longer-established national circuits, Gaumont and ABC. 
Deutsch was most concerned that his Odeons should be eye-catching externally, especially when outlined in neon at night. Internally, the cinemas were more functional, without the design frills of many rivals. Deutsch did not believe in organs and supporting stage shows but simply in providing films in comfortable surroundings. His wife, Lily, was a consultant on the colour schemes. There were, however, many standard features inside the cinemas, including carpets, clocks, settees, and ash-stands, all with a distinctive art deco design. 
Deutsch gave the American distributor United Artists a substantial holding in Odeon to ensure a supply of top-quality British films, especially the productions of Alexander Korda. However, he made a specific point of not involving the company in film production, where huge losses had been incurred by other groups. 
The growth of Odeon was all the more remarkable as Deutsch had serious health problems which were, however, a well-kept secret. He had a major operation for cancer in the late 1920s and followed a strict diet. In 1935 the head office of the Odeon circuit was moved to London and Deutsch lived close by at the Dorchester Hotel. He nevertheless returned home to Birmingham on Friday afternoons to be with his family, and to attend Singer's Hill Synagogue (of which he was warden and president) on the sabbath. A strong supporter of rearmament in the late 1930s, he was able, through the help of Sir Michael Bruce, to help significant numbers of German Jews to escape the Nazi threat. 
Deutsch incurred considerable stress in 1938 when he set about consolidating the various local Odeon companies into one: only the assistance of his accountant, John Davis, enabled proper accounts to be produced, quashing rumours that Odeon was in financial difficulty. 
A courteous, considerate employer, a man of great charm and charisma who readily delegated authority, Deutsch was much admired by his colleagues and staff. His early death from cancer in the London Clinic on 5 December 1941 may have been precipitated by injuries after a bomb explosion hurled him out of bed. His unachieved ambitions, left to his successor as chairman of Odeon Theatres, J. Arthur Rank, had been to take over the rival Gaumont chain and to expand abroad. He was buried in Birmingham and the funeral procession detoured to pass his first Odeon at Perry Barr. Deutsch was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 46879


Thomas Robert Dewar, Baron Dewar (1864-1930), whisky blender and politician. 


@@@@@


doc= 46880


Dickinson, Sir Arthur Lowes (1859-1935), accountant, was born on 8 August 1859 at Langham Chambers, Marylebone, London, the elder son of Lowes Cato Dickinson (1819-1908), a portrait painter, and his wife, Margaret Ellen, 'nee' Williams (died 1882). Arthur's younger brother was the historian and fellow of King's College, Cambridge, Goldsworthy Lowes Dickinson (1862-1932). Arthur was educated at Charterhouse School and at King's College, Cambridge, where he obtained a first in mathematics in 1882. He then served his articles with the chartered accountants William Edwards, Jackson, and Browning, which was based in the City of London. In 1883 Dickinson won the first prize in the intermediate examination of the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales (ICAEW) and joint first place in the final examinations (1886). He married in 1888 Mary Kathleen, daughter of William Jennings, manager of a finance company and actuary. They had two daughters. 
Dickinson joined with another City-based firm, in 1888, to form Lovelock, Whiffin, and Dickinson. Three years later he accepted the invitation from Edwin Waterhouse to take charge of Price Waterhouse's recently established American operations. Together with a number of other British accountants working in the United States, Dickinson helped to organize the newly developing American accountancy profession. Although the first professional association was established in 1886, progress had been slow. Dickinson served as president of the Federation of Societies of Public Accountants in 1904, and as secretary of the American Association of Public Accountants in 1905 helped to bring about the merger of those two bodies. Following his return to Britain in 1913, as partner in Price Waterhouse's London office, he continued his professional involvement, serving as a member of the ICAEW's council between 1914 and 1928. 
While in the United States, Dickinson also made his mark in the development of financial reporting practices. One of Price Waterhouse's largest clients -- possibly the largest -- was the United States Steel Corporation. Dickinson collaborated with the company's controller, William J. Filbert, to produce solutions to financial reporting problems associated with the newly emerging conglomerate form of business organization. The company's accounts for 1902 attracted widespread recognition as representing major progress towards fuller and more meaningful financial disclosure, and of particular interest is the fact that they contained an early example of a group consolidated statement. 
Substantial contributions were made by Dickinson to the accounting literature on both sides of the Atlantic. Presentations to the International Congress on Accounting at St Louis in 1904, and to the school of commerce, accounts, and finance, New York University, in 1905, are notable for their thoughtful analyses of the theory and practice of consolidated statement preparation. Together with two American professional colleagues, William M. Lybrand and Robert H. Montgomery, Dickinson did much to encourage the early widespread adoption of group financial reporting procedures in the United States. Curiously, he was not a prominent public advocate of these procedures following his return to Great Britain, and it is an interesting question whether he exerted any influence on his partner at Price Waterhouse, Gilbert Garnsey, who caused such a stir with his lecture 'Holding companies and their published accounts', presented to the London members of the ICAEW in 1922. 
Dickinson was, however, an outspoken critic of a number of aspects of contemporary accounting practice. A widely published paper presented to the Royal Statistical Society in 1924 (Dickinson had become a fellow of the Institute of Actuaries as early as 1886) drew attention to the lack of business statistics published either for public consumption or for corporate shareholders. The importance of full publicity was also the subject of a paper published in 1926 which, in a climate of industrial unrest, argued the need to recognize the interests of the various partners in business as part of an endeavour to achieve a greater degree of co-operation between representatives of capital and labour. 
Professional accounting examinations were thought by Dickinson to be narrow and technical in their content. 'Accounting Practice and Procedure', published in 1913, was designed to help rectify this situation by supplying a text which would provide accounting students and practitioners with a deeper understanding of the nature, scope, and limitations of accountancy. Dickinson's experience as a company director (directorships included the Ebbw Vale Steel, Iron and Coal Company Ltd, the Alvis Car and Engineering Company Ltd, and the Goodyear Tyre and Rubber Company Ltd) and as partner in an accounting practice, together with the possession of a high intellect, enabled him to combine theory with practice, so as to produce effective solutions to pressing accounting problems. 
Dickinson was active in public service during the First World War as financial adviser, first to the controlled establishments division of the Ministry of Munitions, and later to the controller of coal mines. Other public appointments included membership of the Miners' Welfare Committee, the commerce degree committee of the University of London, and the board of governors of the London School of Economics. He was knighted in 1919 for government service during the war. He lived, towards the end of his life, at Alding, Grayswood, near Haslemere, in Surrey. He died at Queen Anne's Mansions, St James's Park, London, on 28 February 1935, and was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 46881


Dixon, Sir Alfred Herbert, baronet (1857-1920), cotton spinner, was born at 14 St George's Terrace, Kensington, London, on 22 February 1857, the sixth son of Henry Hall Dixon (1822-1870), barrister and racing journalist, and Caroline, daughter of Thomas Lynes of Hackleton House, Northamptonshire. Educated at Kensington grammar school and Brighton School, Dixon followed his grandfather, Peter Dixon of Carlisle, in entering the cotton industry. He served his apprenticeship with William Houldsworth at the Reddish Spinning Company, Stockport. In 1876 he joined A. & G. Murray, a well-established but by then declining Manchester firm of fine cotton spinners, which, under his youthful but astute management, re-emerged in the forefront of the industry. On 7 April 1880 he married Caroline (died 1941), daughter of Henry Sandford, cotton manufacturer of Cringle Hall, Manchester. 
In 1898 Dixon rejoined Houldsworth in establishing the Fine Spinners' and Doublers' Association, a pioneering amalgamation of thirty-one firms in the cotton industry, which sought to achieve economies of scale in a form of corporate enterprise appropriate to the early twentieth century. The Fine Spinners, with Dixon as its managing director, developed a strong central organization, able to co-ordinate its component firms into a successful vertically integrated whole, avoiding the problems of continuing family autonomy, which bedevilled other early amalgamations. The Fine Spinners was to be the most successful of the early textile mergers in England, with an effective dominance, but never a monopoly, of the fine-spinning sector. By 1909 it had grown to comprise fifty firms, 4 million spindles, and over 30,000 employees, forming Edwardian Britain's largest firm. Under Dixon's guidance, it also set a lead in scientific research, employee welfare, and direct investment in cotton plantations in America and cotton merchanting in Egypt. Dixon remained managing director until 1917, when he became chairman until his death. He cautiously but decisively held back the Fine Spinners from overcapitalization at the end of the war, thus putting the firm in a relatively strong position during the 1920s, and earning his reputation as 'perhaps the wisest as well as the most courageous of cotton men' (B. Bowker, 'Lancashire under the Hammer', 1928, 40). 
Dixon also played a pre-eminent part in the business politics of cotton. He was active within the Federation of Master Cotton Spinners, particularly in its labour and conciliation work, was a director of the Manchester Royal Exchange, president of the Textile Institute (1919), and a leading advocate of the empire cotton-growing movement. His strong belief in the collective organization of industry led to his participation in the Federation of British Industry in 1916, serving on several of its early committees and chairing its Manchester branch. Dixon was also one of the growing breed of internationally minded pre-war men of business, an ardent supporter of the International Cotton Federation before 1914 and, as its president in 1919, ready to promote it as a 'businessman's League of Nations'. He led the British delegation to the World Cotton Congress in New Orleans in 1919, and but for his untimely death, he would have presided at the Manchester congress of 1921. 
Dixon's standing with masters and men made him an excellent choice as chairman of the Cotton Control Board set up by the government in June 1917 in order to keep the industry working with a minimum supply of raw cotton. It successfully provided a form of collective regulation, a buffer between the government, the unions, and the employers. The board's schemes avoided redundancies in cotton, allaying the government's fears of the social and political unrest which a second cotton famine might have brought. The wisdom of retaining labour in cotton has been questioned, but there is no doubt that Dixon skilfully achieved the board's objectives, combining, in Hubert Henderson's words, 'in a high measure the devotion to duty, the resourceful vigour, the shrewdness, the tenacity of purpose, even obstinacy of a Lancashire businessman' with 'the graces of a singularly gentle and winning personality' (Henderson, 10). Dixon's work was rewarded with a baronetcy on 7 February 1918. He was also a valued contributor to the post-war Board of Trade advisory committee. 
Dixon was an enthusiastic actor and cricketer in his youth, but his later activities were hampered by ill health, though in 1915 he chaired the committee which raised the Manchester Pals volunteer battalions. He died at his home, The Moss, Great Warford, Cheshire, on 10 December 1920, of the bronchial asthma from which he had long suffered. He was buried on 13 December at Chelford parish church, where he had served as churchwarden. He was survived by his wife and daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 46882


Dixon, Sir Raylton (1838-1901), shipbuilder, was born on 8 July 1838 at Westgate, Newcastle upon Tyne, the second of at least three sons of Jeremiah Dixon of Balla Wray, Ambleside, Westmorland, a bank employee, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Frank. His elder brother, John Dixon, an engineer, was involved in the transfer of Cleopatra's Needle from Egypt to the Thames Embankment in 1879. Dixon was privately educated before being apprenticed to Coutts and Parkinson, shipbuilders, of Willington quay on Tyneside. From there he moved in 1856 to work for Charles Mitchell & Co., iron shipbuilders, at Walker, on the Tyne. 
Dixon moved to Teesside in 1859 as manager of the former Rake Kimber shipyard in Middlesbrough, which Richardson, Duck & Co. had just taken over, and three years later, with a partner, Thomas Backhouse, he bought the yard. They later added the former Candlish Fox and David Jays yards to establish the Cleveland Dockyard, which they ran with the help of Dixon's younger brother Waynman. Dixon married Elizabeth ('b'. 'c'.1842), 'nee' Walker, of Glasgow in 1863; they had two sons and six daughters, one of whom married a member of the Bolckow family. By the time Backhouse retired in 1873, and Dixon became sole owner, they had built more than eighty ships. Although they built mainly passenger and cargo steamers, the yard launched its first warship, HMS 'Tourmaline', in 1875, and went on to build many more naval vessels, especially gunboats and cruisers, for the Royal Navy and several foreign governments, in association with Harroway, the naval architect. Between 1873 and 1882 output grew from 5000 tons a year to 27,000 tons. When Dixon launched his first steel ship in 1883 his workforce had grown to 2300. Despite the depression of 1884 to 1887, when production at the yard shrank to 24 per cent of the 1883 output and many workers were laid off, the yard survived, and in 1886 the SS 'Santiago', the largest ship ever built on the Tees, was launched to be used on the north Atlantic route of the Wilson Line. In 1887 Dixon took over a yard on the site of the old Teesside Iron and Engine Works, and by 1889 had increased his tonnage to over 40,000 tons. In 1889 Dixon was the largest shipbuilder on the Tees, launching 48 per cent of the total output that year, and seven of the ten largest ships built on the Tees between 1889 and 1914 were made at the Cleveland Dockyard, including the SS 'Montrose' (1897), the first Teesside ship over 5000 tons, and the SS 'Manchester City' (1898), which was 7696 tons. The firm became a limited liability company, Sir Raylton Dixon & Co. Ltd, in 1897, and by the time of Dixon's death over 500 ships had been built at the yard, which had expanded to 7 berths. The company built steamers for all the leading passenger lines, including P. & O., and Union Castle, and for mercantile marines all over the world. 
Dixon had other business concerns. He was a director of Sadler & Co. Ltd, chemical manufacturers of Middlesbrough, Robert Stephenson & Co., the Newcastle engineering company, and the Elder, Dempster Shipping Company, Liverpool. He joined the Institution of Naval Architects in 1868, serving twice on the council, and was a member of the North East Coast Institution of Engineers and Shipbuilders. A man with very wide interests, Dixon enjoyed drawing caricatures and photography, and was first president of the Tees Amateur Boating Club. A good shot, he was a major in the 1st North Yorkshire artillery volunteers for eighteen years. He was also a churchwarden of St Hilda's parish church in Middlesbrough. In the 1880s, Dixon moved into Gunnergate Hall, Marton, built by the ironmaster John Vaughan, partner of Henry Bolckow, who had lived nearby in Marton Hall. 
A member of Middlesbrough town council from 1868 to 1874, and from 1878 to 1884, Dixon served as mayor of Middlesbrough from 1888 to 1889, when the prince and princess of Wales opened the new town hall and municipal buildings. His yard was given the contract for a ferry steamer when his proposal for a transporter bridge linking the two sides of the Tees was turned down. He contested Middlesbrough as a Conservative in the general election of 1885, but was defeated by the sitting member, Isaac Wilson, a Cleveland ironmaster. A JP for Middlesbrough from 1872 and on the commission of the peace for the North Riding of Yorkshire from 1885, Dixon served as deputy lieutenant of the county in 1889. He was knighted for public services in 1890, and was appointed a freeman of the borough of Middlesbrough. 
Sir Raylton Dixon died at his home, Gunnergate Hall, on 28 July 1901 after a long illness; he was survived by his wife. He had been one of the leading shipbuilders in the north-east. The yard was taken over by Lambert Bros. Ltd during the First World War, although members of the Dixon family retained their influence, and was closed in 1921. 


@@@@@


doc= 46883


Dobson, Sir Benjamin Alfred (1847-1898), textile machinery manufacturer, was born on 27 October 1847 at Douglas, Isle of Man, the eldest son of Arthur Dobson (1825- 'c'.1876) and Henrietta Elizabeth, 'nee' Harrison. He was a direct descendant of the Dobsons of Westmorland, holders of land near Patterdale at the head of Ullswater since at least the fifteenth century. From 1864 he was employed as a mechanical engineer on the Belfast and Northern Counties Railway. In 1869 he moved from Belfast to Bolton in order to begin work at the firm of Dobson and Barlow, manufacturers of spinning machinery, which was then managed by his uncle. The firm had been founded in 1790 by the cabinet maker Isaac Dobson (1767-1833), and the timber merchant Peter Rothwell (died 1816). It was carried on by the nephew of the founder, Benjamin Dobson (1787-1839), and then by his son, Benjamin Dobson (1823-1874), who took Edward Barlow (1821-1868) into partnership in 1851. After Barlow's death it continued to trade as Dobson and Barlow. As the great-grandson of Isaac Dobson's brother, Benjamin Alfred was the fourth generation of the family in the business. On the retirement of his uncle in 1871 he became a partner, together with Thomas Henry Rushton (1845-1903), the son of Thomas Lever Rushton (1810-1883), a banker and erstwhile ironfounder. At that time the firm faced a harsh dilemma, having almost exhausted the range of its market opportunities. It had specialized in the manufacture of spinning machinery and especially of the mule, as was most fitting for a Bolton engineer. Its operations had expanded in harmony with the expansion of the spinning trade of Bolton, Preston, and Manchester, which spun medium and fine counts of yarn. The demand for its machines remained, however, limited because the medium and fine trade was a relatively small sector of the industry. Thus between 1811 and 1870 Oldham, the seat of the coarse trade, had expanded its spindleage half as fast again as had Bolton. During the 1840s Platts of Oldham had surpassed Dobsons in size, and by the 1870s employed a workforce four times that of Dobsons, manufacturing five times the mule spindleage of the Bolton firm. Above all, customers demanded machinery designed to spin coarse counts. Sales of replacements remained insignificant since Lancashire machinery was built to last. It was the achievement of the two new partners to realize the full potential of the firm's resources, to escape from the restraints imposed by the Bolton-type trade, and to expand into more promising markets. 
Benjamin Alfred Dobson began the task of creative innovation by improving the performance of the Heilmann comber, which the firm had manufactured since 1871: he succeeded in enhancing its productivity by one half. Between 1878 and 1886 local mills replaced their hand mules with the perfected self-acting mule, so generating orders for the firm. Bolton however enjoyed no joint-stock boom comparable to that which made Oldham in 1873-5 the spinning centre of the cotton universe, although Dobson did invest $500 in 1874 in the borough's first limited company, the Bolton Union Spinning Co. Ltd. The firm supplied a large market in France with its machines after the Franco-Prussian War which had transferred Alsace, with its flourishing textile trade, to Germany. Those machines won a gold medal at the Paris Exhibition of 1878 and earned for B. A. Dobson enrolment in the Legion d'honneur. When France introduced a protective tariff in 1891, Dobsons equipped a mill in Lille, financed by Lancashire, to supply fine yarns to the French market. Dobsons then undertook the systematic extension of its operations into the markets of its Oldham rival, improving the mule for spinning coarse counts, and bringing out, in 1887, a mule designed for the high-speed spinning of Oldham counts, and more significantly, investing in the manufacture of ring spinning frames, the spinning machine of the future, invented in the USA. From 1874 Dobsons manufactured ring frames, using the American Rabbeth spindle from 1879, the Dobson-Marsh cork-cushioned spindle patented in 1880, and William Dobson's improved flexible spindle patented in 1884. From 1887 it supplied ring frames to the new mills of Japan in direct competition with Platts. In 1896 B. A. Dobson, while on a round-the-world trip, lectured on the subject of the cotton industry in Japan, and was presented by the Japan Cotton Spinners' Association with a magnificent lacquered cabinet as a memento of his visit. From 1891 the firm equipped the new mills of China and there achieved a success denied to Platts: by 1895 it had supplied 77 per cent of the 180,000 spindles operating in Shanghai. It further equipped the first spinning mills to be established in Ceylon in 1889, in Turkey in 1890, and in Peru in 1897. It also realized the full potential capacity of the ring frame. By 1888 it was supplying to Bolton firms frames capable of spinning up to counts of 160. From 1891 it introduced the technique of electric welding in order to impart a perfect finish to its ring spindles. By 1898, 38 per cent of the firm's production of spindles were designed for ring frames, or almost as much as the proportion of 42 per cent of Platts', while its production of ring frames amounted to four-fifths of the total made by Platts. 
Dobson gave a marked impetus to technical innovation: he established an experiment room, and presented in 1886 Crompton's original mule to the Bolton Museum. Between 1869 and 1898 the firm took out 128 patents in England and 50 abroad, in the USA and Germany from 1878, in Belgium and France from 1880, in Austria from 1886 and in Switzerland from 1889. Dobson himself patented twenty-two inventions between 1877 and 1897. The patent machines were promoted by all the means available. An extensive network of foreign agents was employed. Dobson, an accomplished linguist, travelled widely in order to meet potential customers. He toured the continent, the USA and Canada, Egypt and India, as well as Japan. Foreign-language catalogues were published from 1883. Awards were won at four international exhibitions (1878-88). The new textile trade press spoke well of his machines, as did the textbooks on spinning written by R. Marsden in 1883, H. E. Walmsley in 1883, and J. Nasmith in 1890. 
From 1884 the firm embarked on an era of sustained innovation. It devised the Simplex Revolving Flat Card in 1886, and further improved it in 1890, raising its productivity some 35 per cent above that of any rival. Dobson also elucidated the theory of carding, and lectured upon it in Massachusetts in 1888, devoting his first two books to the subject. Thereby he opened a large market for the products of the firm because the preparatory processes played a vital role in determining the quality of the yarn spun. In 1890 the firm celebrated its centenary by financing a trip to the seaside for its 3700 hands, who filled six trains. In return they presented the partners with an illuminated address testifying to the 'excellent relations' between principals and employees. Since at least 1820 Dobsons had accepted loans from its own workfolk: in 1890 it introduced a profit-sharing scheme whereby loanholders secured a share in profits as well as interest. In 1891 it became a limited company, with a capital of $750,000 or one-fifth the capital of Platts in 1898. Under the regime of the two partners the workforce had doubled in size, from 2000 in 1873 to 4000 in 1897, while the proportion of the population of Bolton supported by the firm had risen from 14 per cent in 1871 to 20 per cent in 1898. 'Its success since 1871 has been conspicuous and its development phenomenal' reported the 'Textile Mercury' (12 March 1898, 210). The range of products had been enlarged to include machinery for wool, worsted, silk, vigogne (vicuna), and waste yarns, and a pattern of continuous innovation had been established. 
In 1876 Benjamin Dobson married Coralie Palin (1853-1904), daughter of William Thomas Palin, a railway engineer serving in India. They had six sons and three daughters. In 1886 Dobson bought the Doffcockers estate, and later another estate at Haverthwaite in Westmorland. His talents were widely recognized within his own profession. He became a member of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers in 1872: he served as a member of its council from 1885 to 1891 and again from 1893 to 1894. The firm overcame opposition from its workmen to the introduction of improved methods of working. It emerged victorious from local strikes in 1875 and 1887 as well as from a national strike in 1897-8. Dobson was elected chairman of the Bolton Engineering Employers' Association, and president of the Bolton Iron Trades Employers' Association as well as, in 1893, an honorary member of the Manchester Association of Engineers. He was chosen by the Engineering Employers' Federation as a representative at the conferences which ended the strike of 1897-8. He entered the Bolton town council in 1874 as a Conservative, and was elected an alderman and borough magistrate in 1880. He took a prominent part in the formation of Bolton Conservative council in 1884, and became the leader of the local Conservative Party. He was an enthusiastic churchman as well as a freemason. He was especially proud of his service as a rifle volunteer with the Loyal North Lancashire regiment, wherein he rose to the rank of lieutenant-colonel and earned the Volunteer Decoration for twenty years of service. As a town councillor he worked steadily from 1887 for the improvement in the facilities available for technical education, endowing scholarships for his workmen, but always viewing education as a lifelong process. As chairman of the council's Technical Instruction committee, he helped to transform the mechanics' institute into a new technical school, which was opened in 1892 and was equipped free of charge with machinery from his firm's own workshops. 
In 1894 a new phase in his life began when Dobson was elected mayor of Bolton, having earlier declined the honour. The appointment was an inspired one, for Dobson had become the borough's senior magistrate as well as its leading businessman, and had been elected president of Bolton's chamber of commerce in 1893. Dobson proved to be an outstanding success as mayor and more popular than any of his predecessors. His personal qualities served him as well in public life as they had in the conduct of business. He was a born leader of men, with a commanding presence, and a pronounced capacity for persuasive speech. Those qualities were reinforced by his keen insight, his sure grasp of detail, his immense tact, and his great determination. He succeeded where two previous mayors had failed, in conciliating the opposition of the out-townships to incorporation in a 'Greater Bolton'. As mayor he accepted office in a dozen associations established for charitable purposes. He had been a governor of Bolton School since 1882. He became vice-president of Bolton Infirmary and president of Bolton Humane Society. As the first citizen of the borough he held official functions for his fellow Boltonians, a ball for children in the town hall, a garden party at Doffcockers, and an autumn conversazione and a Christmas party for the aged poor. Three times he was re-elected to office, in 1895, in 1896, and in 1897, becoming the first mayor of Bolton to hold office for a fourth term. In recognition of his civic services he was knighted in the Queen's Diamond Jubilee honours of 1897, a dignity never conferred upon any member of the Platt family. 
In his fifty-first year, and apparently still in the prime of life, Dobson died at Doffcockers on 4 March 1898. The military funeral was attended by some 20,000 people, by mourners occupying 300 carriages, and by 33 clergymen: it became the occasion for an unprecedented display of public sympathy, and for heart-felt allusions from some 31 pulpits. Dobson was buried on 7 March at St Peter's Church, Smithills, Bolton. He left an estate of $240,134 where his uncle had left one of $140,000 in 1874. His eldest son, Benjamin Palin Dobson (1878-1936) left only $37,646. The profits generated by the firm were apparently reaped by the Rushton family. Dobson's death preceded the year of peak demand for the firm's machines in 1906. Dobson and Barlow had, however, continued to look to the future and manufactured in 1901-3 the first rayon spinning machine, for a Zurich firm. The works lost the name of its founders in 1975 and were closed in 1984. Bolton retained however a permanent memorial of Benjamin Alfred Dobson in the form of a 20 feet tall statue in Victoria Square, outside the town's magnificent town hall. The statue was sculpted by John Cassidy (1860-1939) and was unveiled on 17 February 1900 in the presence of 20,000 spectators. It bore the inscription 'erected by public subscription to commemorate a useful life and service to the town of Bolton'. The statue was never moved from its site, unlike the statue of John Platt erected in Oldham in 1878. 


@@@@@


doc= 46884


Docker, Sir Bernard Dudley Frank (1896-1978), industrialist, was born at Rotton Park Lodge, Edgbaston, on 9 August 1896, only child of Frank Dudley Docker (1862-1944) and Lucy Constance (died 1947), daughter of John Benbow Hebbert. His father was protective, arbitrary, and ambitious for him. He was educated at Harrow School (1911-13) and by private tutors before being successfully crammed for the Oxford University entrance by A. L. Smith. However, in 1915, probably to forestall his conscription, he was put to work by his father in munitions production at the Metropolitan Carriage, Wagon, and Finance Company. In 1918 he was appointed to its board, serving as deputy chairman in 1924-7. 
Despite an immaturity of character that lasted beyond adolescence, Docker was pushed by his father into other positions of responsibility and learned a certain business capacity. He was a member of the Birmingham advisory committee of the Midland Bank from 1925, and later a full board director (until obliged to resign in 1953 on account of his non-attendance at meetings and bad publicity surrounding him). He similarly graduated from the industrial management board to the board of directors of Vickers Ltd, and after his father's rupture with that company, was chairman of one of its competitors, the Birmingham Railway Carriage and Wagon Company (1930-60). He held other important directorships in industrial, financial, electrical, and railway companies operating in Britain and abroad. He joined the board of the Birmingham Small Arms Company (BSA) in 1939. 
In 1944, with his father's deathbed support, Docker consolidated his position by becoming both chairman and managing director of BSA. Its subsidiaries included a motorcycle company and Daimler Motors, manufacturers of limousines. Though the company enjoyed a burst of post-war prosperity, it had been riven by board factionalism for many years and had major difficulties of strategy and structure. A Warwickshire magistrate from 1924, in 1936 Docker became both chairman of Westminster Hospital and president of King Edward VII Memorial Hospital in Birmingham. He was created KBE in 1939, and encouraged political friends to press his claims for a baronetcy in 1941-2. 
Docker in April 1933 married an actress, Jeanne Stuart, 'nee' Ivy Sweet (1908-2003), daughter of William James Sweet. This marriage was broken up by his father after a few months and was dissolved in January 1935. In 1949 Docker married his second wife, Norah (1905-1983), widow of Sir William Collins, previously widow of Clement Callingham, and daughter of Sidney Turner, an unsuccessful Birmingham car salesman. Norah was a glamorous, excitable adventuress, and she shared Docker's dependence on alcohol. They had no children. Docker and his father had detested publicity, but his second wife courted cheap celebrity and together they were ruined by it. Her ostentation and interference in the Daimler business resulted in a notoriously protracted board-room struggle which culminated in Docker's dismissal from BSA in 1956. Hale and amiable within his own social set, in business he had the obstinacy of a weak man. Though puritanism and envy had a part in his downfall at BSA, he and his wife proved themselves to be foolhardy. This impression was confirmed when the Dockers were excluded from Monaco by Prince Rainier after a drunken nightclub row in 1958. His yacht 'Shemara' (built to his specifications at a cost of $100,000 in 1938) was later sold. His family power and fortune were thereafter dissipated. 
Docker was physically imposing, with a sleek, opulent, and self-confident manner; in the 1950s he looked at the world with a glassy-eyed bonhomie, and showed many signs of soft living. Having sold his estate at Stockbridge in Hampshire for $400,000 in 1966, he retired to Jersey. He died at Branksome Park, Dorset, following a stroke, on 22 May 1978. His father's hopes of an industrial dynasty died with him. 


@@@@@


doc= 46885


Dorman, Sir Arthur John, first baronet (1848-1931), steel manufacturer, was born at Ashford, Kent, on 8 August 1848, the son of Charles Dorman, a currier who later became a coal and timber merchant, and his wife, Emma Cage. He was educated at Christ's Hospital and spent a short period in Paris before beginning, at the age of eighteen, an apprenticeship to an iron manufacturer in Stockton-on-Tees, co. Durham. By 1873 he had become a metal broker, and in that year he married Clara, daughter of George Lockwood, a local merchant and shipbuilder. They had four sons and three daughters. 
Having started with some $1500 of capital, in 1876 Dorman launched a partnership with Albert de Lande Long by taking over an existing plant, the West Marsh ironworks, Middlesbrough. With its puddling furnaces and rolling mill, the company initially manufactured iron bars and angles for shipbuilding. In the 1880s, however, the firm switched to the more productive and profitable new steelmaking technologies by installing open-hearth furnaces and exploiting the breakthroughs of Percy Carlisle Gilchrist and his cousin, Sidney Gilchrist Thomas. By 1901 the company was a major manufacturer in the north-east, with a labour force of about 3000 and an output of about 180,000 tons of finished material a year. It competed for a place both at home and abroad with the principal creators of the iron and steel industry in the north-east, Henry Bolckow and Sir Isaac Lowthian Bell. Another surge of expansion occurred between 1900 and 1914, when the trend in the steel industry was towards vertical integration and merger. In 1902 Dorman Long absorbed Bell Bros. (with its distinguished but ageing head, Sir Isaac Lowthian Bell, still at the helm) and then acquired another substantial local firm, the North Eastern Steel Company. By 1914 Dorman Long, with a workforce of about 20,000, was a dominant firm on Teesside and a major British steel producer. 
As both chairman and managing director, Dorman was the key decision maker in the company. Tall and imposing, he had many of the characteristics of the other great Victorian ironmasters: optimism, daring, a great capacity for hard work, and a keen interest in technical improvements. He enjoyed the trappings of wealth (though not for their own sake) and had a paternalistic attitude to his own firm and the local community. He also demonstrated some of the faults of the industry, in which many of the leading merged firms were imperfectly integrated and directed by elderly managers, who were reluctant to delegate authority and even more reluctant to retire. 
These faults were exacerbated by an even more profitable and hectic phase of growth during the First World War, which saw Dorman Long become a major supplier of shells. It started to construct a $4.5 million plant at Redcar, Yorkshire, and also acquired several other large companies, such as Samuelsons and Carlton Iron. Dorman, made a KBE in 1918 and a baronet in 1923, emerged from the war more dominant and apparently more powerful than ever. But his company did not fare well in the black decade of the 1920s, and found itself crippled by inefficient plant and poor management. Although in his seventies, Dorman retained the chairmanship, working alongside the even more geriatric Sir (Thomas) Hugh Bell. Dorman's sons, Charles and Arthur, were brought into the business, though neither was able entirely to replace their father, who continued to make the key decisions through the 1920s. Most of these proved inappropriate in a period of slump, and at the end of the decade Dorman Long reflected the feebleness of its chairman. Over-capitalized and burdened with debts, Dorman sought refuge in another merger in 1929 with an equally ailing neighbour, Bolckow Vaughan. In the depression this move failed to turn the company's fortune, and not until after Dorman had departed (literally, for he never retired) were overdue managerial reforms effected. 
A typical Victorian owner-founder, Dorman was better at conquering new fields than properly organizing what he had acquired. However, it has been argued persuasively that Dorman's later period of 'gerontocracy, dynastic weakness and inefficiency, superimposed on economic stress, should not be allowed to obscure his great qualities of intrepidity, resourcefulness and flair' ('DBB'). He died on 12 February 1931 at his home, Grey Towers, Nunthorpe, near Middlesbrough, Yorkshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 46886


Douglas, George William (1859-1947), woollen and worsted dyer, was born on 14 August 1859 at 26 Spring Gardens, Bradford, in the West Riding of Yorkshire, the son of David Maitland Douglas and his wife, Margaret, 'nee' McConnell. He was educated at Bradford grammar school and at the Yorkshire College, Leeds. His father was a manager and later a partner in the important merchanting establishment in Bradford of A. and S. Henry. Between school and college George worked in his father's firm and while there gained experience in technical and commercial matters, particularly textile materials and their distribution throughout the markets of the world. He accompanied his father on several visits to the United States. On leaving the Yorkshire College in 1878, George Douglas found employment with Edward Ripley & Son, dyers, of Bowling, near Bradford. The firm enjoyed a high reputation in the worsted trade. From very small roots it had progressed to being capable of handling almost every kind of piece-goods manufactured in the Bradford area, and some Lancashire cotton goods. Douglas rose rapidly in the firm, graduating to the position of general manager and junior partner. 
The Yorkshire dyeing industry in the last third of the nineteenth century was facing immense competition from the continent, particularly Germany, and was struggling to achieve the standards the wool textile industry needed for its products to be competitive. In particular the invention and innovation of artificial dyestuffs was putting traditional dyers under much pressure. Douglas led the reorganization of the Ripley business and the redevelopment of the dyeworks, enabling the firm to cope with a wider variety of trade and to encompass broader technological innovation. He joined the campaign to reform the organization of the piece-dyeing industry in Bradford and district, where competition was severe and prices unremunerative. Short-time working was commonplace and standards were suffering. Douglas took the lead in the establishment of the Bradford Dyers' Association, formed to rationalize the local dyeing industry. In 1898 the association was founded, combining twenty-two of the firms engaged in the dyeing and finishing of textile piece-goods in the Bradford district, some ninety per cent of the total business. Edward Ripley & Sons was by far the largest in the amalgamation. The association was floated with a capital of $3 million. Douglas was appointed managing director, and he led attempts to restore remunerative prices for dyeing and to improve the quality of the output of the industry in order to allow it to face foreign competition. Economies were accomplished through the sharing of technical expertise and the centralization of organization and administration. Uneconomic works were closed and work was allocated according to the capabilities of various plants. A monopoly price situation enabled a very high return on assets in the early years of the association. 
In the early twentieth century the association expanded rapidly, incorporating many other dyeing businesses in Yorkshire and Lancashire. By 1906 it employed about 7500 people, having in the previous year ranked as the seventeenth largest industrial company in Britain, in terms of capital employed. Douglas led the association through the First World War and into the textile depression of the inter-war years. He became sole managing director in 1909, and held that position until his retirement in 1946. From 1924 he was also chairman of the association. He was a founder member of the Society of Dyers and Colourists in 1884, serving as its vice-president from 1894 to 1912, and as president from 1912 to 1914. He was appointed an honorary member of the society in 1934. Although, in principle, he favoured free trade, he recognized the need for subsidies to help the dyeing industry in the 1930s, and campaigned for them. He also advocated industrial reorganization in the textile industry at that period to eliminate surplus capacity, maintain prices, and promote exports. 
George Douglas was recognized as having a clear vision about the needs of the industry, and an alert, analytical mind in confronting its problems. He was described as an accomplished organizer and a thoughtful but determined businessman. He shunned personal publicity. He was reported to have been a substantial benefactor, but few details of his bequests were ever published. 
Douglas was married, but the date of the marriage and the name of his wife, who died in France in 1923, are unknown. They had one son and one daughter. From 1908 he lived at Farfield Hall, Addingham, Skipton, West Riding of Yorkshire, spending his leisure hours fishing and shooting on this estate. He died of a cerebral thrombosis at Farfield Hall on 26 November 1947, and was buried at Bolton Abbey church on 29 November. 


@@@@@


doc= 46888


Doxford, Sir William Theodore (1841-1916), shipbuilder, was born at Bridge Street, Bishopwearmouth, Sunderland, co. Durham, on 1 February 1841, the first of four sons in a family of ten children of the merchant shipwright William Doxford (1812-1882) and his wife, Hannah (1814-1895), daughter of Robert Pile, a glassworker. His father made several abortive attempts to set up in business as a wooden shipbuilder before finally succeeding during the 1850s; in 1858 he opened a shipyard at Pallion on the south bank of the River Wear, near Sunderland. Doxford began work there after being educated at Bramham College, and in 1863 he married Margaret (died 1916), daughter of Richard Wilkinson, a Sunderland shipbuilder. They had one son and five daughters. 
Only after the decision was taken in 1864 to build iron ships did the Doxford shipyard make significant progress. The output of 3000 tons of shipping in 1864 had trebled to 9500 tons by 1872. In order to build their own marine engines the Doxfords erected engine and boiler shops in 1878, with a younger brother, Robert Doxford, in charge. When their father died in 1882, all four sons were involved in the management of the business. By this time Doxfords had probably the leading shipyard on the River Wear. 
The Doxfords had an eye for technical innovation. In 1875 they built their first naval vessels, and twelve years later the firm installed oil-burning boilers in a torpedo boat. However, the Admiralty proved uninterested in this novel idea at that time. Doxford dominated the family management, and in 1891 the firm became a limited liability company with a capital of $200,000, all owned by the Doxford family. In the following year the firm introduced its 'turret ship', a design which brought Doxfords both fame and fortune. 
The turret ship was based on the American whaleback steamer then active on the Great Lakes. The hull bent inwards from a little way above the waterline to give a curved deck -- a whaleback -- across the top of the vessel. Steering platforms and other openings projected from the whaleback in vertical structures or 'turrets'. One of these American vessels visited Liverpool in the early 1890s and attracted great interest. Doxfords was commissioned to build a similar vessel under licence. While it did so, A. H. Havers, the firm's chief draughtsman, prepared his own design for a turret ship, and it was patented in the name of Charles Doxford. The principal innovation was that there was now one long turret running the length of the ship. 
The first Doxford turret ship appeared in 1892 and after some initial reluctance from shipowners the type soon became very popular, the Clan Line alone taking no fewer than thirty such ships. In all, between 1892 and 1911, Doxfords built 176 turret ships at Sunderland, while six others were built under licence in other British shipyards and one in Spain. In 1903 Havers sued the company, demanding recognition as the inventor of the turret ship. Doxfords showed that Havers had been handsomely rewarded by the firm, but the jury still awarded him damages of $1250. Nevertheless, this was still only a small slice from the $150,000 profit which Doxfords was said to have made by that time out of the turret ship. 
Besides its inherent strength, helped by a cellular double bottom, the turret ship was also popular with shipowners in the bulk trades because its net tonnage (often used to calculate harbour charges) was low in relation to its deadweight tonnage (the actual weight of cargo carried). Also, the Suez Canal dues were based on the breadth of the upper deck, which on a turret ship was usually half the actual width of the vessel; however, the success of the turret ship led to the canal rules being altered. Between 1907 and 1909 a number of losses and accidents involving turret ships caused alarm, but these were found to be largely due to incorrect loading rather than to faults in the design of the ship. Nevertheless, the popularity of the turret ship waned and the last one was built in 1911. 
The turret ship brought great prosperity to the Doxford shipyard. It launched over 100,000 tons of shipping in 1906 and while the totals for 1905 and 1907 were only about 90,000 tons, this was sufficient to make Doxfords the most productive shipyard in the world in those years. Such productivity was possible because in 1904 the shipyard had been rebuilt. The original five building berths were scrapped to make way for three berths of greater length, each capable of building a 12,000 ton ship. By 1914 the capital of William Doxford & Sons Ltd was $450,000 and it made a profit of $160,000. 
Doxfords also took the bold step of beginning the development of a marine diesel engine. At that time diesel technology was dominated by continental European firms, but, under the engineer K. O. Keller, Doxfords began research and design work in 1906. The first experimental engine was ready by 1912 and the first opposed-piston engine was built in 1913. The Doxford engine did not become a commercial success until after the First World War, but the basis had been laid before 1914 for the firm to achieve the distinction of being the only British company to produce a successful marine diesel engine. 
As well as the technical side of shipbuilding, Doxford took a close interest in labour relations, being aware from his own family history of the hardships that could be caused by the fluctuations in the shipbuilding trade. He helped to make a success of the conciliation board established in Sunderland in 1885 and he was a witness to the royal commission on labour in 1892. He often represented Wearside on the National Federation of Shipbuilding Employers and was chairman of the Wear Shipbuilders' Association from 1908 to 1912. 
Doxford was the first Conservative to be elected for Sunderland for forty years when he became a Unionist MP in 1895. Knighted in 1900, he retired from parliament in 1906. He was actively involved in local affairs, serving on the Sunderland town council and as a River Wear commissioner, in addition to being a magistrate in both the town of Sunderland and co. Durham. He was also a deputy lieutenant of the county. He was a foundation member and second president of the North-East Coast Institution of Engineers and Shipbuilders. He joined the Institution of Naval Architects in 1878, and was elected a council member in 1896 and vice-president in 1908. 
Still head of the family firm, Doxford died on 1 October 1916, at his home, Grindon Hall, Silksworth, Sunderland, co. Durham, a few months after the death of his wife. An obituary in the 'Transactions of the Institution of Naval Architects', surveying Doxford's career, noted that he had been 'associated with all the principal developments in shipbuilding and marine engineering from the days of wooden ships' (49, 1917, 233). 


@@@@@


doc= 46889


Drewe, Julius Charles (1856-1931), retailer and architectural patron, was born on 4 April 1856 at Pulloxhill vicarage, Pulloxhill, Ampthill, Bedfordshire, the sixth child in a family of four sons and three daughters of the Revd George Smith Drew (d. 1880) and his wife, Mary Peek. Drew's most recent ancestors had made their living through commerce: his great-grandfather had practised as a surveyor, and his grandfather George Drew became a tea broker in Marylebone, London. Although his mother's family came from Devon, they also made their living through tea; and following schooling at Bournemouth, Drew was sent by his uncle Francis Peek, a partner in the Liverpool tea importing firm of Peek and Winch, to China as a tea buyer. Drew stayed in the Far East for some years and returned shortly after his twenty-first birthday. A staid job with the firm in Liverpool proved not to his taste, however, and in 1878 Drew opened his own 'Willow Pattern Tea Store' in that city. 
In order to develop the business, in 1883 Drew went into partnership with John Musker. This was a shrewd alliance as Musker's knowledge of the retailing end of the trade was complemented by Drew's expertise as a tea buyer. The establishment of a London shop at 268 Edgware Road was the first fruit of their partnership; this was followed by the establishment of large stores at Islington, Birmingham, and Leeds, as well as a number of smaller tea stores. In 1885 Drew and Musker formed the Home and Colonial Trading Association, with Drew holding a majority of the shares. 
Tea, and especially the fashionable Indian tea personally selected by Drew, remained the core of their business; but there was also a considerable trade in other groceries. Specializing in good quality products at low prices, the firm's turnover, and also profits, were very high. The number of retail outlets also continued to expand at a phenomenal rate: the number of shops peaked at 500 in 1903, and annual profits at $220,000 in 1901. 
Although founder of the grocery chain, Drew ceased from 1888 to have any active role in its management. Wishing to lead the life of a country gentleman, he was able to do so in his mid-thirties because of the increasingly powerful role played by his solicitor, William Capel Slaughter. The leading partner of the City firm of Slaughter and May, Slaughter had acted as Drew's adviser at the time of the launch of Home and Colonial, and had the entrepreneurial drive and City connections that were needed to mastermind the continued expansion of the firm. When the business was converted to a private limited company in March 1888, Slaughter undertook the chairmanship. Henceforth a very wealthy rentier, Drew nevertheless remained a director of the new firm, and he also personally retained more than half of the 150,000 ordinary $1 shares. 
Two years later Drew took the first step towards the establishment of a landed dynasty: on 16 September 1890 he married Frances, daughter of Thomas Richardson of Buxton, a cotton manufacturer. The couple had two daughters and three sons, and their first home was a romantic mock castle, Culverden, near Tunbridge Wells in Kent. In 1899 Drew acquired Wadhurst Hall in Sussex from the estate of the bankrupt Adrian de Murietta, a Spanish banker and extravagant friend of the prince of Wales. This mansion, along with its tapestries and exotic Spanish furniture, remained the family home for the next two decades and should have been enough to satisfy the ambitions of any 'nouveau riche' shopkeeper. However, family tradition maintained that the Drews came from ancient Devon landowning stock, and Julius and his elder brother William investigated this further. With the aid of a professional genealogist they produced a family tree: this showed that one of their putative ancestors was Drogo or Dru, who had accompanied William the Conqueror to England; and his descendant, Drogo de Teign, gave his name to the parish of Drewsteignton (Dru-his-town on the Teign) in Devon in the twelfth century. 
Drew was already familiar with the area, as his first cousin Richard Peek was rector of Drewsteignton; and it was probably on one of his visits there that he conceived the notion of building a castle on his ancestral domain. Moreover, the perfect site was available on glebe land belonging to his cousin: on a narrow ridge overlooking the steep gorge of the River Teign to the south and Chagford Vale to the north. Purchasing the site in 1910, along with 450 acres, he also changed his name by deed poll to the more authentic Drewe. 
In need of an architect, Drewe was advised by Edward Hudson, the proprietor of 'Country Life', that Edwin Lutyens was 'the only possible architect' (Aslet, 168). Although the latter had not yet designed any grand buildings, his domestic architecture would have been familiar to Drewe; and he had also recently remodelled Lindisfarne Castle for Hudson in Northumberland. Lutyens accepted the commission and by 3 August 1910 he was writing to Emily, his wife, that: 'Mr Drew writes a nice and exciting letter. I go on with drawings not more than $50,000 and $10,000 for the gardens... Only I do wish he didn't want a castle -- but just a delicious loveable house with plenty of good large rooms in it. ('Letters of Edwin Lutyens', 199)' The site was staked out one day in early September, but Drewe's ideas were still developing. The principal modification required, Lutyens wrote, was that 'He wants to build a large keep or commemorative tower to commemorate the first Drogo... and this we planned and plotted and he was mighty pleased and proud'. They got on 'famously', and, instead of returning that day to London, Lutyens 'went on to Sidmouth to talk more castles that night'. Although his motoring expenses alone came to $5 5's'., Lutyens noted that he would get it all back, adding that 'Drewe travels and hotels en prince' (ibid., 205). 
Despite what Lutyens had written to Emily, his preliminary sketches suggested a building of heroic proportions. Christopher Hussey noted that: 'As first conceived Drogo would have occupied the whole summit of its heather-clad promontory, approximating in extent and effect to a feudal castle such as Richmond, built of the glittering granite as massively as Durham, and growing out of its summit like a geological outcrop. (Hussey, 219)' Yet because Drewe insisted that the castle had to be built in traditional fashion, using only solid granite laid 6 feet thick, this was never realistic. In the event the original design was scaled down by two-thirds, leaving two wings joined at an angle of 120 degree, with the commemorative entrance tower and the great hall along the south front. 
The foundation stone of Castle Drogo was laid on 4 April 1911. Lutyens was in overall control from his office in London, with Drewe's agent, John Walker, directing operations on site. There was a workforce of up to 100, many of whom hewed and dressed the stone; but, in an almost medieval fashion, every piece of granite was laid by two Devon stonemasons, Cleeve and Dewdney. Drewe's children soon discovered that Lutyens was 'a perfect tease', who would use the pepper and salt containers at table 'to illustrate a point connected with the design and he would make a lot of very quick sketches' ('Castle Drogo', 49). 
In the event Castle Drogo took more than twenty years to complete. Construction was delayed by the continued shortage of worked granite, but the major hold-up was caused by the outbreak of the First World War. More than three-quarters of the workers were called up, and progress was 'fearfully slow' ('Castle Drogo', 50). Drewe, like so many other parents, also suffered a personal disaster in 1917, with the death of his eldest son, Adrian, who had been serving in Flanders. A room in the castle was later furnished as a memorial to him. 
The last stone was laid at Castle Drogo on 22 December 1925, and two years later the family were able to start living at the house. Yet Drewe hardly lived long enough to enjoy being seigneur of Castle Drogo: he had suffered a stroke in 1924, and he died at Kilmorie, Asham Marine Drive, Torquay, on 10 November 1931, survived by his wife. His remains were buried in the churchyard at Drewsteignton, amid the shades of his ancestors, and covered by a simple granite tombstone designed by Lutyens. 
Castle Drogo itself proved to be the lasting memorial to the medieval vision to which Julius Drewe, in alliance with Sir Edwin Lutyens, attempted to give material shape. Although an anachronism, and only a fragment of what was originally conceived, its massive and rugged features are genuinely fortress-like. 'The ultimate justification of Drogo is that it does not pretend to be a castle. It 'is' a castle' (Hussey, 225). Another and more modern view, however, sees it as 'a great country house masquerading as a fortress' (Greeves and Trinick, 55). 
In 1974 Drewe's grandson Anthony gifted Castle Drogo to the National Trust. Although it was the first twentieth-century house to pass into the trust's possession, the first thing visitors see as they approach the great entrance tower is, fittingly, the large heraldic Drewe lion carved above the doorway. Beneath it is carved the family motto, 'Droge nomen et virtus arma dedit' (Drewe is the name and valour gave it arms). 


@@@@@


doc= 46890


Dreyfus, Henry (1882-1944), industrialist, was born in January 1882 into a Jewish family in Switzerland; he was the son of Abraham Dreyfus. Trained as a chemist, he held a doctorate of the University of Basel. In 1912, in conjunction with his elder brother, Camille, and a silk dyer, Alexander Clavel, he set up in Basel a company for the manufacture of cellulose acetate and other chemicals. Cellulose acetate had been the subject of patents for various uses: as a base for cinematograph film; for paints and varnishes including 'dope' used for treating the outer skin of early aircraft; and for spinning into artificial silk. Dreyfus was among those who took out such patents, though his were hotly contested and were rejected in Germany. 
At the outbreak of the First World War the sole sources of dope available to the allied powers were a firm in France and the Dreyfus plant in Switzerland, and in 1915 the British War Office accepted a tender from the latter for the supply of the chemical. In 1916 the Dreyfus brothers and Clavel went to Britain and, in association with some other businessmen, set up the British Cellulose and Chemical Manufacturing Co. Ltd. Work began on the erection, near Derby, of a factory to make cellulose acetate dope and related chemical products. With the aid of tax concessions and loans from the government, production finally started in 1917. So, too, did trouble for the company in the form of complaints about delays, about the government-sponsored monopoly which it had secured, and about some dubious share pushing and speculation. 
Dreyfus's name first came into the public eye in Britain during 1918-19, when a House of Commons select committee, followed by a special government tribunal, reported on the company in connection with what had come to be called the 'dope scandal'. The name also elicited some antisemitic comments, notably, in August 1918, from G. K. Chesterton. But the adverse publicity died down and in 1920 the enterprise was launched as a public company with the stated intention of making artificial silk by the cellulose acetate process. In the following year it began to market the yarn under the name of Celanese and in 1923 the company changed its name to British Celanese Ltd. By 1927 Henry Dreyfus had become chairman and managing director. In the course of the 1920s and 1930s he built up the business into a remarkable example of a vertically integrated chemical and textile concern, undertaking the basic chemical processes, the spinning of yarn, weaving, knitting, and dyeing, and the manufacture of garments. A vigorous selling and advertising campaign ensured that Celanese became a household name in Britain in the 1930s, especially for women's underwear. 
There seems little doubt that it was Dreyfus himself, as both businessman and technical expert, who gave to British Celanese the dynamic qualities which it exhibited at that time. But the price of that contribution was high. He was autocratic and difficult to work with, and his brash optimism, disregard of costs, and extravagant pursuit of goals caused financial chaos and a disastrous profit record. The need to repay government loans, together with the high development costs in the early 1920s, saddled it with a large proportion of preference capital and a heavy burden of debt. Despite a substantial rise in sales and in trading profits, preference dividends remained in arrears and no dividends were paid on the ordinary shares until 1944. 
The personal qualities which Dreyfus brought to bear upon business life also included a pugnacious determination to defend his patents at all costs. But just as the Germans had rejected his original patents, so the validity of later patents which he took out was successfully questioned elsewhere. Undeterred, in 1931 he issued writs against Courtaulds, the dominant firm in rayon manufacture, alleging infringement of patents. Judgment was given against him in 1933; it was upheld by the Court of Appeal and then by the House of Lords in 1935. Still undeterred, Dreyfus persisted in further litigation, now alleging false evidence. Again he lost and prepared to go to appeal. By this time, 1937, an incensed body of shareholders, calling themselves the British Celanese Shareholders Union, had come into being. Dreyfus finally withdrew his appeal. Attempts to secure an understanding with Courtaulds came to nothing; merger negotiations were abandoned in 1940. British Celanese was finally taken over by Courtaulds in 1957. 
On 3 March 1938 Dreyfus married Elizabeth Deborah Jenkinson (1908-1984), only daughter of Captain John Banks Jenkinson of the rifle brigade, and twenty-six years his junior. He died of heart failure on 30 December 1944, at the Hyde Park Hotel, Knightsbridge, London. His estate passed to his brother, Camille. 


@@@@@


doc= 46891


Du Cros, (William) Harvey (1846-1918), pneumatic tyre manufacturer, was born in Dublin on 19 June 1846, son of Edouard Pierce Du Cros and his wife, Maria Molloy. The family was of Huguenot origin, an ancestor, Jean Peter Du Cros, having settled in Dublin at the beginning of the eighteenth century as a refugee from religious persecution. Du Cros was briefly educated at a blue coat school for the children of distressed gentlefolk, King's Hospital, Dublin (1855-60), and when he was fifteen started on a series of minor commercial posts as clerk and later as an unqualified bookkeeper. At the same time he left home, according to his son Arthur, because of differences between his parents. In 1866 he married Annie Jane Roy (died 1899); he had six sons by his mid-twenties. At twenty-three he became part-time assistant secretary of the fledgeling Irish Commercial Travellers' Association. 
A small, wiry, but immensely determined man, with a long and carefully waxed moustache, Du Cros was once described as 'of no particular physique' but 'never known to acknowledge defeat'. He was advised to take up sport for the sake of his health at thirty, and followed the prescription so enthusiastically that he became boxing champion of Ireland at two weights, its fencing champion, and founder and captain of the Bective Rangers Football Club, which won the Irish Rugby championship. He was also a leading amateur cyclist and president of the Irish Cyclists' Association. He insisted his sons follow his example, boxing against them in the gym and forming them into a successful team of racing cyclists on the solid-tyred penny-farthing machines then popular. 
A turning point came for Du Cros when two of his sons were defeated by an unfancied Ulster cyclist using the rudimentary pneumatic tyres invented by John Boyd Dunlop, a Belfast vet. Du Cros instantly appreciated their possibilities and after successful racing trials of the tyres was invited by William Bowden, a Dublin cycle agent to whom Dunlop had informally made over the rights, to set up a company to exploit them. Du Cros insisted on complete control, wrote the prospectus, and effected the public issue of 15,010 $1 shares in 1889. Shrewdly he linked the company with an established cycle agency as the Pneumatic Tyre and Booth's Cycle Agency Ltd, providing early cash flow, and absorbed the Belfast cycle firm which had made the early tyres. 
Du Cros's practical commercial sense and public relations flair carried the company through in spite of the revocation of Dunlop's patent in 1890, barely a year after the flotation, when it was found to have been anticipated. Du Cros rapidly arranged to purchase a separate patent relating to the way the tyre was attached, a key problem for early tyres, and employed the inventor, Charles Kingston Welch. Six years later the owner of a rival patent was bought out. Du Cros inserted his team of sons into the business, sending them to different countries to establish the company. Arthur Du Cros became general manager and another, Harvey, became a major investor in the Austin motor company. 
In 1896 Du Cros secured his fortune when he sold the company, with an issued capital of $260,000, to a group including the motor speculator Ernest T. Hooley for $3 million, subsequently taking part in the reflotation as the Dunlop Pneumatic Tyre Company. He and Arthur became joint managing directors and the company expanded in step with the motor industry, producing its first motor tyre in 1900 (though significantly later than Michelin in France) and later diversifying into golf balls and aero-tyres. Manufacture moved to Coventry in 1893 and was expanded into the production of rubber, cotton, and other components for the tyres. The style was so confident that when the crucial Welch patent expired, Du Cros held a wake, inviting 400 people to celebrate. Among other activities, he helped finance the first airship for the British army and organize the first motorized movement of British troops. In 1906 he became a Conservative MP against the run of Liberal success, standing for Hastings on a platform of tariff controls to protect industry. 
Du Cros's first wife died in 1899 and he later married Florence Gibbings of Bow in Devon. By the time of his death at Inniscorrig, Dalkey, co. Dublin, on 21 December 1918, Dunlop was Britain's fourteenth biggest manufacturing company. Without Du Cros, his contemporaries believed, it could never have survived. 


@@@@@


doc= 46892


Dunn, Sir James Hamet, first baronet (1874-1956), financier, was born on 29 October 1874, in Bathurst, New Brunswick, Canada, only child of Robert Dunn (1846-1875), boatbuilder, and his wife, Elizabeth Abrahams (died 1918), daughter of John Joudrey. He was educated at St Luke's School, Bathurst, and in 1895-8 studied law at Dalhousie University, Halifax. He was called to the bar of Nova Scotia and North-West Territories in 1898 and to the bar of Quebec in 1901. The following year he bought a seat on the Montreal stock exchange where he swiftly made a fortune. 
In 1905 Dunn moved to London, where he established the merchant bank of Dunn, Fischer. He was a wily and opportunistic financier, who often puffed his stocks through corrupt journalists and misleading prospectuses. The Brazilian Traction, Light and Power Company (in 1912) was the most prominent of many Canadian-incorporated foreign utility companies which he floated to British investors through tightly controlled syndicates. His successes were checked in 1913 by the disappearance of his partner C. Louis Fischer, leaving large debts. 
Dunn turned to commodity trading, and during the 1914-18 war was involved with the British government in securing nickel supplies from Norway. He had previously cultivated the prime minister, H. H. Asquith, lending his Rolls-Royce car and hoping for a baronetcy; this was finally gazetted in 1920, ostensibly in recognition of his Norwegian services, but in reality because of contributions to the Lloyd George political fund. He is depicted in 'Sunflower', a novel of the 1920s by Rebecca West, as Sir Jack Murphy, 'a verminous little shyster' whose baronetcy is scandalous (209). 
During the 1920s Dunn worked with a controversial Belgian financier, Alfred Loewenstein, in promoting, by the technique of stock pyramiding, a series of electrical and artificial fibres trusts, notably the Societe Internationale d'Energie Hydro-Electrique and British Celanese. This activity was terminated by Loewenstein's mysterious death in 1928. Dunn continued to underwrite industrial flotations, and together with Sir Hugo Cunliffe-Owen and Lord Trent bought Boot's the chemists from American control in 1933. In 1935 Dunn took charge of the Algoma Steel Corporation in Canada (gaining full control in 1944). In two decades he transformed the company by vertical integration and strong management from a nearly bankrupt concern into Canada's second largest primary steel maker. He also diversified Algoma into iron-ore mining and other lucrative activities. As a result he left an estate in Canada worth nearly C$70 million. His successes with Algoma finally vested him with the semblance of respectability, and in Canada he received honorary degrees from several universities and was made an honorary king's counsel in 1949. 
Dunn married, in 1901, Gertrude Paterson (died 1957), daughter of Herbert Molesworth Price, timber merchant, of Quebec; they had one son and four daughters. Immediately after their divorce in 1926, Dunn married Irene Clarice Douglas (1898-1977), daughter of Henry William Richards, mill owner, and divorced wife of the eleventh marquess of Queensberry; they had one daughter. This marriage was dissolved in 1942, and on 7 June the same year he married his former secretary, Marcia Anastasia (1909-1994) ['see 'Aitken, Marcia Anastasia, 'under' Aitken, William Maxwell], daughter of John Christoforides, and afterwards wife of his friend and biographer Max Aitken, Lord Beaverbrook. 
Dunn had a thin build, vivid blue eyes, sharp features, and a mouth like a trap. Implacable in enforcing his own interests, he could be irascible, callous, obdurate, impulsive, and demanding. Sir Robert Bruce Lockhart in 1947 described him as 'the meanest and hardest man in the world' ('Diaries', 2.618). A lavish and even charming host with sybaritic tastes, he was a munificent art collector, who commissioned thirteen portraits of himself, including one by Dali, in which he was portrayed in the character of Caesar Augustus. His foibles (such as his insistence on having his shoelaces ironed) amused his friends. He hated solitude, was a food faddist, hypochondriacal, and prone to neurotic fears. Dunn died of heart failure, on 1 January 1956, at Dayspring, on Passamaquoddy Bay, near St Andrews, New Brunswick, his ashes being buried in the grounds there, under a favourite tree. 


@@@@@


doc= 46898


Clarksone, Bessie (d. 1625), exemplar of godly life, lived in Lanark at least from 1621, but probably earlier, and died there in April 1625. Knowledge of her life and personality comes from a transcript of conversations between her and her minister, William Livingstone, 'The conflict in conscience of a deare Christian named Bessie Clarksone in the parish of Lanark, which she lay under three year and a half, with the conference that past between her pastor and her at diverse times' (1632). She was married and had at least one child, and was probably a native Scot, given she uses some Scottish dialect words. Although she describes herself as 'a silly poor woman' (Livingstone, 11), she had one servant (ibid., 4), and possibly owned a few jewels (ibid., 24). Before the crisis of faith, which seems to have coincided with an illness which mainly confined her to her home, she 'delighted in prayer' and 'had many calamities' (ibid.), but no further details of her previous life are known. 
The 'Conflict in Conscience' is an ongoing dialogue between sinner and pastor, over three and a half years, in which Clarksone continually doubts her faith in God and her salvation. The anguished expression of her crisis of faith, which remains unresolved at her death, portrays a woman of some education in Calvinist and biblical tenets (she knows about the Calvinist doctrine of election) and some independence in interpreting and applying those tenets to her own life. Throughout the short work her continual, but failed, struggle to discover and acknowledge God's love is heard. Vivid and concrete exempla from everyday life help render the text accessible and effective as a religious polemic from which other sinners and doubters could learn. The minister visited her frequently (Clarksone cries at one point, 'you are troubled with me in pulpit and out in pulpit and in coming to me day after day' (Livingstone, 39) and there were other parishioners witnessing her crisis of faith. This was a communal parish matter, a focal and spectacular event like those which attracted visitors to the bedsides of women prophets in the 1630s and 1640s. Clarksone engages actively and intelligently with her visitors: 'when one beside spake to her of God's favour and presence, she said, 'God if I were as sure of it as you are'' (ibid., 6); 'When some standing by spake to her, she says, 'take all that to yourself that ye say to me, ye have no harrows, no assurance more nor I, and knows not but ye come in the like case'' (ibid., 17). She offered directed theological advice: 'And some gentlemen and others being with me she directs her speech to them, saying 'Ye gentlemen and simple and all, let my casting back be your forward coming. Well are ye that can believe and pray, but I have none'' (ibid., 20). 
Livingstone claims that Clarksone began to turn to God, although the reader is given no concrete, cited evidence of her saying this. She died in Livingstone's absence, 'in presence of divers witnesses', without speaking, but with her hands and eyes 'heaved to the heavens' (Livingstone, 41). He believes 'none will doubt of her deliverance' (ibid., 42), although the theological commonplace sits tantalizingly juxtaposed with the accounts of eyewitnesses and the verbal repetition of her continued despair. The popularity and power of her account possibly lies in this very ambiguity: reflecting and fostering the Calvinist doubt about salvation. 
The text, despite, or perhaps because of, being about an obscure and ordinary woman's crisis of faith, was reprinted several times, and belongs to the popular genre of conversion and deathbed narratives. William Livingstone explains in his preface to the 1632 edition that he has published her words ('as I visit I wrote') in order to counter an 'uncorrect record', probably published the year before, although now not extant. Further editions were published in 1664 and 1698, with grammatical and spelling alterations. 


@@@@@


doc= 46899


Vere, Anne de, countess of Oxford (1556-1588), courtier, was born on 5 December 1556, the daughter of William Cecil, first Baron Burghley (1520/21-1598), and his second wife, Mildred (1526-1589) ['see 'Cecil, Mildred], daughter of Sir Anthony Cooke. Anne presumably gained the equivalent of a grammar school education in the cultivated Cecil household. Writing to Lord Burghley in 1577, the German educator Johannes Sturm (Sturmius) expressed his understanding that Anne 'speaks Latin also' (4 Dec 1577, 'CSP for.', '1577-8', no. 469). 
In 1569 Anne was contracted to marry Philip Sidney, but by July 1571 she was engaged to Burghley's ward, Edward de Vere, seventeenth earl of Oxford (1550-1604). Oxford's biographers have speculated that Burghley engineered the match (despite his protestations to the contrary), yet Anne may have been an attractive as well as accomplished young lady. Her brother, Robert Cecil, thought so, at least; writing from dingy lodgings at Ostend in 1587 he observed that 'If my lady of Oxford were here, her bewty wold quickly be marred' (TNA: PRO, SP 84/21, fol. 242). De Vere married Anne at Westminster Abbey on 19 December 1571, with Queen Elizabeth and many prominent courtiers in attendance. The match, however, proved disastrous; Oxford denied the paternity of his daughter Elizabeth, who was born on 2 July 1575 while he travelled on the continent, and he lived apart from his wife until some time in 1582. 
During the separation Anne maintained cordial relations with the queen; this is evidenced in her exchange of new year's gifts with her sovereign every year from 1575 to 1588. The countess received five book dedications, all between 1575 and 1581. In his dedication to Anne, Geoffrey Fenton described his 'Golden Epistles' (1575) as a 'morall discourse' mingled with 'texts of divinitie' (sig. *2). The last two dedications are translated expositions of 'Ephesians', the first of Niels Hemmingsen's exposition, by Abraham Fleming (1580), the second, an anonymous translation of Chrysostom (1581). In between are two books by de Vere retainers who had already dedicated works to the earl. George Baker terms Anne 'his singular good Lady' (sig. A2) in the dedication to his translation 'Newe Jewell of Health' (1576), from the work by Conrad Gesner. Similarly, John Brooke's 'Christian Discourse' (1578), is dedicated to 'his singuler good ladie and mistres, the countesse of Oxenforde'. Brooke praises her humility and courtesy as well as her 'good inclination to vertue and godlinesse' (sig. A2, A3'v'). Baker praises her 'wit, learning, and authoritie' (sig. A2'v'), Fenton her 'learning and judgement' (sig. *2), and Fleming her regard for learning and 'zealous love to religion' (sig. *3). 
BL, Lansdowne MS 104 preserves copies in Lord Burghley's hand of two letters that the countess sent to her husband in December 1581; in both she professes her devotion to de Vere and her desire for reconciliation. Burghley has corrected several readings in the second letter. After her reconciliation with Oxford, Anne gave birth to three more daughters: Bridget ('b'. 6 April 1584), Susan ('b'. 26 May 1587), and Frances, who died an infant on 12 September 1587. The couple's only son, styled Lord Bolebec (Bulbeck), died within four days of his birth in May 1583. Anne died at Greenwich on 5 June 1588 and was buried at Westminster Abbey on 25 June. 
In 'Pandora' (1584), John Southern credited Anne with four sonnets and two quatrains memorializing her dead son. All six poems, however, are couched in Southern's uniquely arhythmic meters, which are neither accentual nor syllabic. The content of all six draw heavily as well on his favourite poet, Desportes. They could perhaps be translations of Anne's elegies in Latin or another language, but are probably prosopopoeias outright. 


@@@@@


doc= 46901


DuVerger, Susan (bap. 1610, d. 1657x9), translator and author, was born in London and baptized at the French Huguenot church in Threadneedle Street on 29 April 1610, the fifth of the five children of Charles and Ester de La Vallee. Nothing is known about her parents other than their names recorded in the baptismal records, or about her early life in London, but at some point before 1633, Suzanne de La Vallee married Jean-Jacques DuVerger. In the early 1630s she gave birth to two daughters: Francoise ('c'.1633) and Suzanne ('c'.1635). There is no more information about their family life. 
DuVerger published two English translations of works by the French Catholic bishop Jean-Pierre Camus. In 1639 came 'Admirable Events', her translation of his collection of moralistic prose romance tales, which she dedicated to England's French Catholic queen, Henrietta Maria. Although the title-page gives the author only as S. DuVerger, the Stationers' register for 3 October 1638 lists the author of 'Admirable Events' as Susan du Vergeere. In 1641 DuVerger published a second translation of Camus, entitled 'Diotrephe'. The dedicatory letter, to Elizabeth, Lady Herbert -- a zealous and active Catholic gentlewoman -- is signed simply S. DuVerger, but it refers pointedly to her earlier 'labours in this kind', suggesting that this DuVerger was also the translator of 'Admirable Events'. 
Susan DuVerger was probably also the author of an original prose work published in 1657, entitled 'DuVergers Humble Reflections' with the lengthy subtitle 'Upon some passages of the right honorable the lady marchionesse of Newcastles Olio, or, An appeale from her mes-informed, to her owne better informed judgement'. The 'Humble Reflections' is a scholarly defence of monastic life against critical charges made by the prolific author Margaret Cavendish, the marchioness of Newcastle, in her 1655 work 'The World's Olio'. Internal evidence suggests that the DuVerger of the title is an English woman. The author writes, in an introductory letter to the duchess, that the 'Olio' promotes 'the honour of our nation, and sexe, wherin we have had but few arguments'. Much later in the 'Humble Reflections', DuVerger includes a letter to Margaret Cavendish from a male friend who refers to the author as 'Mrs. DuVerger' and describes her as a 'lover of learning, and a verie vertuoso in antiquities, beyond the rate of a woman'. The 'Humble Reflections' is a fascinating book-length letter to Cavendish. As a salvo in a public debate on religion between two educated women, this work is extremely unusual. 
All three of DuVerger's published works raise challenging and as yet unanswered questions about her life. The most intriguing of these is why a woman born into a Huguenot family chose to publish works that seem to support Catholic culture and doctrine. 
Susan DuVerger seems to have died soon after completing the 'Humble Reflections'. In 1659 both her daughters emigrated from France to Quebec and married soon after their arrival. On their marriage records, their mother, listed as 'Suzanne de Laval de Londres, Angleterre', is described as deceased. 


@@@@@


doc= 46902


Fage, Mary (fl. 1637), poet, has until very recently been known only as the 'wife of Robert Fage the younger, Gentleman', as she is identified on the title-page of 'Fames Roule' (1637), her one published work. It is, however, possible that she was the daughter of Edward Fage (died 1638) of Doddinghurst, Essex, that she married her kinsman Robert Fage, and that this kinsman was the Ro: Fage who published a translation of 'Peter Ramus of Vermandois... his Dialectica' (1632): the preliminary matter of this book indicates that the author had Essex connections. 

'Fames Roule' was published in 1637, with a dedicatory poem by Thomas Heywood. It is a collection of over 400 acrostic verses and anagrams, playing on the names and titles of eminent figures at court, and arranged in order of precedence, beginning with Carolus Stuarte: 'Av! Sol's Tru Trace'. Its sheer volume (nearly 300 quarto pages), even for a period that delighted in word play and in which the acrostic and anagram were often overworked, is extraordinary. 
Despite the work's familiarity with the court structure, and its tone of support for the embattled Caroline court, it has not been possible to place either Mary or Robert Fage there, and there are occasional gaps and mistaken identifications, which could suggest that the author lived at one remove from her subject. 'Fames Roule' might have been an effort to secure patronage through a species of shotgun flattery, although Fage's attempt to wrest meanings from names and titles suggests another context for 'Fames Roule', the genre of prophecy: in this case, the reading of fortunes and secular prophecy that was to appeal to so many women in the latter part of the seventeenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 46906


Hooper, Anne (d. 1555), protestant exile, is of obscure origins. Little is known about her parentage or early life, though several sources confirm that she was born into a noble family from the Low Countries, near Antwerp. Anne had at least one sister (later the wife of the French reformer Valerand Poullain) who accompanied her into exile, as well as one brother, who alongside her parents remained staunchly Catholic. 
It is not known when Anne and her sister converted to reformed belief, or the circumstances in which they went into exile, although it is possible that after leaving Antwerp they formed part of the household of the reformist Belgian noble Jacques de Bourgogne, seigneur de Falais, in Strasbourg, where by January 1546 they had taken up residence in the house of the exiled English merchant Richard Hilles. It was here that Anne first met her future husband, John Hooper, a former monk and an English exile, who described their meeting in a letter written at this time to Heinrich Bullinger, stating that he had met 'two sisters of noble family, the younger of whom named Anna is exceedingly favourable to true religion' (Robinson, 1.38). 
Although the exact date of their marriage is unknown, it most likely took place after John Hooper had returned from a visit to England to secure his inheritance in spring 1546. Marriage to Hooper meant that Anne became one of the first English post-Reformation bishops' wives. Hooper first referred to Anne as his wife in a letter dated shortly after 12 December 1546, and Bullinger's diary recorded that the couple visited him in Zurich in March 1547. Over the following years they established close relationships with many of the other leading Swiss reformers and their families, and after their return to England frequently remembered Zurich with great affection in their letters. Their first child, Rachel, was born there in March 1548, and baptized in the Grossmunster church, with Bullinger and the wife of Theodore Bibliander as godparents. 
Although Edward VI had succeeded to the throne in January 1547, the Hoopers did not set out for England until spring 1549. Their journey, which can be traced through surviving letters from Hooper to Bullinger, took them via Germany and Switzerland. Pausing in Antwerp before their crossing to England, Hooper described how his wife had tried to make contact with her natal family, but that on receiving her letter her brother had thrown it into the fire without reading it, and he concluded sadly that 'you see the words of Christ are true, that the brother shall persecute the brother for the sake of the word of God' (Robinson, 1.63). The family finally arrived in London in May 1549, whereupon Hooper was appointed chaplain to the duke of Somerset. 
During their time in London the Hoopers appear to have kept up a busy social life, alongside John's demanding preaching schedule. Although clerical marriage had been legalized in England only in February 1549, Anne appears to have been integrated into London society. In a letter to Bullinger dated 20 May 1550, the couple's mutual friend Marten Micronius described how Anne had recently been invited to the mansion of 'a certain noble lady in the vicinity of the city of London for a change of air', most likely a reference to the duchess of Somerset (Robinson, 2.196). The Hoopers were also invited to dine with the community of international reformers who had congregated in London, and they gave hospitality at their London home to several fellow exiles from Zurich, including John Stumphius and John ab Ulmis. 
Although Hooper was offered a bishopric as early as Lent 1550, his opposition to the ceremony surrounding the consecration of bishops led to a high-profile disputation and short period of imprisonment, before he was eventually consecrated as bishop of Gloucester on 8 March 1551. These events are touched on in the first surviving letter from Anne to Bullinger, dated 3 April 1551, in which she explained that she would have to pass Bullinger's latest message on to Hooper as he had already left London for his new diocese, and she thought it best for him to explain the reasons behind his imprisonment himself. It also contained a request for Bullinger to urge her husband to be more moderate in his labours, and an update on her daughter Rachel's progress. The latter was a feature of many of Hooper's own letters, for at just three years old Rachel appeared to be something of a prodigy, and according to her parents could understand English, French, German, and Latin, and had also learned all the basic tenets of religion by heart. Although John Foxe claimed that Hooper was primarily responsible for the education of his children (a second child, Daniel, was born some time after August 1551), his frequent absences from home, combined with Anne's known learning and fluency in Latin, make it likely that she too played a considerable part in their early education, while Hooper entrusted their education to her sole care after his death. 
After joining Hooper in his diocese Anne appears to have taken on new responsibilities, and on 27 October 1551 she apologized to Bullinger for her slow response to his letter, stating that 'she had been overwhelmed by so many and urgent engagements that scarce any leisure was allowed me' (Robinson, 1.107). For his part Hooper reported how Anne had fallen dangerously ill with the sweating sickness during the summer of 1551, having previously succumbed to bouts of ill health in London. While Hooper was generally praised in his new role by his fellow exiles, who also spoke fondly of his family, he and Anne were criticized by Micronius for being too caught up in worldly concerns. Writing to Bullinger on 14 August 1551 Micronius asked him to warn Anne specifically of 'the thorns, by which the word of God is choked', noting that it was 'a most dangerous thing for one who is in the service of Christ to hunt after riches and honour' (Robinson, 2.576). 
With the accession of Mary I in July 1553 the religious situation rapidly changed, and by September Hooper had been imprisoned in the Fleet. Initially able to send and receive correspondence quite freely, he sent a long letter to Anne on 13 October entitled an 'Exhortation to patience'. Although it is possible the letter was also intended for distribution to a wider audience, it referred to Anne as my 'godly' and 'dearly beloved' wife throughout, and instructed her how to cope with the challenges that lay ahead. Drawing her attention to the twenty-fourth chapter of 'St Matthew's gospel', 'of the which place you and I have taken many times great consolation', he urged Anne to remember it and mark it again for future use (Nevinson, 569). He concluded his letter by reaffirming his belief in Anne's salvation, and signed it 'your brother in Christ John Hooper' (ibid., 570). Hooper also demonstrated his evident concern for the well-being and safety of his wife and children in his letters from prison to Bullinger, who responded that he would be willing to help them in any way possible. 
Although Anne initially stayed in England, by early 1554 Hooper had evidently decided it was no longer safe for her to remain and had persuaded her to leave. Writing to Bullinger on 20 April, Anne described how she had travelled with a party from Antwerp to Frankfurt, where her brother-in-law Valerand Poullain was the chief minister of the foreign church. While Rachel had travelled with her, her young son, Daniel, had been left behind, to be brought over by a female friend at a later date. Anne expressed her thanks to Bullinger for his wish that she could join him in Zurich, but explained her preference for remaining in Frankfurt until Hooper's fate was settled. Describing recent events in England she declared that God had visited her with a calamity 'in which I was forced not only to lament the common condition of the church at large, but also my own individual affliction' (Robinson, 1.110). This ordeal had almost caused her 'woman's mind' to 'immediately give way', but the spirit of the Lord had been with her and she had been comforted by several godly ministers, among whom Bullinger's letter had been the most gratefully received (ibid.). 
Although exile could bring financial hardship, Anne described how she had been able to acquire 'my own hired house', from which she appears to have played an active part in the exile community (Robinson, 1.110). Her subsequent letters to Bullinger include numerous details about the establishment and organization of the exile church in Frankfurt, and show that through her personal connections she was able to act as a mediator for contacts between Zurich and Frankfurt. At one stage she forwarded the exile church's prayer book to Bullinger for his approval, along with Poullain's greetings, and demonstrated her own concern for the state of the reformed church, passing on what news she heard from England and Germany. 
However, the fate of her husband was never far from Anne Hooper's mind and the letters reveal her increasing desperation as the news from England got worse. Writing on 12 November 1554 she described how she often 'felt all but dead with grief', though she still thanked Bullinger for his continuing prayers and support for both herself and her husband (Robinson, 1.113). Her final surviving letter was written on 11 April 1555, two months after Hooper's execution on 9 February, and expressed her grief as well as a request to Bullinger to print one of the last works written by Hooper in prison. It concluded with a postscript stating that Rachel had sent an English coin 'on which are the effigies of Ahab and Jezebel', by whom she meant King Philip and Queen Mary (Robinson, 1.115). Anne remained in Frankfurt until her death on 7 December 1555 during an outbreak of plague. It seems that she was followed shortly afterwards by her daughter, Rachel, but that her son, Daniel, survived a little longer. After her death he went to live with Edward Oldsworth, who alongside Valerand Poullain, his godfather, had been appointed as his guardian, but there is no subsequent record of him. 


@@@@@


doc= 46907


Howard, Anne, countess of Arundel (1557-1630), noblewoman and priest harbourer, was born in Carlisle on 1 March 1557, the eldest daughter of Thomas Dacre, fourth Lord Dacre of Gilsland (1526?-1566), and his second wife, Elizabeth (died 1567), daughter of Sir James Leybourn of Cunswick, Westmorland. Her brother, George, sometimes called Francis, was born in 1562, then two sisters followed: Mary, born in 1563, and Elizabeth, born in 1564. Her father died two years later, and in January 1567 her mother became the third wife of Thomas Howard, fourth duke of Norfolk (1538-1572). Within a year she died in childbirth. 
The children's upbringing was largely in the hands of their grandmother, Lady Mounteagle, formerly married to Sir James Leybourn. She was responsible for the children of her two daughters, Anne, the elder, who married the son of her second husband, and the younger, Elizabeth. Lady Mounteagle was a devout Catholic, and in her care the children were instructed by a Catholic priest. Lady Montague, sister of Lord Dacre, was also a member of this Catholic group, whose influence was balanced by the presence in the duke's household of his sister, Lady Westmorland, a fervent protestant. Following a visit to Oxford in 1568 the duke introduced Gregory Martin as tutor, although after the great Norfolk house at Kenninghall was closed in 1570 Martin left for the continent and was ordained as a Catholic priest in 1573. A protestant tutor took his place. As a child Anne showed no inclination to follow the Catholicism of her grandmother and mother. 
After much difficulty the duke obtained the wardship of the four Dacre children. He planned that George should marry Margaret, daughter of his second wife, Margaret Audley, and that the three girls should marry his three sons: Philip, his heir, son of Mary Fitzalan, daughter of Henry, earl of Arundel; and Thomas and William, sons of Margaret Audley. George, who had succeeded as Lord Dacre, was killed in 1569 by a fall from a vaulting horse, a wooden structure designed to teach young riders to leap on to their mounts. Margaret Howard, a particular favourite of Anne, married instead Robert Sackville, Lord Buckhurst, later earl of Dorset. The three girls duly married the three sons of the duke. 
Anne was first married to Philip Howard (1557-1595) in a ceremony in 1569, when both were twelve. It was repeated two years later after they had reached the age of consent and the duke, then a prisoner in the Tower, had made a bargain with the earl of Arundel that a portion of his inheritance would be advanced to Philip, held in trust until he was twenty-five. Styled earl of Surrey, Philip would succeed to the title of earl of Arundel. Anne, coheir with her sister Elizabeth, inherited extensive Dacre lands, including the estates of Gilsland and Greystoke, nine baronies, and manors in many counties. 
The duke showed himself a fond father to the children, and one of his last letters, directed to all of them in January 1572, when he daily expected execution, expresses his love and deep concern for Philip and Anne. He urges Philip to 'love and make much of your wife', speaking of her as 'endued with so great towardness in resolve and good qualities and in person comparable with the best sort'. When he writes to her directly, he calls her his 'well-beloved Nann, that hath been as dear to me as if you had been mine own daughter', committing to her care his only daughter, Margaret (Williams, 239, 243-4). 
Norfolk's fears that Philip would prove unworthy were justified all too soon. After some years at Cambridge, where his conduct was as reprehensible as that of any young irresponsible nobleman, he presented himself at court, striving to gain the favour of the queen. Meanwhile Anne was entirely neglected. Unsettling moves, from Audley End to Arundel House, London, to Nonsuch, with occasional visits to the Charterhouse, then known as Howard House, occurred frequently for many years. By the early 1580s she was at Arundel Castle in Sussex, and there she was converted to Catholicism, received by a Marian priest to whom she was brought by one of Philip Howard's servants, Richard Bayly. Lady Margaret Sackville also became a Catholic about this time. Philip showed no displeasure; out of favour at court and hurt by the apparent coldness of the queen, he returned to the country and joined his wife. The queen, however, expressed strong disapproval, and ordered Anne to the house of Sir Thomas Shirley at Wiston, Sussex, where her first child, Elizabeth, was born in 1583. She was forced to remain there for about a year, writing pitifully to Sir Francis Walsingham on 10 June 1584 for release from 'my unfortunate estate' (copy, Arundel Castle Archives, MD 2734). 
Towards the end of 1584 Philip was converted to Roman Catholicism by the Jesuit William Weston. The queen's suspicions led to his house arrest, and when her fears were confirmed in 1585 on his attempt to escape to France, he was captured at sea and committed to the Tower. He was tried in Star Chamber and condemned to indefinite imprisonment, with a fine of $10,000. From this time the queen's behaviour towards both Philip and Anne was spiteful and mean. Refused permission to live in London, Anne rented a house in Romford, Essex. On 7 July 1585 her son, Thomas Howard, the future fourteenth earl of Arundel, was born in the parsonage of Finchingfield, Essex, a house that had been granted to the third duke of Norfolk by Henry VIII. Philip was told that the child was another daughter, and although he discovered that he had a son, he never saw the child or his wife again. 
After Philip's imprisonment, and on the urging of Thomas Morgan, her agent in France, Mary, queen of Scots, wrote to Anne to praise the constancy in religion the Howards showed. She expressed her willingness to act in order to secure the release of the earl 'who is so dear to me', but was afraid that her motives would be wrongly interpreted. She enclosed letters addressed to her friends in Scotland, and asked Anne to forward them through her 'friends and servants upon the borders' and to receive answers, a correspondence that was to be secret (Walter, 2.256). There were letters also to Lord Henry Howard, Philip's uncle, and to Lady Cobham. She could apparently rely upon a close friendship with Anne, whom she addressed as 'cousin', for she asked her to purchase silks or velvets sufficient for two gowns for Lady Cobham, leaving the gift to Anne's discretion. The letter was to be delivered by means of the French ambassador, and replies sent by the same route. At this time of such tension it would have been most unwise if Anne had allowed herself to be enmeshed in Mary's political machinations. 
In 1588 Anne was living in a wing of Arundel House, for which she paid a lease of $30 a year. When Queen Elizabeth wished to visit Somerset House, next door to the property, Anne was required to vacate it. 
Philip's ordeal was intensified when he was accused of arranging a mass to be said on behalf of the Spanish forces at the time of the Armada. He was tried for treason and condemned to death. Execution was postponed, but his close imprisonment continued until his death on 19 October 1595, not without suspicion of poison. His lands and those of his wife were attainted. Arundel House was searched, and most of the furniture carried away. For some time Anne took refuge in small houses, one in Spitalfields and one in Acton. Reduced to a meagre $8 pension a week, irregularly received, she sold jewels to pay her remaining servants and, deprived of her coach, she was forced to walk. Her state seemed to her like penury. Her grandson William Howard, writing the life of his father, describes the difficulties she suffered: 'all her estate beinge taken from her, and a very small allowance allowed her, hardly enough to kepe her selfe and children, much lesse to bee able to give her sonne such breedinge, as was fitte for a personne of his qualety, during the Queenes rayne. (Hervey, appx 3, 463)' 

Throughout these years the countess called upon the services of Catholic priests. Martin Array, a seminary priest, was her chaplain until his arrest in June 1586 and banishment a month later. Within a few months the Jesuit Robert Southwell entered her household. He acted also as spiritual adviser to the earl, with whom he exchanged letters, the basis of the lengthy prose study 'An Epistle of Comfort'. The volume was printed on a press set up in one of the countess's houses, probably that in Spitalfields, where the Jesuit John Gerard saw it in 1588. Southwell understood the difficulties faced by the countess in establishing a religious life. For her he wrote 'A shorte rule of good life', a simple statement of faith and a guide to everyday living. It is a directive for a devout laywoman of high rank and, like the Ignatian 'Spiritual Exercises', is a flexible outline, expressed in the first person, to be enlarged according to changing circumstances. The countess followed the 'Rule' for the rest of her life. 
In 1592 Southwell was captured after he had left the comparative security of the countess's house. She tried to alleviate the conditions in which he was held by sending him books and necessaries through his sister, Mary Bannister. He was executed on 21 February 1595, a few months before Philip Howard died. The countess's hopes for her children had to be abandoned. In 1598 her daughter, Elizabeth, died of tuberculosis. As he grew older, she was forced to relinquish the direction of Thomas's education. An early biographer states that he attended Westminster School, and passed on to Cambridge, after which he travelled abroad. 
The possessions that should have come to Anne after the death of her husband were withheld. In her financial affairs she was guided by her steward, Robert Spiller, who served her for more than forty years before his death in 1615. When he first undertook the task, she had debts of $14,000 as a result of her husband's free-spending at court. She eventually had to pay $10,000 for lands designated as her jointure. In 1599 and again in 1602 she sold lands in order to secure an income. In 1601 John Hobart, a Norfolk man and an agent for the marquess of Winchester, tried to arrange a loan for the countess and her brother-in-law Lord William Howard so that they might make composition to the queen for Lord Dacre's lands. The baronies of Gilsland and Greystoke finally became her property by an instruction given to the attorney-general, probably in 1603. In 1607 she recovered Arundel House, although forced to pay $4000 to Charles Howard, earl of Nottingham, who had claimed it quite unjustifiably. 
As she regained the property due to her as her inheritance and her jointure, Anne was also able to secure a place in society for her son. At the new year's festivities in 1606 both the countess and Thomas made gifts of $20 to the king, who responded with a gift of 30 ounces of 'guilt plate'. That summer Thomas married Aletheia (died 1654), youngest daughter and coheir of Gilbert Talbot, seventh earl of Shrewsbury ['see 'Howard, Aletheia, countess of Arundel], a match brokered by John Hobart, who proposed it to the countess of Shrewsbury. 
Anne's admiration for the Society of Jesus was shown in 1612 when she made a gift of $2500 to the Jesuit Richard Blount, then serving in England. She hoped that the sum would be invested and the interest compounded until she died, but the money was mishandled and lost. An even more significant gift was made in 1621, when she founded the tertianship in Ghent. If ever England again embraced Catholicism, the house was to move to Carlisle, where she was born. For the last fourteen years before her death the countess maintained a Jesuit priest who wrote accounts of her life and that of the earl. 'The life of the right honourable and virtuouse lady, the Lady Anne late countesse of Arundell and Surrey' has an intimacy that could arise only after many years' observation. The manuscript work is clearly a compilation of reminiscences, some of which represent her attempts to recall early stages in her life, while others record the day-to-day life in her household, when she practised a disciplined and practical piety. Events are overlaid with the emotions that remained with the countess, as in the account 'Of the Queen's hatred towards Her' ('Life of... the Lady Anne', chap. 6) and in her thankfulness that Southwell came to live with her as the result of a misunderstanding, admitted some years afterwards 'in pleasant discourse' (ibid., chap. 7). The death of the earl was followed by a period of intense mourning and of physical suffering, when, against the advice of Lady Montague, she took a vow of chastity, regularly renewed. The writer admires her for her 'vertuous, modest and discreet' behaviour, and notes that 'altho there wanted not many that did not much care for her naturally speaking, yet none were ever hear'd to speak one evil word of her' (ibid., chap. 8). 
The account is made up of frequent anecdotes, including the story of the plan Anne made to rescue George Blackwell, the arch-priest, when he had hidden for three days in a house that was closely watched. She not only provided a substantial bribe for the officer in charge, but sent him a venison pie every year on twelfth night, the anniversary. Not unexpectedly, she was deeply hurt by her son's submission to the Church of England. The explanation given by her biographer is that 'partly through fear, partly through desire of the King's favour (meeting with some bad counsellors) he accommodated himself by degrees to the times more than he ought to have done'. In no way did she change her affection for him, but 'I and others' heard her say that she would welcome the news of his death if 'she might have good hopes of his salvation' ('Life of... the Lady Anne', chap. 12). She was indeed able to rejoice at the deaths of those who died in the old faith. When her eldest grandson, James, died in 1623 of smallpox in Ghent, reconciled by John Gerard, she felt that his good death was a sign of God's approval of the Jesuit house she had founded there, and similarly when her grandson Charles died in her care aged about seven, she was said to have exclaimed aloud of her joy that he had gone to heaven (ibid.). 
In advanced age Anne spent much of the day in attendance in the chapel and in other religious observances. She oversaw the preparation of medicines and dressings, and many came to her seeking treatment. She had obtained a relic, a bone from one of Southwell's feet, and was said to effect cures by its powers. (At her death it was left to Richard Blount, the Jesuit provincial.) She was extremely generous, giving alms to all kinds of people in need, distributing food three times a week, sometimes to 'well nigh a Hundred', and paying pensions, and also (remembering her northern origins) supplying a quantity of woollen cloth from her northern estates and providing a salary for a schoolmaster in Cumberland. She made great occasions of the birthdays of her three great-grandchildren. When the eldest was three, shortly before her death, she entertained 'almost eight score poor Children', giving each a herring pie (since it was Lent) and three pennies ('Life of... the Lady Anne', chap. 10). 
The admiration expressed by Anne's biographer extends to her appearance. Those who knew her when she was young reported that she was fair and beautiful, and she still retained a fresh colour. She was tall, and towards the end of her life was 'something corpulent', a state that might have set off her grace and dignity, but she would do nothing out of vanity. She wore simple black gowns of inexpensive material, with a piece of religious jewellery on festival occasions. The rather unperceptive chaplain found it hard to see that she ever made any change, 'the new being so like the old in all respects' ('Life of... the Lady Anne', chap. 17). He records that a portrait was sent to Philip III of Spain and was hung in the Escorial (ibid., chap. 16), but it can no longer be found. When she was sixty-nine, drawings were made by Lucas Vorsterman: one is preserved in the British Museum, and another was later engraved by Wenceslaus Hollar, of which several copies survive. 
During the period when her biographer lived with her the countess moved four times. For the last two years of her life she was at the manor house at Shifnal, Shropshire. She appears to have had such confidence in her chaplain that he was present at the making of her will, and he records that having had the usual legacies to her family and close friends written out for her, she wrote in her own hand a number of particular bequests. After more than six months' decline she became so weak that she could no longer attend chapel. She was visited by Thomas Howard and his wife and children, and by others to whom the reader is told -- with perhaps a touch of irony -- she gave her last advice and counsel. She died quietly at Shifnal on 13 April 1630 and was buried in the Fitzalan Chapel, Arundel Castle. 
The countess's biographer finished his work on 15 June 1635, meticulously recording the years, months, and days after her death. Two manuscript copies are preserved at Arundel Castle. The earlier, in octavo, probably dates from the mid-seventeenth century and includes material omitted from the other copy in quarto. A printed version, with many abridgements, was edited by the duke of Norfolk in 1857. The manuscripts vary so much in details of style that the biography may have been written originally in Latin, to be sent to Rome. 
Although the work is hagiography, from it there emerges a vivid picture of a woman of extraordinary strength and endurance, recalling the past and re-creating in the present a useful, busy, and ordered life out of the public eye. Other sources reveal how watchful she was over her son and his family, whose fluctuating fortunes continued to bring her anxiety. She worked so diligently to recover her lands that it was said at her death that she left Thomas Howard an income of $6000. In her faith she was greatly sustained by the directive prepared for her by Robert Southwell. She was indeed an exemplar of a Catholic woman of rank whose piety and charity helped to keep Catholicism alive in England. 


@@@@@


doc= 46909


Livingstone, Helen, countess of Linlithgow (d. 1627), royal tutor, was the only daughter of Andrew Hay, eighth earl of Erroll, and Jean, his first wife. Helen and her brother's financial and marital interests were represented by the king (to whom they were said to be 'of kyn'; Pitcairn, 2.546), after her father's second marriage. In 1584 she married Alexander Livingstone (d. 1621), seventh Lord Livingstone from 1592 and created earl of Linlithgow in 1600; they had five children, of whom two daughters married in 1609 and 1612. 
In 1587 the 'Grieves of the Kirk', presented to James VI, described Lady Livingstone as a 'malicious papist'. Her brother Francis ['see 'Hay, Francis] was an active Catholic and their family had had a resident Jesuit priest. She was cited to appear before the presbytery for failure to attend church and confess her faith in 1594 and 1596, but James VI and his wife, Anne of Denmark, entrusted her and her husband to educate their daughters, the princesses Elizabeth and Margaret, in 1596. In 1597 she was threatened with excommunication, although a deputation found that she was reading the 'Bible' daily, and attending church. Nevertheless, the general assembly's concern, both with her recusancy and with her position of influence over the royal daughters, meant that she continued to be targeted for her religious beliefs. In 1601 they cited: 'the education of their Majesties' children [in] the company of obstinat and profest Papists sic as the Ladie Livingstoun' ('Universall Kirk', 3.965) as a major cause 'of the deflection from the purity, zeal and practice of true religion' (ibid.). The king, despite the order to remove his daughters, did not, suggesting that religious affiliations were inconsequential, relative to his daughters' safe care. In 1602 the countess's husband gained her a stay of excommunication so long as he 'deal with her at all times carefully for her conversion' (ibid., 1004). James VI's accession to the English throne in 1603 ended Helen Livingstone's care of his daughters, which may explain the kirk's silence until 1611, when the visitation to the kirk of Linlithgow recorded her recusancy. In 1612 the presbytery called her to appear on an excommunication charge and, despite her non-appearance, enjoined their brethren to 'give her public admonition and prayer' to convert. She was described as a kind and hospitable woman by the imprisoned ministers who were lodged at Linlithgow Castle in 1606. 
In 1627 Helen Livingstone's daughter, the countess of Wigtown, wrote to John Livingstone, requesting his presence at her mother's deathbed. He wrote afterwards that '[she] had been all her days a papist, but some while before had deserted that religion' ('Brief Relation'). She died in 1627 at her daughter's house in Cumbernauld. 

'The confession and conversion of the right honourable, most illustrious and elect lady, my lady C. of L.' (1629), printed by John Livingston (no known relation), gives little flavour of individuality, being an orthodox, conventional confession of Calvinist faith and rejection of Catholicism. The countess speaks of how Catholicism 'this many years contented mee, till at last in my old dayes GOD so happily moved my heart to heare the trueth of better and sounder instructers and their warrand' (sig. B2'r'- 'v'), and how she now hopes to hear 'a hundreth sermons in GOD's true Kirk' (sig. B4'r'). The confession is appended by a collection of psalms and prayers, focusing on the experience of rebirth and salvation. John Livingston claims her words were 'most joyfullie, and constantlie uttered and declared before many honourable men and women' (sig. B7'v'). 


@@@@@


doc= 46911


Martin, Dorcas, Lady Martin (1536/7-1599), translator and bookseller, was probably the daughter of John Eccleston, grocer, of Cheapside and Tottenham, who may have moved to London from Lancashire (on her monument, Dorcas is described as the daughter of John Eccleston of Lancaster, gentleman), and his wife, Margery (died 1571). She married, probably after 1552, Sir Richard Martin (1533/4-1617), master of the mint and twice lord mayor of London, and they had five sons and one daughter. She is depicted with her husband on a silver medal of 1562, which gives her age as twenty-five. White identifies Martin as an active participant in a radical puritan circle. Martin's role in the admonition crisis appears in Archbishop Grindal's letter to Archbishop Parker which refers to her as 'the stationer for all the first impressions' of Thomas Cartwright's unlawfully published 'Replie to an Answere' (1573) (Nicholson, 347-8). James Rowbotham dedicated 'The Perfect Pathway to Salvation' (1590?) to her. Martin's translation of a French text, 'An Instruction for Christians', appears in the second lamp of Thomas Bentley's 'Monument of Matrones' (1582) where Bentley introduces her as a 'godlie matrone and gentlewoman' (p. 221). Her translation includes prayers, psalm verses, and, notably, a catechism in which a mother questions a child. 
Martin died on 1 September 1599, and was buried the following night in the south chancel of All Hallows, Tottenham. 


@@@@@


doc= 46912


More, Alice, Lady More (b. in or after 1474, d. in or before 1551), second wife of Sir Thomas More, was born, probably at Epping, Essex, to Elizabeth (died in or after 1510), coheir of Sir Peter Ardern of Markhall, Essex, and her second husband, Sir Richard Harpur (died 1492). After her father's death her mother married Sir Andrew Dymoke (died 1508). Before 1492 Alice married John Middleton, a London mercer, who named her co-executor of his will in 1509 and left his fortune to her and their daughters, Alice ('c'.1501-1563) and Helen (died 'c'.1510). 
In 1511, about a month after his first wife's death, Alice married Thomas More (1478-1535) and moved to his London home. He forwarded her thanks to Erasmus in 1516 for his wish that she have a long life, for it would enable her, she joked, to plague her husband all the longer. On a tomb at Chelsea, where they moved in 1525, Thomas lauded both wives as 'beloved' (Norrington, 56). 
As his career advanced, More frequently left Alice alone to supervise the household; his only extant letter to her concerns their barn that burned down in 1529. Around the end of 1534, although she did not understand the reasons for his imprisonment, she petitioned the government for his relief. After his execution the crown voided the trust he had belatedly established for her but granted her an annuity of $20 in 1537. She became entangled in lawsuits, one of them initiated by William Roper, her stepson-in-law, who depicted her as an interfering busybody in his account of Thomas's life. Writers have disparaged her role as a martyr's wife, even identifying her as the hook-beaked harpy mentioned in a letter of October 1511 from Ammonio, Henry VIII's Latin secretary, to Erasmus; Holbein's portrait contradicts this claim. She died on or before 25 April 1551 and was probably buried at Chelsea. Her daughter Alice had three children with Thomas Elrington and nine with her second husband, Sir Giles Alington. Through the Alington line Alice was an ancestor of Elizabeth II. 


@@@@@


doc= 46913


Munda, Constantia (fl. 1617), author, wrote 'The worming of a mad dogge, or, A soppe for Cerberus the jaylor of hell: no confutation but a sharpe redargution of the bayter of women' (1617), the third and last response to Joseph Swetnam's 'The araignment of lewde, idle, froward, and unconstant women, or, The vanitie of them choose you whether' (1615). 
It is impossible to determine the gender of the writer behind 'The Worming'. In 'Mortalities Memorandum' (1621) Rachel Speght refers to Constantia as a woman, but the knowledge of Greek, Latin, and Italian texts and of legal language demonstrated in 'The Worming' makes this doubtful. The ranting use of language ('your turbulent mind is defecated'; Munda, sig. C1'r') also makes one question Munda's alleged female gender. Constantia does, however, dedicate 'The Worming' to 'The Right Worshipful Lady her most deare Mother, the Lady Prudentia Munda' and offers 'her writing hand' that penned this pamphlet 'in recompense' for the 'pangs of sorrow you sustain'd / In child-birth' (ibid., sig. A3'r'). Constantia establishes her persona as the daughter of a lady; if her social status is aristocratic, this could account for her learned references. 
Although Constantia includes some of the traditional arguments for the worth of women, such as that women are 'the meanes / Of all mens being', 'The Worming' is more of a satirical attack on Swetnam and on his desire 'to please / The giddy-headed vulgar' than a defence of women. Constantia attacks the popular press, which has 'become the receptacle of every dissolute Pamphlet' (Munda, sig. B2'r') and the public theatre, where 'every fantasticke Poetaster... will strive to represent unseemely figments imputed to our sex' (ibid., sig. B3'r'). Calling Swetnam an 'ill-favoured hunks' (ibid., sig. E1'v'), Constantia accuses him of plagiarism, repeatedly corrects his inaccurate allusions, and charges him with 'Nero-like... ripping up the bowels of thine own mother' when he says that all women are evil (ibid., sig. D2'r'). She speculates that Swetnam knows so much about brothels because he has spent so much time in them (ibid., sig. C3'r'). 

'The Worming' was printed for Laurence Hayes by G. Purslowe, the same printer who produced the second edition of Swetnam's 'Araignment'; it appears to be a rushed job to take advantage of the profits accruing to Swetnam's bookseller. Hayes entered 'The Worming' in the Stationers' register on 29 April 1617, without indicating an author, which has led to speculation as to whether the author of the pamphlet was in his employ. 


@@@@@


doc= 46914


Neville, Frances, Lady Bergavenny (d. 1576), writer, was the third daughter of the ten children of Thomas Manners, first earl of Rutland (d. 1543), and his second wife, Eleanor Paston (died 1550). By 1554 she had married Henry Neville, fourth Lord Bergavenny or Abergavenny (died 1587), and they had one daughter, Mary (1554-1626), who married Sir Thomas Fane and unsuccessfully claimed the barony on the death of her father. Collinson cites a letter by the puritan preacher Edward Dering attacking Lord Abergavenny for 'ungodly talke', 'unclennes', and 'riot' (Collinson, 301). Lady Abergavenny wrote pious works. Her 'Praiers' in prose and verse were later published in the second lamp of 'The Monument of Matrones' (1582), Thomas Bentley's anthology of protestant women writers' prayers. In a deathbed dedication of her work to her daughter, she calls her work 'a jewell of health for the soule, and a perfect path to paradise, verie profitable to be used of everie faithfull Christian man and woman' (Aburgavennie, 139). Her collection includes sixty-seven pages of prose prayers for private use and public worship linked to varied occasions and times of day; a metrical prayer against vices; a five-page acrostic prayer based on Mary Fane's name; and a concluding acrostic prayer based on her own name. She died in 1576. 


@@@@@


doc= 46916


Oxlie, Mary (fl. 1616), poet, is known for a single commendatory poem addressed to the Scottish poet William Drummond of Hawthornden. Her fifty-two-line poem, a striking apologia for female creativity as well as a panegyric, 'To William Drummond of Hawthornden', appeared in the 1656 edition of Drummond's 'Poems'. It is signed by 'Mary Oxlie of Morpet' but her identity is subsequently confused in the next reprinting of her poem. Edward Phillips, in the section of his 'Theatrum poetarum' (London, 1675) entitled 'Women among the moderns eminent for poetry', declares her a 'Scotch Poetess' but names her 'Mary Morpeth'. Oxlie is the only ostensibly Scottish female writer to be named in Phillips's collection. Phillips alludes to 'many other things in Poetry' by Oxlie (Phillips, 259) but nothing else can be securely attributed to her. David Laing in his 'Various Pieces of Fugitive Scotish Poetry' (1825) attributed to Oxlie two political broadsides but later retracted the ascription, first assumed on the evidence of the initials 'M. M.' (the spurious 'Mary Morpeth'). 
The original 1656 ascription identifies Oxlie as a Northumbrian writer; one inference may be that she either directly moved to Scotland or became indirectly associated with literary circles around Drummond at Hawthornden, south of Edinburgh. David Masson's biography of Drummond (1873) suggests that Phillips obtained this and other dedicatory poems from Drummond's brother-in-law, Sir John Scot of Scotstarvet. Although Oxlie's poem cannot be dated, its presumed existence among Drummond's manuscripts, partly exchanged between Phillips and Scot, implies that it predated the 1656 posthumous edition. The poem contains allusions to Drummond's 'Tears on the Death of Moeliades' (1613) and the amatory sonnet sequence of 'Poems' (1616). It may have been presented to Drummond shortly after the 1616 edition, and was possibly not intended for publication. This remains conjectural, but there is evidence to suggest that the literary milieu cultivated by Drummond included women writers such as Anna Hume. 
Oxlie's poem opens disingenuously with a plea that her 'worke' should not be compared to Drummond's, claiming in her defence, and on behalf of women artists, that creativity is frustrated by social and material concerns and by psychological anxiety: '
From an untroubled mind should Verses flow; 

My discontents makes mine too muddy show; 

And hoarse encumbrances of household care 

Where these remaine, the muses ne're repaire. 

' This humility is superseded by Oxlie's skilful 'recreation' of Drummond's pastoral mode. Ironically, Oxlie's poetic identity has been constituted through imitation. The poem's proposition that 'the Tree-turn'd 'Daphne'' will crown the poet with the laurel 'garland' is possibly a reply to the commendatory sonnet of William Alexander published in the 1616 edition, as if to consciously 'feminize' the original dedication signifying male patronage. Oxlie's extant poem offers an insight into post-1603 Scottish literary culture and the coterie environment which cultivated women writers. Its proto-feminist justification of 'limited' female creativity was observed by the American writer and critic Tillie Olsen ('b'. 1913) in her pioneering work 'Silences' (1978). 


@@@@@


doc= 46917


Paston, Katherine, Lady Paston (bap. 1578, d. 1629), estate manager and letter writer, was baptized on 22 June 1578 at Ashwellthorpe in north Norfolk, one of six surviving children of Sir Thomas Knyvett (died 1618) and his wife, Muriel (died 1616), daughter of Sir Thomas Parry (1515-1560). Details of Katherine's education are unknown. On 28 April 1603 she married Edmund Paston (1585-1632), the only son of Christopher Paston ('b'. 1554, died in or after 1611) and his wife, Anne ('nee' Audley). The Paston family was at that time headed by Sir William Paston (1528-1610), Edmund's grandfather, and it might have been he who initiated the match between Edmund and Katherine, for her father had been an 'old friend' (Marshall, 32) of his and one of the first governors of Paston School, which was his foundation. 
Edmund Paston was knighted in March 1609. Following Sir William's death in 1610, Edmund and Katherine moved to the family seat, Paston Hall, and had two sons, William (1610-1663) and Thomas ('b'. 1614). However, their lives remained heavily influenced by the actions of the family patriarch. Owing to the fact that his heir, Christopher, suffered from mental illness, in deeds of 1603 and 1608 Sir William had settled his estate into a trust from which Edmund and Katherine received $800 a year for their maintenance. This arrangement led to several legal disputes between his descendants. Concerned that full provision should be made for her two sons, and because her husband was 'exceedinge sickly' (BL, Add. MS 27447, fol. 175), Katherine took matters into her own hands and carried a suit in Edmund's name to the court of chancery. In October 1618 she took up residence at St Giles-in-the-Fields in London with her two 'sweet boyes' (ibid., fol. 168) to enable her to attend the court. Although she corresponded frequently with Sir John Heveningham (1577-1633), husband of Edmund's sister Bridget (1583-1624) and one of Sir William's trustees, and also received support from Sir Thomas Holland (1574-1626), widower of her sister Mary and godfather to her younger son, Lady Paston was far from dependent on these men. Her correspondence, preserved at the British Library (Add. MSS 27447 and 36988) and published in the twentieth century, reveals a sceptical businesswoman who tended to check all accounts and documents herself in the interest of her family. There are forty-eight letters from her, and thirty-seven addressed to her or to members of her family, mostly dating from 1618 to 1627. 
About half the letters are from Lady Paston to her son William, and are concentrated in the period 1624 to 1627, when he was a student at Corpus Christi College, Cambridge. They reveal a significant level of maternal care and control, as well as a strong piety, usually beginning and ending with invocations of God's blessings on her son. Katherine sent advice, reminding William that now was 'the cheefest time to gayne the truest good boeth for sowll and body', and hoping that he might return to her 'adorned bothe with devine and humayne Learninge' (BL, Add. MS 36988, fol. 27). She also sent parcels of food for her son and his tutor, William Roberts, as well as the occasional gift for the college's master, Dr Samuel Walsall, who acknowledged thankfully the gifts of her 'bountifull hand' and was full of praise for William's 'conversation & demeanour' (BL, Add. MS 27447, fol. 205). Katherine visited Cambridge at least twice, in June and in October 1626, on the latter occasion just before the family moved temporarily to Palgrave to escape an outbreak of plague at Paston. They remained there until shortly before Easter 1627. 
Lady Paston died on 10 March 1629 and was buried at St Margaret's Church, Paston. The master mason and sculptor Nicholas Stone made the monument the same year. The inscription proclaiming that her '
vertue did all ill soe overswaye 

That her whole life was a comunion day 
('Correspondence', 23)' was said to have been written by John Donne, but the editor of the letters was unable to find evidence to substantiate this. 


@@@@@


doc= 46921


Lady Margaret Seymour (b. 1540) and Anne Seymour [


@@@@@


doc= 46922


Sowernam, Ester (fl. 1617), author, published a pamphlet entitled 'Ester hath hang'd Haman, or, An answere to a lewd pamphlet entituled 'The arraignment of women': with the arraignment of lewd, idle, froward, and unconstant men, and husbands' in London in 1617. The pamphlet was a response to Joseph Swetnam's 1615 pamphlet 'The Arraignment of Lewde, Idle, Froward, and Unconstant Women', and was one of several published in the same year, including Rachel Speght's 'A Mouzell for Melastomus' and Constantia Munda's 'The Worming of a Mad Dogge'. Ester Sowernam is clearly a pseudonym: 'Sowernam' presents a witty opposition to Swetnam, while 'Ester' refers to the biblical figure Esther who saved her people, the Jews living in Persia, by revealing the plots against them of the Persian chief minister Haman who was consequently hanged. The actual identity of Ester Sowernam remains unknown. Since the early 1980s, when this text and others relating to early modern controversies about the nature of women attracted much feminist interest, there has been debate as to whether the author was a woman engaged in an early feminist argument, or a man taking a woman's point of view as part of a formal exercise in rhetoric or disputation, or in order to profit from exploitation of a fashionable controversy. 
Sowernam's text itself is notable for its logical organization. Its opening contains a concise, lucid statement of purpose and method: first to 'deliver the worthinesse and worth of women; both in respect of their Creation as in the work of Redemption' and to give biblical examples of women as 'gratious instruments' of God; then, in the second part, to show how women have been valued in history; and finally to respond to 'all materiall objections' against women and to 'arraigne' all men such as Joseph Swetnam who are 'lewd, idle, furious and beastly disposed persons' (sigs. A2'v'-A3'r'). Throughout, Sowernam uses logic and wordplay to refute Swetnam's (and traditional) railings against women, and to turn anti-women arguments back on themselves. She argues, for instance, that in the biblical account of the fall Adam was more culpable than Eve and that evil is more associated with masculinity than femininity since the serpent was 'of the masculine gender' (sig. B4'r'). 
Sowernam's pamphlet has literary and historical importance as an example of measured, witty polemic. It both employs and self-consciously criticizes seventeenth-century habits of arguing by means of analogy, dispute over biblical interpretation, classical logic, and play with language. It is a significant text, too, in that it has been a focus in the late twentieth century for debates over the importance of signature and the gendering of authorship. Read as a cultural artefact it offers an insight into the concerns and fashionable interests of urban, educated, middle-class women and men in the early seventeenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 46924


Katherine Stubbes (1570/71-1590) was the daughter of a Dutch woman whose maiden name is unknown and William Emmes, cordwainer of the parish of St Dunstan-in-the-West and a freeman of the city of London. The youngest but one of six children, she inherited property on the death of her father late in 1583 and at the age of fifteen was married to Philip Stubbes. The contemporary suggestion that Stubbes cynically insinuated himself into the young heiress's affections is unsubstantiated and probably slanderous. According to her husband's pious account of her life, Katherine was 'a perfect paterne of true Christianitie' and 'a mirrour of womanhood'. Modest, virtuous, and an avid reader of the scriptures, she prophesied her own death from postnatal complications following the birth of a son, and passed away after making 'a most heavenly confession' of the protestant faith and struggling heroically against the temptations of Satan (Stubbes, 'Christal Glasse', sigs. A2'r' and title-page). It is difficult to disentangle the historical person Katherine Stubbes from the paragon she became in a text heavily conditioned by generic convention. The parish registers of St Modwen's, Burton upon Trent, confirm the baptism of John Stubbes on 17 November 1590 and the burial of Katherine on 14 December. 


@@@@@


doc= 46925


Sutcliffe, Alice (fl. 1624-1634), author, was probably the daughter of Luke Woodhouse, of Kimberley in Norfolk. Little is known about her early life, but she seems to have been attached to the household of Katherine, duchess of Buckingham, the widow of George Villiers, first duke of Buckingham, for she refers to the duchess as 'a 'Mother''. This association with the Buckingham faction makes it likely that Sutcliffe herself was either a Catholic or sympathetic to the Catholic cause, since the duchess of Buckingham was involved in the resurgence in Catholicism at court under the auspices of Queen Henrietta Maria. In addition, Sutcliffe specifically thanks the duchess of Buckingham and her sister for the ''Spirituall' blessings' they have bestowed upon her, and she concludes her carefully worded prose treatise with a prayer to God for knowledge of 'the Glory of the inheritance of his Saints'. Any open statement of Catholicism would, however, have been unwise. 
It is likely that Sutcliffe, after leaving the Buckingham household, entered court, for by 1624 she was married to John Sutcliffe of Yorkshire, a squire to James I and subsequently groom of the privy chamber to Charles I. They had a daughter, Susan, of whom nothing else is known. The connection with the Buckingham group appears to have persisted after Sutcliffe's marriage, since her only recorded work, 'Meditations of Man's Mortality, or, A Way to True Blessedness' (1634), includes dedications to Susan, countess of Denbigh, Buckingham's sister, to Philip Herbert, earl of Pembroke and Montgomery, whose son had married Buckingham's daughter, as well as to Katherine, the widowed duchess of Buckingham. 

'Meditations of Man's Mortality, or, A Way to True Blessedness' comprises a biblical prose treatise and a spiritual poem. It sets out to warn the reader of the omnipresence of death, initially painting a darkly Gothic picture of human sin and damnation, but then turning in the final stanzas to welcome death as a way to salvation and eternal life. The poem demonstrates Sutcliffe's biblical knowledge as well as her classical learning, but she seems to be torn between openly demonstrating her literary skill, and disavowing expertise on the grounds of her sex. Thus, she denigrates her 'sex's act' in writing, but simultaneously praises female intelligence: '
Nor is there aught that lives in woman kind 

Exceeding the rare prowess of her mind. 

' Similarly, while the poem attacks Eve as a 'Wicked woman' Sutcliffe is also able to defend her sex, 'courage woman'. This balancing act between defending women and accepting their vilification parallels that of the central theme of the poem: a fear and a welcoming of death, and of the religious subtext of Catholicism and protestantism. In each case Sutcliffe evades open confrontation between the opposing discourses, but the resulting tensions inevitably thread through the poetry, leaving the reader with a sense of unsettling ambiguity. Among the commendatory poems prefixed to 'Man's Mortality' is one by Ben Jonson. 
The date and place of Alice Sutcliffe's death are not known. 


@@@@@


doc= 46928


Twysden, Anne, Lady Twysden (1574-1638), writer, was born on 28 February 1574 at Heneage House in London, the eldest daughter of Sir Maple, or Mayle, Finch (died 1614) and Elizabeth Heneage (died 1633). Her mother was created Viscountess Maidstone in 1623 and countess of Winchilsea in 1628. Anne was educated by her grandmother at the court of Queen Elizabeth, and was proficient in Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. She was married by Alexander Nowell, dean of St Paul's, at Heneage House on 4 October 1591, to William Twysden (1566-1629) of East Peckham, Kent. Her husband was knighted in 1603 and created a baronet in 1611. He died on 8 January 1629 and was buried at East Peckham. 
There were five sons and two daughters of the marriage: Roger Twysden, second baronet (1597-1672); Elizabeth (1600-1655), who married Sir Hugh Cholmley (died 1657) in 1622; Thomas Twisden (1602-1683); Anne (1603-1670), who married Sir Christopher Yelverton (died 1654) in 1630; William (1605-1641); John Twysden (1607-1688); and Francis (1610-1675). The burden of Sir William's estate fell to Sir Roger on his death; Lady Anne's jointure was free. She succeeded to the two houses in East Peckham and Redcross Street, London. Her ladies-in-waiting, the diarist Isabella Saunder and Jane Thomlinson, married her sons Roger and Thomas in 1635 and 1639 respectively. Lady Anne refused to pay Charles I's ship-money tax, but was twice cajoled into paying by her eldest son, who also held objections to it. 
Twysden composed at least one book of devotions, known as the Jennings-Bramley manuscript. This contains her own prayer compositions, scriptural passages, accounts of the devout deaths of her father, mother, and brother Sir Heneage, and a prayer composed by the latter. Sir Roger Twysden ordered a copy to be made of this manuscript, with some omissions and additions, inserting headnotes in his own hand -- one of these is dated 10 November 1638 (CKS, MS U 1655 F8, p. 23). The whereabouts of the former manuscript is currently unknown, although Kemble cites from it in his 1849 edition of Roger Twysden's 'Certaine Considerations upon the Government of England'. Lady Twysden's letters are held in the British Library (BL, Add. MS 34173, fols. 9-11), and her son Roger commented of her epistolary skills: 'She had the best way of expressing her mind in writing, wth the most facilyty I ever met with in woeman indeed it might bee incredible should I say I never saw man indite better letters then I have read of hers. (BL, Add. MS 34163, fol. 80)' John Hiud's 'Storie of Stories' (1632) was dedicated to her; Hiud (1578-1651) was a German friend and servant to the family for thirty-two years. 
Twysden fell ill at church on Sunday 23 September 1638 and died at home in Kent on 14 October following. Her sons John and Roger both provide detailed accounts of this illness, which reveal their affection for her and her piety. She was attended by most of her children, their spouses, her grandchildren, and Hiud. Sir Roger was her executor, disposing of at least $168 (BL, Add. MS 34176, fols. 68-73). John described her as tall and fair, while Roger surmised that she 'was the handsommest woeman... I ever saw' (BL, Add. MS 34163, fol. 80), although she was lame from a fall as a child. 


@@@@@


doc= 46929


Tyrwhit, Elizabeth, Lady Tyrwhit (d. 1578), author and courtier, was born at Forde Place, Brede, Sussex, one of five children of Sir Goddard Oxenbridge (died 1531) and his second wife, Anne (died 1531), daughter of Sir Thomas Fiennes, son of Richard, Lord Dacre of Herstmonceux. Between March 1538 and August 1539 Elizabeth Oxenbridge was married, as his second wife, to Sir Robert Tyrwhit (died 1572) of Leighton Bromswold, Huntingdonshire, second son of Sir Robert Tyrwhit of Kettleby, Lincolnshire, and his wife, Maude, daughter of Sir Robert Taylboys. They had a daughter named Katherine who married Sir Henry Darcy of Brimham, Yorkshire, and died in 1567. From her father's first marriage Elizabeth had a half-brother, Thomas, whose daughter Elizabeth, also married to a Robert Tyrwhit, needs to be distinguished from her father's half-sister. 
The elder Elizabeth Tyrwhit's early career took place at the court of Henry VIII, where she appears in household records from 1537 on as a recipient of gifts and as a gentlewoman of the privy chamber. Her relationship with Katherine Parr was especially close, possibly because Parr was cousin by marriage to Sir Robert Tyrwhit through her own first marriage to Edward, Lord Borough. Tyrwhit shared Parr's protestant sympathies and, with others of Parr's ladies-in-waiting suspected of links to the martyr Anne Askew, was arrested by Henry in 1546. When Katherine Parr died of puerperal fever in September 1548, Tyrwhit was at her bedside. For a brief period in 1549, after the scandal surrounding the relationship between Parr's last husband, Thomas Seymour, and Princess Elizabeth in 1547-8, Tyrwhit was appointed governess to the princess in lieu of the suspect Katherine Astley. 
In recognition of her ardently Reformist leanings, Tyrwhit's husband noted that 'my wyffe is not sayne in Dyvinity, but is half a Scripture woman' (Haynes, 'Collection of State Papers', 104). Both her own work and the dedication to her by John Feilde, rector of St Giles Cripplegate, London, of his translation of Jean de l'Espine's 'Excellent Treatise of Christian Righteousness' (T. Vautrollier, 1577) support this view of her religious opinions. Tyrwhit's book, 'Morning and Evening Praiers, with Divers Psalmes Himnes and Meditations' (1574), contains orders for private morning and evening prayers, with a series of 'godly prayers' and hymns appended, and appears in a unique copy held in the British Library. Another version appears in 'The second lampe' of Thomas Bentley's 'Monument of Matrones' (1582). It differs substantially from the original, however, for Bentley changes not only structure, but also content and tone, by amalgamating some prayers, inserting others by different authors, and deleting some of Tyrwhit's altogether. 
Of considerable interest is the volume in which Tyrwhit's original text appears, largely because a handwritten note on the flyleaf indicates that it belonged to Elizabeth I. Along with Tyrwhit's work, it contains the litany and an incomplete copy of 'The Queen's Prayers' by Katherine Parr. The book's binding in enamelled gold depicts Moses raising the serpent and the judgment of Solomon on front and back covers, respectively. The former is surrounded by the phrase, 'Make the afyrye serpent an settt ['sic'] up for a sygne that as many as are bytte maye loke upon it an lyve', while the border around the latter states, 'Then the kyng ansvered an sayd gyve her the lyvyng child an slaye [it] not for she is the mother thereof.' 
Tyrwhit died at her home in St John's Lane, Clerkenwell, Middlesex, and her will, dated 1577, was proved on 28 April 1578. An effigy of Elizabeth, along with those of her husband and daughter, can be found in the church of St Mary, Leighton Bromswold. 


@@@@@


doc= 46930


Tyler, Margaret (fl. 1558-1578), translator, translated as 'The Mirrour of Princely Deedes and Knighthood' (1578) the first book of a work in Spanish by Diego Ortunez de Calahorra. This was the first English publication of a secular text translated by a woman. Her preface and dedication to Lord Thomas Howard say that she is of a 'staied age' (A4'v') and was a 'servant' to his parents (A2'v'), the duke and second duchess of Norfolk, thus roughly between 1558 and 1564. A waiting-woman who translated romances for household entertainment, she might have been married to another literate ducal employee, perhaps the 'John Tyler, Gentleman' who copied a survey of tenant leases in 1565 (CUL, MS 5909). Her spirited preface defends a woman's right to pen secular stories: if books can be dedicated to women, they must be able to read and write books. She should not be expected to write of divinity, having no competence for it. And finally, translation is 'a matter of more heede' than of manly invention or learning (A4); she has only given 'entertainment to a stranger' (A2'v'). 


@@@@@


doc= 46931


Anne Dudley, countess of Warwick (1538-1587)], she received a full humanist education, as did their brother Edward. The education of Jane, Anne, and Margaret seems to be directly connected with their father's political life. He was accused of plotting to marry Jane to her first cousin Edward VI, to which her princess-like education gives some credibility. The sisters were tutored by one John Crane, and then by a French humanist and Pleiade poet in French and Latin, Nicholas Denisot. Their literary ambitions were known outside the family from an early age: Margaret and Jane wrote an undated letter (1548?) to Edward VI, thanking the young king for his 'literary gift', while a letter from Jane to Bucer and Fagius, in Latin, dated 12 June 1549 (when she was eight), thanks them for sending her and her sister books. 


@@@@@


doc= 46932


Wheathill, Anne (fl. 1584), writer, is known only as the author of 'A Handfull of Holesome (though Homelie) Hearbs', a collection of forty-nine prayers printed in 1584 by Henry Denham, a major printer of religious books in sixteenth-century England. On the title-page and at the end of her preface, she is styled 'gentlewoman', which is all that is known about her social status. 
In her preface, recognizing her presumed limitations as a woman, Wheathill counters by asserting her humility and her zeal and claiming that writing the book shows how well she has used her time in her state of virginity. Although she might be merely using her chastity as other female writers had, to justify writing or publishing a book, it seems very likely that she was unmarried. She never writes with a personal, female voice, nor addresses issues specific to women, such as the needs of wives, mothers, and widows. Furthermore, unlike virtually all other general prayer books of the period, her book contains no prayers for women in childbirth. This is probably because she was addressing a general, not just a female, readership, but again, it may be because she was unmarried. 
Wheathill was almost certainly a member of the Church of England since Denham is unlikely to have published a book by someone who was not. Her prayers are full of echoes and quotations from the 'Bible', illustrating the extensive knowledge of both testaments one would expect of a devout protestant. She believes firmly in predestination, repeatedly using the word 'elect' in the book and asserting that salvation comes only from Christ's purchase by his 'precious blood' (Wheathill). She refers to the sacrament of baptism, but never mentions the eucharist or lord's supper. This is consistent with the Calvinist theology of the English church in 1584, so we cannot label her a puritan. 
Wheathill organized the forty-nine numbered prayers in 'A Handfull of Holesome (though Homelie) Hearbs' not by the usual occasions (times of the day, going to church, marriage, and so on) but according to a highly sophisticated numerological scheme called the 'week-of-weeks', comprising seven groups of seven, reflecting the seven days of creation. Her knowledge of the hexaemeral tradition suggests that she had access to learned works such as Guillaume du Bartas's 'La semaine' (1578) and Pico della Mirandola's 'Heptaplus' (1489). 


@@@@@


doc= 46933


Rose, Herbert Jennings (1883-1961), classical scholar, was born at Orillia, Ontario, Canada, on 5 May 1883, son of Revd Samuel Peter Rose DD ('b'. 1853), a Methodist minister, and his wife, Jean Andrews. He was educated first by private tuition, then at the Collegiate Institute, Ottawa, and at McGill University, Montreal, where he graduated with first-class honours in classics in 1904. Then, appointed from the province of Quebec as one of the first Rhodes scholars, he left Canada in 1904 to study at Balliol College, Oxford. Success there (Ireland and Craven scholar, 1905; chancellor's Latin essayist, 1907, and firsts in classical moderations and 'literae humaniores') led to his appointment at Exeter College as fellow and lecturer in 1907; he held these posts until 1911. In that year he married Elsie Plimsoll (died 1939), daughter of Samuel Plimsoll MP ('the sailors' friend'), and the sister of a Balliol contemporary. They had four sons and two daughters. 
Rose returned to McGill University as associate professor of classics for four years (1911-15); then served in the war with the Canadian overseas forces as a private in Princess Patricia's Canadian light infantry, 1915-19. He was professor of Latin at Aberystwyth from 1919 to 1927, when he was appointed professor of Greek at the University of St Andrews. He remained at St Andrews until his retirement in 1953. He was honoured as FBA (1934), honorary fellow of Exeter College (1944), and honorary LLD, St Andrews (1954); he was appointed foreign member of the Royal Society of Letters, Lund, and of the Royal Netherlands Academy; he was invited to give the Sather lectures in California (1939) and the first Eitrem lectures in Oslo (1955). As a pioneer in the scholarly study of folklore, he became in 1932 president both of the Folklore Society and of the Scottish Anthropological Society. 
Rose published a great deal. His greatest contribution to scholarship is perhaps his 'Hygini fabulae' (1934); but he is best remembered for his 'Handbook of Greek Mythology' (1928). Among other works were handbooks of Greek literature (1934) and Latin literature (1936), books on Greek religion (1948) and Roman religion (1949), 'A Commentary on the Surviving Plays of Aeschylus' (1, 1957; 2, 1958), and articles in various encyclopaedias, including 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' (14th and 15th edns). In addition, he translated works from Italian, Dutch, German, and Swedish. He had an encyclopaedic mind, a prodigious apparently photographic memory, and a great gift for languages. His forte was the orderly arrangement and lucid exposition of multifarious information, and his work on Greek mythology, though now somewhat slighted, remains a useful reference resource. 
Rose was a large man with a powerful personality, well-known in the local community, where he served in the Home Guard during the Second World War. To the end of his life he pedalled from his home to the beach for a daily swim in the North Sea. Indoor pursuits were chess and music. In a letter from Aberystwyth before taking up appointment at St Andrews, he wrote that he expected to have 'agreeable colleagues, interesting work, a very fair salary, and opportunity for a good row or two' (Rose MSS, St Andrews University). He did not shirk 'rows', and his book reviews, like his conversation, could be acerbic. He died at his home, 16 Queens Gardens, St Andrews, on 31 July 1961, and his funeral took place in the college chapel of the University of St Andrews on 3 August 1961. 


@@@@@


doc= 46937


Compton, James, third earl of Northampton (1622-1681), playwright and translator, was born on 19 August 1622, the eldest of the six sons of Spencer Compton, the second earl (1601-1643), and his wife, Mary (died 1654), daughter of Sir Francis Beaumont. William Compton and Henry Compton were his brothers. In 1633 James entered Eton College, and in February 1636, while visiting Cambridge in the train of the young elector palatine, received the MA as 'filius nobilis'. A year later he was admitted at Queens', where in 1615 his father had played before James I in Ruggles's comedy 'Ignoramus'. His name appears below the only verse contribution from the college to the university's celebration of the birth of Princess Anne in 1637 ('Synodia', sig. A3). 
In September 1640 Compton was recalled from travel or military service in the Low Countries to stand as knight of the shire for Warwickshire. In April 1641 he voted against Strafford's attainder and the next year served as messenger between the parliament and Charles at York. Deprived of his seat after Edgehill, he fought at Hopton Heath (19 March 1643), where his father died, Cropredy Bridge (June 1644), and Banbury (October 1644), and in April 1645 was routed by Cromwell at Islip. He was present at Naseby in June, and after commanding 1500 horse in Wales retired to Oxford. In February 1646 he began the process of compounding, and his fine of $21,455, reduced on appeal by one third (BL, Add. MS 34253, fols. 42, 44), was discharged by December 1651. He later claimed to have lost $50,000 in the wars, an early sacrifice being his library of some 250 books, confiscated in 1643 from Crosby Hall, Bishopsgate, and sold for $57 3's'. 6died (TNA: PRO, SP 20/7, fols. 17-20). In July 1647 he married Isabella (1622-1661), younger daughter of Richard Sackville, third earl of Dorset (died 1624), and his wife, Lady Anne Clifford, then countess of Pembroke, who was active in promoting the match. They had six children, only one of whom, Alethea, survived into adulthood. 
During the interregnum, when he was several times imprisoned, Northampton occupied his leisure by writing or translating plays and other works that lay unidentified in manuscript at his Northamptonshire seat of Castle Ashby until 1978 (BL, Add. MSS 60276-60282). He was modest about his own literary talents, describing himself to his neighbour Lord Hatton in 1645 as one who had studied 'but slightly and truantlyke' (BL, Add. MS 29570, fol. 30). Rugged translations of Seneca's 'Agamemnon' and 'Hercules furens', which omit the choruses, may be early work (Add. MSS 60276, 60277). A taste for Italian literature, evident in his confiscated library, produced his best effort in this field, a racy adaptation of Machiavelli's comedy 'La Mandragola', relocated from Renaissance Florence to Commonwealth London (Add. MS 60278). His rendering of three scenes from 'Don Sancho d'Aragon' (1649) into heroic verse makes him one of the earliest English translators of Corneille also (ibid.). The same impulse that moved him to translate the story of the martyred Christian convert Hermenegildus from the Latin (1620) of the Jesuit Nicholas Caussin led him to compose an original piece on the much handled subject of Mariamne, wife of Herod the Great (Add. MSS 60276, 60280). Altogether accomplished is his blank-verse drama on Leontias, king of Cyprus, in which a close acquaintance with Shakespeare is apparent. A five-act play on the usurper Caracalla and an unfinished draft of a drama about Strafford (Add. MS 60281) form a link with his few directly political writings which include a brief prose account of Charles I and two unfinished verse satires (Add. MSS 60282, 60276). In the 1650s and early 1660s Northampton acted as patron to actors and dramatists, and was the dedicatee of printed works by Samuel Holland, Henry Glapthorne, and William Heminges, as well as the recipient of three manuscript plays by his particular protege Cosmo Manuche (Add. MSS 60273-60275). 
At the Restoration Northampton became lord lieutenant of Warwickshire and recorder of Coventry. Within three years of his first wife's death in 1661 he married Mary (died 1719), eldest daughter of Baptist Noel, third Viscount Campden, with whom he had three sons and two daughters. In May 1663 he was elected fellow of the Royal Society. He attended the House of Lords punctiliously until 1669, and sporadically thereafter, his most notable action there being the introduction in December 1667 of a bill calling for the perpetual banishment of Clarendon, which Pepys called 'mighty poor I think, and so doth everybody else'. The last decade of his life saw a burst of public activity as privy councillor (1673-9), constable of the Tower (1675-9), and a lord of trade (1677). Northampton died at Castle Ashby on 15 December 1681 and was buried on 29 December at Compton Wynyates. Lely's portrait of him in armour was bequeathed as an heirloom to Ashby by his widow in 1719. 


@@@@@


doc= 46938


Andrews, Richard (bap. 1575, d. 1634), physician and poet, was baptized on 31 July 1575 at St Leonard Eastcheap, London, the second son of William Andrews (died 1588), twice joint warden of the Butchers' Company, and his wife, Elizabeth Harrison, of the same parish. From Merchant Taylors' School he passed to St John's College, Oxford, in October 1591, graduating BA in 1595 and MA in 1599. Here, besides showing a distinct talent for Latin verse, he responded as fellow and rhetoric reader of the college in a disputation in moral philosophy held before James I in August 1605 (Bodl. Oxf., MS Tanner 75, fols. 138, 139). In October he was 'called away out of the University' by Charles Blount, earl of Devonshire, who died six months later; he then procured leave to visit France. 
On his return Andrews received the degree of bachelor of medicine in June 1607, and later in the year contributed money to the dramatic entertainments staged during the seasonal revels of 'The Christmas Prince' (St John's College, Oxford, MS 52, fols. 10, 115). As MD (June 1608) he was elected fellow of the Royal College of Physicians in 1610, and as vice-president of St John's defended the contested election of William Laud to the headship in 1611 (Bodl. Oxf., MS Tanner 388, fols. 328-67). He resigned in April 1612 to marry Mary, the eighteen-year-old daughter of Richard May of Islington, with whom he had nine children. 
Anthony Wood says that Andrews 'had improv'd himself much in his Faculty in his Travels beyond the Seas, which afterwards made him highly esteemed among learned men and others' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 1st edn, 1.802). During the two decades in which he practised medicine in the parish of St Mary Aldermanbury, Andrews struck up friendships with literary men. With Ben Jonson, John Selden, Sir Robert Cotton, Sir Henry Spelman, and Thomas Farnaby he signed a pledge to promote Caleb Morley's scheme 'for the attayning & retayninge of languages & other partes of good literature' (BL, Sloane MS 1466, fol. 16). To Farnaby he addressed verses between 1615 and 1629, and at some time in this period when his children mutilated a book that he had borrowed from John Donne he replaced the damaged sections in manuscript, receiving a graceful Latin poem in return (Donne, 'Poems', 2nd edn, 1635, 278). His acquaintance with Ben Jonson is known from his professional dealings with two William Cavendishes, the one first earl (and later duke) of Newcastle (BL, Add. MS 70499, fols. 145, 160, 168), and the other second earl of Devonshire. A comic portrait of the playwright is preserved in Andrews's verses on a visit in August 1627 to Poole's Hole, near Devonshire's seat of Chatsworth, that survive in a manuscript anthology copied by Newcastle's secretary (BL, Harley MS 4955, fols. 164-171'v'). This incorporates, along with important texts of masques by Jonson and poems by Donne, some eighty-five pieces apparently of Andrews's own composition (ibid., fols. 57-87'v', 145-72, 189-190'v') ranging from political and religious epigrams to journey-poems, epithalamia, and elegies. In June 1631, while sending some verses of his own to Newcastle, Andrews mentioned that 'Mr Johnson hath promised some-what as soone as it is readie' (BL, Add. MS 70499, fol. 145). 
Andrews's professional standing is witnessed by his appointment in January 1633 as deputy to William Harvey at St Bartholomew's Hospital (Keynes, 196-7). The post, with its annual salary of $33 6's'. 8died, was confirmed in October, when he was voted $20 'for his paines in visitinge and prescribinge for the poore of this howse for the yeare last past' (ibid., 202-3). One year later he was complaining in a letter to Newcastle of failing health and 'the forgettfullness of some eminent freinds, of whome I expected most' (BL, Add. MS 70499, fol. 160). He died in St Mary Aldermanbury on 25 July 1634 and was buried five days later in the chancel of the parish church. By his will, dated 20 November 1632, he bequeathed to his widow his house in the churchyard, with $1600 to be divided between his two surviving sons and three daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 46942


Gimson, Alfred Charles (1917-1985), phonetician, was born on 7 June 1917 at 587 Garratt Lane, Wandsworth, London, the son of Charles Edmund Gimson, munition factory fireman, and his wife, Kate Louise Derbyshire. He was educated at Earlsfield primary school in Wandsworth, London, and, from 1928 to 1936, at Emanuel School, Wandsworth, where he was school captain, editor of the school magazine, and captain of tennis. He entered University College, London (UCL), in October 1936 to study for a BA degree in French; he graduated with first-class honours in 1939. As part of his course he took classes in French and English phonetics under the tutelage of Helene Coustenoble (1894-1963) and Daniel Jones -- events that were to shape his future career. Gimson spent the Second World War in the army intelligence corps, mainly as a liaison officer with the French and Polish allied forces, and rose to the rank of major. He was known familiarly as Gim. 
In 1945 Gimson was appointed to a temporary lectureship in phonetics at UCL, the post being made permanent the following year. In 1961 he was appointed reader, and in 1966 professor. Between 1971 and 1983 (the year of his retirement) he was head of department. In 1973 he was made a fellow of UCL. His published work focused mainly on the pronunciation of modern English, though his range of expertise included French, Serbo-Croat, Norwegian, and the history of English. His most significant publication, the 'Introduction to the Pronunciation of English', first published in 1962 and revised on several occasions since, remains the standard authoritative work on the pronunciation of British English, written, as the title indicates, ostensibly for the beginner, but including a good deal of more advanced material as well. His 'Practical Course of English Pronunciation' (1975) is a well-respected course, especially among teachers of English as a foreign language. 
The International Phonetic Association benefited greatly from Gimson's administrative and managerial support from 1949 onwards, when he took on the post of secretary and, later, treasurer. He was made a life president of the association in 1984. His involvement with the profession of speech and language therapy was marked by his appointment to the examinations board of the Royal College of Speech and Language Therapists in 1949, and by the award of an honorary fellowship of the college in 1958. He acted as chairman of the college from 1965 to 1972. 
Gimson was a founding member in 1967 of the academic advisory committee of Linguaphone, and his name is associated with many self-study language courses produced by the company. His skills as a phonetician came to the attention of a wider public with his short talks on BBC radio on aspects of current English pronunciation ('Changing English'), and his role as the pronunciation adviser to the 'Longman Dictionary of Contemporary English' (Proctor and others, 1978) and to the 'Oxford Advanced Learner's Dictionary of Current English' (Hornby and others, 1974). In 1967 Gimson took over the editorship of the 'English Pronouncing Dictionary', begun by Daniel Jones in 1917, and made various necessary changes to its content and style of presentation. It is still one of the standard academic reference works on British pronunciation. 
Gimson was regarded by students and colleagues worldwide as not only a talented lecturer and tutor, but also a humane, kind-hearted, and supportive person. He and his wife, Margaret Dilys Muir, had a daughter. Gimson died suddenly of a heart attack in his sleep at his home, 50 Princes Avenue, Petts Wood, Orpington, Kent, on 22 April 1985; his wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 46943


Stephen, Julia Prinsep (1846-1895), celebrated beauty and philanthropist, the second wife of Leslie Stephen (1832-1904), was born on 7 February 1846, in Calcutta, India, the youngest of the three daughters of John Jackson MD (1804-1887) and his wife, Maria (1818-1892), one of the seven famously good-looking Pattle sisters. One of her mother's sisters was Julia Margaret Cameron (1815-1879), who took many photographs of Julia; another, Virginia, married Lord Eastnor, later third Earl Somers, of Eastnor Castle in the Malvern Hills, where Julia and her mother were often guests. Through this connection, Julia Jackson was first cousin to Lady Isabella Caroline Somerset (1851-1921) and her sister Adeline Mary Russell, duchess of Bedford (1852-1920). A third of the Pattle sisters -- Sarah -- was married to Henry Thoby Prinsep (1792-1878). Their home, Little Holland House, a meeting place for writers, artists, and politicians, was to be important in Julia Jackson's early social life. Her cousin was the painter Valentine Cameron Prinsep. 
In 1848 Maria and Julia Jackson returned to live in England, Dr Jackson following in 1855. From 1855 to 1866 the family lived at Brent Lodge, Hendon, where Julia was educated at home. After her sisters' marriages (in 1856 and 1862) Julia became her mother's principal nurse and companion. As a frequent visitor to Little Holland House she was greatly admired: she met Edward Burne-Jones (1833-1898), George Frederic Watts (1817-1904), and William Holman Hunt (1827-1910), all of whom drew and painted her. In 1864 both Holman Hunt and the sculptor Thomas Woolner proposed to her. (Her mother claimed that every man who met her in a railway carriage fell in love with her.) Two years before, however, she had met a young barrister, Herbert Duckworth (1833-1870), to whom she may have been attracted for his very straightforwardness: Leslie Stephen recalled his being described as 'the perfect type of public-school man' (L. Stephen, 35). They were married on 4 May 1867. They had three children: George Herbert ('b'. 1868), Stella ('b'. 1869), and Gerald L'Etang Duckworth, born in 1870, six weeks after his father's death in September from an undiagnosed abscess. Their marriage was evidently blissfully happy, and was consecrated in her memory as perfect. After Herbert Duckworth's death Julia was devastated. She lay on his grave. She felt that life was 'a shipwreck', and only the need to look after the children kept her going. She felt herself become deadened, and her grief left its mark in a new gravity, an enduring stoicism, and an awareness of suffering in others. She decisively rejected Christianity, and as she read Leslie Stephen's articles on agnosticism, first became interested in him. Through her friend Anny Thackeray, Stephen's sister-in-law, Julia became close to Minny and Leslie Stephen. They were drawn together after Minny's death, when Julia helped Leslie Stephen and Anny to move to the house almost next door to hers in Hyde Park Gate, London. Early in 1877 he declared his love for her, but since she did not imagine that she could ever marry again, they agreed to remain very close friends. However in January 1878 she changed her mind, and on 26 March they were married. In 1879 Burne-Jones completed his painting of her as Mary in his 'Annunciation'; on 30 May Vanessa (1879-1961) ['see 'Bell, Vanessa] was born. Three other children followed: Julian Thoby (1880-1906); Adeline Virginia ['see 'Woolf, (Adeline) Virginia (1882-1941)]; and Adrian Leslie (1883-1948). Julia also became the stepmother of Leslie Stephen's daughter Laura, who was mentally handicapped. 
Julia Stephen's character and its impact were powerful, but are elusive to capture. Lily Briscoe, the artist in Virginia Woolf's 'To the Lighthouse' (1927), in which the character of Mrs Ramsay was modelled on Woolf's mother, struggles throughout the novel to paint Mrs Ramsay: 'Fifty pairs of eyes were not enough to get round that one woman with, she thought. Among them, must be one that was stone blind to her beauty' (Woolf, 'Lighthouse', 188). She was 'astonishingly beautiful'. The phrase is repeated in the novel, and Lily Briscoe comments that 'Beauty had its penalty -- it came too readily, came too completely. It stilled life -- froze it' (ibid., 186). It was difficult to get behind it; while Mrs Ramsay herself was aware of its power. In his 'Mausoleum Book', written for her children after Julia's death, Leslie Stephen wrote reverentially about her complete beauty of body and soul (L. Stephen, 32). As Quentin Bell observed, he drew the portrait of a saint, and because of this 'one cannot quite believe in her' (Bell, 17). The complexities of her character and indeed of their relationship are smoothed over in Leslie Stephen's memorial, although the model of sanctified family life was certainly one to which she was entirely committed. The edges of reality were rougher and more distinctive. She lived a life devoted to the service of others; yet Virginia Woolf was keen to distinguish this from 'the mischievous philanthropy which other women practise so complacently and often with such disastrous results' (Woolf, 'Moments', 34). Woolf wrote of Julia's remarkable sympathy with people, her intense engagement with the event of the moment, her good judgement and decisiveness, her sense of irony and of the absurd. She wished she could recapture the tone of 'the clear round voice, or the sight of the beautiful figure, so upright and distinct, in its long shabby cloak, with the head held at a certain angle, so that the eye looked straight out at you' (ibid., 36). 
Julia Stephen was always there to support her family, her friends, an endless stream of supplicants. She nursed the sick and dying, and travelled round London by bus visiting hospitals and workhouses. The help which she offered was specific, practical, and increasingly professional, and she was never afraid to speak out (for example in the 'Pall Mall Gazette', 4 October 1879, on behalf of workhouse inmates whose half-pint beer allocation had been removed by temperance campaigners). In 1883 she published her 'Notes from Sick Rooms', a discussion of good nursing practice, which demonstrated a fine attention to detail -- and to language: it included an eloquent and witty passage on the torment of crumbs in bed. At the same time as she was concerned with the sick, both in London and (from 1881) at Talland House, St Ives, their summer home, she was constantly entertaining, filling the house with disparate people -- the lively and the boring -- out of whom she delighted in creating a harmony. Here the imperiousness of her character came out. The willingness to interfere and the confidence that she knew what was best which sustained her philanthropy found its domestic role in the manipulation of relationships and in assiduous matchmaking. She thought that everyone should be married. 
As well as teaching her children (somewhat erratically), Julia Stephen wrote stories for them, never published in her lifetime, in which she promoted the values of family life and kindness to animals. One, 'Cat's Meat', treats of two children whose parents are always out looking after the poor, and who decide that they will be more likely to see them if they run away to become a crossing sweeper and a cat's meat girl. Ultimately they realize the advantages of home. But the moral is not entirely straightforward. The tensions were there in Julia Stephen's own life. The demands on her were ultimately to pull in too many different directions. She soothed Leslie Stephen's depressions, always responded to his calls for attention (which created deep-seated resentments towards him in her children), and boosted his self-confidence; she nursed her father and mother until their deaths; she was often called away from home, and was worn down by her many commitments. In needing to break away from the model set by her mother, Virginia Woolf was to express exasperation at her mother's selflessness: 'boasting of her capacity to surround and protect, there was scarcely a shell of herself left for her to know herself by' (Woolf, 'Lighthouse', 35). Yet she also recognized the strength and quality of the womanly ideal by which Julia Stephen had lived. Julia admired Leslie Stephen totally, and, while she knew her own mind, did not set any store by her intellect. But 'she never belittled her own works, thinking them, if properly discharged, of equal, though other, importance with her husband's' (Woolf, 'Moments', 37). It was in this context that she wrote (in 1880) a spirited defence of agnostic women's spirituality and capacity for philanthropic work (in response to the claim that agnosticism would cause women to lose such qualities); and in 1889 signed a petition against female suffrage, alongside her close friend Octavia Hill (1838-1912). The models which she set up for her daughters were Hill, Florence Nightingale (1820-1910), and Mrs Humphry Ward (1851-1920). She held strong views on women's proper sphere of activity, and had complete assurance in the centrality of her own role as the person who held everything together. Her legacy was a challenging one. It was made the more poignant by her premature death. On 5 May 1895, at 22 Hyde Park Gate, Julia Stephen died of heart failure, following a bad bout of influenza. The funeral took place on 8 May at Highgate cemetery, where she was buried. 


@@@@@


doc= 46944


Kelly, Herbert Hamilton (1860-1950), founder of the Society of the Sacred Mission and theologian, was born on 18 July 1860 at St James's vicarage, George Street, Manchester, the son of the Revd James Davenport Kelly (1829-1912) and his wife, Margaret Alice Eccles (1846-1912). His father was rector of St James's; his mother was the daughter of a prosperous mill owner near Blackburn. He was educated at Manchester grammar school following which he enrolled as an officer cadet in the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, in 1877. It was soon evident that he was not suited to this profession and in 1879 he went up to Queen's College, Oxford. 
E. B. Pusey was still alive, but Kelly was less impressed by the Tractarians than by F. D. Maurice, from whom he learnt something about the way in which God may be perceived in history. Kelly was not impressed with the history taught at Oxford (he got a fourth) but he did begin to understand the way in which a society and culture create propositions about God, and then create a church 'system' that follows from those propositions. Kelly wished to distinguish both the propositions and the system from the reality that lies behind them -- a fundamental distinction between 'God' and 'religion'. He was ordained in 1883 and went as a curate to St Paul's, Wimbledon Park, where he was not a great success. 'I preached occasionally but they petitioned that the curate should not preach' (Kelly, 'No Pious Person', 39). 
It was in 1890 that Kelly responded to an invitation from Charles Corfe, bishop in Korea, to take charge of half a dozen young men who had volunteered for missionary work. Kelly's analysis of the missionary situation at the end of the nineteenth century was that institutional religion was in transition: the church was working 'with ideas which not only do not fit the world around us, but which we no longer think ourselves and are even indignant at being told that we do' (Kelly, lecture notes). He concluded that the church system based on these ideas needed radical revision. 
In a house in Vassall Road, London, Kelly first interviewed and then trained a succession of candidates, first for Korea and then for other missionary ventures, especially in Africa. There were three conditions: acceptance did not necessarily mean ordination, there was to be no pay, and therefore no marriage. The period of preparation was to be four years, during which students could think through their faith in a community of work, study, and prayer. Living in this way brought Kelly to the idea of a religious community, the concept having been revived in the Church of England fifty years earlier. This community, to be called the Society of the Sacred Mission, was given a constitution written by Herbert Kelly; and he and Herbert Woodward made their profession in 1894. From that point some men came to train and join the society while others came to share the life of the community in their training, but would be free to work overseas or in an English parish at the end of it. 
The basis of the theological course as it emerged was the historical theology with which Kelly had been wrestling; so that students, discerning the purposes of God in different ages and places, might attain a vision of God in their own lives and for the world of their day. The integration of study and worship was vital to the development of this vision. A significant innovation was that recruitment included men whose background gave them neither the educational nor financial means to offer themselves for ordination through the normal route of university and theological college. The numbers of students increased and the college moved first to Mildenhall in Suffolk and then to the Gilbert Scott mansion at Kelham in Nottinghamshire in 1903, where it continued to train students until 1971. 
In 1910 H. K. (as he had become known) ceased to be director of the Society of the Sacred Mission and head of the house and college at Kelham. Between 1913 and 1919 he was in Japan as professor of apologetics at the Anglican central theological college, and here he wrote a series of seminal articles. Instead of parishes being supplied from outside with a paid professional and college-bred priesthood, or as in the mission field with qualified catechists having a missionary behind them and supported by a foreign source, Herbert Kelly wished to see every congregation choosing a spiritual leader from their own number. Kelly believed that locally ordained ministers should replace the system of professional stipendaries that had already outlived its effectiveness. 
On his return, Kelly continued to give some lectures at Kelham until 1943 when he was over eighty. Long before that he had become 'the old man', a deaf and eccentric figure asking questions about God and writing theological letters and lectures on scraps of paper designed for another purpose. He nevertheless continued to be sought by a wide range of people with whom he corresponded. He died on 31 October 1950 at Kelham Hall and was buried there, probably on 4 November, in the society's cemetery, ten years before the society reached its numerical peak of eighty-three. Its members continue to offer educational and pastoral work in different parts of the world. 


@@@@@


doc= 46946


Forster, William (1784-1854), philanthropist and Quaker minister, was born at Tottenham, Middlesex, on 23 March 1784, the second of the ten children of William Forster (1747-1824), schoolmaster and later land surveyor, and Elizabeth (1759-1837), daughter of Robert and Mary Hayward of Kelvedon, Essex. William senior's father, Josiah (1693?-1763), who hailed from co. Durham, settled in 1752 in Tottenham, a village which was to become a Quaker stronghold and, until 1880, the home of members of the family. 
After education at the village schools and with private tutors, William junior learned land surveying in Sheffield with his uncle William Fairbank (c.1730-1801) ['see under 'Fairbank family]. On returning to Tottenham he joined his father, but in 1806 he was released from business responsibilities and devoted himself to working for the Society of Friends and his various philanthropic concerns. Before he was twenty he had begun to take a vocal part in Quaker worship, and his gift in the ministry was acknowledged by Tottenham monthly meeting in August 1805. Next month he received the meeting's support for the first of a succession of religious visits in Britain, including (1812) the Hebrides. Like other itinerant ministering Friends his concern was not only domestic and pastoral but also to reach a wide audience through specially appointed meetings, often where there was no Quaker presence. This was particularly true of his extensive visit to Ireland (1813-14). 
Forster's head and hands were huge and his frame unwieldy; his whole body would shake with emotion and his voice deepen as he gave expression to his feelings. His ministry was evangelical, but his sense of awe was such that he felt it almost profane to talk of religion, and his humanitarian zeal transcended the doctrinal. His intellectual capacity was considerable, but it was the manner of his ministry that was remembered rather than the content. Forster accompanied the American Quaker Stephen Grellet (1773-1855) in visiting London prisons in January 1813, and went with him to Elizabeth Fry to report the appalling conditions on the women's side of Newgate. Her first visit, next day, with clothing for the children was (as were later visits) with Anna Buxton (1784-1855), whom Forster married on 3 October 1816. She was the daughter of Thomas Fowell and Anna ('nee' Hanbury) Buxton of Earls Colne, Essex, and sister of Sir Thomas Fowell Buxton, first baronet, the anti-slavery protagonist. For two decades they lived at Bradpole, Dorset, but in 1837 moved to Norwich, which was their home until his death. 
Forster travelled extensively in North America in 1820-25, viewing with increasing misgiving the growth among Friends there of what he considered unitarian views. His and concurrent visits by George Withy (1763-1837) in 1821, Elizabeth Robson and her brother Isaac Stephenson (1765-1830) in 1823, and Anna Braithwaite in 1824 had the cumulative effect of giving the suspect Elias Hicks (1748-1830) and his many adherents the impression that they were being preached at rather than listened to, and may well have hastened the American Quaker separations of 1827-8. 
Forster's second visit to America (1845-6) was with his brother Josiah ['see below'], George Stacey (1786-1857), and John Allen (1790-1859), following a breach in Indiana yearly meeting over the slavery issue: it was perhaps ironic that the anti-slavery militants whom the deputation condemned for separating were, in effect, closer to the views of British Quakers on slavery than the main body, who received the deputation's support. 
Irish Quakers, following the 1846 failure of the potato crop, set up on 13 November a central relief committee. Forster spent over four months visiting the worst-stricken districts, especially in Connaught. His knowledge from 1813-14 stood him in good stead, and his reports and contacts, not least with Catholic parish priests, were crucial to the relief committee's work. His son William Edward Forster accompanied him for part of the time, as also did James Hack Tuke. For each it was an introduction to a lifetime's concern. Forster and his brothers Josiah and Robert ['see below'] also served on a committee of British Friends to arouse awareness of the need and to raise funds. 
In 1849 British Quakers drew up a memorial against the continuance of the slave trade: from then until 1852 Forster was on a number of deputations to continental rulers. In 1853, with his brother Josiah, John Candler (1787-1869), and William Holmes (1805-1867), he paid his third American visit. After seeing the president, Franklin Pierce (1804-1869), they travelled through many of the southern and mid-western states, securing interviews with the governors of thirteen of them. Forster died at the home of Samuel Low, near the Holston River, Knox county, East Tennessee, on 27 January 1854, his body being interred in the Friends' burial-ground, Friendsville, Tennessee. 
Of William Forster's nine brothers and sisters, one died in childhood. The others remained single except for Josiah Forster (1782-1870), who in 1808 married Rachel Wilson (1783-1873), daughter of John Wilson (1748-1801) and Sarah, 'nee' Dillworth (1754-1788) of Kendal: there was one child, who died aged eleven weeks. In 1805 Josiah opened a school at Southgate, which moved to Tottenham in 1820 and closed in 1826. He had a reputation for naivety -- as when, confiscating fireworks as dangerous toys, he threw them on the fire to ensure their destruction. But with his adult fellow Quakers, so far from being naive, he could be stentorian and unyielding. He was from 1820 to 1831 clerk (presiding officer) of the yearly meeting of British Quakers, a body he consistently attended from the late eighteenth century until his death, and in which he was an ever more frequent speaker. His wife was recorded as a minister in 1810. In 1811 he was appointed to the meeting for sufferings (the representative committee of the yearly meeting) and in 1817 he became an elder: both offices he held until his death. He frequently accompanied ministering Friends visiting the continent and was an indefatigable correspondent. He was for many years on the committees of the British and Foreign Anti-Slavery Society and of the British and Foreign Bible Society. 
Another brother, Robert Forster (1791-1873), carried on the family land surveying business. For many years steward to the earl of Darnley, he managed the Kentish estates during the young earl's minority and built a great part of Northfleet, Kent. Perhaps his most notable Quaker service was as a member of deputations to present to European governments 'A plea for liberty of conscience', drawn up by the yearly meeting of 1856: that year he visited Paris, in 1857 the Netherlands and Germany, and in 1858 Russia and northern Europe. He served as an elder and for many years on the meeting for sufferings. He was a member of the committee of the British and Foreign School Society from 1817 until his death. He was also on the committee of the Quaker school at Croydon, and he and Josiah were longtime members of the London committee for Ackworth School. They were lifelong trustees, and active in the management, of Grove House School, Tottenham, established in 1828 and notable for the part that science had in the curriculum. 
In his later years Robert, who suffered a decline of mental powers, was tended by his sister Anne Forster (1797-1873), whose philanthropic interests extended to the animal kingdom if the ascription to her of the broadside 'To Butchers, their Men and Boys' (Norwich, n.d.) be correct. Mary Forster (1786-1873) was with relatives in Plymouth from 1810 to 1834; on her return to Tottenham she devoted herself to visiting women prisoners and in 1837 was appointed an elder. Sarah (1799-1880), who was recorded a minister in 1848, was granted minutes for religious service on seventeen occasions. Most of the sisters' activities were local rather than national, and the family home in Philip Lane, Tottenham Green, was noted for its warm hospitality. 
Josiah Forster died on 27 June 1870; and the year 1873 saw the deaths of his widow on 5 March, of Mary on 24 February, Robert on 11 October, and Anne on 14 October. Elizabeth died on 29 March 1879 and Sarah on 14 September 1880. The bodies of all were interred in Tottenham Friends' burial-ground. 


@@@@@


doc= 46947


Forster, William (1784-1854), philanthropist and Quaker minister, was born at Tottenham, Middlesex, on 23 March 1784, the second of the ten children of William Forster (1747-1824), schoolmaster and later land surveyor, and Elizabeth (1759-1837), daughter of Robert and Mary Hayward of Kelvedon, Essex. William senior's father, Josiah (1693?-1763), who hailed from co. Durham, settled in 1752 in Tottenham, a village which was to become a Quaker stronghold and, until 1880, the home of members of the family. 
After education at the village schools and with private tutors, William junior learned land surveying in Sheffield with his uncle William Fairbank (c.1730-1801) ['see under 'Fairbank family]. On returning to Tottenham he joined his father, but in 1806 he was released from business responsibilities and devoted himself to working for the Society of Friends and his various philanthropic concerns. Before he was twenty he had begun to take a vocal part in Quaker worship, and his gift in the ministry was acknowledged by Tottenham monthly meeting in August 1805. Next month he received the meeting's support for the first of a succession of religious visits in Britain, including (1812) the Hebrides. Like other itinerant ministering Friends his concern was not only domestic and pastoral but also to reach a wide audience through specially appointed meetings, often where there was no Quaker presence. This was particularly true of his extensive visit to Ireland (1813-14). 
Forster's head and hands were huge and his frame unwieldy; his whole body would shake with emotion and his voice deepen as he gave expression to his feelings. His ministry was evangelical, but his sense of awe was such that he felt it almost profane to talk of religion, and his humanitarian zeal transcended the doctrinal. His intellectual capacity was considerable, but it was the manner of his ministry that was remembered rather than the content. Forster accompanied the American Quaker Stephen Grellet (1773-1855) in visiting London prisons in January 1813, and went with him to Elizabeth Fry to report the appalling conditions on the women's side of Newgate. Her first visit, next day, with clothing for the children was (as were later visits) with Anna Buxton (1784-1855), whom Forster married on 3 October 1816. She was the daughter of Thomas Fowell and Anna ('nee' Hanbury) Buxton of Earls Colne, Essex, and sister of Sir Thomas Fowell Buxton, first baronet, the anti-slavery protagonist. For two decades they lived at Bradpole, Dorset, but in 1837 moved to Norwich, which was their home until his death. 
Forster travelled extensively in North America in 1820-25, viewing with increasing misgiving the growth among Friends there of what he considered unitarian views. His and concurrent visits by George Withy (1763-1837) in 1821, Elizabeth Robson and her brother Isaac Stephenson (1765-1830) in 1823, and Anna Braithwaite in 1824 had the cumulative effect of giving the suspect Elias Hicks (1748-1830) and his many adherents the impression that they were being preached at rather than listened to, and may well have hastened the American Quaker separations of 1827-8. 
Forster's second visit to America (1845-6) was with his brother Josiah ['see below'], George Stacey (1786-1857), and John Allen (1790-1859), following a breach in Indiana yearly meeting over the slavery issue: it was perhaps ironic that the anti-slavery militants whom the deputation condemned for separating were, in effect, closer to the views of British Quakers on slavery than the main body, who received the deputation's support. 
Irish Quakers, following the 1846 failure of the potato crop, set up on 13 November a central relief committee. Forster spent over four months visiting the worst-stricken districts, especially in Connaught. His knowledge from 1813-14 stood him in good stead, and his reports and contacts, not least with Catholic parish priests, were crucial to the relief committee's work. His son William Edward Forster accompanied him for part of the time, as also did James Hack Tuke. For each it was an introduction to a lifetime's concern. Forster and his brothers Josiah and Robert ['see below'] also served on a committee of British Friends to arouse awareness of the need and to raise funds. 
In 1849 British Quakers drew up a memorial against the continuance of the slave trade: from then until 1852 Forster was on a number of deputations to continental rulers. In 1853, with his brother Josiah, John Candler (1787-1869), and William Holmes (1805-1867), he paid his third American visit. After seeing the president, Franklin Pierce (1804-1869), they travelled through many of the southern and mid-western states, securing interviews with the governors of thirteen of them. Forster died at the home of Samuel Low, near the Holston River, Knox county, East Tennessee, on 27 January 1854, his body being interred in the Friends' burial-ground, Friendsville, Tennessee. 
Of William Forster's nine brothers and sisters, one died in childhood. The others remained single except for Josiah Forster (1782-1870), who in 1808 married Rachel Wilson (1783-1873), daughter of John Wilson (1748-1801) and Sarah, 'nee' Dillworth (1754-1788) of Kendal: there was one child, who died aged eleven weeks. In 1805 Josiah opened a school at Southgate, which moved to Tottenham in 1820 and closed in 1826. He had a reputation for naivety -- as when, confiscating fireworks as dangerous toys, he threw them on the fire to ensure their destruction. But with his adult fellow Quakers, so far from being naive, he could be stentorian and unyielding. He was from 1820 to 1831 clerk (presiding officer) of the yearly meeting of British Quakers, a body he consistently attended from the late eighteenth century until his death, and in which he was an ever more frequent speaker. His wife was recorded as a minister in 1810. In 1811 he was appointed to the meeting for sufferings (the representative committee of the yearly meeting) and in 1817 he became an elder: both offices he held until his death. He frequently accompanied ministering Friends visiting the continent and was an indefatigable correspondent. He was for many years on the committees of the British and Foreign Anti-Slavery Society and of the British and Foreign Bible Society. 
Another brother, Robert Forster (1791-1873), carried on the family land surveying business. For many years steward to the earl of Darnley, he managed the Kentish estates during the young earl's minority and built a great part of Northfleet, Kent. Perhaps his most notable Quaker service was as a member of deputations to present to European governments 'A plea for liberty of conscience', drawn up by the yearly meeting of 1856: that year he visited Paris, in 1857 the Netherlands and Germany, and in 1858 Russia and northern Europe. He served as an elder and for many years on the meeting for sufferings. He was a member of the committee of the British and Foreign School Society from 1817 until his death. He was also on the committee of the Quaker school at Croydon, and he and Josiah were longtime members of the London committee for Ackworth School. They were lifelong trustees, and active in the management, of Grove House School, Tottenham, established in 1828 and notable for the part that science had in the curriculum. 
In his later years Robert, who suffered a decline of mental powers, was tended by his sister Anne Forster (1797-1873), whose philanthropic interests extended to the animal kingdom if the ascription to her of the broadside 'To Butchers, their Men and Boys' (Norwich, n.d.) be correct. Mary Forster (1786-1873) was with relatives in Plymouth from 1810 to 1834; on her return to Tottenham she devoted herself to visiting women prisoners and in 1837 was appointed an elder. Sarah (1799-1880), who was recorded a minister in 1848, was granted minutes for religious service on seventeen occasions. Most of the sisters' activities were local rather than national, and the family home in Philip Lane, Tottenham Green, was noted for its warm hospitality. 
Josiah Forster died on 27 June 1870; and the year 1873 saw the deaths of his widow on 5 March, of Mary on 24 February, Robert on 11 October, and Anne on 14 October. Elizabeth died on 29 March 1879 and Sarah on 14 September 1880. The bodies of all were interred in Tottenham Friends' burial-ground. 


@@@@@


doc= 46948


Brotherton, Edward Allen, Baron Brotherton (1856-1930), chemical manufacturer and philanthropist, was born on 1 April 1856 at 2 Tiverton Place, Ardwick Green, Manchester, the eldest of three children of Theophilus Brotherton, a yarn agent, and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' O'Donnell. His relatives included the educational reformer Edward Brotherton, and Joseph Brotherton, the first MP for Salford. At fourteen he made an abortive attempt to go to sea, returning after two days, when the ship put into Holyhead. He finally left school at the age of fifteen, and worked in a hardware store and as assistant in a chemical laboratory. During this period he also attended Henry Roscoe's evening classes in chemistry at Owens College, Manchester. At the age of nineteen, he obtained a post at a chemical works in Wakefield. 
In 1878 Brotherton became a partner in the firm of Dyson Bros. and Brotherton, based in Wakefield, which manufactured ammonium sulphate. Its activities typified Brotherton's approach to business, which, he later suggested, had always been to seek to develop the economic rather than the technical side of the chemical industry. The firm was not technically innovative, aiming rather to exploit the large supplies of ammoniacal liquor produced in the coal-gas industry. It was served by an extensive transportation network, which moved the ammoniacal liquor from gasworks in the surrounding towns to Wakefield, where it was processed on a large scale. Brotherton was both fortunate in business and a shrewd judge of opportunities. During the 1870s Brunner, Mond & Co. was established in Cheshire, manufacturing sodium carbonate by the Solvay process. This process required ammonia, and grew very rapidly late in the nineteenth century, as its product replaced Leblanc soda; Brotherton secured the contract to supply Brunner, Mond. He established other factories, on a similar basis to that at Wakefield, in several major conurbations. In 1881 Dyson Bros. and Brotherton became Brotherton & Co. It exploited other opportunities for the sale of ammonia, supplying the textile industry and becoming associated, through a chance contact between Sir George Beilby and Brotherton, with the Cassel Cyanide Company. This firm extracted gold using potassium cyanide, in the production of which ammonia was employed. Brotherton & Co., meanwhile, expanded into coal-tar distillation, and the treatment of its organic by-products. A range of primary and secondary coal-tar products was manufactured during the First World War -- pitch, creosote, naphthalene, anthracene, TNT, and picric acid (an important explosive). Brotherton also purchased the Mersey Chemical Co., which had been German-owned, and extended his interests into the production of both inorganic materials (sulphur dioxide and oleum) and synthetic dyestuffs. His combination of business acumen and relative technical conservatism was highly successful, and in 1902, when his business interests were amalgamated and Brotherton & Co. became a limited company, it was said to be the largest private chemical company in the country. In 1924, on Beilby's death, Brotherton became chairman of Cassel. 
Brotherton had many public interests outside his business. He was mayor of Wakefield (1902-3) and Leeds (1913-14), and sat as MP for Wakefield, as a coalition Unionist, from 1902 until 1910, and from 1918 until 1922. But it is as a benefactor of the University of Leeds that he is best remembered, through the university library, and a collection of manuscripts and books which carries his name. His bibliographic interests began in 1922, through the efforts of his niece by marriage, Dorothy Una Ratcliffe, to prevent the export to the USA of a medieval manuscript, the 'Towneley Mysteries', which contained a cycle of plays with Wakefield associations. Characteristically, Brotherton had the manuscript valued, and was unwilling to bid above the valuation when it came up for sale, so that his efforts were unsuccessful. Nevertheless the enterprise led him to begin a collection which eventually included 35,000 books, 400 manuscripts, 4000 deeds, and 30,000 letters, for the administration of which he employed a full-time librarian. Brotherton made a series of large donations to the University of Leeds. He endowed the chair of bacteriology in 1921, and in 1927 donated $100,000 towards the cost of a new university library. One of his last public acts, in June 1930, was to lay the foundation stone of the new library, when he announced that he was leaving his collection of books and manuscripts in trust to the university. When he died, later in the year, his will revealed that he had bequeathed the institution a further $100,000. The Brotherton Library, which was modelled internally on the British Museum reading-room, was completed in 1936. He made numerous other philanthropic donations, including $100,000 for the relief of poverty in Wakefield, as well as contributing $500,000 to the war loan fund. 
Brotherton received many honours. In 1923 he was granted the honorary degree of LLD by the University of Leeds. He was honorary colonel of the 15th battalion, the West Yorkshire regiment (the 'Leeds Pals'), which he had raised and equipped, and which was later wiped out on the Somme. He was created baronet in 1918 and Baron Brotherton of Wakefield in 1929. He received the Messel medal of the Society of Chemical Industry, of which he was a founder member, in 1930. 
Brotherton was of medium height, with vivid blue eyes and a heavy moustache, which gave him a somewhat Elgarian appearance. He was rarely without a carnation as a buttonhole and grew the blooms himself. He was said to drive a hard bargain, and once claimed never to have had a credit balance at his bankers: he could not sleep if he had, and preferred his banker to have the sleepless nights. In 1882 Brotherton married Jane Brookes, the daughter of the artist and designer Warwick Brookes. She died in childbirth in 1883, the child surviving only briefly. He did not remarry, and it is perhaps unsurprising that his niece described him as a 'lonely, self-contained man'. He chose as his heirs Charles Ratcliffe, his nephew, who later took the name Brotherton, and Dorothy Una Ratcliffe. He lived during his later years at Kirkham Hall, Yorkshire, and Roundhay Hall, Leeds, and died at Kirkham Hall on 21 October 1930. His burial, which was attended, at his stipulation, only by male members of his family, took place at Lawnswood cemetery, Leeds, on 24 October. 


@@@@@


doc= 46949


Forster, William (1784-1854), philanthropist and Quaker minister, was born at Tottenham, Middlesex, on 23 March 1784, the second of the ten children of William Forster (1747-1824), schoolmaster and later land surveyor, and Elizabeth (1759-1837), daughter of Robert and Mary Hayward of Kelvedon, Essex. William senior's father, Josiah (1693?-1763), who hailed from co. Durham, settled in 1752 in Tottenham, a village which was to become a Quaker stronghold and, until 1880, the home of members of the family. 
After education at the village schools and with private tutors, William junior learned land surveying in Sheffield with his uncle William Fairbank (c.1730-1801) ['see under 'Fairbank family]. On returning to Tottenham he joined his father, but in 1806 he was released from business responsibilities and devoted himself to working for the Society of Friends and his various philanthropic concerns. Before he was twenty he had begun to take a vocal part in Quaker worship, and his gift in the ministry was acknowledged by Tottenham monthly meeting in August 1805. Next month he received the meeting's support for the first of a succession of religious visits in Britain, including (1812) the Hebrides. Like other itinerant ministering Friends his concern was not only domestic and pastoral but also to reach a wide audience through specially appointed meetings, often where there was no Quaker presence. This was particularly true of his extensive visit to Ireland (1813-14). 
Forster's head and hands were huge and his frame unwieldy; his whole body would shake with emotion and his voice deepen as he gave expression to his feelings. His ministry was evangelical, but his sense of awe was such that he felt it almost profane to talk of religion, and his humanitarian zeal transcended the doctrinal. His intellectual capacity was considerable, but it was the manner of his ministry that was remembered rather than the content. Forster accompanied the American Quaker Stephen Grellet (1773-1855) in visiting London prisons in January 1813, and went with him to Elizabeth Fry to report the appalling conditions on the women's side of Newgate. Her first visit, next day, with clothing for the children was (as were later visits) with Anna Buxton (1784-1855), whom Forster married on 3 October 1816. She was the daughter of Thomas Fowell and Anna ('nee' Hanbury) Buxton of Earls Colne, Essex, and sister of Sir Thomas Fowell Buxton, first baronet, the anti-slavery protagonist. For two decades they lived at Bradpole, Dorset, but in 1837 moved to Norwich, which was their home until his death. 
Forster travelled extensively in North America in 1820-25, viewing with increasing misgiving the growth among Friends there of what he considered unitarian views. His and concurrent visits by George Withy (1763-1837) in 1821, Elizabeth Robson and her brother Isaac Stephenson (1765-1830) in 1823, and Anna Braithwaite in 1824 had the cumulative effect of giving the suspect Elias Hicks (1748-1830) and his many adherents the impression that they were being preached at rather than listened to, and may well have hastened the American Quaker separations of 1827-8. 
Forster's second visit to America (1845-6) was with his brother Josiah ['see below'], George Stacey (1786-1857), and John Allen (1790-1859), following a breach in Indiana yearly meeting over the slavery issue: it was perhaps ironic that the anti-slavery militants whom the deputation condemned for separating were, in effect, closer to the views of British Quakers on slavery than the main body, who received the deputation's support. 
Irish Quakers, following the 1846 failure of the potato crop, set up on 13 November a central relief committee. Forster spent over four months visiting the worst-stricken districts, especially in Connaught. His knowledge from 1813-14 stood him in good stead, and his reports and contacts, not least with Catholic parish priests, were crucial to the relief committee's work. His son William Edward Forster accompanied him for part of the time, as also did James Hack Tuke. For each it was an introduction to a lifetime's concern. Forster and his brothers Josiah and Robert ['see below'] also served on a committee of British Friends to arouse awareness of the need and to raise funds. 
In 1849 British Quakers drew up a memorial against the continuance of the slave trade: from then until 1852 Forster was on a number of deputations to continental rulers. In 1853, with his brother Josiah, John Candler (1787-1869), and William Holmes (1805-1867), he paid his third American visit. After seeing the president, Franklin Pierce (1804-1869), they travelled through many of the southern and mid-western states, securing interviews with the governors of thirteen of them. Forster died at the home of Samuel Low, near the Holston River, Knox county, East Tennessee, on 27 January 1854, his body being interred in the Friends' burial-ground, Friendsville, Tennessee. 
Of William Forster's nine brothers and sisters, one died in childhood. The others remained single except for Josiah Forster (1782-1870), who in 1808 married Rachel Wilson (1783-1873), daughter of John Wilson (1748-1801) and Sarah, 'nee' Dillworth (1754-1788) of Kendal: there was one child, who died aged eleven weeks. In 1805 Josiah opened a school at Southgate, which moved to Tottenham in 1820 and closed in 1826. He had a reputation for naivety -- as when, confiscating fireworks as dangerous toys, he threw them on the fire to ensure their destruction. But with his adult fellow Quakers, so far from being naive, he could be stentorian and unyielding. He was from 1820 to 1831 clerk (presiding officer) of the yearly meeting of British Quakers, a body he consistently attended from the late eighteenth century until his death, and in which he was an ever more frequent speaker. His wife was recorded as a minister in 1810. In 1811 he was appointed to the meeting for sufferings (the representative committee of the yearly meeting) and in 1817 he became an elder: both offices he held until his death. He frequently accompanied ministering Friends visiting the continent and was an indefatigable correspondent. He was for many years on the committees of the British and Foreign Anti-Slavery Society and of the British and Foreign Bible Society. 
Another brother, Robert Forster (1791-1873), carried on the family land surveying business. For many years steward to the earl of Darnley, he managed the Kentish estates during the young earl's minority and built a great part of Northfleet, Kent. Perhaps his most notable Quaker service was as a member of deputations to present to European governments 'A plea for liberty of conscience', drawn up by the yearly meeting of 1856: that year he visited Paris, in 1857 the Netherlands and Germany, and in 1858 Russia and northern Europe. He served as an elder and for many years on the meeting for sufferings. He was a member of the committee of the British and Foreign School Society from 1817 until his death. He was also on the committee of the Quaker school at Croydon, and he and Josiah were longtime members of the London committee for Ackworth School. They were lifelong trustees, and active in the management, of Grove House School, Tottenham, established in 1828 and notable for the part that science had in the curriculum. 
In his later years Robert, who suffered a decline of mental powers, was tended by his sister Anne Forster (1797-1873), whose philanthropic interests extended to the animal kingdom if the ascription to her of the broadside 'To Butchers, their Men and Boys' (Norwich, n.d.) be correct. Mary Forster (1786-1873) was with relatives in Plymouth from 1810 to 1834; on her return to Tottenham she devoted herself to visiting women prisoners and in 1837 was appointed an elder. Sarah (1799-1880), who was recorded a minister in 1848, was granted minutes for religious service on seventeen occasions. Most of the sisters' activities were local rather than national, and the family home in Philip Lane, Tottenham Green, was noted for its warm hospitality. 
Josiah Forster died on 27 June 1870; and the year 1873 saw the deaths of his widow on 5 March, of Mary on 24 February, Robert on 11 October, and Anne on 14 October. Elizabeth died on 29 March 1879 and Sarah on 14 September 1880. The bodies of all were interred in Tottenham Friends' burial-ground. 


@@@@@


doc= 46950


Forster, William (1784-1854), philanthropist and Quaker minister, was born at Tottenham, Middlesex, on 23 March 1784, the second of the ten children of William Forster (1747-1824), schoolmaster and later land surveyor, and Elizabeth (1759-1837), daughter of Robert and Mary Hayward of Kelvedon, Essex. William senior's father, Josiah (1693?-1763), who hailed from co. Durham, settled in 1752 in Tottenham, a village which was to become a Quaker stronghold and, until 1880, the home of members of the family. 
After education at the village schools and with private tutors, William junior learned land surveying in Sheffield with his uncle William Fairbank (c.1730-1801) ['see under 'Fairbank family]. On returning to Tottenham he joined his father, but in 1806 he was released from business responsibilities and devoted himself to working for the Society of Friends and his various philanthropic concerns. Before he was twenty he had begun to take a vocal part in Quaker worship, and his gift in the ministry was acknowledged by Tottenham monthly meeting in August 1805. Next month he received the meeting's support for the first of a succession of religious visits in Britain, including (1812) the Hebrides. Like other itinerant ministering Friends his concern was not only domestic and pastoral but also to reach a wide audience through specially appointed meetings, often where there was no Quaker presence. This was particularly true of his extensive visit to Ireland (1813-14). 
Forster's head and hands were huge and his frame unwieldy; his whole body would shake with emotion and his voice deepen as he gave expression to his feelings. His ministry was evangelical, but his sense of awe was such that he felt it almost profane to talk of religion, and his humanitarian zeal transcended the doctrinal. His intellectual capacity was considerable, but it was the manner of his ministry that was remembered rather than the content. Forster accompanied the American Quaker Stephen Grellet (1773-1855) in visiting London prisons in January 1813, and went with him to Elizabeth Fry to report the appalling conditions on the women's side of Newgate. Her first visit, next day, with clothing for the children was (as were later visits) with Anna Buxton (1784-1855), whom Forster married on 3 October 1816. She was the daughter of Thomas Fowell and Anna ('nee' Hanbury) Buxton of Earls Colne, Essex, and sister of Sir Thomas Fowell Buxton, first baronet, the anti-slavery protagonist. For two decades they lived at Bradpole, Dorset, but in 1837 moved to Norwich, which was their home until his death. 
Forster travelled extensively in North America in 1820-25, viewing with increasing misgiving the growth among Friends there of what he considered unitarian views. His and concurrent visits by George Withy (1763-1837) in 1821, Elizabeth Robson and her brother Isaac Stephenson (1765-1830) in 1823, and Anna Braithwaite in 1824 had the cumulative effect of giving the suspect Elias Hicks (1748-1830) and his many adherents the impression that they were being preached at rather than listened to, and may well have hastened the American Quaker separations of 1827-8. 
Forster's second visit to America (1845-6) was with his brother Josiah ['see below'], George Stacey (1786-1857), and John Allen (1790-1859), following a breach in Indiana yearly meeting over the slavery issue: it was perhaps ironic that the anti-slavery militants whom the deputation condemned for separating were, in effect, closer to the views of British Quakers on slavery than the main body, who received the deputation's support. 
Irish Quakers, following the 1846 failure of the potato crop, set up on 13 November a central relief committee. Forster spent over four months visiting the worst-stricken districts, especially in Connaught. His knowledge from 1813-14 stood him in good stead, and his reports and contacts, not least with Catholic parish priests, were crucial to the relief committee's work. His son William Edward Forster accompanied him for part of the time, as also did James Hack Tuke. For each it was an introduction to a lifetime's concern. Forster and his brothers Josiah and Robert ['see below'] also served on a committee of British Friends to arouse awareness of the need and to raise funds. 
In 1849 British Quakers drew up a memorial against the continuance of the slave trade: from then until 1852 Forster was on a number of deputations to continental rulers. In 1853, with his brother Josiah, John Candler (1787-1869), and William Holmes (1805-1867), he paid his third American visit. After seeing the president, Franklin Pierce (1804-1869), they travelled through many of the southern and mid-western states, securing interviews with the governors of thirteen of them. Forster died at the home of Samuel Low, near the Holston River, Knox county, East Tennessee, on 27 January 1854, his body being interred in the Friends' burial-ground, Friendsville, Tennessee. 
Of William Forster's nine brothers and sisters, one died in childhood. The others remained single except for Josiah Forster (1782-1870), who in 1808 married Rachel Wilson (1783-1873), daughter of John Wilson (1748-1801) and Sarah, 'nee' Dillworth (1754-1788) of Kendal: there was one child, who died aged eleven weeks. In 1805 Josiah opened a school at Southgate, which moved to Tottenham in 1820 and closed in 1826. He had a reputation for naivety -- as when, confiscating fireworks as dangerous toys, he threw them on the fire to ensure their destruction. But with his adult fellow Quakers, so far from being naive, he could be stentorian and unyielding. He was from 1820 to 1831 clerk (presiding officer) of the yearly meeting of British Quakers, a body he consistently attended from the late eighteenth century until his death, and in which he was an ever more frequent speaker. His wife was recorded as a minister in 1810. In 1811 he was appointed to the meeting for sufferings (the representative committee of the yearly meeting) and in 1817 he became an elder: both offices he held until his death. He frequently accompanied ministering Friends visiting the continent and was an indefatigable correspondent. He was for many years on the committees of the British and Foreign Anti-Slavery Society and of the British and Foreign Bible Society. 
Another brother, Robert Forster (1791-1873), carried on the family land surveying business. For many years steward to the earl of Darnley, he managed the Kentish estates during the young earl's minority and built a great part of Northfleet, Kent. Perhaps his most notable Quaker service was as a member of deputations to present to European governments 'A plea for liberty of conscience', drawn up by the yearly meeting of 1856: that year he visited Paris, in 1857 the Netherlands and Germany, and in 1858 Russia and northern Europe. He served as an elder and for many years on the meeting for sufferings. He was a member of the committee of the British and Foreign School Society from 1817 until his death. He was also on the committee of the Quaker school at Croydon, and he and Josiah were longtime members of the London committee for Ackworth School. They were lifelong trustees, and active in the management, of Grove House School, Tottenham, established in 1828 and notable for the part that science had in the curriculum. 
In his later years Robert, who suffered a decline of mental powers, was tended by his sister Anne Forster (1797-1873), whose philanthropic interests extended to the animal kingdom if the ascription to her of the broadside 'To Butchers, their Men and Boys' (Norwich, n.d.) be correct. Mary Forster (1786-1873) was with relatives in Plymouth from 1810 to 1834; on her return to Tottenham she devoted herself to visiting women prisoners and in 1837 was appointed an elder. Sarah (1799-1880), who was recorded a minister in 1848, was granted minutes for religious service on seventeen occasions. Most of the sisters' activities were local rather than national, and the family home in Philip Lane, Tottenham Green, was noted for its warm hospitality. 
Josiah Forster died on 27 June 1870; and the year 1873 saw the deaths of his widow on 5 March, of Mary on 24 February, Robert on 11 October, and Anne on 14 October. Elizabeth died on 29 March 1879 and Sarah on 14 September 1880. The bodies of all were interred in Tottenham Friends' burial-ground. 


@@@@@


doc= 46951


Mercer, John (c.1300-1380), merchant, was the son of Thomas Mercer of Perth, and became the most prominent Scottish merchant of his day. The Mercers were closely associated with Perth, and John held several properties there and served as alderman. Nevertheless, little is known of his early career, and he must have been well advanced in years when he rose to national prominence in David II's service, perhaps coming to royal attention as a burgh representative negotiating the king's ransom in 1357. He represented Perth at a general council in 1365 and in parliament in 1370, and from 1359 to 1380 he was custumar of the town. In 1359-62 and 1374-7 he was in charge of arrangements for paying the ransom of David II, raised through the wool customs and collected in Flanders. He was later special deputy of the chamberlain (1364), receiver of the king's money (1376-7), and auditor of the sheriffs' accounts (1374). Mercer undertook diplomatic missions to Flanders in 1367 and to England in 1379. He was said to be in great favour with the king of France; this may have been true, but the John Mercer who was the French king's councillor in 1384 was probably a relative, perhaps his son. 
Throughout his life John Mercer continued his mercantile activities, trading in England, Flanders, and France, often in partnership with his son Andrew. In a celebrated incident which brought him to the attention of English chroniclers he was shipwrecked during a voyage off the English coast in 1376 and was imprisoned by the earl of Northumberland. The earl of Douglas, Mercer's patron, protested to Edward III, and Mercer was freed, much to the regret of Thomas Walsingham, who believed that if he had been ransomed 'he would have enriched both the king and the kingdom by his vast wealth' ('Historia Anglicana', 1.369). Mercer deducted 2000 merks from the royal ransom payments to compensate for his losses. His son Andrew took more drastic action and in 1378 raised a fleet of Spanish, French, and Scottish ships that attacked and plundered ships at Scarborough. In response the London merchant John Philipot (died 1384) assembled his own fleet and captured Andrew and his booty. Andrew was released later that year. According to family tradition, an engraved cup commemorates this event, although the cup itself is probably later in date. Thomas Mercer, archdeacon of Glasgow and perhaps another son of John's, was imprisoned in England when returning from an embassy to France; the date is uncertain, but he was released under safe conduct in October 1379. 
John Mercer died in 1380, and was buried in St John's Church, Perth. A probably inaccurate tradition maintains that the family traded their mills on the north and south inches of Perth for the right of burial in the church: '
Folk say the Mercers tried the town to cheat, 

When for two Inches they did win two feet. 
('Our Seven Centuries', 6)' During his career Mercer amassed substantial holdings in Perth and Perthshire, including Lyndoch, Tullybeagle, Meikle Kinnaird, Pettland, and Meikleour, and his marriage to Ada Murray of Tullibardine, Perthshire, 'c'.1327, brought Aldie in Kinross-shire to the family. Their son Sir Andrew Mercer (died 'c'.1389) married Jonet, kinswoman of Margaret Berclay, the wife of Robert II's son Walter, thereby establishing ties of kinship to the royal family; his standing is shown by his acting as arbitrator in a lawsuit between John Logie, David II's stepson, and Robert Stewart, earl of Fife, Robert II's second son, in 1385. Among John's other sons may have been the Robert Mercer whose family became lairds of Innerpeffray in Strathearn, and John Mercer, canon of Dunkeld, whose petition for a papal dispensation in 1372 was supported by the kings of both Scotland and France. Thomas Walsingham described Mercer as 'skilful in matters relating to commerce, and fertile in expedient and prudent in counsel' ('Historia Anglicana', 1.369). He represents the growing prominence of medieval merchants, who, through their financial importance to the crown, were able to exert increasing influence on national affairs, and to ensure the upward social mobility of their families. 


@@@@@


doc= 46957


Lady Almeria Carpenter (1752-1809), who was born on 20 February 1752, the eldest daughter of George Carpenter, first earl of Tyrconnel (1723-1762), and his wife, Frances Clifton (died 1786). In January 1782 Carpenter gave birth to a daughter, Louisa Maria La Coast (died 1835), who was brought up by Farley Edsir, Gloucester's steward who kept a dairy farm at Hampton Court. Louisa eloped in 1799 with Godfrey Macdonald, later third Baron Macdonald, though they were not legally married until 1803. Gloucester and his duchess, still attended by Carpenter, spent much of 1784-7 on the continent, living in Geneva and Italy, again for both financial and physiological reasons. Before Gloucester's return George III arranged for a governess for his children, Miss Dee, and a pension from the Irish revenues. Carpenter remained a presence. In his 'Memoirs' for December 1788 Nathaniel Wraxall described her as 'one of the most beautiful women of her time, but to whom nature had been sparing of intellectual attractions' (Wraxall, 5.201) and the 'ornament' and 'pride' (ibid.) and hostess at Gloucester House. By the start of the 1790s the duke and duchess had all but separated and Gloucester sometimes restricted his wife's access to their children. None the less, the Gloucesters continued to maintain their household jointly and Carpenter was never allowed to completely eclipse Maria. 


@@@@@


doc= 46958


Browne, William Alexander Francis (1805-1885), alienist, was born on 24 June 1805 in Stirling, the son of William Browne ('c'.1785-1806), a lieutenant in the Cameronians, who drowned in the wreck of a troopship on the Goodwin Sands, and his wife, Jessie (died 1861). Brought up in the home of his paternal grandparents, The Enclosure, Stirling, by his mother and her two unmarried sisters, Browne was a member of the Scottish Episcopal church. He was educated at the local high school, studied medicine at the University of Edinburgh, and qualified as a licentiate of the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh in 1826. Elected a fellow of the Royal Medical Society on 25 November 1825, he became its president on 8 December 1826 and its senior president for 1827-8. Like many ambitious but ill-connected young professionals in the 1820s, Browne was strongly attracted to the phrenological doctrines of F. J. Gall (1757-1828) and J. G. Spurzheim (1776-1832), and he became a close friend and disciple of the leading Scottish phrenologists, the brothers George and Andrew Combe. Vice-president of the Edinburgh Phrenological Society between 1830 and 1832, Browne was for a time one of the more popular phrenological lecturers in the city. 
In 1828 Browne left Edinburgh for the continent, entrusted with the care of a well-to-do lunatic being treated through travel and changes of scene. For two years, as they travelled through Belgium, France, and Italy, Browne made a practice of visiting local asylums, forming a close attachment in Paris to the French alienist J. E. D. Esquirol (1772-1840), with whom he returned to study for several months in 1832. Subsequently he sought to establish himself as a general practitioner in his home town of Stirling. In 1834, however, with the support of the Combes, he secured the vacant superintendency of the Royal Lunatic Asylum at Montrose. That same year he married Magdalene Howden Balfour, daughter of Andrew Balfour, physician and publisher of the 'Edinburgh Encyclopaedia'. They had eight children, three of whom died in infancy; two others -- James Crichton-Browne (1840-1938) and John Hutton Balfour Browne (1845-1921) -- achieved eminence in medicine and law respectively. 
A talented administrator, Browne began his tenure at Montrose by introducing the new system of moral treatment pioneered by William Tuke at the York Retreat, and by Philippe Pinel and Esquirol in Paris. He enjoyed considerable success with this new system, which minimized the use of physical coercion and sought to employ carefully designed techniques and a controlled environment to induce patients to collaborate in their own recovery. A course of public lectures delivered at the asylum in the autumn of 1836 and published in May 1837, 'What asylums were, are, and ought to be', brought him national and international attention. Its harrowing, if over-simplified, descriptions of the worst horrors of the traditional madhouse were drawn directly from evidence presented to a series of early nineteenth-century parliamentary inquiries, and its powerful propaganda on behalf of the new therapeutic regime significantly advanced the cause of reform in the treatment of lunatics. 
The book also secured for Browne the superintendency of the new and handsomely endowed Crichton Royal Asylum, then being constructed in Dumfries, and he arrived in time to play a major role in designing, equipping, and staffing the asylum. Browne obtained his MD from Heidelberg in January 1839 and then sought over the next eighteen years to turn the Crichton Royal into an actual example of his utopian vision of the perfect asylum. Within an institution carefully designed to preserve existing class distinctions, patients were encouraged to engage in work or other physical activity, to learn languages or musical instruments, to participate as audience or actors in plays, and to submit themselves to a minutely organized and rigidly structured routine. Browne also insisted on the importance of making use of drugs as an additional aid in the treatment of mental disorder, and he experimented aggressively with a variety of possible pharmacological remedies. Yet despite his extraordinary energies and talents, and the virtual absence of the material constraints that hampered other Victorian asylum superintendents, Browne's annual reports at the Crichton Royal revealed that his experience essentially paralleled theirs: declining cure rates; the accumulation of chronic patients; and on his part a growing pessimism about the prospects and even the desirability of curing mental illness. 
Browne shared with his fellow Scots an abhorrence of the English poor law. He was proud of the fact that Scotland's asylums were charitable enterprises, and when in the mid-1850s the American reformer Dorothea Dix (1802-1887) sought to extend the English model of centrally supervised, tax-funded pauper asylums north of the border, he fought publicly to block her plans. When the legislation was passed anyway, he manoeuvred behind the scenes to secure his appointment as one of the two Scottish lunacy commissioners, a position he assumed in 1857. 
Browne spent much of the next fifteen years on the official circuit. The task seems to have suited him less well than the day-to-day challenges of running an asylum, but his official post added to his visibility within the profession. In 1865 his stature was recognized by his election as president of the Medico-Psychological Association of Great Britain and Ireland for 1865-6. By this time he had published 'Endemic Degeneration' (1862), 'Epileptics' (1865), and 'Sisterhoods in Asylums' (1866). In 1870, on a tour of inspection in East Lothian, Browne was thrown from his carriage, and suffered severe head injuries that left him blind. Forced into an unwanted retirement, he spent the last fifteen years of his life at the home he had established in 1857, Crindan, Dumfries, cared for by his two unmarried daughters, Madeline and Margaret. He died suddenly of a heart attack at Crindan on 2 March 1885. 


@@@@@


doc= 46960


Sir Adam Forrester (d. 1405) combined a mercantile career with royal service. A merchant by 1363, he became clerk of the rolls in 1366, then served as exchequer auditor, deputy chamberlain, chamberlain of the queen's household, sheriff of Lothian, keeper of the great seal, and ambassador to England and Europe. He was custumar of Edinburgh from 1375 to 1405. In the 1380s he supervised fortification work at Edinburgh Castle. He lent large sums of money to the crown, and was financial agent for the earl of Caithness, the bishop of Aberdeen, and others. As a burgess of Edinburgh, he represented the town in parliament in 1370 and was alderman in 1373 and 1378. In 1387 he was party to a contract to enlarge St Giles's Church. Forrester came to possess extensive lands, including Niddrie and Drylaw near Edinburgh, Traquair in Peeblesshire, and Fingask in Aberdeenshire; Fingask was granted to him by the bishop of Aberdeen as a reward for his services. In 1376 he acquired Corstorphine in Edinburghshire, which became the family seat; he probably built Corstorphine Castle. He also held lands in Edinburgh, including property in Forrester's Wynd, where he lived for a time. 
Forrester's first wife was probably Agnes (died before 1405), daughter of John Dundas of Dundas, who held Fingask in Perthshire. His second wife, Margaret (died after 1429), was possibly a Forrester. Adam and Margaret had at least three children, John ['see below'], Marie (died after 1439), and Thomas (died after 1431), who held the lands of Drylaw. Marie married first Andrew Leper, an Edinburgh burgess, and second, 'c'.1402, Alan Farnlie, custumar of Edinburgh with John from 1406 to 1425. 
Forrester was knighted by 1403, perhaps because of service at the battle of Hamildon Hill in 1402, where he and his son John were taken prisoner. He endowed three chaplains in the chapel of St John the Baptist which he founded in Corstorphine, beside the parish church. He was probably also a benefactor of St Machar's, Aberdeen, where his obit was recorded. He died on 13 October 1405, probably at Corstorphine Castle, and was probably buried either in St Giles's or in his chapel at Corstorphine. A tomb and a burial slab at St John's are traditionally associated with him, although their identification is not certain. 



@@@@@


doc= 46970


Eccles, Sir Josiah (1897-1967), engineer and industrialist, was born in northern Ireland on 29 July 1897, the son of Johnston and Mary Anne Eccles. Nothing is known of his schooling but he had begun to study engineering at Queen's University, Belfast, when the First World War began. Eccles left his studies for active service and, in 1917, he was awarded the Military Medal. When peace came he returned to the university, completing his studies in 1922 when he took a BSc in engineering with first-class honours. From 1922 to 1928 he worked with the Metropolitan-Vickers Electrical Company, where he specialized in outside construction work. In 1928 he was elected an associate member of the Institution of Electrical Engineers, becoming a full member ten years later. 
From 1928 until 1944 Eccles worked for the electrical department of Edinburgh corporation, first as senior technical assistant and then successively as construction engineer, generating engineer, and deputy engineer; in 1940 he was appointed engineer and manager of the department. He married Katherine Lillie Gillah, daughter of Alfred Summerson, a solicitor, in 1930; they had three children, a son and two daughters. 
In 1944 Eccles was appointed Liverpool's city electrical engineer and when the Labour government nationalized the electricity supply industry, he was involved in planning as a member of the organizing committee of the British Electricity Authority (BEA), the industry's new centralized governing body. He was the natural choice for the chairmanship of the newly created Merseyside and North Wales Electricity Board. In the six years he held the position he was concerned with the amalgamation of the distribution operations of a number of formerly independent corporate and municipally owned undertakings. He was appointed CBE in 1950. 
Eccles's primary interest, however, had always been in electricity generation, which was the responsibility of the BEA in London; he therefore welcomed the offer that came in 1954 to succeed Sir John Hacking as deputy chairman of the BEA. In his three years with the authority Eccles made his most significant contribution to the generation side through his support for the development of much larger and more thermally efficient sets, hitherto rejected by the more conservatively minded engineers at the BEA. He encouraged F. H. S. (Stanley) Brown, who had worked with him at Liverpool and who became, shortly after Eccles arrived at the BEA, its generation design engineer, to introduce the larger sets into the power station construction programme for the late 1950s and early 1960s. This took the British industry, for a time, into the technological vanguard in Europe. In 1956 Eccles played a major part in securing the appointment of Brown as BEA's chief engineer. 
By then the authority was being pressed by the government to expand the nuclear power programme. Eccles opposed this on the grounds that it was neither feasible nor economic and although events were to prove that his views were correct, the rest of his career in the industry was blighted. In 1957 the industry was reorganized and the Central Electricity Generating Board (CEGB) created; the appointment of a nuclear engineer, Christopher Hinton, as its chairman not only bypassed Eccles (who refused to be Hinton's deputy) but also signalled the government's intention to press ahead with the construction of the Magnox nuclear-powered stations. Eccles became deputy chairman of the Electricity Council, also created by the reorganization, and was knighted. In 1961 Eccles was a member of the McKenzie committee on the organization of electricity supply in Scotland, whose recommendations for centralization were rejected, on political rather than economic grounds. Eccles retired from the deputy chairmanship of the Electricity Council in 1961. 
Jack Eccles (as he was always known) combined his professionalism as an engineer with a shrewd commercial sense and a willingness to consider new ideas in both engineering and business not always characteristic of senior men in the industry. It was his misfortune that those qualities were not always appreciated by a government with its own agenda for the electricity supply industry and the power to impose its decisions on the nationalized industry. Throughout his life Eccles played an active role in the Institution of Electrical Engineers, as a member of its council from 1945 and serving as its president in 1954. He was made an honorary fellow in 1967. He also participated in several other industry organizations, including the Incorporated Municipal Electrical Association, the British Electrical Development Association, and the British Electrical Power Convention. He wrote many articles on both engineering and management matters in the electricity supply industry. He died at his home, 21 Sandy Lodge Road, Moor Park, Rickmansworth, Hertfordshire, on 14 October 1967. 


@@@@@


doc= 46971


Edwards, James Coster (1828-1896), terracotta manufacturer, was born at Trefnant in Denbighshire on 7 November 1828, the son of William Edwards (1797-1877) and his wife, Diana Coster (1796-1875). His father was employed as a clerk at some local coalmines, having originally moved north from Montgomeryshire to transport coal, iron, lime, and slate on the Ellesmere and Montgomeryshire canals. His mother was born at Llanymynech on the border between Shropshire and Montgomeryshire. 
After an elementary education, Edwards began work as an apprentice to a draper in Wrexham, leaving to become a storekeeper at the New British Iron Company's works in Acrefair, Denbighshire. From around 1850 he was working clay deposits near Ruabon, at Cefn and Acrefair. At the age of about thirty he was involved in an unsuccessful venture in operating a smelting works. Edwards married Elizabeth (1833-1920), daughter of Evan Edwards, a draper at Mold, on 24 May 1859. The couple had five daughters and two sons. About 1860 his father bought some coal works, and Edwards used the clay from the seams to make common bricks and earthenware, in a yard where he employed a man and two boys. He became the first to exploit fully the value of the red Ruabon marls and so helped to initiate the recovery of the local economy from the long recession caused by the decline of the iron industry. As the market for architectural and industrial ceramics developed, new works were established and, by the time of its founder's death, the firm employed nearly a thousand men in four large factories. The name of J. C. Edwards was by then widely respected among late Victorian architects and builders, and its ceramics were renowned for their durability and brilliant colours. 
A works at Trefnant, located between Ruabon and Llangollen, was bought in the 1860s; it housed the production of encaustic tiles and sanitary pipes and was expanded to cover 6 acres. In 1871 or the following year Edwards took over two kilns at Penybont, to the south of Ruabon and sited by one of the richest clay reserves of the area. This claypit, so rich that it was called the 'clayworkers' Eldorado', was initially used for the manufacture of roofing tiles and facing bricks. The marls proved ideal for being pressed and fired into the bright red terracotta for which the business became famous. Terracotta, large blocks of red or buff clayware moulded with florid decoration, was used on commercial and public buildings in most industrial cities, but most widely in Birmingham, Leeds, and the towns of south Lancashire and Cheshire. 
Among the most important contracts that J. C. Edwards supplied were most of the Prudential offices designed by Alfred Waterhouse and the exterior of the assize courts in Birmingham by Aston Webb and Ingress Bell, built 1887-91. For more modest buildings, a range of copings, pier caps, and other components could be ordered from catalogues. While Edwards is supposed to have designed some of the details himself, he also commissioned architects for designs. Douglas and Fordham, for example, were responsible for a range of chimney tops. The Penybont works was extended in response to growing demand, so that it incorporated forty-five kilns and provided employment for five hundred workers in 1896. In 1883 a new works was opened at Coppy, Denbigh, for the manufacture of glazed and enamelled bricks. Pottery making was introduced in the fourth of Edwards's factories, at Plas Kynaston. 
After about 1890 Edwards progressively withdrew from the management of his business to pursue responsibilities as a landowner and as a figure within the county. He moved into Trevor Hall near Llangollen and purchased the adjacent West Tower estate. He held office as a justice of the peace, deputy lieutenant, and, in 1892-3, as high sheriff, in the county of Denbigh. In the spring of 1896 he went to Guernsey for a recuperative holiday, but died on 26 March at the Old Government House Hotel. He was buried at Llantysilio church, near Llangollen. His sons, James Coster Edwards (1864-1934) and E. Lloyd Edwards (1860-1956), inherited the business. Terracotta was made on a decreasing scale in the Edwardian and inter-war periods. His grandson, the son of Edward Lloyd, with the name of James Coster Lloyd Edwards ('b'. 1897), was groomed to take over the business but died of appendicitis in 1930. Flooring tiles and facing bricks made up the bulk of the production until the firm was sold in 1956. 


@@@@@


doc= 46972


Leveson, Sir John (1555-1615), landowner, was born on 21 March 1555 at Whornes Place, Cuxton, Kent, the eldest son of Thomas Leveson (1532-1576), landowner, and Ursula Gresham (1534-1574). The main family estates were in Kent and Essex, but the ancestral property in Wolverhampton was retained. On 10 January 1576 he matriculated at Queen's College, Oxford, and he also spent time at Gray's Inn. On 27 April 1579 he married Margaret, daughter of Sir Roger Manwood, a leading member of the Kentish gentry. She died on 26 April 1585, and on 9 July the following year Leveson married Christian (died 1627), daughter of Sir Walter Mildmay and widow of Charles Barrett, a match which indicated Leveson's puritan sympathies. Leveson's letters also illustrate the faith which influenced his whole life. 
Leveson was efficient in estate management, his family connections brought him into politics, and he became an excellent public servant. Later he traded in pearls and was a shareholder in the Virginia Company. First noted among the thirty-eight Kentish landowners petitioning the privy council against Archbishop Whitgift's attack on the puritans in 1584, he was appointed deputy lieutenant for Kent in 1590, and proved himself invaluable to the lord lieutenant, William, Lord Cobham, in both public and private affairs. Leveson first served him as a military commander in raising the trained bands, and later in the preparations against the Armada; the defence of Kent in 1588 can be followed in his papers. He served as a captain in Lord Willoughby's disastrous expedition to France in 1589 and protested at the hardships thus incurred. Knighted in 1589, he was active in raising volunteers for Norris's expedition of that year, for Cadiz in 1596, and for the Netherlands in 1601-2. With his cousin Sir Richard Leveson he shipped 2000 soldiers from Rochester for Ireland in 1601. Besides warning the government about the unpopularity of musters, he had earlier passed on a massive protest about taxation in 1593. He also served as captain of Upnor Castle from 1596, and advised the government about the placing of beacons. 
Leveson was more directly linked with the court in the procurement of supplies for the royal household, and with the arrangements for Queen Elizabeth's Kent progress in 1596. During her last illness he informed the court about the security of the county, and later he reported treasonable talk against the new king, James I. The supervision of recusants, and the detection and apprehension of Jesuits and seminary priests, were also of concern to the government. Leveson entered parliament as MP for Bossiney in 1584, probably owing to Mildmay's influence, and later sat for Maidstone and Kent, being active also in the 1614 election there. He served on several parliamentary committees, most notably in 1601 when three of the four had particular reference to Kent. A Cecilite, he built up connections at court which were to prove invaluable. Executor to William, Lord Cobham, he was entrusted with the funds for Cobham College. Leveson was equally trusted by Henry, Lord Cobham, and helped him during his imprisonment. 
On 8 February 1601, riding to his house in Blackfriars, Leveson suddenly became involved in Essex's revolt. The earl of Cumberland and the bishop of London had collected a large body of men on Ludgate Hill; Leveson was asked to take command. He stationed the halberdiers behind a chain drawn across the road, and armed the musketeers. Within half an hour Essex, coming from St Paul's Churchyard with a great company, was halted at the barrier. Recognizing Leveson, Essex sent two envoys to him asking for passage. He refused both persuasion and threats. Shots were fired when Essex's men tried to force their way through. Leveson's men gave no ground and returned the fire. Seeing that Sir Christopher Blount was injured, Essex called his men off and withdrew to Essex House. 
When promoting the navigation of the Medway, Leveson had come into conflict with Thomas Sackville, later earl of Dorset and lord treasurer. The sudden death of his cousin Admiral Sir Richard Leveson in 1605 made Sir John's young son Richard (1598-1661) possessor of the great Leveson estate (over 30,000 acres) in Staffordshire and Shropshire. Sackville now showed himself Leveson's mortal enemy. In his official capacity he demanded $40,000 for treasure allegedly taken from the 'St Valentine' carrack by Sir Richard. Then, with Sackville's support, a forged will was produced making Sir Richard's cousin Mary Curzon the heir; Mary was married to Sackville's younger grandson. Finally Sir John Leveson had to settle Sir Richard's debts. The carrack claim was settled for $5000, the forgery exposed, and much of the debt paid. But Sir John observed in his will that he had spent $18,000 more in clearing the estate than it had paid in income. Important for his public services, Leveson had survived in the harsh world of the Jacobean court. After a short illness, he died at Whornes Place on 14 November 1615, and was buried on 22 November at Cuxton parish church. 


@@@@@


doc= 46974


Gower, Sir Thomas, second baronet (1604/5-1672), politician, was the eldest son of Sir Thomas Gower, first baronet (1584-1651), of Stittenham, Sheriff Hutton, Yorkshire, and Anne Doyley (died 1633). He went to Wadham College, Oxford, in 1617, aged twelve, and was admitted to Gray's Inn in 1621; he could be considered a scholar and linguist as well as an active politician. He was knighted in 1630 and the next year, following the death of his first wife, Elizabeth Howard, he married Frances Leveson (1614-1661), a marriage which led to the future aggrandizement of his family. As sheriff of Yorkshire in 1642 he vainly strove to achieve consensus among the Yorkshire gentry as civil war approached. After diligently carrying out the orders of parliament, he was named in the king's commission of array together with Sir Marmaduke Langdale and others previously sympathetic to the parliamentary cause. He, his father, and his five brothers all fought for the king. Having raised a regiment, he lent Charles $2250, eventually receiving repayment in 1665. He criticized the management of the siege of Hull and the damage it did the king's cause and later, in October 1642, commented on the problems Sir John Hotham's success caused the royalists in Yorkshire. He surrendered at Oxford in 1646 and, with Sir Thomas Fairfax's assistance, made his peace with parliament. Compounding cost him $730, which he paid in 1650. 
During the interregnum Gower maintained his wife's interest in the great estate of her uncle Sir Richard Leveson of Trentham, Staffordshire, and opposed the machinations of her nephew and rival, Sir Richard Temple of Stowe, Buckinghamshire. The officials of the protectorate regarded him with suspicion and confined him to within a narrow radius of his house in 1657, when two of his brothers were imprisoned; he used this detention to study medicine to help his poor neighbours. Gower's letters to Sir Richard Leveson describe how Fairfax, the duke of Buckingham, and many Yorkshire gentry including the Gowers took York from Lambert at the beginning of 1660. 
The Restoration brought Gower into national politics. Although Thomas Danby defeated him in the election for Malton in 1661 Gower won the seat on appeal, and his elder son, Edward, was active in the Scarborough election. Gower served the government in Yorkshire as JP, as deputy lieutenant for the North Riding, as collector of taxes, and as an invaluable source of intelligence on dissident activities. He learned early on of the Yorkshire, or Farmley Wood, plot of 1663, which drew on the large number of disaffected parliamentarians in Yorkshire, and ensured that two of his spies attended the plotters' preliminary meeting at Harrogate on 9 June. He informed the government, who promptly sent the duke of Buckingham north with a troop of horse, and himself began the series of arrests which soon rounded up 100 or so suspects. He continued to monitor developments closely, making use of the informer, Major Joshua Greathead. The planned uprising petered out in October, though the government response was relatively harsh. Gower's deployment of numerous agents had been of considerable value, and he would remain a source of information on suspicious activities in Yorkshire up to 1670. 
Gower was a conscientious member of the Cavalier Parliament, serving on 389 committees. He was considered an ally of Buckingham or of Ormond and was not a supporter of Clarendon; indeed, he was far from uncritical of government proceedings. A major disappointment for him was the fate of the Leveson inheritance -- for Sir Richard Leveson, who had considered Gower's son Edward as his heir for a time, left the estate to another relation. In 1668, united with his enemy Sir Richard Temple, another disappointed heir, Gower opposed a bill to settle the Leveson estate. An unexpected death in September 1668, however, gave the estate to the next heir, his younger son William, who took the name of Leveson-Gower. Gower continued active in the House of Commons, which instructed him to look into the historic precedents when trade between England and Scotland was being debated in 1668. He spoke in the debate about the assault on Sir John Coventry in 1671 and was serving on a committee enquiring into the growth of popery when he died, at Stittenham Manor, Sheriff Hutton, after a short illness, on 3 September 1672. He was deemed 'a right valiant and learned knight and true patriot of his country' (Plaxton). Gower was buried at Sheriff Hutton church. 


@@@@@


doc= 46976


Paton, Alan Stewart (1903-1988), writer, educationist, and politician, was born on 11 January 1903 at 9 Greyling Street, Pietermaritzburg, Natal, the oldest of the four children, two boys and two girls, of James Paton (1872-1930), a Scottish shorthand writer who had emigrated to South Africa in 1895, and his wife, Eunice Warder James (1878?-1965), the daughter of a Bristol clerk and his South African-born wife, Edith. James Paton was a puritanical tyrant, from whom his oldest son learned an abiding hatred of violence and authoritarianism. 
Alan Paton had a distinguished academic career at Maritzburg College (1914-18) and Natal University College (1919-24) before beginning work as a teacher at Ixopo, where he met his first wife, Doris (Dorrie) Lusted (1897-1967), daughter of a local solicitor, George Francis, and recently widowed. They married on 2 July 1928, and although the marriage was difficult from the start, it endured. Alan Paton in maturity was less than 5 feet 7 inches in height, very fair of complexion, and with piercing pale blue eyes. 
Paton, who had not been happy as a teacher, made a momentous career change in 1935, taking on the post of director of a turbulent borstal for black youths, Diepkloof, near Johannesburg. It was at Diepkloof that he formed most of the important political ideas which were to shape his writing and his life. On his arrival he found that Diepkloof was run on prison camp lines, with armed guards, two high fences topped with barbed wire, a massive front gate and severe military discipline. In spite of these measures, or because of them, there were constant escapes. Paton saw that the gate, the guards, and the repressive discipline were part of the problem, and courageously decided to begin breaking them down. The youths would be controlled, not with counter-violence but with love and self-discipline. They were encouraged to spend their days in useful work, gardening, and education; the discipline was gradually made less severe; and after some months first the outer fence, then the huge gate, then the inner fence were removed. Critics such as H. F. Verwoerd, the architect of apartheid, predicted break-outs on a massive scale; in fact the number of escapees dropped sharply and remained low. 
It was while he was principal of Diepkloof that Paton, in 1946-7, was sent on a government-sponsored tour of similar borstals in Scandinavia, Britain, and North America. While on this tour, beginning in Norway, he wrote 'Cry, the Beloved Country: a Story of Comfort in Desolation'. He finished it in the United States, and it was immediately accepted by Scribners and published in 1948. Its success, both critical and popular, was great and lasting; it is widely recognized as one of the outstanding novels of the twentieth century. 
Financial security and fame changed Alan Paton's life, as the experience at Diepkloof had done. Shortly before the Nationalist government came to power in the year of 'Cry, the Beloved Country''s publication, Paton resigned from Diepkloof and became a full-time writer, turning out a stream of poems and a succession of biographies and novels, including the haunting 'Too Late the Phalarope' (1953), which focused attention on the tragedy of the Afrikaner, imprisoned and consumed by the apartheid he had created. 
In pursuit of his non-racial ideals, Paton helped to found the South African Liberal Party in 1953, becoming its national chairman in 1956 and its president in 1958. From then on his career became increasingly political and dedicated to helping all racial groups in South Africa. Accordingly he was harassed by the Nationalist government, and only his international eminence saved him from imprisonment. He refused to be cowed or silenced, producing a steady stream of polemical articles which kept him in the public eye, and a constant flow of fine poems, many of them unpublished in his own lifetime, most of them having a political message and a satirical edge. 
Paton also produced two important political biographies, of his political mentor J. H. Hofmeyr ('Hofmeyr', 1965), and of the Anglican bishop Geoffrey Clayton ('Apartheid and the Archbishop', 1974). He saw these two very different men as representative of the roots of South African liberalism, and his biographies, like his novels, poems, and other writings, are part of a consistent moral and political concern that actuated him all his life. 
The same is true of his two volumes of autobiography, 'Toward the Mountain' (1980) and 'Journey Continued' (1988), in which there emerges clearly his view of human life as a moral and spiritual pilgrimage, in which our aim should be to live, not for ourselves, but for others. This aim he pursued all his life, though he felt it was an ideal of which he had often fallen short. 
After the death of his wife, Dorrie, on 23 October 1967 Paton was sustained by the joy of a successful second marriage, on 30 January 1969, to his secretary, Anne Hopkins ('b'. 1927), an English-born divorcee. In his later years he found himself criticized both from the left and from the right, as political polarization produced greater extremism, but he stubbornly stood his ground, arguing that violence and repression were wrong no matter who was practising them. He died of cancer of the oesophagus on 12 April 1988 at his home near Durban, Lintrose, Botha's Hill. His ashes were scattered in the garden there in October of that year. 


@@@@@


doc= 46979


Mastin, John (1747-1829), topographer, was born on 30 September 1747 in Epperstone, Nottinghamshire, to William Mastin (died 1779), a freeholder husbandman, and his wife, Ann ('c'.1721-1792), daughter of John Baguley, of Stoke Bardolph, Nottinghamshire. After education at a dame-school and at establishments at Woodborough and Nottingham, Mastin returned home to Epperstone when about twelve and entered the service of a succession of gentlemen and clergymen. Over the next ten years his self-education continued with his employers' encouragement. He was both competent and energetic, and in his later teenage years was well known locally as a wrestler. About 1771 he obtained his first senior post, as a steward at Rickmansworth, Hertfordshire. In 1772, however, he resigned after eloping to marry the seventeen-year-old Mary Gurney (1754/5-1811), a modestly wealthy minor whose prospects he checked by journeying to London to inspect the will of her deceased father, William Gurney, a freeholder and wheelwright of Rickmansworth. 
In 1773 a kinsman offered Mastin a curacy if he could qualify himself, which he did in 1777 after instruction by a clergyman. By the end of the same year he had been appointed to the curacies of Husbands Bosworth, Leicestershire, and of Naseby, Northamptonshire. Ordained priest in 1779, he was appointed sequestrator at Naseby in 1781, the year his seventh and last child was born. He became vicar of Naseby in 1783 and moved there, to the newly refurbished parsonage, in 1787. In 1791, a year after he surrendered his curacy of Husbands Bosworth, he began to write a history of Naseby. At the instigation of George Ashby, the patron of the living, this was published for some 600 subscribers in 1792. Although 'The History and Antiquities of Naseby' was conventionally cumulative, perhaps not least because of the guidance Mastin received from the Leicestershire historian John Nichols, it nevertheless owed much to Mastin's own curiosity, observations, and fieldwork, including archaeological excavation. As well as sections on church and manorial history, soils, fossils, agriculture, and plants it included a lengthy discourse on the battle of 1645, reprinting various primary sources and recording a few local traditions. It was enlivened with biographical sketches of the parish's 'ingenious mechanics' such as John Tresler, blacksmith and whitesmith, caster of metals, locksmith, and maker of steel crossbows for shooting rooks with balls. The book was well received, and an offer was made (but declined) to propose Mastin as a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries. A second edition, with additions and engravings, was published in 1818. 
Mastin remained vicar of Naseby until his death. During that time he served in addition numerous terms as curate or stipendiary priest in nearby parishes. In 1802 he became vicar of Dunton Bassett, Leicestershire, and in 1822 vicar of Cold Ashby, which adjoins Naseby. He was reportedly a formidable figure, 'largely formed, but not corpulently covered. His dress was of the old school, black coat and waistcoat and knee breeches with black stockings' (Foard, 353). Throughout his adult life he also maintained an active interest in farming and land management, and acted both on his own behalf and as agent for others. He submitted several communications to the board of agriculture, from which he received a silver plate in 1801 for an essay, probably on the conversion of grass levels to tillage. In his old age he wrote a manuscript autobiography. 
Mastin died aged eighty-one in his daughter's arms at Naseby vicarage on 15 January 1829 after a long decline, and was buried in his own church. 


@@@@@


doc= 46980


Engelbach, Charles Richard Fox (1876-1943), motor engineer, was born on 20 May 1876 in Kensington, London, son of Lewis William Engelbach, a clerk in the War Office, and his wife, Jessie Bryan. He left Sandringham School at Southport, Lancashire, when he was sixteen and was apprenticed at the great armaments manufacturer Armstrong Whitworth at Newcastle upon Tyne. After several years of working on naval gun-turrets, in 1906 he was given the task of reviewing the faltering production of Wilson-Pilcher motor cars, a sideline recently purchased by Armstrongs to provide alternative peacetime work. His lucid analysis highlighted problems common to the fledgeling motor industry in Britain, and became the basis for his career as one of the key figures in developing the industry into an effective producer. 
Engelbach found no specialized motor department and little planning and organization devoted to Wilson-Pilcher. Parts were produced in six or seven different shops, depending on what other work was available. As a result an erratic mix of components arrived at the assembly department. Of thirty-two cars, only ten had been delivered without being returned with complaints. Engelbach's plans for organized large-scale production were rejected but he was given charge of a new plant to build limited numbers of the larger 30 hp Armstrong Whitworth cars, which he did successfully. 
On the outbreak of war in 1914, Engelbach, a keen reserve naval officer, was called up, but after a year his skills were recognized and he was put in charge of the howitzer department of the Coventry ordnance works. He was made an OBE for his work. After the armistice he worked briefly for a components supplier before being called in by the team restructuring the Austin Motor Company which was in the hands of the official receiver in the post-war slump. The Austin works at Longbridge in Birmingham had grown hugely during the war but had required expensive re-engineering for peacetime production and lacked popular models. 
Engelbach was appointed works director. On the back of the success of the Austin 7 small car, introduced in 1922, he reorganized production systematically, drawing on his experience and people from Coventry. Principal components were made and assembled in the same shop and then delivered to the appropriate position for assembly on a track. Bodies were built in series and carried on an overhead runway to a mounting shop where they met the chassis from the assembly line. It was a pattern familiar in the USA, but much less so in Britain. 
Engelbach's reforms, spelt out in a lecture to the Institution of Automobile Engineers, whose president he became, meant that between 1922 and 1927 the number of man-weeks required to build a car fell from fifty-five to ten. Labour relations benefited from carefully worked out wage rates which increased output and earnings, and the firm later pioneered sick pay and pension schemes in line with Engelbach's belief that secure work at a good wage produced the best results. 
The changes, though much copied, helped Austin meet the challenge of Ford's new factory, opened on a green-field site at Dagenham in 1931. But by 1938 Engelbach's eyesight had deteriorated so much that he had to be guided round the factory, and he retired. He was, nevertheless, an obvious choice for the committee which planned the government's pre-war 'shadow' factory programme to construct ready-equipped plants for possible wartime production by existing manufacturers. 
A sympathetic man, witty, with a range of interests, Engelbach had once turned down a professional singing career with the D'Oyly Carte company. His wife, Florence Ada, 'nee' Neumegen, whom he married on 4 October 1902, painted, exhibiting at the Royal Academy. They had two sons. He also enjoyed the conventional activities of the motor manufacturers -- golf and yachting -- and was an active freemason and office bearer in local and national employers' associations. He died on 19 February 1943 at his home, Quarry Farm, Quarry Lane, Northfield, Birmingham. 


@@@@@


doc= 46982


Ercolani, Lucian Randolph (1888-1976), furniture designer and manufacturer, was born on 8 May 1888 at Sant' Angelo in Vado, in the Marche, Italy, the eldest son of Abdon Ercolani, a picture framer, and his wife, a dressmaker. He was left in the care of his grandmother when his parents moved to Florence for his father's employment, being reunited with them in 1895. Ercolani's father was a protestant evangelist, and sent his son to a Baptist school in Florence; however in 1898 local Salvation Army representatives encouraged the father to migrate to London, from where he was shortly able to send for his wife and family and settle at Walthamstow. After a brief schooling, Ercolani began work as a messenger boy for the Salvation Army. He was encouraged by his father to attend night school, and in 1902 enrolled at Shoreditch Technical Institute where he studied drawing and design, followed by the construction of furniture. About 1906 he transferred to the Salvation Army joinery department, where he remained several years. Ercolani took every opportunity to familiarize himself with furniture of all historical periods, by visiting museums and great houses open to the public. On Sundays he played the trombone in the Salvation Army band but he did not have enough free time for rehearsals, and in 1909 the bandmaster asked him to resign. Ercolani then began attending services at his local Baptist church, where he met his future wife, Eva Mary (1886/7-1971), daughter of George Brett, a retired policeman. 
At about this time Ercolani left his course at Shoreditch. He began to earn money as a freelance artist and designer and after leaving the joinery he was hired as a furniture designer by Frederick Parker of High Wycombe, the firm which later became Parker-Knoll. Ercolani began teaching in the evenings and it was as his pupil that he first met Edward Gomme, son of a chairmaker and later famous for his G-plan furniture. The two men became lifelong friends and professional colleagues. On the outbreak of the First World War Ercolani volunteered to enlist in the British army, but before he could be directed into active service he was placed on the reserve list and sent to Gomme's factory, which was already fully engaged on war work, principally on aircraft components and propellors. He and Eva Brett were married on 1 June 1915; they had two sons, Lucian and Barry, and a daughter, Roma. 
The opportunity of independence came when a consortium of people connected with the furniture trade invited Ercolani to join them in the construction and operation of a new manufactory in High Wycombe. These were Rich and Peters, twine merchants, and Harding and Ironmonger, merchant bankers; they were willing to put up the money, and when Ercolani, who was to be managing director and in charge of the factory, explained that he could not afford to invest, they gave him shares worth $1000. A site was acquired, the factory built and equipped, and production commenced in a modest way in 1920, trading as Furniture Industries. 
After surmounting the inevitable problems associated with running a factory during the depression, Ercolani's backers encouraged him to visit the USA. A month in New York brought him many new insights and a glimpse of different business methods, but the most important inspiration came on his last afternoon when he discovered at the back of the Metropolitan Museum a room full of Shaker furniture which greatly impressed him with its simple practicality and beauty of form. 
Ercolani's takeover of the respected, but then loss-making, furniture business of Skull, in 1931, was totally unexpected, the offer and acceptance taking only twenty-five minutes. He sold off the unprofitable Skull properties and expanded the joint business. Much of Ercolani's custom came in the form of large outfitting contracts for government or commercial organizations, rather than from the retail trade. His sons were already involved in the business when the Second World War broke out, but they joined the Royal Air Force, returning with rank and decorations at the end of the war. Ercolani, who had taken British nationality in 1923, turned his factory over to war work, beginning with an order for 6 million tent pegs, and ultimately producing 36 million, made from small and malformed timber rejected as useless for more important products. 
Towards the end of the war the Board of Trade was seeking to place a large order for cheap windsor-type chairs. The price offered ruled out the use of expensive beech wood, and demanded some inexpensive process of manufacture. Ercolani met the specification by making the chairs of elm, a wood previously considered unsuitable for furniture because of its long-term liability to warp, a problem which he cured by designing a kiln to dry it more effectively. He was the British Furniture Manufacturers' representative on the 'Britain can make it' exhibition, which spurred him to design a suite of sideboard, table, and chairs based on the windsor style. Somewhat to his surprise, these items later appeared at the 1951 Festival of Britain. 
From these beginnings Ercolani and his sons developed the successful Ercol range, which became a household name. He was one of the few British furniture manufacturers who succeeded in putting an individual stamp on a mass-market product and, in the face of denials that it was possible, he succeeded in combining machine production with true craftsmanship. Ercolani died at Wycombe General Hospital, High Wycombe, on 9 June 1976. 


@@@@@


doc= 46984


Evans, William (1864-1934), grocer and soft drinks manufacturer, was born at Trellwyn Uchaf Farm, near Fishguard, Pembrokeshire, Wales, on 24 August 1864, the oldest of the fourteen children of Thomas Evans ('b'. 1842/3), farmer, and his wife, Maria Francis ('b'. 1844/5). He was educated at Jabez Chapel school and Pontvane School, Pembrokeshire. At the age of twelve he became an apprentice to James Rees, a Haverfordwest grocer, and at sixteen he went to work in alderman William Thomas's grocery store at Aber-big, Monmouthshire. At nineteen he became manager of the Porth branch of Peglers' Stores in the Rhondda valley, Glamorgan. 
In 1885, in partnership with his former employer, William Thomas, Evans opened a grocery and provision shop in Hannah Street, Porth, a central location for serving the rapidly growing population of the Rhondda valleys. On 27 July 1886 he married Annie Jane Evans (died 1949), a native of Aberystwyth, whose father had established a butcher's shop in Hannah Street, Porth. There is no record of any children. 
In 1888 Thomas left the partnership, although the business continued as Thomas and Evans, with William Evans in sole control. From a single grocery store, the business gradually expanded. A bakery was added in 1890, followed by branch shops at three other locations by 1895. In 1897 Evans, an adherent of the temperance movement, became interested in the manufacture of soft drinks following a chance meeting with an Indian 'quack doctor'. Production of soft drinks at Porth, comprising hop bitters, ginger beer, and lemonade, under the label Welsh Hills Mineral Waters, commenced at the beginning of the twentieth century. From these small beginnings the Corona business emerged. 
Before the First World War, the expansion of production and distribution of the soft drinks was confined to the south Wales region, but following the change of name from Welsh Hills to Corona in the early 1920s, the business mushroomed. By the time of Evans's death, in 1934, there were about twenty-seven factories and fifty depots throughout England and Wales. A key factor in the success of Thomas and Evans was Evans's ability to assess the customer's needs and develop methods of satisfying them. In the case of Corona this involved doorstep deliveries, a concept he had pioneered at Porth with his grocery business. From this retail base, a notable development was the formation of a chain of small, fully stocked, local grocers' shops (the Terry shops), a forerunner of the later Spar and Mace grocery chains. 
Evans did not regard business as simply a means of self-aggrandizement through profit maximization: 'In his expressed view, commerce, properly conducted, conveyed advantage not only to the provider of capital and enterprise, but also to customer and employee, and beyond these to the community at large, and the nation as a whole' (Jones, 35). In 1920 Evans made a gift of 200 acres of ground for the creation of a public park for the benefit of the inhabitants of Porth. A deeply committed Baptist, he was connected with Salem Chapel, Porth, for nearly forty years, being both a deacon and treasurer, and in 1930-31 he was president of the Welsh Baptist Union. A Liberal, in 1910 he became a Glamorgan county councillor, serving for a time as chairman of the finance committee, and in 1917 he was appointed a JP for Glamorgan. 
William Evans died of a stroke at Bronwydd, Porth, his home for much of his later life, on 27 September 1934. He left $287,658 gross, and was succeeded in the control of Thomas and Evans, a private limited company since 1920, by his brother Daniel Francis (Frank) Evans (1875-1940), a business partner since the early 1890s. In the 1950s Thomas and Evans was acquired by Beechams Ltd. 


@@@@@


doc= 46985


Ewart, Sir William, first baronet (1817-1889), linen manufacturer, politician, and philanthropist, was born on 11 November 1817 in Sydenham, on the outskirts of Belfast, the eldest son of William Ewart (1789-1873) and Mary Anne, 'nee' Rosen. He was educated at the Belfast Royal Academy, and was then employed in his grandfather's firm of William Ewart & Son, becoming a partner in 1843. In 1840 he married Isabella Kelso, daughter of Lavens Mathewson of Newtownstewart, co. Tyrone. They had nine sons and five daughters, of whom nine children survived him. As a partner he was the dominant influence in the business and a powerful figure in the linen industry generally, so much so that when he died, the 'Northern Whig' described him, with a touch of hyperbole, as the 'father of our staple trade in Belfast' ('Northern Whig', 5 Aug 1889). 
Ewart's grandfather, also William Ewart (1759-1851), had moved to Ballymacarret, close to Belfast, from Hillsborough, co. Down, about 1790, and became involved in the newly developing cotton industry. In 1814 he formed a partnership with his eldest son, Ewart's father. About 1840 the firm diversified into flax spinning, thus following a trend initiated by Andrew Mulholland a decade earlier and taken up by an increasing number of Belfast cotton producers, who exploited the comparative advantages that wet flax-spinning techniques offered. The Ewarts were unusual only in that they had been manufacturers of cloth rather than spinners. 
The Ewarts' first mill, powered by water, was on the Crumlin Road. Power-loom weaving was added about 1850, and in 1852 they purchased the Glenbank bleaching works. In 1859 the firm moved to extensive warehouses at 11 Donegal Place, though it kept its mills on the Crumlin Road. On the eve of the American civil war and the subsequent cotton famine, the Ewarts were already in possession of a vertically integrated business and well placed to meet the increasing demand for linen. By now Ewart was in full control. 
By good management, Ewarts survived the post-war depression and, indeed, prospered by buying up the assets of less enterprising competitors. For example, in 1876 it bought the premises of the Bedford Street Weaving Company and in the same year purchased the Mountain mill, Ligoniel, from Waring and Duncan. During the trade depression of 1883, in order to protect the family wealth, Ewart turned the business into a limited liability company, with a capital of $500,000. There were six partners: Ewart himself, and five sons. 
Part of the success of Ewarts can be attributed to tight family control both before and after the adoption of limited liability. Five of Ewart's six surviving sons entered the business. Two of them were resident in New York and attended to American sales. The reputation of the firm as an employer was mixed. According to a contemporary source, Ewart, on winning a legal case with a rival firm over water rights, was cheered by an 'enthusiastic crowd' all the way from the court house to his office. After he acquired the Mountain mill he built 500 dwelling houses at Ligoniel for his employees. On the other hand, in 1870 the firm was fined $13 10's'. for employing labour between 8 p.m. and 11 p.m. in breach of the 'Factory Acts', and had repeatedly been reported for serious infringements in its spinning mills. When Ewart died, the firm had between 5000 and 6000 employees and an annual wage bill of $150,000. It operated 33,500 spindles and 2000 power looms. 
In common with many other Belfast manufacturers during the nineteenth century, Ewart played an active part in the political, philanthropic, and religious life of the city. He was a member of the Belfast corporation for twenty-five years and mayor in 1859 and 1860. He was elected for Belfast City as a Conservative at a by-election in 1878; he held the seat in 1880. In 1885 he moved to North Belfast as a result of boundary changes. He was created a baronet in 1887. He was a justice of the peace for Belfast, Antrim, and Down, served on the boards of several charitable institutions, as well as trade bodies such as the Flax Supply Association, the Linen Merchants' Association, and the Belfast chamber of commerce. 
Ewart was a staunch member of the Church of Ireland and was a member of the representative board set up in 1869 after disestablishment. In this role he was active in putting the financial affairs of the church on a sound footing. According to his obituary, 'there was hardly a church throughout Belfast which had not received of his liberality' ('Northern Whig', 5 Aug 1889). He died in London at 14 Albemarle Street, Piccadilly, on 1 August 1889 and was buried in Belfast five days later. News of his death arrived in Belfast on a Saturday, in time for five churches to hold memorial services on Sunday and for the encomiums to be reported at length in the press the following morning. He opposed, however, the building of a cathedral in Belfast, arguing that it would detract from the erection of parish churches required by a growing population. He was succeeded by his eldest son, William Quartus Ewart (1844-1919). 


@@@@@


doc= 46987


Falk, Herman Eugene (1820-1898), salt manufacturer, was born on 20 November 1820 in Danzig, the fourth of five children of David Wilhelm Falk (1773-1848), merchant, and his second wife, Julianne Rickert. His parents were both German, though his grandfather, he claimed, was English. In 1839 Falk emigrated to England where since 1829 his half-brother, Eduard, and brother, Robert, had been separately in business. Robert's partnerships failed in 1836 and 1840 but Herman invested family capital in Robert's new scheme trading from Liverpool in coal, iron, grain, silk, guano, and salt. Both brothers married into Liverpool commerce, their wives being the daughters of John Thompson, glazier, painter, and plumber; Herman married Elizabeth in 1844, his brother her sister. Elizabeth Falk died after giving birth to her first child (1851). In 1854 Falk married his daughter's governess, Anne Hadfield. The couple had two sons and three daughters. In 1841 the Falks invested in salt works at Winsford, Cheshire, where Herman, as resident manager, mined at record depths. Herman also founded the industry's standard information bulletin, 'Falk's Salt Circular'. 
In 1843 Herman moved to Hull to organize the import of Baltic timber for railway sleepers commissioned by the engineer Robert Stephenson. Business confidence faltered in 1845. Crucial railway contracts were lost. The brothers faced two crippling actions in chancery, one raised by their half-brother. Their partnership, denuded of capital, was dissolved. While Robert maintained businesses in England, Herman in 1846 took up forestry in New Brunswick, Canada. Returning in 1848 he was forced out of Winsford salt works in 1850 through the actions of the salt traders' association, unimpressed by his vacillating attitude to agreements on prices and production. He was arrested for debt, and costly legal actions came eventually into chancery (1850-53). He overcame difficulties, establishing himself at Meadowbank (Winsford) salt works, with Robert as London agent until the latter's bankruptcy in 1856. 
Following an economic recession Falk united the major salt proprietors of Cheshire and Worcestershire in a Salt chamber of commerce (1858), whose committee regulated production and prices. In 1860 he successfully advanced the interests of British salt manufacturers at negotiations for the Anglo-French commercial treaty. 
Falk claimed that the industry's stability was threatened by the 'proletariat element' of family proprietors reducing prices and expanding production. To outmanoeuvre these firms and destroy the business of independent hauliers, he constructed in his own shipyard, from 1863, the River Weaver's first iron steamboats to tow strings of dumb barges. In 1868 a strike of saltworkers forced proprietors to increase wages and reduce hours. Falk stood firm upon economic grounds, replacing his own workers with Germans, hired for low wages in Liverpool while in transit to America. When the Germans in turn 'conspired with rebellious spirit', Falk recruited 'docile' Poles and Hungarians to his 350-strong workforce. Falk determined to counter the 'gross materialism' of wage demands by providing schooling and housing, though conditions, particularly for foreign workers -- criticized by the press and xenophobic locals -- were eventually (inconclusively) investigated by the select committee on the emigration and immigration of foreigners (1888). 
Falk travelled widely and published papers on the world's salt. He provided evidence to official inquiries of 1873-81 concerning the environmental impact of his salt works, particularly subsidences and noxious acid emissions. He identified labour obstruction and poor coal as factors, reporting that his own model farm at Catsclough in the heart of the salt districts was, through skilful management, flourishing. His authoritative pronouncements delayed compensation legislation until 1891. From 1873 Cheshire's burgeoning chemical industry boosted Falk's business, though competition from Teesside and manufacturing processes independent of salt limited profits. In 1884 Falk devised the first British joint-stock industrial combination, an attempt legitimized by limited liability, to control production and prices. Falk wrote in his annual report for the Salt chamber of commerce (1886-7), 26: 'The tendency of the age is for an amalgamation and co-operation of all manufactures, in order to lay the great bully competition'. In 1888 a syndicate, having purchased the majority of salt works in Britain and Ireland for above their market value, converted itself into a limited company, the Salt Union. Falk, who by now enjoyed the popular title 'Father of the salt trade', refused to serve on the board, though his barrister son did. The inefficient combine tottered through strikes and commercial crises until absorbed into Imperial Chemical Industries in 1937. 
Falk retired to his farm, Catsclough, Winsford, Cheshire, where, following the death of his second wife, he married in 1894 an engineer's daughter, Alice Stanley. He died at Catsclough on 19 January 1898, leaving his effects to Alice and directing that his body be cremated without a funeral and that mourning should be limited to six months. 


@@@@@


doc= 46991


John James Fenwick (1846-1905), department store founder and fashion designer. Born on 31 July 1846 at 83 Frenchgate, Richmond, in the North Riding of Yorkshire, J. J. Fenwick was the fifth of the eleven children (two of whom died in infancy) of John Fenwick (1810-1886), grocer, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Cooper (1812-1860), daughter of a farmer from Grinton, near Reeth, in Swaledale. He was brought up by his Fenwick grandparents on their farm at Feldom, near Marske, in Swaledale, moving back to Richmond in 1857 after the death of his grandmother. He attended the corporation school in Tower Street, Richmond, until he was fifteen, and then worked for his father for a time. He may have worked for a draper in Middlesbrough when his father moved there, and then served a seven-year apprenticeship with a draper in Stockton. In 1868 he moved to Newcastle upon Tyne, where he got a job as a shop assistant with Moses and Brown, a drapery business in Mosley Street, and in the following year he moved to Charles Bragg & Co., silk mercers, of Pilgrim Street, where he worked his way up to be a buyer, and then manager. 
In 1872 Fenwick married Mary Hannah, eldest daughter of Robert Burnand, master tailor, of Newcastle; they had three sons and one daughter. While working for Braggs he began selling insurance, but he turned down the offer of a full-time job as Newcastle representative of the National Provident Institution of Gracechurch Street, London, in 1877. In 1882 he was dismissed by Braggs for running an insurance agency on the side, but he issued a writ for wrongful dismissal, and the $1000 he was awarded in settlement in 1882 helped to finance the expansion of the mantle business he had opened four months earlier at 5 Northumberland Street. 
Northumberland Street at that time was an exclusive residential street, and from the start, Fenwicks was exclusive. J. J. Fenwick advertised under the heading 'Nouveautes Exclusives', and by the end of the first year his clientele included the Percys at Alnwick and other society ladies. By 1903 the 'Newcastle Journal' was able to list 174 'Society Patrons' of the business, including the empress of Germany and three European princesses. With such a clientele, Fenwicks's stock included furs, hunting jackets, silk dresses, walking gowns, and sealskin jackets. In 1883 Fenwick was able to lease 39 Northumberland Street, and in 1885 acquired no. 37, and employed a well-known local architect, W. H. Knowles, to design a shop front with two large display windows, each supported by seven pillars with the fluting picked out in gold leaf, in which he displayed elegant gowns and furs. Meanwhile Fenwick was travelling to London and Paris to keep abreast of the new fashions and materials, and in 1887 he made his first trip to the French riviera to display his latest creations to ladies spending the winter there. He opened a shop in Sunderland in 1888, but this was not a success and closed within a year. Meanwhile he continued to acquire properties in Northumberland Street, preferring to run a number of separate shops rather than create one store with several departments, as E. M. Bainbridge had done nearly fifty years earlier in Market Street. In 1889 he opened the International Fur Store at 18 Northumberland Street (he changed its name to the Northern Fur Shop following objections from Jays of Regent Street), moving it into no. 2 a year later. In 1890 Fenwick was appointed northern agent for Liberty of London, and he bought 41 Northumberland Street to stock Liberty fabrics, calling it the Eastern Art Store -- this lasted a year, before he sold the property and moved the fabrics into nos. 37-9. 
In 1891 Fenwick opened a store in London, at 62-3 New Bond Street and 15-17 Brook Street, selling model gowns, coats, mantles, and furs, which was not very successful at first, but meanwhile his reputation as a fashion designer was growing, and, increasingly compared to the famous French fashion designers, he became known as the Worth of the North. He designed clothes for Ellen Terry, and in 1895 Dorothea Baird, who was to star in Gerald du Maurier's successful musical 'Trilby' at the Haymarket Theatre, asked Fenwick to design her a gown to wear on the first night, when she was to be presented to the prince and princess of Wales. In the 1890s Fenwick began creating designs based on early nineteenth-century fashion plates, and he became notorious for his 'carriage gown', with a full skirt and a steel-wired hem, based on a design of the 1830s, which led to the formation of the Anti-Crinoline League, with 16,000 signatures. His 'short cut walking skirt for women', which exposed the ankles, caused another outcry: Fenwick named it 'the Anti-Microbe Skirt', a reference to Pasteur, who had died in 1895. 
The business became a limited company in 1897 and in that year, after the purchase of more adjoining buildings, several houses were demolished and Knowles designed a new Newcastle store on the lines of Bon Marche in Paris, with a central fashion hall with Ionic columns and stained glass windows. Fenwicks, while remaining an exclusive fashion store, was turning into a department store, and by 1900 there were 200 employees in Newcastle. But it remained a family business: all the shares were held by members of the family, and the Fenwicks trade mark was based on J. J. Fenwick's signature until 1962. 
A Wesleyan Methodist, Fenwick was a leading officer of the Brunswick Place Chapel, and superintendent of the Orphan House Sunday schools. He and Thomas Hudson Bainbridge, eldest son of E. M. Bainbridge, financed the building of a new Methodist church in Jesmond, the Newcastle suburb where they lived, and they became joint superintendents of its Sunday school. A keen lawn tennis player, Fenwick was a member of the Avenues Tennis Club, the first lawn tennis club in the north of England. 
Fenwick died of a heart attack at his home, Elderhurst, in Jesmond, Newcastle, on 9 July 1905, and was buried in Jesmond old cemetery. 



@@@@@


doc= 46992


Ferens, Thomas Robinson (1847-1930), businessman and philanthropist, was born on 4 May 1847 at East Thickley, near Bishop Auckland, the third of the seven children of George Waller Ferens (1817-1893), flour miller, of New Shildon, co. Durham, and his wife, Anne, 'nee' Jackson. He was educated at Bishop Auckland private school until the age of thirteen, when he became a clerk in the Shildon office of the mineral department of the Stockton and Darlington Railway. In 1866, aged nineteen, he left home and went to Stockton as a clerk to Head, Wrightson & Co. Raised as a devout Wesleyan Methodist and teetotaller -- he remained so all his life -- Ferens spent many of his non-working hours attending chapel and Band of Hope meetings, and teaching in Sunday school. He also played cricket regularly, and passed winter evenings teaching himself grammar, arithmetic, mechanics, and shorthand, practising the latter in chapel by copying down sermons. This autodidactism underpinned one of his lifelong maxims, namely 'whatever position you occupy, make yourself indispensable'. 
In April 1868 Ferens moved to Hull as shorthand and confidential clerk to James Reckitt, one of several Quaker brothers running a successful firm manufacturing household wares such as starch, washing blue, and black lead. His energy and thoroughness soon impressed his employers. In 1874 he was appointed works manager, with a share in profits. As manager he insisted upon punctuality from the workforce, with his own impeccable timekeeping as an example. He also keenly pursued productivity gains. On one occasion Ferens asked a female worker to see how many bags she could tie inside a minute, and then set the daily target for the factory by the outcome. On 11 September 1873 he married Esther Ellen (Ettie) Field, a merchant's daughter, whom he had met as a fellow teacher in the Brunswick Sunday school, where they both continued to teach throughout their lives. In 1880 they adopted Ettie's nephew, John Johnson Till, whose mother had been widowed. Till Ferens became estranged from his adoptive parents during the First World War, following a separation from his wife. 
Ferens became secretary of Reckitts in 1879 and in 1880 general manager. In 1888 Reckitts became a public company with a capital of $450,000, and he became a director. The firm expanded rapidly, especially overseas, with Ferens and James Reckitt as the driving force. Ferens was remembered in these years as being 'very tall and spare and elastic, always walking with a spring, and inspiring energy by example'. He could appear patriarchal to his employees, but had a kindly disposition, a charming smile, and a sense of humour. He understood the importance to Reckitts of strong brand names, product quality, and backward integration to secure raw material supplies. With the great increase in turnover, profits, and capital -- $1.97 million by 1913 -- the value of Reckitts shares multiplied. This formed the basis of Ferens's personal fortune; in 1911 his net estate was worth, by his own estimation, $650,000. Ferens became joint chairman upon the death of Sir James Reckitt in 1924. 
In 1894 Ferens was appointed a JP and became increasingly involved in public affairs. In 1900 he was defeated as Liberal parliamentary candidate for East Hull, but he stood successfully in 1906 and held the seat for thirteen years. He gave up the day-to-day running of Reckitts, but kept in close touch with policy making. In 1911 he was given the freedom of Hull. In 1912 he was sworn of the privy council and made high steward of Hull. He was no orator, and seldom spoke in parliament, but he did chair several committees and was a member of the Inter-Parliamentary Union before the First World War. A loyal supporter of Asquith, he never warmed to Lloyd George or the coalition government after 1916, and, following personal attacks on him as a Little Englander and defeat in the 1918 election, he resolved never to stand again. After the war he became an active supporter of the League of Nations. 
From 1900 Ferens began to donate, widely and generously. He gave large sums to the Middlesex Hospital and the Victoria Hospital for Sick Children. He supported the Hull Institute for the Deaf and Dumb, the St John Ambulance Association, the NSPCA, and Yorkshire Cancer Research. In 1906 he gave recreation grounds to the Young People's Christian and Literary Institute in Hull, and the next year helped to establish Reckitts Garden Village in the city. Further gifts followed in 1912, with a boating lake in East Park and twelve almshouses, the Ferens Haven of Rest. As patron of Hull Society of Artists, he enhanced the city's art collection, in 1917 donating $35,000 for a new building, opened as the Ferens Art Gallery in 1927. 
Although childless himself, Ferens took especial interest in education. He gave large amounts to Kingswood School, Bath, Farrington's School, Chislehurst, and Leys School, Cambridge, and endowed numerous scholarships at secondary schools in Hull and elsewhere. In 1925 he donated his largest gift, $250,000 and 60 acres of land, for the establishment of a university college in Hull. In all this he believed giving to be a moral duty, and carried it out with characteristic modesty, but he also enjoyed it as 'one of the greatest blessings of my life'. By 1920 he was distributing some $47,000 out of his annual income of $50,000; he donated over $1 million during the last years of his life. 
Although never at the centre of fashionable society, the Ferenses entertained a wide range of guests at their garden parties at Holderness House, east Hull, and met most dignitaries visiting the city. They lived happily together, as Ferens put it, 'in a comparatively modest though very comfortable style'. Ettie died in 1922. Ferens died at home on 9 May 1930, leaving most of his $292,843 to charity, and requesting that the Reckitts shares be retained to provide future income for his bequests. He was cremated and his ashes placed next to his wife's in a vault in the grounds of Holderness House. 


@@@@@


doc= 46993


ffrench, Charles Austin Thomas Robert John Joseph, sixth Baron ffrench (1868-1955), company director, was born at Birchgrove, his maternal grandfather's house in co. Roscommon, on 20 June 1868, the elder son of the Hon. Martin Joseph ffrench (1813-1893), of Frascati, Blackrock, Dublin, resident magistrate at Cashel in co. Tipperary (1846-82), who succeeded his brother as fifth Baron ffrench in 1892; his mother was his father's second cousin, Catherine Mary Anne, daughter of John O'Shaughnessy. Two of his four sisters were nuns in teaching orders. The second baron had shot himself in 1814 following the failure of his ffrench Bank, and left his affairs so encumbered that his will was proved as late as 1915. Castle ffrench and the family's Galway land were alienated until the establishment of the Irish Free State, when they were repurchased by ffrench's sister-in-law, an admirer of Eamon de Valera and daughter of a Roman banker. The family was excluded from the Protestant ascendancy, and had no hope of employment in the Dublin Castle entourage; their Irish peerage did not carry a seat in the House of Lords. Charlie ffrench, whose paternal grandfather raised funds for the Catholic emancipation campaigns of Daniel O'Connell, inherited his title in 1893. 
ffrench was educated at Clongowes Wood College, co. Kildare, and at Trinity College, Dublin, where he studied philosophy and found a lifelong interest in the existential ideas of Kierkegaard. In 1892 he married Mary Margaret (died 1944), daughter of Matthew James Corbally, of Rathbeal Hall, Swords, near Dublin; she was tubercular, as a result of which their only child, an infant son, died in 1894. ffrench also later contracted tuberculosis. To improve his wife's health he settled at Graaff-Reinet in Cape Colony before moving to Johannesburg around 1896. His friendship with Roger Casement, with whose Irish nationalism he discreetly sympathized, dates from this time. He was also in the set that promoted the Jameson raid. 
In Rhodesia, ffrench met the former minister of mines and public works, George Pauling, who was in partnership with Rutherfoord Harris, formerly confidential agent of Cecil Rhodes. Pauling and Harris appointed ffrench as their agent in China, and from 1907 he struggled to negotiate railway-building contracts for them. The projects with which he was chiefly concerned were the Fakumen Railway in Manchuria (1907-8), the Canton (Guangzhou)-Hankow (Hankou) line (1908-9), the Chinchow (Jinzhou)-Aigun (1909-11), the Canton-Chungking (Chongqing)-Lanchow (Lanzhou) (1911-12), and the Yangtze (Yangzi)-Singyifu (1913-14). These schemes were all thwarted, either by Russian or Japanese animosity, or because of the exclusive British diplomatic support given in China to the Hongkong and Shanghai Bank. ffrench spent part of 1915-16 in Russia where Pauling was building a railway from the ice-free port of Murmansk. The Russian authorities proved as frustrating as the Chinese. These reverses contributed to his pessimistic, sardonic outlook. 
From 1918 until 1924 ffrench was chairman of a newly formed issuing house, British Stockbrokers Trust. BST represented a revolt by brokers from the great industrial areas of Britain who had long resented the way in which new capital issues were offered to them for subscription by London brokers. The trust formed subsidiary companies in five main catchment areas for provincial investment. Industrial issues became a less exclusive and metropolitan activity as a result of its success. 
ffrench also accepted directorships from British Oxygen and other companies. As a result of financial reverses in the 1930s, he gave up his house in Kensington and returned to Dublin, living first with his sisters in Upper Leeson Street, afterwards at Rathbeal Hall, Swords, with his wife's sister-in-law Lady Mary Corbally, and latterly in a hotel suite at Dun Laoghaire. After his first wife's death in 1944, he married second, in 1951, Catherine Elizabeth, always known as Kay (died 1960), fifth daughter of Sir Christopher Nixon, first baronet, a Dublin physician. Both his wives were highly strung and neither matched his intelligence. He died of heart failure in St Michael's Hospital at Dun Laoghaire, co. Dublin, on 4 March 1955 and was buried in Glasnevin cemetery, Dublin. 
ffrench had a cadaverous but imposing appearance, being very tall with a long, narrow nose and a goatee beard. He was a dedicated Roman Catholic who was sure of his opinions and cared little for those of others; the phrase with which he terminated a theological discussion, that he could not argue, but only instruct, was characteristically peremptory. He epitomized the mixture of intelligence and abstracted eccentricity meant by the Irish sobriquet, 'a queer hawk'. Contemporaries were more impressed by ffrench's energy and title than by his acumen for business. An archetype of landless Irish nobility, his activities in China and elsewhere made him a significant player in the great game of financial imperialism. 


@@@@@


doc= 46998


Foden, William (1868-1964), vehicle manufacturer, was born on 23 September 1868 at Bradwall Green, near Sandbach, Cheshire, the elder son of Edwin Foden (1841-1911), engineer and vehicle manufacturer, and his wife, Sophia Scragg (1841-1893). His father was a partner, later proprietor of an agricultural engineering business at Sandbach which, as Edwin Foden & Sons (later Fodens Ltd), became a noted manufacturer of steam-powered goods vehicles. Educated at Sandbach grammar school, William shared his father's engineering skill, as also did his younger brother, 
During the period from the late 1880s to the early years of the twentieth century the family firm successfully developed a steam vehicle for the road, in the form of the 'overtype' steam wagon, which carried its payload rather than pulling it as the traction engine did. The Foden overtype wagon, in its 5 ton form, provided Fodens' main product line into the mid-1920s. By this time the model had dated and a successor was introduced, with an improved cab, better driving visibility, and, most important, more powerful brakes. 
In 1924 William Foden, who had largely run the commercial side of the business, retired to Australia with his family. This move was brought about by the brothers' major differences with their stepmother, Annie Cowap (1868-1939), whom their father had married in 1894. She had been a major shareholder since their father's death in 1911. More general factors lay behind the upheaval: the depressed market in commercial vehicles as a result of the availability of military stock, and an increasing preference for the internal combustion engine with its greater ease of operation. 
William, by correspondence, helped to convince Edwin of the future of the diesel engine, and limited production was in place at Fodens by 1932. Edwin retired in 1932, but after a period of recuperation he returned to the development of a diesel lorry on his own account. With the collaboration of his son Dennis, William's son Ted, and several key figures dismissed by Fodens, Edwin went on to establish in 1933 a rival concern, which became ERF Ltd. 
Two years later William returned from retirement, at the age of sixty-seven, and took over again as managing director of Fodens. The firm was by then in dire straits, with an order book of three vehicles and a file of unsettled warranty claims. William eased liquidity problems by introducing sharper accounting methods and greater manufacturing economy. His son Ted also joined the firm, which now concentrated on diesel lorry manufacture, the first Foden diesel lorry having been built in 1931, powered by a Gardner engine. The introduction of a new series of diesel-engined lorries subsequently restored the viability of Fodens. By the end of 1937 the tide of decline had been turned, placing the company in a strong position to develop its war production of military lorries, and also of tanks and shells. 
ERF's war production concentrated on military lorries, mostly for the Royal Army Service Corps, with some vehicles for essential civilian users. Edwin Foden died on 23 December 1950, having remained active in the firm until the end of his life and having seen some development of what was to be the post-war model range. He had an interest in all forms of transport: he was successful in cycle racing and progressed to motorcycles and cars, being reserve driver for the Vauxhall works' team in the 1914 Isle of Man motor car TT races. He was also an enthusiastic owner of motor cruisers and interested in flying. Active in charity, Edwin Foden was particularly involved with the Foden Motor Works Band, which had been established by his father. Edwin remained its patron even after setting up ERF. Under such distinguished conductors as William Rimmer and Fred and Harry Mortimer, it played a major role in the life of Fodens in the inter-war period, and it also achieved national prominence through broadcasting. 
Diversification helped to carry Fodens through a difficult period after the war. With William Foden as governing director, and assisted by his two sons as managing directors, the firm applied the new two-stroke diesel to industrial and marine uses and developed a rugged dumper-truck range. William's long involvement with the family company came to an end only with his death from heart failure on 2 June 1964, at Knowlton House, Parson Street, Congleton, Cheshire. He was described by Fodens' historian as 'a firm, insistent but sympathetic boss' (Kennett, 155). 
The Fodens, William and Edwin Richard, take their place alongside the Dennis, Jensen, and Rootes brothers, as examples of fraternal co-operation in the development of successful motor-manufacturing concerns, but with a significant difference: the Foden brothers finished their working lives as proprietors of competing companies. 


@@@@@


doc= 46999


Edwin Richard Foden (1870-1950), who was born at Bradwall Green on 28 March 1870. They both joined the business and assisted their father. On 5 January 1892 William Foden married Ellen Arden Davies ('b'. 1870?), daughter of Thomas Davies, a hotel keeper; they had three children. Edwin Foden married in 1896 Elizabeth Ann Davenport, and they also had three children; Elizabeth died in 1912, and in 1934 Edwin married Mary Cooke, with whom he had had a further child in 1930. 


@@@@@


doc= 47001


Horner, (Norman) Gerald (1882-1954), physician and medical editor, was born on 1 January 1882 at High Street, Tonbridge, Kent, the son of Arthur Claypon Horner, medical practitioner, and his wife, Frances, formerly Cundell ('nee' Cooper). He was normally known by his middle name, Gerald, or as 'NG'. His father, who died while he was a child, had served with the Red Cross during the Franco-Prussian War and as medical officer and naturalist on two Arctic expeditions. From 1891 to 1899 Horner was educated at Tonbridge School, where his father held the post of medical officer; he then went to Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, where he read natural sciences (1899-1902). After graduating with a second-class degree he undertook his medical training, at St Bartholomew's Hospital, London. He also gained his first experience of medical journalism, as assistant editor of the 'St Bartholomew's Hospital Journal'. He qualified MRCS and LRCP in 1906. In 1910 he graduated MB BCh, from Cambridge. He was awarded the degree of MD in 1922 with a thesis on the history of the general practitioner in England. In his youth Horner was a capable cricketer and an enthusiastic performer of amateur dramatics, in which he excelled as a female impersonator. 
In London, after a short spell as house surgeon at Westminster Hospital, Horner returned to St Bartholomew's where, briefly, he was both house physician and editor of its journal. He then combined general practice with clinical assistantships at both St Bartholomew's and Shadwell Children's Hospital in east London. Meanwhile he retained his links with medical journalism, first as a contributor and then as an assistant editor of Sir Henry Burdett's weekly journal for GPs, 'The Hospital'. On 4 August 1911 Horner married Grace Malleson Fearon (1890/91-1950), daughter of Walter Malleson Fearon, a woman of powerful personality. In the same year he gave up clinical practice to become assistant editor of 'The Lancet'. One of his first duties was to cover the national health-insurance struggle. In 1915 he left 'The Lancet' to take up a commission in the Royal Army Medical Corps (RAMC). He attained the rank of captain and for two years served in France, including on the Somme. In 1917 his wife, aware that her husband did not wish to return to 'The Lancet' on leaving the army, took it upon herself to ask the editor of the 'British Medical Journal' ('BMJ'), Sir Dawson Williams, to arrange her husband's release from the RAMC and appoint him to an assistant editorship. These arrangements having been made, Horner stayed with the 'BMJ' until his retirement in 1946. He was editor from 1928, though for several years before his departure the journal was effectively run by his successor, Hugh Clegg. 
Horner faced several difficulties during his years at the 'BMJ'. As assistant editor he had to shoulder much of the editorial responsibility for producing it as Williams's health declined. As his own health failed, particularly following the detachment of his right retina in 1940, he carried the substantial burden of having to run the journal under wartime conditions. Moreover he had major difficulty as editor in his inability to escape the conviction that he was unworthy to succeed his mentor, Williams. Nevertheless, under his editorship the 'BMJ' had its successes. Most significantly it carried many important scientific papers. Horner also oversaw the major design changes of 1936-7, in which a new front cover was introduced featuring a design by Eric Gill and a typeface designed by Stanley Morison. Additionally, the 'BMJ''s circulation rose substantially during Horner's editorship, though this had more to do with rising membership of the British Medical Association (the journal was a benefit of membership) than with the journalistic quality. 
Overall, however, Horner cannot be counted a successful editor of the 'BMJ'. His successor observed that he 'did nothing except sit there and shift columns'; the journal 'wasn't being edited and people were beginning to complain' (Clegg MSS). Under Horner's direction the 'BMJ' became staid and unimaginative, and as such it reflected the personality of its editor. Kind and courteous, Horner possessed an understated sense of humour, but he was also extremely diffident, painfully sensitive to criticism, pedantic, indecisive, and wholly undynamic. Shortly after his appointment as editor 'The Times' suggested that the responsibility of editing the 'BMJ' was 'well-nigh crushing' (28 Feb 1928). Sadly, Horner was well and truly crushed. 
Horner became honorary FRCP in 1939 and FRCS in 1942. Towards the end of the Second World War he began to live at the Savile Club, possibly because he and his wife had separated. He had a keen interest in the history of medicine and was, successively, honorary secretary and vice-president of the Royal Society of Medicine's history of medicine section. Although he wrote very little outside the pages of the journals with which he was editorially connected, in retirement he briefly assisted in the compilation of Sir Arthur MacNulty's official medical history of the Second World War. Following several years of illness, Horner died of broncho-pneumonia, pulmonary oedema, and coronary thrombosis at St Pancras Hospital, London, on 7 March 1954. He was cremated at Golders Green crematorium on 12 March. His only child, a son, survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 47002


Williams, Sir Dawson (1854-1928), medical editor, was born on 17 July 1854 at Ulleskelf in the West Riding of Yorkshire, the eldest of the seven children of John Mack Williams, rector of Burnby, and his wife, Ellen, daughter of Nicolas Monsarrat, who was of Spanish and Huguenot descent. He was educated at Pocklington grammar school and University College Hospital, London, having been unable, probably for financial reasons, to attend Cambridge University. Williams had an outstanding career as a medical student and graduated MB, BCh (1879), and MD (1881). He was elected MRCS in 1878, MRCP in 1885, and FRCP in 1895. On qualifying he served briefly as house physician and ophthalmic and obstetric assistant at University College Hospital. He soon moved to the Victoria Hospital for Children and, later, the Brompton Hospital for Consumption. In 1884, after having considered a career in the Indian Medical Service, he took up the post of assistant physician at the East London Hospital for Children at Shadwell (he was full physician from 1894). A specialist in paediatrics, his only book, 'Medical Diseases of Infancy and Childhood' (1898), dealt with this field. 
In 1881, having obtained an introduction to Ernest Hart, the editor of the 'British Medical Journal', Williams took up medical journalism in order to supplement his income. In the following year he married Catherine (died 1917), the daughter of Robert Kirkpatrick-Howat, of Mabie, Kirkcudbrightshire. They had one daughter. When Williams joined the 'BMJ' it marked the beginning of a forty-seven-year association with the British Medical Association's medical weekly. Initially simply a contributor, he became the journal's hospital reporter in 1884, its principal sub-editor in 1886, and its assistant editor in 1895. All of these posts were held on a part-time basis while he built up a practice as a consulting physician and performed his hospital duties. As Hart's health failed in the 1890s, Williams became, in all but name, editor of the 'BMJ'. With his predecessor's death, in January 1898, he formally assumed the editorship at an initial salary of $650 per annum, with extra payments for contributions. The vacancy was not advertised and no other candidate was considered for the post. Hence Williams was the first 'BMJ' editor appointed through internal promotion. In 1902, at the BMA's insistence, he resigned his hospital appointment and became the journal's first full-time editor. He held the post for three decades, relinquishing it only shortly before his death. No other 'BMJ' editor before or since has had such a long tenure of office. 
Unlike his predecessor Williams had little interest in social medicine or medical politics. He believed the journal's prime function was to nurture medical science or, as he put it, have 'post-graduation training brought to the practitioner's door' ('BMJ', 10 March 1928, 422). Under his influence the 'BMJ''s scientific standing, already high when he became editor, was further enhanced, particularly in the early 1900s when it carried numerous ground-breaking papers, by such luminaries as William Gowers, Victor Horsley, Almroth Wright, William Leishmann, and Patrick Manson. In terms of campaigning journalism, Williams's main target was the highly profitable trade in quack medicine. Yet, as later became embarrassingly plain, the 'BMJ''s own advertising pages were themselves full of advertisements for proprietary medicines. The First World War provided one of Williams's greatest challenges as editor. A decline in advertising revenue, coupled with spiralling costs, paper shortages, and the destruction of the premises in which the journal was printed, all made for a testing time. By 1917, the year of his wife's death, Williams was without any editorial assistance. Nevertheless, no 'BMJ' issue was lost, and editorial standards were sustained, not least through an outstanding series of articles on medicine and surgery on the western front. After the war Williams's achievements, not least as a prominent member of the BMA's medical war committee, were recognized by the conferment of several honours. He became CBE in 1919, and in 1921, 'too late to do any good' as he once observed ('BMJ', 10 March 1928, 417), he was awarded a knighthood. Also in 1921 the BMA conferred its gold medal of merit upon him. Williams received honorary degrees from the universities of Sheffield, Glasgow, and Durham. Had he retired in 1918 his editorship could have been counted an outstanding success. However, afraid of enduring a long retirement, he stayed on for another decade, during which time the journal became somewhat staid and unimaginative. 
Williams ran the 'BMJ' as a benevolent dictatorship. R. Scott Stevenson, a sub-editor who worked with him in the 1920s 'never lost the feeling in his presence that I was a schoolboy up in front of the headmaster' (Stevenson, 'Goodbye Harley Street', 83). Until illness, including recurrent bouts of bronchitis, took its toll, Williams cut an imposing figure, being well over 6 feet tall. For a while he suffered from an 'acute neurosis', which prevented him from working, and in July 1910 he suffered serious injuries, including a fractured leg, in a road traffic accident near Horsham. These confined him to a nursing home for six weeks. However, when he recovered he was cured of the neurosis. In 1920 heart problems were diagnosed and he was given only two weeks to live. Although he confounded this prognosis he continued to experience cardiac irregularity. In 1927, when he was in his seventy-third year, the BMA decided it was time to appoint a new editor. Williams, however, was unwilling to relinquish a position he had held for so long; he was persuaded to retire on 19 January 1928 -- the thirtieth anniversary of his appointment -- only by the inducements of three months' salary in lieu of notice and a grant of $1000 in compensation for loss of office. His remuneration at the time of retirement was $2000 per annum, though with no additional payments for articles, this practice having been abolished during the war. His departure was marked by a leading article in 'The Times' (2 January 1928). Williams died of heart failure on 27 February 1928 at his country home, Well End, near Bourne End in Buckinghamshire. His funeral took place at Little Marlow cemetery on 2 March. 


@@@@@


doc= 47004


Forwood, Sir William Bower (1840-1928), merchant and politician, was born on 21 January 1840 in Edge Hill, Liverpool, the second son of Thomas Brittain Forwood (1810-1884), Liverpool merchant, and Charlotte (died 1861), daughter of William Bower, Liverpool cotton broker. Arthur Forwood was his brother. 
Thomas Forwood was senior partner in Leech, Harrison, and Forwood, and was also a notable civic figure: he was vice-president of the Liverpool chamber of commerce, a long-serving member of the dock board, a Cheshire magistrate, and involved in the restoration of Chester Cathedral. His eldest sons, Arthur and William, continued and widened these concerns. William was educated at Liverpool Collegiate, and at Dr Heldenmier's Pestalozzian school in Worksop. After leaving school he temporarily joined the cotton brokers, Salisbury, Turner, and Earle. In late 1857 his father sent him on a voyage around the world, and before he was eighteen he had visited the Australian goldfields, learned to helm and navigate an ocean-going ship, and gone aloft to break out frozen sails south of Cape Horn. 
William Forwood entered the family business in late 1859. Almost immediately the American Civil War disrupted the cotton trade. Thomas Forwood retired in 1862, leaving Arthur and William in charge. They rapidly made their fortunes, first from wartime speculation and blockade running, and then from exploiting telegraph and cotton futures. William Forwood had a keen analytical mind -- he was elected president of the Liverpool Philomathic Society in 1868 and fellow of the Statistical Society in 1871 -- and he later claimed that the firm had adjusted more quickly than most. He wrote in his autobiography (almost certainly exaggerating) that 'Futures trading... was very profitable, and for some time we had it all to ourselves' (Forwood, 'Recollections', 74). 
The firm established branches in New York, New Orleans, and Bombay. Forwood visited the southern United States regularly, but his major contribution was in Liverpool. The new methods progressively reduced commissions and set merchants against brokers. Forwood had already served as president of the American chamber of commerce (in 1872) and of the Liverpool chamber of commerce (in 1871 and 1878-81). He claimed that in 1877 he brought the merchants and brokers together, and became 'President of the United Cotton Association, the promoters of the Liverpool Cotton Association' (Forwood, 'Incidents', 3). The Cotton Association managed the Liverpool cotton exchange, which became one of the world's leading commodity markets. While Forwood's narrative does not match Thomas Ellison's detailed contemporary account of the formation of the association in 1882, it is likely that, as mayor of Liverpool in 1880-81, he did play some important mediating role. 
The Forwood brothers also became shipowners, against strong competition successfully running a small fleet to the West Indies, Costa Rica, and New York. By the early 1880s both were rich men, and they reduced their business interests. Leech, Harrison, and Forwood continued as general merchants into the next century. The Forwoods' shipping line was absorbed by the Royal Mail Steam Packet Company in 1908. Arthur Forwood became an MP in 1885 and quickly gained national as well as local influence. William Forwood, on the other hand, despite retiring from trade in 1890, specialized in civic affairs and retained important business interests. He organized the Liverpool docks' overhead railway in 1887 -- the first electric railway in the world. He served as a director of Cunard from 1888 to 1923, and as its deputy chairman from 1906 to 1909 -- when the 'Lusitania' and 'Mauretania' were built; he was also director of the Bank of Liverpool from 1887 to 1928, and its chairman from 1898 to 1901. 
William Forwood had demonstrated political flair as a sixteen-year-old by collecting 60,000 signatures in support of Wavertree Park. He was elected to the city council in 1868 and served for more than forty years. His main interests were the watch committee and the libraries' committee -- he persuaded Andrew Carnegie to give $50,000 to build new libraries. He was knighted in 1883 for his mayoral work in opposing the Fenians. As a leading Liverpool Conservative he successfully managed the election campaign against W. E. Gladstone, in 1868, and he persuaded George Nathaniel Curzon to stand for parliament in 1883. He represented Liverpool's commercial interests against the Lancashire railway companies in 1872-3, and against the Manchester Ship Canal in 1883-5. He served on the royal commission on motor cars in 1905, advocating tight speed-limits. His last important service, in 1921, was to win over the Liverpool chamber of commerce, and the public generally, to the concept of a Mersey road tunnel. 
Forwood also sat on the Liverpool borough bench from 1873 to 1925 and was JP for Lancashire from 1882. As a magistrate he attempted to moderate Liverpool's notorious alcoholism by sensible licensing. He became deputy lieutenant for Lancashire in 1902, and high sheriff in 1905. He was invited to stand for several Lancashire constituencies, 'but always considered my native city had the first claim on me' (Forwood, 'Incidents', 16). Elected an honorary freeman of the city in 1902, Forwood was created KBE in 1917. His Conservatism included sympathy for social problems and labour, and he was proud that when he retired Liverpool was no longer 'the black spot on the Mersey' that he had observed in 1860. He refused to support Chamberlain on imperial protection, but in 1920 he denounced the Labour Party for ignoring economic realities. 
Forwood married in 1862 Mary Miles Moss, only daughter of William Miles Moss, a Liverpool shipowner; they had three sons and seven daughters. After Mary died in the mid-1890s, he married in 1898 Elizabeth, daughter of General le Fleming of Rydal House. Forwood was a great traveller, visiting North and Central America many times. In 1861 he was arrested in New York city, suspected of carrying money and dispatches to the Confederacy. After his release Abraham Lincoln offered to meet him, an invitation he rejected. Forty years later he did finally dine at the White House, after which President Theodore Roosevelt insisted on a bout of ju-jitsu. He also met and negotiated railroad contracts with President Diaz of Mexico. At home he was an active canoeist, gardener, and yachtsman. He became commodore of the Mersey and Windermere yacht clubs, and was a co-founder of the Yacht Racing Association. He claimed that he was never happier than at the Windermere regattas. 
A committed Anglican, Sir William was chairman of the committee which financed and built Liverpool Cathedral. Bishop Chavasse wrote to him, 'You are really the Father of the Cathedral.... If it had not been for your wonderful energy and enthusiasm... the Cathedral would never have been built' (Forwood, 'Incidents', 14). In 1925 Forwood published a survey of the cathedral, entitled 'The Liverpool Cathedral: the Story of its Foundation, 1850-1914'. 
Forwood documented his views and experiences in a number of works. He kept a journal of his voyage on the 'Red Jacket' to Australia. Although he was too busy to write during his early years in business and politics, he presented lengthy written and oral evidence in the debates about water, railways, and the Manchester Ship Canal. In the 1890s and early 1900s he wrote pamphlets on art, technical education, and free trade. In 1912 he was lucky to survive a severe fall, which dislocated his back. Thereafter he had to wear a steel corset and rest much of the time, but he continued writing, including pamphlets on the war effort and the Mersey Tunnel as well as his autobiographical 'Reminiscences of a Liverpool Shipowner, 1850-1920' (1920). 
Sir William Forwood died after a short illness on 23 March 1928 at Reids Palace Hotel, Funchal, Madeira. He was buried in Windermere cemetery. His obituaries emphasized his positive, optimistic, and helpful contribution to Liverpool. 


@@@@@


doc= 47006


Foster, William (1821-1884), worsted manufacturer and merchant, was born on 2 February 1821, probably at Low Fold, Clayton, Queenshead (later Queensbury), near Bradford, Yorkshire, the eldest son of John Foster (1798-1879), worsted cloth merchant, and his wife, Ruth (1801-1882), daughter of Abraham Briggs; the Briggs family were farmers in Bradford. William obtained a modest but sound education at the local nonconformist academy of Joseph Hinchliffe at Horton House, Bradford, and in 1834 joined his father at Prospect House, Queensbury, in his successful business as a master manufacturer in the domestic worsted trade. From a warehouse adjoining Prospect House, pieces of worsted cloth, woven in the cottages of local hand-loom weavers, were stored before their sale at the piece halls of Bradford or Halifax. In the same year Abraham Briggs conveyed land to his son-in-law John Foster, including a farm at Black Dyke. From this farm the purpose-built spinning mill (opened in 1835) took its name, and became known as Black Dyke mills (later famous as the home of the brass band of that name). William's apprenticeship (1834-42) familiarized him with all the processes of production, and when he came of age his father had every confidence in making him a full partner in the business. 
For the next forty years Foster was the dominant figure in the affairs of the firm, which carried the name John Foster & Son, in spite of the founder's subsequently taking three other sons into the business. By 1874 William had brought into the firm three sons from his first marriage, William Henry ('b'. 1848), Robert John ('b'. 1850), and Frederick Charles ('b'. 1851). They extended the wide range of commercial interests initiated by their father between 1842 and 1882. In addition to the manufacture of worsted cloth, the partnership at Black Dyke mills operated as merchants and bankers, as well as manufacturers of soap, tiles, coke, tar, and chemical dyestuffs. Profits also accrued from collieries, farms, brickworks, and building contracts. 
It was, however, as a principal manufactory of worsted cloth made from cotton warps and alpaca or mohair wefts that Black Dyke mills gained an international reputation and generated massive wealth for William Foster and his family. The firm's growth during Foster's chairmanship is revealed in the extensive business archive discovered by E. M. Sigsworth, which shows that the number of spindles in use for spinning yarn was 3036 in 1842 and by 1889 had increased to 51,368. The number of power looms for weaving cloth increased from 61 in 1842 to 962 in 1875. Combing was the last sector of the worsted trade to be mechanized and the firm's six combing machines in 1852 increased gradually to fifty-seven by 1880. When the textile trade was subdued in 1880-81 Foster founded a movement to promote the weaving of ladies' fashion garments from wool. It was patronized by leading society people, including the marquess of Salisbury and the countess of Bective, after whom it was named, and enjoyed a moderate success. 
In addition to his widespread textile interests, Foster was quick to realize the importance of railways. By 1864 he was a director of the West Riding and Grimsby Railway, the sale of which he personally negotiated to the Great Northern Railway in 1865, and by virtue of which he became a director of that large and successful company. He founded and chaired the Bradford and Thornton Railway Company in 1870, and in 1872 he was invited to join the board of the Lancashire and Yorkshire Railway Company. 
William Foster was first married in January 1848 to Emma Elizabeth (1828-1865), daughter of Swithin Anderton, a leading Bradford manufacturer. During their seventeen-year marriage she gave birth to five sons and four daughters. From 1856 she and William lived at Harrowins House, a mansion erected by him in a commanding position at Queensbury. Foster's second marriage, in 1867, to Mary Ellen Hornby of Filey, in the East Riding of Yorkshire, produced six more children. 
In 1862 Foster's father paid $205,000 for a castle and an estate of nearly 11,000 acres at Hornby, near Lancaster. In 1878, shortly before his father's death, Foster and his second wife left Queensbury to live for a while at Hornby Castle, which became their permanent home in 1882. His landed estates in Lancashire (Hornby Castle) and west Yorkshire had a gross annual value of $9098 by 1879. The Fosters took their place in the ranks of the landed gentry with further land purchases at Egton Hall (Whitby), Canwell Hall (Staffordshire), and Moor Park (Oxford). This transfer into the upper reaches of English society was reinforced by the marriages of most of William Foster's children to sons or daughters of the landed classes. Such upward social mobility was made possible by the enormous wealth created by the ever expanding manufactory at Black Dyke mills, one of the largest woollen textile mills in the world. 
Foster's devotion to business matters did not preclude him from a career in public service. He sat for many years as a magistrate for Bradford, the West Riding, and Lancashire. He served as high sheriff of Lancashire in 1881, and deputy lord lieutenant of Yorkshire. A Liberal in politics, he declined to stand as the Liberal candidate for North West Lancashire in 1880 on health grounds. He became vice-president of the Bradford chamber of commerce and was a member of the Queensbury local board of health (1864-73). A prominent freemason, he was also an active member of the Anglican church in Queensbury, financing extensions to Holy Trinity Church, and acting for twenty-five years as trustee and manager of the national school there. 
Foster's interests included music (he was a member of the committee that organized the Bradford Subscription Concerts) and game shooting on the family estates. He was a regular churchgoer (twice on Sundays) and enjoyed wine in moderation. Portraits and diary entries (Sigsworth, 355-64) suggest that he was forthright and decisive, but approachable and understanding when the need arose, particularly with his children. Throughout middle age he was constantly pained and irritated by bowel ulcers, inclining him to depression and melancholy. Daily application of nitric acid for his condition and, ultimately, surgery of the bowel finally took their toll and he died at Hornby Castle on 8 February 1884, only two years after his retirement, and was buried on 13 February at Holy Trinity Church, Queensbury. He was survived by his second wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 47009


Fraser, (William) Lionel (1895-1965), merchant banker, was born on 15 June 1895 in London, the second of the four children of Harry Fraser and his wife, Alice, 'nee' Barnard (died 1949). His father, a Scot, was butler to Gordon Selfridge, founder of Selfridges department store. 
Fraser's schooling began and ended at St Mary Abbots higher grade church school, Kensington, although he periodically attended other schools as his parents moved around the country. Thanks to a scholarship, he enrolled, at the age of thirteen, at Pitman's School where he received an intensive commercial training, studying French, German, Spanish, shorthand, typing, and accounts. 
Fraser's working life began in June 1911, aged sixteen, when he joined Bonn & Co., a small bank that specialized in foreign exchange transactions. He handled correspondence and bookkeeping at a salary of $70. A member of a territorial regiment, he was mobilized on the outbreak of war and commissioned in 1915, before being invalided out because of a knee injury sustained during a game of football. For the rest of the hostilities, he worked in naval intelligence. 
The early 1920s saw turbulent conditions in the foreign exchange market, providing lucrative opportunities for astute operators. In 1921, following the acquisition of Bonn & Co. by Helbert, Wagg & Co., he was made head of Helbert, Wagg's foreign exchange department. With George Bolton, later a leading figure at the Bank of England and elsewhere in the City of London, as his second in command, Fraser established Helbert, Wagg as a leading participant in the London foreign exchange market, much enhancing the firm's standing. In the mid-1920s, he switched to UK equities, both trading and underwriting, and soon developed a formidable reputation as a corporate financier. He was made a director of Helbert, Wagg in 1934. In 1931, aged thirty-six, he married Cynthia Elizabeth Walter and they had two sons and a daughter. A devoted family man, he lived at home looking after his mother until his marriage. 
In the Second World War, sponsored by Montagu Norman, governor of the Bank of England, whose personal investments he managed, Fraser worked at the Treasury, his responsibilities including liaison with the governments-in-exile of occupied countries. He was created CMG in 1945 for his services. These connections led to his appointment as the Bank of England's representative to the State Bank of Morocco. 
Returning to Helbert, Wagg after the war, Fraser was appointed deputy chairman in 1946. The same year, he also became chairman of the newly formed Issuing Houses Association. In 1954, he was made chairman of Helbert, Wagg. A highly regarded figure in the City, his reputation sprang from his expertise in the provision of advice about corporate finance. He played an influential role in a number of take-overs. For instance, he was called upon to act as an impartial mediator in the negotiations that followed Sears's controversial hostile take-over bid for Watneys in 1959. 
Fraser received many invitations to sit on outside boards. His directorships included the engineering firm Tube Investments, Royal Exchange Assurance, and also Spicers, the paper makers. In 1950 he became chairman of boiler-makers Babcock and Wilcox, a Helbert, Wagg client. He devoted up to a third of his working time to the Babcock chairmanship, which he held until 1960. 
In the 1950s Fraser also served as chairman of Thomas Tilling, of which he had been a director since 1942. This appointment stemmed from the untimely demise of his predecessor, Frederick Heaton, in May 1949. Just before his death, Heaton had negotiated the sale of Tillings's bus and garage interests, its major business, to the government body charged with the nationalization of British transport. It fell to Fraser to deploy these resources to develop Tillings into a new entity, a diversified industrial holding company, then a relatively novel concept in the UK. By 1962, when he stepped down, the activities of Tillings's thirty or so main subsidiaries were indeed diversified, comprising building supplies, electrical wholesaling, engineering, glassware manufacture, textiles, insurance, vehicle distribution, and publishing. A small and specialized head office staff provided guidance and supervision, especially in relation to finance and strategy. But hands-on management was decentralized, being conducted at subsidiary level. This textbook conglomerate structure proved successful, Tillings's business expanding rapidly and profitably. 
Although not the originator of the proposal for a merger between Helbert, Wagg and Schroders, Fraser actively pursued the idea. There is no doubt that he expected to become deputy chairman of the new entity and was disappointed when Gordon Richardson was appointed in May 1962. He resigned a few months later, having been recruited to set up the London subsidiary of the French merchant bank Paribas. 
At a height of 6 feet 4 inches, Fraser never went unnoticed. The newspaper publisher Hugh Cudlip described him in a thumbnail sketch as a tall, straightforward, handsome, commanding figure. He had a forceful and energetic personality and a strong will to win, sometimes earning him enemies. But among his friends, including his obituarist in 'The Times', he was cherished for a 'warm heart, a gift for friendship, and a gay attitude to life... He was an ardent Christian Scientist and his deep religious convictions added a fundamental integrity and seriousness of character. All these things made him an inspiring leader' ('The Times', 6 Jan 1965). 
Business absorbed most of Fraser's time and energy, although in 1945-50 he served as a Conservative member of Chelsea borough council and toyed with the idea of standing for parliament. He and his wife were keen collectors of abstract art, and Fraser served as a trustee of the Tate Gallery. He enjoyed club life, being a member of six clubs, including the Garrick, the Travellers', and White's. Lionel Fraser died of bronchial pneumonia and cancer on 2 January 1965 at his residence, 30 Charles Street, Westminster, London, aged sixty-nine. 


@@@@@


doc= 47011


Edwin Freshfield (1832-1918), became solicitors. James William was effectively in charge of the firm from the 1830s and was senior partner from 1840 until his sudden and premature death on 19 May 1857. He did much of the work for the firm's aristocratic and wealthy clients, who included the Peels, the Carringtons, and the Gladstones, as well as the Bank of England. He was highly regarded by the bank's governor and directors; their tribute to him spoke, in terms not used of any other solicitor before or since, of his integrity, the extent of his legal knowledge, and the 'almost irreparable' loss sustained by the bank (Bank of England court minutes, 21 May 1858, Slinn, 94). 
James William's younger brothers Charles and Henry took over at the firm after his death. Both were by then married, Charles (in 1834) to Elizabeth Sims Stephenson (died 1849), daughter of Daniel Stephenson, an elder brother of Trinity House, Henry (in 1840) to Jane Crawford, daughter of William Crawford, an East India merchant well connected in the City of London, which he represented as its MP from 1833 to 1841, and a director of the Alliance Assurance Company. Charles had two sons who both died young and Henry had one son, Douglas William Freshfield, who became better known as a traveller and mountaineer. The future of the firm, therefore, lay in the hands of their nephews, William Dawes and Edwin, both educated at Winchester College and at Trinity College, Cambridge. They both became partners in 1858 but it was not until the 1870s that their uncles retired. Charles went in 1870; he was MP for Dover from 1865 to 1868 and from 1874 to 1885 and died on 5 June 1891. Henry retired from the firm in 1877, spending his retirement at Kidbrooke Park, a house and estate in Sussex he had bought three years before. He was active in local affairs as a JP and as high sheriff of Sussex in 1885 (his father had held the same office for Surrey in 1850). Henry Freshfield died on 8 February 1895 and, like his brother Charles, left a considerable personal estate. 
On 19 August 1903 William Dawes Freshfield died suddenly. The year before, the only surviving son born to him and his wife, Elizabeth Catherine, 'nee' Borrer, 


@@@@@


doc= 47012


Friswell, Sir Charles Ernest Hain (1871-1926), motor car distributor and manufacturer, was born on 30 December 1871 at 17 Buckingham Street, Marylebone, the son of George Friswell, advertising agent, and his wife, Jane Street. He received a private education, but little is known about his personal life. Friswell married Edith Kate Frewer in 1905; they had no children. 
Like many others, Friswell entered the world of the automobile from that of the cycle, at first combining an agency for cycles with other business interests. Friswells Ltd was established in London in 1896 with a capital of $40,000 and specialized in the imported French Peugeot car. Such was his success and prominence that in 1901 Friswell was selected by the Automobile Mutual Protection Association Ltd to fight a test case against H. J. Lawson's monopolistic British Motor Traction Company Ltd. The claim, that Friswell had infringed Maybach's float feed patent by selling a car so fitted, was dismissed and an appeal dropped. By this time he was operating on a large scale: Friswell's Automobile Palace Ltd, a five-storey building, could accommodate hundreds of vehicles in garage and showroom space, with repair and paint shops, accessory sales and auction facilities, and other provisions for the convenience of the clientele. 
A logical progression from the motor trade was into manufacturing, and Friswell moved into production after visiting the stand of the Standard Motor Company of Coventry at the Olympia Motor Exhibition in November 1905. He was made sole distributor for Standard cars and became chairman of the Standard Motor Company Ltd (founded 1903), a position he held until November 1912. To strengthen its financial position Friswell organized a guaranteed overdraft with Barclays Bank and the company acquired additional premises, as coachworks and repair and service centres. For nearly six years (four of which are recorded in a volume of detailed board decisions) Friswell dominated the company, both in strategy and in the detail of production. This dominance in production could be construed as undue interference and was probably a major factor contributing to his break from Standard at the end of 1912. 
The board decisions show that Friswell was usually present at meetings, unless abroad, and that he was closely involved in detail as well as broad policy, for example in relation to quality control, production, and publicity. The needs of his agency seem to have impeded production runs and his attendance at morning meetings was often followed by a walk around the works before his return to London. Despite this over-close involvement, he was aware of the need to make a formal separation between manufacturer and agent, and decisions affecting his agency were transmitted in writing, even when Friswell was present at the board meeting in question. 
In the wider world Friswell put his skill as a publicist to good use. In 1909 he played a prominent part in entertaining delegates to the Imperial Press Conference, attended by newspaper proprietors and editors from across the empire. In recognition for this, and also for his having arranged for hundreds of London's horse-cabmen to be retrained as motor car drivers at his own expense, he was knighted in November 1909. In 1911 his publicity secured for Standard the contract to provide all motor transport, involving some seventy vehicles, for the coronation durbar held in Delhi. During Friswell's absence in India, however, a financial crisis developed at Standard following difficulties in collecting Friswell's account for November 1911. His company subsequently dishonoured its bill for goods supplied in January 1912. Standard survived, but on short time in mid-1912 and Friswell's sole agency agreement was terminated with effect from 30 September. The ending of Friswell's connection with Standard followed soon thereafter, his offer to buy out Reginald Maudslay, founder of Standard, having failed in the face of a successful counter-bid. 
In consequence, Friswell left the motor industry; his reconstructed dealership, Friswells Ltd, went into voluntary liquidation in November 1915. Friswell pursued his other business interests, in South Africa and in Sheffield, where he had manufacturing silversmiths works. He died on 15 December 1926 at Eagle House Nursing Home, Woodford Green, Essex. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 47015


Gabriel, (John) Beresford Stuart (1888-1979), machine tool manufacturer, was born on 1 August 1888 at Twickenham, Middlesex, the elder son of the three children of John William Wright Gabriel and his wife, Eleanor, 'nee' Broad. That year J. W. W. Gabriel sold his interest in the family drug manufacturing company of Gabriel and Troke and joined the partnership of Charles Churchill (1837-1916) and his eldest son, Charles Henry Churchill, formed in 1865 to import the new machine tools of the American system of interchangeable manufacture, which led to mass production. In 1889 the firm was registered as Charles Churchill Ltd, a private company with a capital of $5500. 
Beresford Gabriel, as he was known, went to Mill Hill School (1902-7) and then read mechanical and applied sciences at Emmanuel College, Cambridge, graduating with a second class degree in 1910. He then gained practical engineering experience, successively in the works of R. W. Munro & Co. and the Churchill Machine Tool Company, and afterwards as overseas representative for the Cincinnati Milling Machine Company. During the First World War he served with the Royal Engineers, working on searchlight defences for London and reaching the rank of captain. 
Gabriel returned to the Churchill family firm as assistant managing director in 1920. Demand for machine tools, traditionally cyclical and derived from the machine making industries, was dented first by the post-war sale of surplus government machine tools and then by the slump of 1921-2. Moreover, during the war years Charles Churchill and two of his sons had died. Gabriel, appointed a joint managing director in 1923, reduced the network of warehouses to those in Birmingham, Glasgow, Manchester, Newcastle, and London (the location of headquarters). Manufacturing was sited in two plants, one near Salford, which made grinding machines under a subsidiary company, the Churchill Machine Tool Company. The other was a third share (purchased in 1919) in C. Redman & Sons' Pioneer ironworks at Halifax, a small firm which made a variety of planers and lathes. 
Some recovery came in the late 1920s but in 1931 the national economic crisis hit the company with a peculiar severity, cutting demand and introducing 20 per cent duties on imported machine tools. Gabriel, sole managing director from 1932, responded by securing manufacturing licences from a number of Churchills' American suppliers. Secondly he negotiated the formation in 1933 of an English subsidiary of the Cincinnati Milling Machine Company, with himself as chairman. At this point boardroom divisions split the firm between a sales agency and a manufacturing business (named the Churchill Machine Tool Company). Gabriel stayed with the former, Charles Churchill & Co., as managing director, under F. P. Burnage, son-in-law of Charles Churchill, chairman. In December 1934 Gabriel restored the firm's manufacturing base by purchasing complete control of the Redman firm, renamed the Churchill-Redman Company, which grew to a turnover of $141,773, with pre-tax profits of $23,415, and 300 employees in 1939. The basic technology still originated in the USA. From the Jones and Lamson Company of Springfield, Vermont, a manufacturing licence was secured in 1937 for the Fay lathe, an automatic lathe noted for its versatility, suitability for mass production, and relative ease of operation. 
Still, neither Churchill-Redman, nor the British machine tool industry as a whole, met effective demand. This grew with the expansion of the motor industry in the early 1930s. The Ford Motor Company placed the first of its many orders with Churchill-Redman in 1931 and Gabriel set up a new machine tool headquarters at South Yardley in the midlands' motor manufacturing region in 1938. Demand for machine tools was augmented by rearmament after 1936 and then by the outbreak of war in 1939. 
For much of the Second World War Gabriel was controller of machine tools, in charge of the Ministry of Supply's programme for mobilizing the industry which had to meet 83 per cent of home demand, the rest coming from the USA under 'cash and carry' and lend-lease arrangements. Targets were reached in November 1943. Gabriel returned to Churchills in 1944. 
When peacetime released pent-up demand for machine tools, Gabriel expanded the firm's output. In 1945 he visited the USA to negotiate arrangements under which Churchills would manufacture hobbing and gear shaving machines, required by the motor industry particularly. Capacity was then increased by purchasing the Longfield foundry in Halifax and by leasing from Vickers Armstrong part of the extensive Admiralty works in Scotswood Road, Newcastle upon Tyne. At Halifax, Gabriel launched the search for technical improvements in machine tool performance. Higher cutting speeds and faster times in sizing work pieces, setting up work, and transferring it to another machine were the objectives which led the firm's engineers to develop a new heavy-duty copying lathe, forerunner of the CR P5 range of fully automatic, multi-tool and profiling lathes. A lathe with an automatic feed and delivery heralded an automatic machine tool production line. 
The growth in machine tool demand, stemming from the expansion in motor car manufacture, was reflected in Churchill-Redman turnover, which rose from just over $200,000 in 1946 to over $1 million in 1955. To meet demand, new capacity and new products were sought in the mid-1950s. The Scotswood operation moved to a purpose-built factory at Blaydon on the other side of the Tyne in 1957. This plant made machine tools for the motor industry, including the Vertimax vertical spindle production lathe, invented in the war by James Anderson, a Glasgow garage proprietor. 
Anderson's company was one of a number of innovative firms in the industry which Gabriel brought into the Churchill Group in the 1950s and early 1960s. Gabriel preferred to run these acquisitions as separate operating companies, to which he added a selling firm, Charles H. Churchill Ltd, in 1962. The firm's headquarters were moved in 1950 from London to Birmingham, though he kept his chairman's office at Caxton Street, London, until 1960. The parent company's capital was increased to $1.26 million in 1955. A decade later the Churchill Group was one of the largest in the machine tool industry, with group sales of $14 million and employing 2000. However, rising German and Japanese competition, and the concomitant needs to increase investment and to cut labour costs drastically, persuaded him to recommend a take-over of the Churchill Group by Tube Investments. When this happened in 1966 Gabriel retired. 
Gabriel belonged to both the Institution of Mechanical Engineers and the Institution of Civil Engineers. In 1949-51 he served as president of the Machine Tool Trades Association. Early in life he enjoyed rowing and later took up golf. Raised as a Methodist, he later attended the Church of England, but could not always agree with Anglican doctrines. Politically, he regarded socialism as a false paradise. He married in 1914 Elfrida Ianthe Mary Griffith Clarke, daughter of Edward Clarke, a merchant. They had three sons, the youngest of whom, Ralph, read engineering at Cambridge, served in the REME in the Second World War, and afterwards joined the management of the Churchill Group. Gabriel died at his home, Robin Hill, Forrest Road, Kenilworth, on 7 July 1979. 


@@@@@


doc= 47016


Gallaher, Thomas (1840-1927), tobacco manufacturer, was born on 27 April 1840 in the townland of Templemoyle, near Eglinton, co. Londonderry, the fourth of the ten children of Thomas Gallaher (died 1855), corn miller, and his wife, Martha. Both his parents were Irish. The younger Thomas was educated privately, and at an early age helped in the substantial family business. He later recalled that, aged twelve, he had been 'gaffer' in charge of fifty men. On the death of Thomas senior, the mill passed to his second son, John, the eldest son, Alexander, having entered the Anglican church. Unwilling to accept a subsidiary role within the firm, Thomas established himself independently. 
During an apprenticeship with Osborne and Allen, general merchants, of Londonderry, Gallaher learned the techniques of tobacco manufacture. In 1857, with $200 borrowed from his mother at 5 per cent interest, he established his own business in the city. It was an opportune period: from the early 1850s tobacco consumption 'per capita' in Ireland rose steadily, doubling by 1900. Through energy and hard work -- Gallaher later claimed to have worked seventeen hours a day -- he earned a reputation for producing pipe tobacco far superior to the adulterated product common in Ireland, and built a small export trade to Britain. In 1863 he moved to Belfast, which offered an expanding market and better port facilities. The firm prospered, and in 1873 Thomas married Robina Mitchell (died 1930), with whom he had five daughters and a son, who predeceased him. In 1881 a factory employing 600 workers was constructed in Belfast, replacing hand-operated methods of production with power-driven machinery. During the next decade, following visits by Thomas to America, the firm acquired plantations and stemming factories in Kentucky and Virginia, which he personally supervised. In 1888 premises were established in London, employing 200. In 1896 a new factory was built in Belfast and the company acquired limited liability status. Gallahers had become the largest tobacco firm in Ireland and was one of the biggest in the United Kingdom. 
In 1898 Thomas's position in the industry was recognized when he became chairman of the National Association of Tobacco Manufacturers. Yet he refused to join the Imperial Tobacco Company founded in 1901 to combat American competition. Gallaher believed the firm's interests were still predominantly Irish, and Imperial was seen as a British organization. Furthermore, Thomas did not relish playing second fiddle to the Wills family. The decision had no adverse effects, though Gallahers had to beat off a challenge from the American Tobacco Company by producing (under the 'Park Drive' brand) machine-made cigarettes, which Thomas had originally despised. 
During the years before 1914 the firm expanded its markets in Britain, the empire, America, and Scandinavia. The 1920s saw difficulties for the company, however, and Gallaher was, by then, old and troubled by heart problems. There were losses in the southern Irish market following boycott and partition, and increased competition in Britain. After Thomas's death the company's position improved. In 1928 it became public when the Gallaher family sold its holding to a consortium. The move proved decisive in the firm's fortunes, its share of the tobacco market increasing throughout the 1930s. 
Gallaher's business interests were not confined to tobacco. He was for a period chairman of the Belfast Steamship Company. In this capacity he came into conflict with James Larkin, the radical Irish trade union leader, who had been sent from Liverpool to organize dock labourers into trade unions. Gallaher was recognized as a good employer, even by the Belfast socialists like William Walker, but he was against trade unions -- 'Do not argue' was one of the mottoes displayed in his Belfast factory -- and resisted Larkin's attempt to unionize the labour force. The ensuing conflict escalated into a bitter industrial struggle, involving most of the workers employed in unloading and transporting goods in Belfast. The dispute spilled over into Gallaher's tobacco factory. Seven girls who attended one of Larkin's meetings were suspended from work, and 1000 walked out in sympathy. The strike eventually petered out, however, and the labour force returned to work. 
Gallaher never claimed to be a technical innovator, attributing his success to hard work and an ability to grasp market opportunities; but, as his dealings with Larkin showed, he could be ruthless. He was, nevertheless, the first employer in the tobacco industry to reduce the working week from fifty-four to forty-seven hours. Perhaps his greatest achievement was to create, in Belfast, a non-sectarian workforce, something requiring both moral and physical courage. On one occasion he kept an agitator out of the factory only by acquiring a pistol and threatening to shoot him. Gallaher died on 3 May 1927 at his home, Ballygoland House, Greencastle, near Belfast, aged eighty-seven. He was buried at Belfast city cemetery. 


