@@@@@


doc= 47072


Robert Coster (1696-1736) married Grace, sister of Sir William Pendarves (1696-1765) of Cornwall. The brothers were concerned with mining management, new mining equipment, and the organization of buying and selling ore, with John [iii] taking much the senior role. In collaboration with his father, John [iii] registered a new type of engine for drawing water out of deep mines, under patent no. 397 in 1714. He and Thomas received an equal number of shares, together with much property in the family business, at the death of their father in 1718. John [iii] Coster died on 27 June 1731. 
Robert Coster was still a minor when his father's will was made, and although he received a smaller share of his estate, he grew in influence with time. His wife, Grace Pendarves, inherited Cornish land and mining property from her brother, Sir William Pendarves, after his widow's death. Following Robert Coster's death, aged forty, on 31 March 1736, Grace married Samuel Percival (died 1764), who then became a partner of the Coster business. Although the women of the family played no active role in the business, they in fact sustained it by bringing in new partners through their marriages. After Thomas Coster's death, the partnership was further expanded and eventually renamed the Samuel Percival and Copper Company. Following Percival's death in 1764, the then senior partner gave his name to the business as the John Freeman and Copper Company, which survived at Swansea in reduced form until about 1870. 
Throughout these changes in name the business remained a direct descendant of that built up by the Costers, initiated by John [ii] Coster and made possible by his significant innovations in coal-fired smelting and his development of the reverberatory furnace. Apart from its other important eighteenth-century uses in tin and lead production, this furnace was ultimately adapted late in the eighteenth century by Henry Cort for his process of making 'puddled' iron, thus bringing British production of wrought iron to the fore in the early nineteenth century. By then the economic and technical development of copper smelting in the reverberatory furnaces of south Wales was leading the world in copper production. 


@@@@@


doc= 47089


Martha Sherman (1806-1848), daughter of Benjamin Tucker and his wife ('nee' Grant) of Enfield, whom he married on 3 March 1835 and with whom he had three daughters. A gifted woman of high-spirited and generous personality, she found an outlet acceptable at the time for her energies and abilities in charitable work at her husband's church -- fund-raising through sales, pastoral visiting, and the organization of Maternal Associations. The number of church members doubled to 800, the average congregation rose to almost 3000, the largest in London, and the buildings were extended. Sherman's ardent evangelistic preaching achieved many conversions; it was said that eighty-four people joined his church after one sermon in 1837. He was a moderate Calvinist, of eirenic temper and attractive personality; he disliked controversy, and though his nonconformist convictions grew stronger in later life, he was widely respected outside nonconformist circles. He and his wife were known as convinced total abstainers. Both were interested in, supported, and initiated organizations linked to their church for the improvement of the material welfare of the poorer members. This concern led James Sherman to found the Christian Mutual Provident Society in 1847. In 1842 and 1846 they paid visits to Germany, Austria, and Switzerland in search of better health. Martha Sherman died from consumption on 18 May 1848 at the Surrey Chapel parsonage, and was buried on the 25th in Abney Park cemetery, Stoke Newington. 


@@@@@


doc= 47305


Lord John Thomas Henry Somerset (1787-1846), the eighth son of Henry Somerset, fifth duke of Beaufort (1744-1803), and Elizabeth (1747-1828), daughter of Admiral the Hon. Edward Boscawen, was born on 30 August 1787. He attended Goodenough's School, Ealing, and Westminster School at the same time as his younger brother, FitzRoy. Commissioned as cornet in the 7th light dragoons on 4 August 1804, he advanced to lieutenant on 14 August 1805 and transferred to the 23rd light dragoons as captain on 15 April 1808. He served with the regiment in the Peninsula, taking part in the battle of Talavera (28 July 1809) with his brothers Edward and FitzRoy. He married, on 4 December 1814, Lady Catharine Annesley (died 1865), daughter of the earl of Mountnorris, and they had one son and three daughters. Somerset joined the 60th foot on 15 May 1815, advancing to major on 18 June, the day that he fought at Waterloo, where he reputedly 'saved a brother officer's life' (Durant, 174). On 25 July he went on half pay, progressing to brevet lieutenant-colonel (19 July 1821), lieutenant-colonel (16 July 1830), and colonel (10 January 1837). In 1843 he was restored to full pay on appointment as inspecting field officer to Bristol recruiting district, a post that he held until his death. Suffering from a persistent cough and violent rheumatic pains in his shoulder and neck, he then developed a tumour between his legs, according to his younger brother 'due to the inactive state of his liver'. He moved from Bristol to Weston-super-Mare, Somerset, in the hope that the sea air would improve his health. However, he died there on 3 October 1846, to the grief of FitzRoy: 'I have lost an affectionate brother... the companion of my youth' (Sweetman, 135). FitzRoy believed that, although frugal, Somerset left little money because of his wife's extravagance. He was buried in a vault in the nave of Bristol Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 47334


Crawford, William (1833-1890), trade unionist and politician, was born at Whitley in Northumberland, the son of William Crawford, a miner. Little is known of his early years, except that he suffered a serious injury when sent to work in the pits at about the age of ten. Doctors wanted to amputate his leg but his father refused. He was able to attend Seaton Sluice School during convalescence and as a result was somewhat better educated than most miners' sons. At the age of twenty-four, when he married Sarah Ann, daughter of John Townson of Tamworth, he was already a Primitive Methodist preacher and an advocate of temperance and social reform. 
By the early 1860s Crawford was an active trade unionist, and in 1863 he played a key role in the formation of the Northumberland and Durham Mutual Confident Association. Towards the end of that year colliery owners threatened to reintroduce the yearly bond (or contractual arrangement) into Northumberland but met with stern resistance from the pitmen. Spurred by the thought of collective strength the pitmen agreed to form a union at the end of December; Crawford was elected general secretary. The union was much stronger in Northumberland than in Durham and Crawford worked with considerable success to encourage interest in unionization in the Auckland district of Durham. In the same year, 1863, he was nominated as delegate to the famous conference of the National Association of Coal, Lime, and Ironstone Miners. There he argued the case for improved inspection of mines, but urged rejection of the proposal for an eight-hour bill in mining. Crawford was vehemently opposed to the disruption of working practices in the region which would be entailed by limiting the hours worked by boys. 
In 1864 the Northumberland miners seceded from the joint association, and this led to a campaign by Durham miners to establish their own trade union. Crawford remained secretary and agent of the Northumberland Association until June 1865 when he became secretary of the Cowpen co-operative store at Blyth, Northumberland. He was succeeded in the union by Thomas Burt. Earlier in the same year, shortly before leaving the Northumberland union, Crawford gave evidence before the select committee on the regulation and inspection of mines and miners' complaints. He worked for about a year for his co-operative society and then began business on his own account at Bedlington. 
The creation of the Durham Miners' Association (DMA) in 1869 was to prove pivotal to Crawford's future career. In Durham as in Northumberland, miners were becoming increasingly aware of their common problems and the possibility of finding solutions in united action. They shared a common detestation of the yearly bond and the realization of the need to protect their rates of pay and conditions of work. The issue came to a head at Monkwearmouth colliery in 1869 when four men were charged before the courts for breach of contract. They had signed the 'bond' but had then withdrawn their labour on the grounds that the low wages which the colliers were being paid did not provide anything like a living wage. Their dispute provided a focal point for the widespread discontent which had been growing in the Durham coalfield for many years. On 20 November 1869 a decision was made in the Market Hotel in Durham to form a Durham miners' union. Crawford became involved somewhat later, but was appointed a full-time agent in May 1870. Thereafter his position and influence grew considerably. He was invited to become president at the end of 1870 and from 1872 acted in addition as secretary of the DMA, itself on the way to becoming the largest separate miners' union in the United Kingdom. In 1872 the DMA secured replacement of the yearly bond by a fortnightly agreement. 
The union was formed at an opportune time. Trade was beginning to boom and continued to do so until 1873 when conditions quickly changed. During 1873 coal prices fell. Demand was far lower than the industry's capacity to produce coal and this was reflected in the continued reduction of wage rates. The union's early responses to these troubled times bore the mark of Crawford's influence. Although he had a lasting concern to improve legislative regulation over coalmining accidents and workmen's compensation, he was driven in his regular dealings with miners and colliery owners by more personal and powerful instincts. Committed to the cause of improving the position of working men through trade union action, he consistently opposed unconstitutional strike action. As a religious nonconformist he was opposed to industrial militancy; only by moderation and tolerance did he foresee negotiations being maintained with the coal owners on the basis of mutual respect. He worked hard to establish and maintain conciliation boards and representative committees to establish wage levels in general and colliery price lists and tonnage rates in particular. 
Under Crawford the Durham Miners' Association had a highly developed system of collective bargaining based on a sliding scale of wages and defence of traditional working hours and shift systems. Crawford acquiesced in the coal owners' view that wages should vary with the selling price of coal in both an upward and downward direction. This issue, together with the question of the length of the working day, affected Durham's relationship with other mining associations and ultimately with the Miners' Federation of Great Britain (MFGB), formed in 1888. Sliding-scale wage agreements fell out of favour in other coalfields during the 1880s: the MFGB resisted their continuation and remained determined to secure legislative limitation of miners' daily working hours to a maximum of eight. The dispute over the statutory working day led Durham to refuse to join the MFGB, a divide which left the Durham miners in a vulnerable position in their major strike of 1892. Crawford remained convinced, however, that his duty was to protect the interests of the Durham miners as he saw them. 
Better suited to the detailed complexity of committee work rather than to platform oratory, Crawford was nevertheless skilful in negotiation and a man of considerable executive power; he was a solver of problems, as well as a manager of men. Short-tempered and intolerant at times, he remained utterly convinced of the power of trade unionism. In politics he was a firm Liberal, and sat on the parliamentary committee of the TUC from 1878 to 1890 and was its chairman in 1881 and again in 1888. He was elected to parliament in 1885 for Mid Durham, and re-elected in 1886, serving as its MP until his death. For some years he was an alderman of the Durham county council. 
Although he contributed to committee work in the House of Commons, Crawford participated very little in parliamentary affairs, never once speaking on the floor of the house. Nevertheless he held strong views, consistently rejecting socialism as invalid in favour of a radical brand of Liberalism by which people like himself could stand for parliament as a candidate in the Labour interest, but with Liberal sponsorship. Up to the time of his death he remained committed to mining affairs. He was secretary of the Miners' National Association from 1877 to 1890, and in the year of his death he attended the international miners' conference in Belgium. He joined the freemasons in 1878 and was worshipful master of his local lodge in 1886. He died at his home, 15 North Road, Durham, on 1 July 1890. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 47335


Dash, Jack O'Brien (1907-1989), political activist and unofficial dockers' leader, was born on 23 April 1907 in Southwark, south London, the youngest of four sons of Joseph Thomas Dash, a stagehand, and his wife, Rose Gertrude Johns, an actor. According to Dash's own account, his upbringing was one of great material hardship. His mother died of tuberculosis when he was seven and his father, who then had an even greater struggle to support the family, also died of a lung complaint a few years later. After an elementary schooling, his skill at drawing led to a trial period with an engraving firm, but pressure to take home a better wage resulted in a series of menial jobs, starting in a J. Lyons cafe, followed by spells as an office boy and then as a carrier of books for a wholesaler. After being unemployed for several weeks at the age of nineteen he signed up for two years in the Royal Army Service Corps. 
On 22 June 1931 Dash married Ellen Elizabeth Frett (died 'c'.1980); they had a daughter, Kathleen. After leaving the army, he found it hard to get regular work, though by the mid-1930s he was most often employed on building sites as a hod-carrier. An already strong commitment to trade unionism, further stimulated by the reading of left-wing literature, encouraged him to persuade other building workers on the site to join a trade union, for which he was awarded the Trades Union Congress's Tolpuddle medal. In his autobiography, Dash claimed that he thanked Walter Citrine and Herbert Morrison, the signatories of a citation that accompanied the medal, while pointing out that he had recently joined an organization of which they disapproved, the Communist Party of Great Britain. He remained a loyal, active, and uncritical member of the party for the rest of his life. 
In the late 1930s Dash took part in some of the publicity stunts organized by Wal Hannington and others in the National Unemployed Workers' Movement. These included a visit in December 1938 to the Ritz Hotel by a group of the unemployed who attempted to order afternoon tea. It was after the war (in which he volunteered for the fire service) that his political activities became notorious. In the summer of 1945, when non-registered men were being taken on in the Port of London, he became a docker in the Royal Group of Docks. That he was neither born into the industry nor able to boast dock work as his first and only trade was sometimes held against him, but he soon showed an understanding of the peculiar conditions of the industry and their effects on the workforce. He was most able to influence the actions of his fellow dockers by expressing the grievances that arose from issues of piece-work rates, compulsory overtime, the unloading of dirty or dangerous cargoes, and, even after the Dock Labour Scheme of 1947, the existence of casual employment. Though an ardent trade unionist -- in his autobiography he wrote warmly of workers 'bound in the finest brotherhood of man, the trade union movement' (Dash, 163) -- he was frequently at odds with the officials of his own union, the Transport and General Workers. 
In 1949 Dash and five other dockers were questioned by Arthur Deakin (1890-1955), general secretary of the union, about their agitation to 'black' the unloading of the Canadian cargo of the 'Beaver Brae', in support of a strike of Canadian seamen. Three of the six were expelled from the union while Dash and two others received a two-year suspension from holding office -- although communists had recently been debarred by the union from official positions. The exclusion of militants from the councils of the Transport Workers' Union strengthened a separate body claiming to represent rank-and-file workers of which Dash became the chairman in 1958, the London Docks Liaison Committee. This unofficial group, usually numbering five men informally elected at dock-gate meetings, was at the centre of several disputes with employers. Typically on these occasions dockers would leave their work to hear Dash address them, a stocky, pugnacious speaker who usually stood on an old chair and opened with the words he later used for the title of his autobiography, 'Good morning, brothers!' 
In 1966 Dash's notoriety became more widespread when during the seamen's strike he was named in the House of Commons by the prime minister, Harold Wilson. In a controversial speech which drew on evidence gathered by the secret services, Wilson argued that members of the Communist Party were intent on extending the dispute to trade unions beyond the National Union of Seamen. After identifying Dash as a member of 'the unofficial liaison committee in the London docks', he added: 'Mr. Dash... took a more moderate line because he was torn between his loyalty to the party and his loyalty to his union, which was resisting all pressures to take the Communist line' ('Hansard 5C', cols. 1619-20). In turn, Dash held that Wilson was 'the greatest man in the con business', one of Labour's 'unholy trinity' -- in the 1960s the other two were George Brown and Ray Gunter, by the 1970s his derided trinity comprised Wilson, Roy Jenkins, and James Callaghan (Dash, 155, 33). 
Dash's standing as unofficial leader was recognized by Lord Devlin who met him when gathering evidence for his report of 1965 into the port transport industry and took up his suggestion that dockers should have shop stewards. In 1968 Dash was elected as a shop steward, which caused the Transport Workers' Union, then led by the left-winger Frank Cousins, to end its ban on communist officials. Though Devlin's report proposed an end to the system whereby the docks were run on casual labour, the militants argued that decasualization would result in a smaller labour force and the end of restrictive (or, according to Dash, protective) practices. As an alternative, the liaison committee pressed for improved conditions for dockers and the nationalization of the industry. Dash maintained that Devlin's proposals were designed to protect the employers' profits. He could readily quote figures to show how the capitalist system as a whole and the port employers in particular exploited the workers. As he humorously stated in an obituary he composed for a television programme, the epitaph he wished for was: '
Here lies Jack Dash 

All he wanted was 

To separate them from their cash. 
(Dash, 188)' Dash's penchant for colourful phrases, along with a largely hostile portrayal in the press, helped to make him a public figure. In the course of his leadership of an eight-week unofficial strike against the Devlin proposals in late 1967 he received much attention. Yet his personality made it difficult for critics to demonize him. His cockney wit and charm could be disarming. In addition to politics and the docks he talked freely about his enthusiasm for painting and drawing, his fondness for animals (in his younger days he bred dogs), his fitness regime (he was a vegetarian, had boxed and given instruction in physical training), his tastes in music and poetry, and his interest in the history of London. He frequently spoke to audiences of students and occasionally to such groups as rotary clubs. Roy Thomson invited him to a dinner at Claridge's Hotel to address a meeting of millionaires. 
Early in 1970, nearing the age of sixty-three and affected by a back complaint that had kept him off work for some time, Dash decided to accept a severance payment of $1500 and to leave the docks. For the rest of his life he followed his hobbies and welcomed opportunities to further his views, travelling widely to address meetings. He remained an uncompromising communist, unreconstructedly repeating the old slogans associated with the party's Stalinist period. Visits to Poland and the USSR had reinforced his beliefs and he expressed support for Soviet policies, including the invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968. 
In his retirement Dash was saddened by the redevelopment of dockland -- he observed many of the changes that took place from his top-storey flat in a high-rise council block -- and by the level of unemployment, especially of young people, in the East End. During the last few months of his life, despite the onset of what was to be a fatal attack of cancer, he kept up his political work, regularly attending and speaking at meetings. He died on 8 June 1989 in the London Hospital, Whitechapel. The hundreds of mourners at his funeral, held on 14 June at the East London crematorium, were accompanied by trade union banners and sang the 'Internationale' as his coffin was draped with the flag of the shop stewards' committee of the Royal Group of Docks. 


@@@@@


doc= 47336


King, John (bap. 1614, d. 1681), physician, was baptized Joannes Regius in the Dutch church at Austin Friars, London, on 11 September 1614, the first of six children of the Revd Joannes Regius (1574-1627), a minister of that church, and his second wife, Johanna. His father's family were pillars of the Flemish Reformed church, his grandfather Jacobus Regius having been a minister of the London Dutch church from 1572 until 1601. King's father studied divinity at Leiden and Heidelberg, where he took his degree in theology in 1595. He was a staunch defender of orthodox Calvinism against the heresies of Servetus and Arminius. Persecuted for their religion in the Netherlands, the Regius family took refuge in London. In 1601 Joannes Regius succeeded his father as a minister of the Dutch church at Austin Friars, where he remained until his death in 1627. Between 1604 and 1625 he had eleven children, of whom four survived him. Among these was John King, the only one of six children of the Revd Regius's second wife to survive infancy. At least some of these children died in the London plague of 1625. King's father died of the stone in 1627 and under his father's will he received $360. 
In 1633 King began his medical education at Leiden. After five years he earned his MD, his thesis being on the subject of fevers, and returned to London. He incorporated on his Leiden degree at the University of Oxford on 14 January 1641. King was proposed by the president of the College of Physicians, Othowell Meverell, for election to the college on 22 December 1643 and was approved 'by a majority of the votes' (annals, RCP Lond., bk 3.4). It was not until 1648, however, that he was able to fill a vacant fellowship. 
On 6 April 1643 King married, in the London Dutch church, Joanna Marolois, the widow of Jacob de Backer. On 13 December 1643 King was nominated for a deaconship in the Dutch church. He was not elected. In the same year he and his wife were to be found in the parish of St Olave Jewry, where, of seventy-one ratepayers King was assessed as the tenth wealthiest. A parliamentary assessment of April 1643 rated King's household seventeenth out of a total of sixty-four assessed. King aligned himself with the parliamentary cause when he signed the solemn league and covenant on 2 October 1643. In 1644 he was assessed by a parliamentary committee raising money to fight Charles I at $100, indicating that he was not among the top rank of physicians, who were assessed at $250. 
King had three daughters and two sons. At least two of his daughters were baptized in both the English and the Dutch church, showing that King was concerned about maintaining good relations with both communities. King was formally elected to the long-awaited fellowship in the College of Physicians on 9 August 1648. On 25 September 1648 King subscribed to the relief of the Dutch church in Colchester, where civil war still raged. He was an unsuccessful candidate for the eldership of the Dutch church on five separate occasions between 1652 and 1659. As a fellow of the College of Physicians, King attended at least one college meeting a year from 1648 to 1674. He was elected a censor of the college in 1651, 1659, and 1661. From 25 June 1651 to 1654 King and George Ent had charge of the college library. To mark the end of his stewardship, King presented the college with the four volumes of the 'Historiae naturalis' by the Polish physician Joannes Jonstonus. Between 1675 and 1679 he was absent from college proceedings. None the less, in 1680, he was made an elect. 
King died from jaundice at his house in Austin Friars on 28 October 1681. He was buried six days later in the parish church of St Peter-le-Poer, where his father was also buried. In his will King left 'all my East Indian Actions in the Chambre of Amsterdam', $100 sterling, 'and also my Studie of Books' to his eldest son, John King ['see below']. To his other son, James King ('who is now at Surat in the East Indies, and well settled there'), he left another $100. The rest of his estate was to be shared by his surviving daughters, Mary Philipps and Hester King, but with a special provision for Hester who 'is verie weak impotent and infirme by reason of a melancholick Distemp[er] upon her, and thereby is disabled to helpe or mainteyne herself' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/368, sig. 166). John King left no publications beyond his Leiden thesis of 1638. He does, however, represent the presence of London's Anglo-Dutch community in the seventeenth-century medical profession. 
King has in the past been confused with other individuals. Among these was another physician, John King (1604-1688), who also took an MD at Leiden and was also the father of a John King, in this instance the lawyer Sir John King (1639-1677). Munk's 'Roll of the Royal College of Physicians' conflates the lives of these two John Kings. 




@@@@@


doc= 47339


Davies, Stephen Owen (1886-1972), miners' leader and politician, was born at 39 John Street, Abercwmboi, Glamorgan, probably on 9 November 1886, the fourth of six children of Thomas Davies, miner and union organizer, and his wife, Esther. However, there is some uncertainty over the exact date of his birth. 
After attending Capcoch School in Abercwmboi Davies started work in local coal mines at the age of twelve, but subsequently studied mining engineering at night classes, and in 1908 secured sponsorship from Brecon Memorial College to study for a BA at University College, Cardiff, with the ultimate intention of entering the nonconformist ministry. Conflict with Brecon over the precise nature of his religious beliefs led to withdrawal of support, but Davies nevertheless obtained his degree in 1913. 
Davies's plans to become a minister were superseded by growing activism in socialist politics and trade unionism -- two factors inextricably linked in the south Wales coalfield. In 1918 Davies became full-time agent for the Dowlais district of the South Wales Miners' Federation (SWMF) and entered into a formidable partnership with his counterpart in the neighbouring district of Merthyr, Noah Ablett (1883-1935). On 23 August 1919 he married Margaret Eley (died 1932) of Cardiff; they had three daughters. 
Adopting almost a syndicalist position, Davies maintained implacable opposition to post-war demands for nationalization of the industry as well as unsuccessfully advocating affiliation of the Miners' Federation of Great Britain to the Red International of Labour Unions (RILU) formed in Moscow in 1921. In 1922 Davies paid a visit to the Soviet Union as delegate of the Dowlais district of the SWMF to the Second World Congress of the RILU. This visit furnished him with a lifelong but often uncritical admiration for the Soviet system. Despite this, and although sympathetic to many of its aims, Davies did not join the Communist Party of Great Britain, preferring to remain within the Labour Party throughout the coalfield struggles of the 1920s. In 1934 Davies was elected Labour MP for Merthyr. The same year he remarried, his first wife having died two years earlier. His second wife was Sephora Davies from Carmarthenshire, with whom he had two sons. 
At Westminster Davies consistently proved himself of independent mind, as prone to oppose the policies of a Labour government as those of a Conservative administration. Ever the watchdog for socialism, in its purest sense, as well as a rigid apologist for Soviet domestic and foreign policy whatever the excesses, he lost the whip on three occasions between 1953 and 1961 on issues relating to American bases in Britain, West German rearmament, and opposition to the Polaris submarine programme. A thorn in the side of the Wilson government between 1966 and 1970, he disagreed with its policy on public spending, wage controls, and trade union legislation. His support for the idea of Welsh self-government also often found him at variance with party policy. 
Unsurprisingly, Davies was never offered government office but proved himself an excellent constituency MP. His concerns included reformation of the national insurance law in 1967, giving additional compensation to former miners afflicted with dust-related diseases. Such successes gained him a popular affection which transcended his admission to the Aberfan disaster tribunal in 1966 that he had entertained misgivings about the safety of local coal tips but remained silent, fearing that raising concern might cause closure of nearby collieries. 
The Aberfan disaster also led to Davies's final estrangement from the Labour Party. Harold Wilson's support for the idea of using the disaster fund to contribute towards removal of the tips led Davies to boycott the ceremony bestowing freedom of the borough of Merthyr on the prime minister in 1970. His constituency party consequently replaced him as its candidate in the general election later that year. Refusing to accept that his political career was over, he stood as an independent socialist and, campaigning on his record, won by more than 7000 votes over the official Labour candidate. While this may say something about the historically individualistic nature of Merthyr politics, it also testified to his reputation and the local esteem in which he was held. 
S. O. Davies died at Merthyr Tudful's general hospital on 25 February 1972, following a chest infection, and was buried at Maesyrarian cemetery, Mountain Ash, in his native Cynon valley on the 29th. He was survived by his second wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 47340


Ridgley, Thomas (c.1576-1656), physician, was the only son of Simon Rugeley, of Hawksyard, near Rugeley, Staffordshire, and his wife, Catherine, daughter of Augustine Babington, of Normanton, Derbyshire. He matriculated at St John's College, Cambridge, in 1594, taking his BA there in 1597 and MA in 1600. While an undergraduate he wrote verses to the memory of the master of St John's, William Whitaker, who died in 1595. Ridgley took his MD at the college in 1608. From 1608 to 1616 he was a country physician at Newark, Nottinghamshire. On 6 February 1608 he took out a Nottinghamshire licence to marry Anne Odingsells, daughter of Gabriel Odingsells of Epperstone and Bulcote, Nottinghamshire; they had four children, Thomas ('b'. 1613), Luke ('b'. 1615), George, and Mary. 
In 1617 Ridgley moved to London. This would have enabled him to give greater attention to a lawsuit he was involved in and to increase his income. Intending to become a fellow of the College of Physicians, he made his first, unofficial appearance before the president and twelve fellows of the college, on 18 March 1617. His first formal appearance before the full 'comitia' of the college occurred on 3 June 1617. A letter from the chief royal physician, Theodore Turquet de Mayerne, to the president of the college recommended Ridgley and the college elected him a candidate. Mayerne's interest in Ridgley may have been sparked by their common interest in chemical medicine. Ridgley's reputation prompted a letter from Sir Gervase Clifton, which may perhaps be dated to this period, and which dealt with the value to sexual potency of a mercury derivative. Ridgley ridiculed the idea: 'Those Puritane Alchymists that talke so muche of separating the impure part from the pure cannot with all their art separate or extract anie thing out of Mercury... it being a simple homogeneous body never to be resolved into diverse natures. (Lansdowne MS 238, fol. 149)' In the same context, Ridgley also impugned the aphrodisiac benefits of the 'aurum potabile' preparation of Francis Anthony. 
On 14 January 1619 Ridgley and Thomas Winston testified in the college against the medical activities of William Eyre. Despite these prerogatives of place, Ridgley was left to languish as a candidate for a number of years, still waiting to be elevated to a vacant fellowship. Rumour that Ridgley was to be passed over again in favour of a younger candidate caused James I to write to the college on Ridgley's behalf. In the letter, dated 7 March 1621, James argued 'that a man of whose merite yourselves are satisfied and we have receaved your good testimonie, should not be discouraged or kept back from such orderly prefermentes' (annals, RCP Lond., 3.143). The fellows vowed to elect him to the next open place, which they did on 28 November 1622. But their failure to elect him immediately irritated Ridgley; on 9 November 1621 the ill feeling between the fellows and Ridgley finally erupted, as the college demanded Ridgley's dues as a candidate: 'Dr Ridgley in his turn stood much upon his gentrye and knew none of us better: that he to paye was forced fowly and injuriously: but bids us keep our othe. Now he wanted moneye, but they pay more than the privilege is worth: He desiers no favour: but had brought the Kings letters: and it is not agenist his othe to bring the Kings letters. (ibid., 3.149)' The college censors were not impressed by Ridgley or Dr Diodati, who was also delinquent, and 'considered that an example ought to be made of them' (ibid.). Ridgley would not submit, and further letters of recommendation were sent by the earl of Rutland and Viscount Rocheford. Finally, on 28 November 1622, Ridgley 'humbled himself before the College', 'gave an ex tempore speech in good Latin and submissive in tone, following which he was more acceptable', and was elected a fellow by the votes of all present (ibid., 3.159). 
Despite his initial problems with the college, Ridgley's time as a fellow gained him the respect of his colleagues. He was chosen as a censor in 1628, 1633, and 1638; and, according to Baldwin Hamey, did all that was asked of him without complaint. He was the model of the grave, learned physician, although at least one fellow, Peter Bowne, thought him too serious. But generally, the college and the public admired his honesty, his directness, his skill as a doctor, and the strong principles from which he seldom wavered. He was chosen as an elect on 2 September 1641; a supporter of the royalist cause, he resigned from this position on 24 May 1642 and withdrew from the college just as it was about to commit itself fully to parliament. He returned to the college in 1649. 
As he was a physician of excellent reputation, Ridgley's comfortable income might have been greater, had he not limited the number of his patients. In 1618 he was among eighteen householders in Bassishaw ward who had 'taken the River Water into their houses'. In 1621 Ridgley made a voluntary contribution to aid the elector of the Palatinate at the beginning of the Thirty Years' War. When the common council of London assessed Bassishaw ward in 1624, of 108 persons so assessed, 23 were rated higher than Ridgley. In 1636 Ridgley was among forty residents of the ward contributing ship money; only eight others contributed more, this being perhaps an early indication of his loyalty to Charles I. In 1638 Ridgley's house in St Michael Bassishaw was valued at $26, a figure which placed him in the top 10 per cent of a large parish with perhaps 240 other householders. 
Ridgley is best known as an early Helmontian or chemical physician. Samuel Hartlib wrote of him in 1654: 'Dr Ridgely an auncient physitian of the colledg the chiefest chymical doctor and preparing many excellent medicines... He bought up all Glauberian furnaces especially the 2nd with a new head, which Mr Boyle also hath' (Webster, 34). A 'Dr Ridgely' was also among the 'chemically given' physicians, named by George Starkey in 1657, who had repudiated Galenic medicine, although this may refer to Ridgley's son Luke, who shared the same chemical outlook. 
Thomas Ridgley died at his house in London, possibly in the parish of St Sepulchre, on 21 June 1656 and was conveyed in a procession of college fellows, by candlelight, to the church of St Botolph's, Aldersgate, where he was interred. It was an honour that not even Sir Theodore Turquet de Mayerne or Thomas Winston had enjoyed. Ridgley's will, like the man, was short and direct. His money was to be divided into five equal parts, three-fifths going to his eldest son, Thomas, and two-fifths to his second son, Luke, who was also to receive 'all my books' and household goods, and the rest of the estate not otherwise bequeathed. Luke was made sole executor of the will, which he proved on 27 September 1656. Ridgley's other two children, George and Mary, alive in 1633, were not mentioned in the will. 


@@@@@


doc= 47341


Duncan, Charles (1865-1933), trade unionist and politician, was born on 8 June 1865 at 93 Stockton Street, Middlesbrough, the son of Alexander Duncan, a ship's pilot, and his wife, Jane Dobson. The family had a comfortable lifestyle and Charles was able to attend the local church school until he was sixteen. He then served an engineering apprenticeship, joining the Amalgamated Society of Engineers (ASE) in 1888. He served as its district secretary for a time, and retained his membership of this skilled union for the rest of his life. In 1890 he married Lydia Copeland. 
Duncan became a socialist in 1887, apparently primarily motivated by a concern to improve the lives of those less fortunate than himself, and this led to his active involvement in local welfare issues and his election to Middlesbrough town council as an Independent Labour Party member from 1895 to 1900. At the same time Duncan was a supporter of Tom Mann's campaign to reform the ASE and this led to his appointment as a full-time official of the new Workers' Union in 1898. Formed in the aftermath of the defeat of the engineers in the 1897 lock-out, this body was based on Mann's political ideals: it aimed to create a single union for all workers, devoted to industrial militancy and the promotion of Labour candidates in local and national elections. However, in 1901 the union still had fewer than 5000 members, and Mann emigrated to Australia in the course of that year. Duncan, who had been appointed general secretary the year before, became the dominant influence. 
In Duncan's first years as leader, the Workers' Union faced a period of rising unemployment and falling membership, and he responded not only with rigid economies in administration but also with two fundamental departures from the organization's original aims. First, influenced by his own experiences in the ASE, he introduced elementary welfare benefits to provide individuals with a financial incentive for steady membership. Second, he gradually shifted recruitment towards semi-skilled workers with some security of employment. These departures helped to stabilize membership and finances, but not to develop internal democracy: patchy recruitment undermined the branch structure, and lack of resources inhibited district and national procedures. However, the union was now well-placed for explosive growth in the 1910-14 boom when its membership rose from 5000 to over 140,000 members. 
Despite Tom Mann's return after ten years and his appearance on the union's platforms as a prophet of syndicalism, Duncan retained the real control and maintained his cautious emphasis on financial strength and steady recruitment, especially among semi-skilled workers in light engineering in the midlands. This focus of recruitment became even more marked during the First World War when the expansion of munitions production led to a flood of new labour, including women, into the engineering industry and also into the Workers' Union, which by 1919 claimed to be the largest single union in the country with half a million members. 
It was unlikely that this position could be maintained after the end of the exceptional wartime conditions, but the boom of the immediate post-war years encouraged optimism and Duncan introduced a more generous scheme of unemployment benefits late in 1920, in an effort to stabilize the still highly volatile membership. Unfortunately the almost immediate onset of heavy unemployment initiated a sharp downward spiral in which membership collapsed, income from subscriptions fell, and the insecurity of benefit provision led to further losses of members: by the end of 1922 the union had only 150,000 members and a deficit of $30,000. Duncan's best efforts at rigid economy and new recruitment were unfortunately undermined by the general strike of 1926, which involved almost half of the union's members and cost almost $60,000: in order to avoid terminal collapse he had to negotiate a merger with the Transport and General Workers' Union (TGWU) in 1929. Although its own history had thus come to a rather depressing conclusion, the Workers' Union was to have a major influence within the TGWU, giving it the skeleton organization to make a long-term shift away from dockers and transport workers into what were to be more dynamic fields of recruitment, above all in the motor industry. 
In parallel with his career as a trade union leader, Duncan had a long, but not very distinguished, career in parliament. He was first elected as an MP for Barrow in Furness in 1906, sponsored by the ASE, and he held this seat until 1918, serving for a time as a Labour whip. He was an enthusiastic patriot during the First World War and a member of the British Workers' League, until it became clear that it would oppose Labour candidates in the 1918 general election. However, Duncan's resignation from the league was too late to save his seat. Keen to return to parliament he was unsuccessful in two by-elections in 1920, but held the safe Derbyshire mining seat of Clay Cross from 1922 until 1933. After the union amalgamation of 1929 he retained a nominal official position with the TGWU but was restricted mainly to a role as one of its parliamentary representatives. 
Charles Duncan was a quiet, well-dressed man with an unusually alert and upright appearance, possibly due to prowess as an athlete in his youth. In addition to his trade union and parliamentary careers he was active in the Willesden co-operative society, and became a JP for Middlesex in 1919. After a long illness Duncan died in Manor House Hospital, North End Road, Hampstead, on 6 July 1933. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 47342


Oxenbridge, Daniel (1571-1642), physician, the only son of the Revd John Oxenbridge (died 1618) and his wife, Mary, was born in Surrey. In the following year his father was presented to the living of Southam in Warwickshire by the Throgmorton family, who were both puritan and well-connected. He was later expelled from his rectory at Southam because of his involvement with the presbyterian movement of Thomas Cartwright, and was one of a number of Warwickshire ministers who subscribed the presbyterian 'Book of Discipline' in 1588. 
Daniel Oxenbridge's early years were spent in Warwickshire; he was first educated at St Peter's College, Westminster, from where he was elected to Christ Church, Oxford. He entered the university in 1590 and took his BA in 1593, and MA in 1596. Any thought of following his father into the ministry vanished with the violent suppression of the presbyterian movement in the 1590s. Medicine remained a realistic alternative for many puritans, and Oxenbridge practised medicine for many years in Daventry, Northamptonshire. About 1601 he married Katherine Harby, a member of a local gentry family. They had four daughters, Mary ('b'. 1602), Dorcas, Katherine, who married the parliamentarian commander Philip Skippon, and Elizabeth, who married the prominent parliamentarian leader Oliver St John; and three sons, John Oxenbridge, Daniel, and Clement. The Restoration poet Katherine Philips was Oxenbridge's granddaughter. 
After many years in practice in Daventry, in 1620 Oxenbridge rather suddenly accumulated his MB and MD degrees at Christ Church. Soon after he moved his practice and his family to London. The need to increase his income to support his large family may have prompted the move, or it may have been due to increasing pressure from bishops on the practice of medicine by puritans. A university medical degree obviated an episcopal medical licence, while an MD from Oxford or Cambridge was also a primary qualification for a fellowship of the College of Physicians in London. 
Oxenbridge first appeared before the college on 23 May 1623, asking for preferential treatment based on the currency of his degree, and his many years of practice before its award. Oxenbridge's advanced age was somewhat unusual in a prospective fellow, as was his extensive medical experience. However, he did not become a candidate in the college until August 1626, and was not formally elected a fellow until 22 November 1627. His tenure in the college was uneventful: he held no office, but regularly attended meetings, at which he, like all the fellows, complained about the medical malpractice observed in the City. Oxenbridge's financial contributions to the college were average; modest, too, was the house in which he and his wife lived in St Benet Sherehog parish. A tithing survey of 1638 rated the house the ninth most valuable out of the twenty-eight houses noted in the parish. A circumspect life did not, however, preclude his coming to the aid of his puritan co-religionists, which he did in 1639, when he stood surety for Peter Smart, canon of Durham, in his struggle with his Laudian fellow canon John Cosin. Oxenbridge died at his London house in St Sythe's Lane, St Benet Sherehog, on 24 August 1642. He was buried in St Benet Sherehog churchyard. 
Oxenbridge's will of 1641 revealed that, as well as his house, he owned a number of landholdings, which he passed on to his wife, children, and grandchildren. These included lands and tenements in the most radical puritan parish in the City, St Stephen's, Coleman Street; lands in Northumberland and Bermuda; and a property called the Tynne Farm. Among the physician's other bequests were $10 to his daughter Katherine Fowler, then the wife of a London merchant, and $10 more to the Fowlers' daughter, Oxenbridge's granddaughter, Katherine. The anonymous 'General Observations and Prescriptions in the Practice of Physick', published in 1715, is said to have been based on Oxenbridge's casebook. 


@@@@@


doc= 47343


Rand, Samuel (bap. 1588, d. 1654), physician, the eldest surviving son of the Revd James Rand (died 1621), vicar of Norton, co. Durham (1578-1621) and prebend of Durham Cathedral (1606-20), and his wife, Margery, daughter of the Revd Edward Banckes, rector of Long Newton, co. Durham, was baptized at Norton on 18 August 1588. His early schooling was probably in Stockton. He matriculated as a pensioner at Christ's College, Cambridge, his father's college, at Easter 1606, and became BA in 1610, and MA in 1613. He may also have studied at St Andrew's in 1612; his cousin, Ralph Rand, took an MA at St Andrew's in that same year. Samuel Rand was admitted on the medical line at Leiden on 2 September 1616, but he took his MD from Groningen in the following year, on 18 August 1617. He dedicated his thesis on vertigo to his uncle, the Revd Ralph Rand, rector and 'minister of the word of God' at Oxted, Surrey. There is no record that Rand ever incorporated his foreign degree at either Oxford or Cambridge. 
Rand did not begin to practise medicine in London until 1624. It is likely that prior to that date he practised near his family's home district in the north-east of England. On 3 February 1626 Rand was reprimanded for abusing his College of Physicians licence to practise outside London, by doing so within the City. By 6 July 1626 he had somehow satisfied the requirement of incorporation and was elected a candidate; he became a fellow on 22 December 1630. 
While practising as a prominent London physician, Rand also became an investor in the colonization of the British West Indies and in particular in the plantation of the island of Tortuga, which was organized by a relative, Anthony Hilton, a shipmaster from Durham. On the death of Hilton in 1635, Rand purchased his estate for Hilton's widow, in order to keep it out of the hands of her late husband's creditors. On 8 August 1631 he consulted with John Clarke of the College of Physicians during the terminal illness of William Nethersole. Rand and Clarke were both products of the intensely puritan Christ's College, Cambridge, and their relationship may well have gone back to their Cambridge days. They were also both signatories to a college petition in 1632 to Charles I, which implored the king to curb the improper medical activities of London apothecaries who prescribed without the direction of a physician. In 1633 Rand purchased a pedigree from the College of Arms on its visitation of London. In September 1635, along with Dr Othowell Meverell and Dr William Clement of the College of Physicians, he attended the mother of John Evelyn in her final illness. 
Rand is listed in the annals of the Royal College of Physicians as practising in Newcastle by 13 January 1637. The ostensible reason for his departure was to take up the position as town physician to Newcastle upon Tyne. He held this post until 21 April 1643, when he was removed by royalist sympathizers. However, in September 1644 parliament appointed him master of Greatham Hospital, Durham. A strong puritan as well as a parliamentarian, Rand was elected an elder in the Presbyterian classis at Stockton, co. Durham, in December 1645. In 1647 he was elected by town authorities at Newcastle as one of four elders to assist the Presbyterian minister, Richard Prideaux, at All Saints' parish, in the city. He was restored as town physician to Newcastle in 1652. Rand died in 1654 and was buried at Gateshead, co. Durham, on 8 March. 


@@@@@


doc= 47346


Morris, Claver (bap. 1659, d. 1727), physician, was baptized on 1 May 1659 at Bishops Caundle in Dorset, the youngest of four known children (and second son) born to William Morris, rector of Manston, and his wife, Hannah (1632?-1724). Morris matriculated at New Inn Hall, Oxford, in March 1676, and received degrees including the BA (1679), MA (1682), MB (1685), and MD (1691). In 1683 he became an extra licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians. Morris was not a widely known figure in his own day: he neither published nor participated in any but local politics. He would have been remembered only by his family and friends had he not kept detailed accounts between 1684 and 1726, and diaries for March 1709 to March 1710, and June 1718 to August 1726. These manuscripts provide a unique glimpse into the life of a successful provincial professional man in late Stuart and early Hanoverian England. 
Beginning in the 1680s, Morris practised medicine in Wells, serving as that city's only physician (although not its only medical practitioner) for many years. He apparently was an iatrochemist, developing remedies in his home laboratory which he dispensed directly to patients or distributed through a local apothecary's shop. Morris's therapeutic approach was conventional for the period, involving generous prescription of emetics, laxatives, enemas, sweating, and blood-letting. He performed no surgery, but referred surgical cases either to Mr Lucas of Wells or to surgeons in London or Bristol. He maintained good professional relationships with other physicians in the region, occasionally consulting on their cases or inviting them to serve as consultants on his own. 
Morris's practice included patients ranging from regional gentry families to the poor of Wells, whom he charged on a sliding scale depending on their means. He visited patients in their own homes, sometimes at distances of 25 miles from Wells, travelling on horseback. At the height of his career in 1719, when he was about sixty years old, Morris was paid more than $300 by the 258 patients who sought 'my advice and prescriptions in physick'. Between 1712 and 1723 his annual earnings from this source averaged approximately $250. 
In addition to developing a substantial medical practice, Morris was a social and financial success. Indeed, he exemplifies one route to upward social mobility for talented, impecunious, young men of his era. Morris married well -- three times. His first wife, Grace, 'nee' Green, of London, whom he married on 13 October 1685, brought him two valuable London properties and $400 in cash. She died in January 1689. In 1696 Morris married the widow Elizabeth Jeans, daughter of Edward Dawe of Ditcheat, near Castle Cary. She brought him property at West Pennard. Having borne him his beloved daughter Betty in 1697, Elizabeth died in 1699. In 1703 Morris married Molly Bragge, who came with a portion of $3000. In 1709 she gave birth to his only surviving son, William. Molly died in 1725. 
Morris became a wealthy man. He invested in property and lent money at interest. He augmented his property by requesting enclosure (carried out in 1722) of Baltonsbury Northwood and Glastonbury Common Moor. In 1723 his income from investments was nearly $400, which, combined with his medical earnings, yielded approximately $600. Morris enjoyed the lifestyle this income afforded. Between 1699 and 1702 he had a grand house built in Wells at a cost of $807. He spent freely on household goods, clothing, horses, and entertainment. He set a lavish and hospitable table and, at 5 feet 6 inches tall and 15 stone in weight, apparently enjoyed its bounty. 
Morris was well regarded in Wells. He held several local offices, serving from 1706 as commissioner for the land tax, and from 1709 as commissioner for sewers. In 1717 he became a member of the Company of Mercers and was made a burgess of the city of Wells. In 1724 he served as a district commissioner charged with collecting a special tax levied on Roman Catholics. 
Like many educated people of his time, Morris was interested in natural philosophy, particularly chemistry. He regularly purchased books on this topic and ordered chemical ingredients for the experiments he conducted in his laboratory, where he also developed recipes for remedies and cosmetics, and constructed mechanical devices. 
In addition to his other activities, Morris was an enthusiastic and expert musician. He sang, played several instruments, and was an active member of a music club that met weekly for many years. He also attended public concerts and musical gatherings in private homes. He purchased and performed pieces by a wide range of contemporary composers. He also owned a number of instruments and experimented with innovations in their construction and tuning. 
Claver Morris died, aged sixty-seven, on 19 March 1727, of an illness which he diagnosed as 'a consumption & a growing phthisis' (probably tuberculosis). He was buried in Wells Cathedral, where a tablet was erected to his memory. His epitaph describes him as he would have wished to be remembered: the royalist and tory son of a clergyman 'who had suffered greatly in the King's cause in the Civil War'; an accomplished musician; a natural philosopher, who understood chemistry, anatomy, herbs, and mathematics; a physician who invented remedies effective against 'grievous diseases'; and a charitable, well-respected citizen. 


@@@@@


doc= 47348


Dunning, Thomas Joseph (1799-1873), trade unionist, was born in Southwark, London, on 12 January 1799, the son of Joseph Hill Dunning (1760/61-1829), turncock and inspector of London waterworks, and his wife, Ann, 'nee' Barber (died 1840). Apprenticed in 1813, he learned the trade of bookbinder, a small trade that participated in the great nineteenth-century expansion of printing and publishing and which, despite the growth of mass production and the mechanization of some stages of production, remained a skilled occupation. 
In 1820 Dunning joined the London Consolidated Society of Journeymen Bookbinders, and he quickly became a leading member of lodge no. 5. He married on 28 June 1824 Susanna, 'nee' Hooper, with whom he had at least one daughter. Elected to the society's committee in the late 1830s, he came to the fore in the great industrial dispute in 1839, writing a number of the society's addresses on the struggle. His desire for an agreement with the employers was opposed by the majority, however, and he resigned from the committee, only to become one of the negotiators of the final settlement. He then led the reorganization of the society, with the merger of the different lodges into a unitary London Consolidated Lodge of Journeymen Bookbinders, which for a brief while also joined the new national union, with Dunning as chief secretary until London was forced to leave. Following the death of his wife, he married at the Independent chapel, Islington, on 8 September 1840 Susannah Heath (1809/10-1880). 
Dunning's condemnation of wasteful celebrations and strikes, and domineering and sometimes unscrupulous behaviour at meetings led to many attacks on him in the 1840s, culminating in a purge and schism in 1850, leaving him the unchallenged ruler thenceforth. He was also a leading figure in wider movements among the London trades, such as a campaign around 1830 against machinery and orthodox political economy, in connection with which he wrote in 'The Advocate, or, Artizans' and Labourers' Friend'. He helped to establish 'The Charter' newspaper in 1839, to which he contributed, and also campaigned in support of the London stonemasons' strike of 1841-2. He was active in the formation of the National Association of United Trades in 1845, though he soon led his society out of it, and campaigned in the early 1850s in support of the prosecuted Wolverhampton tin-plate workers and the Preston strike, and over the 'Friendly Societies' Bill' of 1855. He was also a good singer and musician, and took part in activities to help the blind. 
In 1850 Dunning persuaded his society to establish the 'Bookbinders' Trade Circular', which he edited for over twenty years. He was also examined in 1856 by a select committee of the House of Commons on arbitration of labour disputes, and in the 1860s produced a number of pamphlets on trade unionism, and papers to the National Association for the Promotion of Social Science, being the sole trade union member of its committee that in 1860 produced an influential report on trade unions and disputes. His most famous work was his pamphlet 'Trades Unions and Strikes: their Philosophy and Intention' (1860). 
In the 1860s Dunning was one of the most prestigious trade unionists in London, but he led his society out of the London Trades Council, which he regarded as too political, and he joined with George Potter (1832-1893) in his quarrel with that body, his criticisms of the Amalgamated Society of Engineers as a mere benefit society, and campaigns for reform of the master and servant law and arbitration, though he was sceptical over positive legislation in favour of working men because of the social bias of parliament and law courts. He also contributed to Potter's 'Bee-Hive' newspaper. Although he was a member of Potter's London Working Men's Association, he had little interest in parliamentary reform, and his conviction of the inferiority of black people led him to oppose the campaigns in support of the north in the American Civil War and against the conduct of the governor of Jamaica. In 1869 he was prominent in the Labour Representation League. 
In 1870 Dunning was leader of an amalgamated committee of the three London bookbinders' societies, but a street accident in 1871 left him partially paralysed and he had to resign as secretary of his society, though he remained editor of the 'Circular' until his death from 'apoplexy' on 23 December 1873 at his home, 65 Napier Street, Hoxton New Town. He was buried in Abney Park cemetery. As head of a strong trade society for thirty years he was an influential figure in the London trade union world, but he is not easy to classify. He was a trade union reformer who induced his society to cease meeting in public houses and to establish a library and a journal conducted by him, which discussed general trade union and economic questions. While being a constant advocate of conciliation with employers and a Chartist who opposed trade society involvement in political questions and campaigns to secure legal status for trade unions, he nevertheless opposed the new amalgamated forms of trade unionism and the 'junta', and publicly justified strikes. 


@@@@@


doc= 47349


Edwards, (Allen) Clement (1869-1938), trade unionist, barrister, and journalist, was born on 7 June 1869 in Knighton, Radnorshire, the third of seven children born to George Benjamin Edwards, auctioneer, master tailor, and draper, and Sarah Ellen ('nee' Tudge). Both parents came from farming, nonconformist, and radical families in the border areas. Edwards, who was known as Clem, was educated at Knighton national school until the age of thirteen. Like many of his generation, he also attended evening classes (in mathematics and languages at Birkbeck Institute, London) and engaged in private study (most notably in economics and law). He was called to the bar in 1899. 
Following school, Edwards worked as a clerk in a local solicitor's office. He experimented with journalism before moving to London, although he remained at heart a countryman. In London he became a Congregationalist (although a Welsh-speaking champion of nonconformist grievances, he was born into the Church of England). He studied Karl Marx and the land reformer Henry George; he was attracted to both fiery preachers such as Charles Spurgeon and Hugh Price Hughes, and the secularist radical Charles Bradlaugh. In the late 1880s Edwards helped form a series of trade unions for unskilled workers (especially dockers). Like other radicals, he saw trade unions as a defence against cruel employers and an erratic economic system which induced personal poverty, immorality, and misery. Edwards worked both with the leading union figures Ben Tillett, J. E. Burns, and Tom Mann, and with London's religious philanthropists and Liberal campaigners. He was assistant secretary of the Dock, Wharf, and General Labourers Union, formed in 1890, and general secretary of the short-lived federation of dockland and transport unions formed in 1891. 
Edwards's radical contacts enabled him to forge a career in journalism -- where he exposed poverty and supported strikers' families -- and to enter municipal politics, where he campaigned for better education and housing. He became labour editor of the radical London paper 'The Sun' in 1893 and of 'The Echo' in 1894, before moving to the 'Daily News'. He stood as Progressive candidate for the London school board in 1894 (Islington) and was elected to Islington council in 1898. He stood unsuccessfully for parliament in 1895 (Tottenham) and 1900 (Denbigh Boroughs) before winning the latter seat in 1906. Defeated by just ten votes in January 1910, he was elected in December that year for the mining seat of East Glamorgan. 
As a barrister, and also later in parliament, Edwards supported the legal restoration of trade union rights. As a young barrister, he quickly gained a reputation with cases involving trade unions on the south Wales circuit. He was briefed as a junior counsel by the unions when the Taff Vale and Osborne judgments threatened the trade unions' ability to engage in industrial and political action. He put the miners' case following the infamous 1913 Senghenydd pit disaster in which 439 men died. A man of strong and determined views in public and private life, he combined support for traditional Welsh radical courses with a vehement and populistic hostility to the Labour Party and to syndicalism. 
During the war Edwards was a super-patriot. Like the former new union leader Ben Tillett and other Labour men from a trade union background he backed David Lloyd George, notably in efforts to prevent industrial unrest. He became a prominent figure in the National Democratic Party (NDP), a 'patriotic labour' organization. He was the party's successful parliamentary candidate for East Ham South in 1918, and the organization's chairman from 1919 to 1920. He attacked the 'unreasonable' and 'Bolshevik' actions of some unions during the post-war industrial unrest. By the end of the coalition years, this approach was losing its appeal, and although Edwards stood in 1922 for the NDP (as a supporter of the Lloyd George coalition) he was defeated. 
Edwards married Fanny (died 1920), daughter of Captain Emerson, the superintendent of Trinity House, Great Yarmouth, in 1890. After her death, in 1922 he married the secretary of the NDP, Alice May Parker; they had one son, John. Edwards's views and past actions did not fit easily with the now reunited Liberal Party. He remained a champion of union rights during the turmoil of the mid-1920s but drifted out of Liberal politics. He claimed to be a Liberal until 1931, when he lost faith with the party leaders and resigned his membership. He eventually retired as a barrister and died comparatively poor of cancer at Manor House Hospital, Golders Green, on 23 June 1938. He was cremated at Golders Green. Edwards's second wife worked for the London and North Eastern Railway in the 1920s and 1930s. On her husband's death the family left the ground-floor flat looking onto Hampstead Heath which had been home for some years, and lived as tenants of relations. Alice Edwards died in the 1980s. Their son, John Edwards, became a solicitor. 


@@@@@


doc= 47350


Edwards, Enoch (1852-1912), trade union leader and politician, was born on 10 April 1852 in the north Staffordshire coal-mining village of Talk-o'-the-Hill, the eldest son of James Edwards, a coal-miner, and his wife, Eliza Boulton. Little is known about his private life except that he married Elizabeth Alice, daughter of Henry Rathbone, in 1875. He was educated briefly at a Primitive Methodist day school, was encouraged to read by some of the miners with whom he began to work from the age of nine, and taught at a Sunday school which had a small library attached to it. 
Edwards worked at several collieries in north Staffordshire, and joined the local lodge of the North Staffordshire Miners' Association in 1870, becoming lodge treasurer within a few months, and checkweighman in 1875. Later in the same year he was made treasurer of the association, and two years later he was elected general secretary, a position that he held until his death thirty-five years later. He was the driving force behind the establishment in 1886 of the Midland Miners' Federation (which included unions in Shropshire, Staffordshire, and Warwickshire). As president of the federation from its foundation until 1912, Edwards helped to establish the Miners' Federation of Great Britain (MFGB) in 1889, and became a leading figure in the new organization. He was national treasurer from 1889 to 1904, and succeeded Ben Pickard as president from 1904 until his death in 1912. To Edwards, claimed Robert Smillie in 1912, 'more than anyone else living today, or anyone connected or who has been connected with the Federation, is due the fact that the miners have been for some time now, absolutely solidly organised together in one body' (Arnot, 121). 
Edwards was active socially and politically at local, regional, and national levels. He was a Primitive Methodist preacher, a member of the Ancient Order of Foresters, and district secretary of the Ancient Order of Shepherds. He was a member of Burslem school board (1886-95), a member, alderman, and mayor (1899-1900) of Burslem town council, a member of Staffordshire county council, a JP for Burslem (and later Stoke-on-Trent), and a member of the royal commission on mines which reported in 1909. 
He was the member of parliament for Hanley from 1906 to 1912. Although he stood first for the Liberal Party and then for the Labour Party, he remained a convinced free-trade Liberal even when the MFGB affiliated to the Labour Party in 1909. He stood as a Liberal candidate, unsuccessfully in 1900 and successfully in 1906; and then stood, successfully, as a Labour candidate in the two general elections of 1910. It is significant, however, that the local press continued to describe him as a 'Lib-Lab', and that when he was adopted as Labour candidate in 1910 it was at a joint meeting of Hanley Trades Council and Hanley Liberal Association. His new Labour Party label, it has been claimed, 'made no difference at all' (Gregory, 169). Enoch Edwards died at 78 Lord Street, Southport, on 28 June 1912. 


@@@@@


doc= 47351


Fenwick, Charles (1850-1918), trade union leader and politician, was born on 5 May 1850, the son of John Fenwick, a miner, in a colliery house at Paradise Row, Cramlington, Northumberland. Although he spent some time at the village school, his considerable education was primarily the result of his own efforts. In later life, he cited Mazzini, Macaulay, Scott, and Kingsley among his favourite reading, as well as specifically religious works and accounts of missionary explorers. 
At the age of ten, after a short period of surface work, Fenwick went underground, working between twelve and thirteen hours a day. His working day was considerably shortened when, at seventeen, he joined the colliery's elite band of hewers. He now had more time for reading and became active in the Northumberland miners' union, which he had joined at the age of thirteen. In 1869 he married a local girl, Jane Gardner; they had two sons. By the mid-1870s, while still a working miner, Fenwick was a local union leader, and often served as branch delegate or in negotiations with employers. He represented the union at the 1884 TUC meeting. 
When the redistribution of 1884-5 created a new Wansbeck constituency dominated by the mining vote, Fenwick was elected its first MP, and he held the seat with little difficulty for thirty-two years. Despite his moderation, and his open opposition to the concept of a separate Labour Party, he was secretary of the TUC parliamentary committee from 1890 to 1894. Although not so well known as contemporary Labour leaders like Keir Hardie, he played an important part in consolidating Labour parliamentary representation. 
Never a socialist, Fenwick steadfastly maintained the principles of Gladstonian Liberalism in his political and union activities, even when this meant conflict with other leaders of the labour movement, including Hardie and David Shackleton. These differences surfaced clearly during his four year stint as secretary of the TUC parliamentary committee. He was elected to this post in 1890, just after the TUC narrowly endorsed the principle of a statutory eight-hour day for miners, something to which Fenwick was known to be opposed. He continued to oppose this policy in the House of Commons, despite a running fire of criticism from more militant miners' leaders. Eventually, in 1894, he was defeated in the election for the secretaryship of the parliamentary committee, although this rejection was accompanied by tributes to his honesty and consistency on the issue of legislative restriction of working hours and similar issues. In 1911 he supported unsuccessful proposals for regulating the right to strike by imposing a compulsory 'cooling-off' period, with fines for workers who defied the restriction. 
Fenwick was conspicuously respectable and devout, and was for many years a Primitive Methodist preacher. His parliamentary career, though less dramatic than that of his more ebullient colleagues, helped to establish the position of Labour representatives. The first Labour member to be appointed to the important Commons committee for selection, he became a house deputy chairman and on many occasions presided over the Commons in committee. He served on a number of important royal commissions dealing with labour questions and similar topics. He was chosen to second the address in 1894, and appointed a privy councillor in the coronation honours of 1911. By the latter years of Fenwick's career, the political position of Lib-Lab MPs was becoming more difficult. When, in 1907, the Northumberland miners' union voted to affiliate to the infant Labour Party, Fenwick, together with his colleague Thomas Burt, refused to toe the line. Both men were returned as independent Liberals in the 1910 general elections, and their personal prestige was still able to ensure that they did not face Labour opponents. 
Fenwick died at his Newcastle home, 14 Tankerville Terrace, on 20 April 1918, having previously announced his impending retirement from parliament. He was survived by his wife. His funeral was attended by the city's lord mayor and prominent northern coal-owners, as well as a variety of political and union colleagues. Like his friends John Burnett and Thomas Burt, Fenwick was much cited as an illustration of how a worker could attain a position of dignity and prominence in late Victorian and Edwardian society. 


@@@@@


doc= 47357


Goldstone, Sir Frank Walter (1870-1955), trade unionist and politician, was born on 7 December 1870 in Sunderland, the third son of Frederick Goldstone, stained-glass artist, and Sarah Trigg ('nee' Blott). Educated at Diamond Hall council school in Sunderland, Goldstone became a pupil teacher in Sheffield and later trained at Borough Road Training College, Isleworth. In 1895 he married Elizabeth Alice Henderson of Whittingham, Northumberland; they had two children, a boy and a girl. 
In 1891 Goldstone was appointed an assistant master at Bow Street council school in Sheffield, and continued to teach in that city until 1910. During those years he was also an active figure in the National Union of Teachers (NUT), being involved especially in a group within it, the National Federation of Class Teachers. This concerned itself with the remuneration of teachers, and Goldstone served as its president in 1902, and was also a founder and editor of its journal, the 'Class Teacher'. 
Elected to the executive committee of the NUT in 1904, Goldstone chaired its law committee two years later. He represented the union at meetings with the Board of Education and at meetings of the National Association of Education Committees. Increasingly influential within the NUT, he left teaching in 1910 to become a full-time official of the union, following his appointment as organization secretary. He subsequently held the two highest positions, as assistant secretary (1918-1924), and as general secretary (1924-1931). 
Goldstone's political career began inauspiciously. He was selected Labour candidate for Sunderland shortly before the December 1910 election, a late replacement for R. J. Wilson (a prominent member of the Co-operative Society). He was nominally sponsored by the Fabian Society, but his expenses were paid by the NUT, which was not affiliated to the Labour Party. Goldstone consequently did not sign the party constitution. Although Ramsay MacDonald objected, party officials wanted to secure NUT support and so allowed the concession. 
At the time of his election to parliament Goldstone's educational programme was summarized in a campaign leaflet: he stood for 'a national system of education with a free teaching profession; one register of teachers; increased salaries for rural and class teachers; an improved system of superannuation applied to all teachers working under local education authorities; a code of professional honour; a 'forward' policy generally' ('DLB'). In 1911 he attacked the policies of Sir Robert Morant, the permanent secretary of the Board of Education, arguing that secondary schools and universities should be freely opened to all those who had the required ability. Down to 1914 Goldstone also pressed in the Commons for improved medical inspection for children and better educational facilities for disabled people, as well as promoting the 1914 bill to abolish the half-time system. In 1916 he was appointed to the departmental committee on juvenile education and employment (established by H. A. L. Fisher); and this recommended a standard school-leaving age of fourteen, with continuation classes for fourteen- to eighteen-year-olds. Goldstone also served on the departmental committee on scholarships and free places in 1918. 
Goldstone was not a charismatic MP. He was overshadowed by other Labour figures in campaigns against 'boy labour' and in favour of school meals and medical inspections. Keir Hardie none the less commented favourably on Goldstone's first session in parliament, when he criticized the government's 'National Insurance Bill'. A reliable back-bencher and a good constituency MP, he asked pertinent questions and made careful speeches. On home rule he reflected the views of his many Irish-born constituents. As an MP for a shipbuilding constituency he managed to attack the arms race without advocating a small navy. He supported the war effort (working in the War Office) but continued to denounce militarism and xenophobia. 
Such attributes made Goldstone an obvious choice for chief whip in 1916, when Arthur Henderson was appointed to the Board of Education in the coalition government. It helped that he was also mild, cheerful, and tactful. This allowed him in 1916 to raise the issue of Henderson's ambiguous position as both cabinet minister and secretary of the party, and to do so without attacking Henderson directly or focusing on the limited time which he devoted to educational issues. He was a member of the speaker's conference on the franchise, which supplied the blueprint for the 1918 'Reform Act'. He sat on the Burnham standing joint committee, which created a payments scale for teachers; the Tomlin commission on the civil service, which reported in 1931; and the joint committee of mayors and voluntary agencies, which administered the Miners' Relief Fund in the late 1920s. 
Expanding educational opportunities was always more important than politics to Goldstone, and this became even more obvious after his election defeat in 1918. As a union official he was noted for solid organizational work, attention to detail, orderly exposition of the facts, and careful negotiation. In campaigns against educational cuts and in support of NUT policies, he deferred neither to government officials nor to fellow Labour politicians, but was always respectful to both. A traditionalist in some respects, he still wanted to raise the school-leaving age and extend opportunities. So far as Labour politics were concerned, he remained overshadowed by R. H. Tawney, MacDonald, and others in debates over educational policy. Although technically chair of Labour's education advisory committee, he was conspicuously absent from its deliberations (as he had been from the speaker's conference). 
Goldstone was always somewhat distant from Labour colleagues; and his name seldom appears in the diaries, correspondence, and memoirs of Labour, Fabian, and socialist contemporaries. He was closer to NUT colleagues, but they too painted a picture of a neatly dressed, sincere, but rather formal bureaucrat (despite his liking for football and cricket). 
Goldstone retired as general secretary of the NUT in 1931, when he also received a knighthood. He acted as principal of a tutorial college for three years, but played little further part in political affairs. His wife died at Ipswich in 1942. Goldstone was not distinguished as a propagandist for the Independent Labour Party, a great pamphleteer, or a prominent municipal politician. However, his form of political activism, enthusiasm for education, and attention to the details of union activity were important ingredients in the early Labour Party. He died at 12 Temple Road, Ipswich, on 25 December 1955. 


@@@@@


doc= 47360


Halliday, Thomas (1835-1919), trade unionist, was born on 18 July 1835 at Prestolee near Bolton in Lancashire, the son of a coalminer who was killed in an accident when Thomas was only two years of age. His mother, who had been born in Wales, worked in a textile mill following her husband's death. 
Halliday's working life started at the age of eight, and he toiled in the coal industry in various parts of the north of England until August 1863, when he became the full-time agent of the newly created Farnworth and District Miners' Union. Together with William Pickard from Ince in Lancashire, Halliday struggled to build up support for mining unionism in the Lancashire coalfield. Trade unionism in the Lancashire coalfield had briefly flourished in the 1840s, when the systematic use of localized strike action supported by neighbouring union branches had led to some improvements in wages and conditions. But the later years of that decade saw unionism decline, and revival was delayed by bitter local rivalries and the absence of solidarity engendered by the social and geographical exclusivity of mining communities in other coalfields. In Lancashire miners tended to live among workers in other trades, and were more vulnerable to the importation of migrant, especially Irish and Welsh, labour. 
The two men became leading figures in the Miners' National Association, with Pickard as treasurer and Halliday as vice-president. This organization was dominated by the strategy and personality of its president, Alexander Macdonald, who tended to favour redress of grievances and improvement of conditions through parliamentary action, conciliation, and collaboration with employers. It was a policy which was not without its critics who advocated a more confrontational strategy, and in 1864 this led to schism in the ranks of mining trade unionism when critics of Macdonald withdrew from the national association and established the Practical Miners' Association which pursued a more aggressive industrial policy. This breakaway organization collapsed within two years, and during these disputes Pickard and Halliday remained loyal to Macdonald. The Miners' National Association was, in effect, a loose confederation of local unions which provided Macdonald with a platform from which to lobby parliament and the government for reforms in the conditions of employment in the coal industry. Halliday was among those who felt the need for an organization which could also co-ordinate industrial action, offer financial aid to members in disputes with employers, and organize sympathetic action if necessary. 
Although relations with Macdonald never deteriorated into deep personal hostility, Halliday led a new challenge to Macdonald's supremacy within mining trade unionism in the late 1860s. It was the difficulties encountered by Halliday in trying to organize the miners of Lancashire, where the systematic use of strike-breakers, and female and child labour, made effective trade unionism very difficult, that convinced him that only a genuinely amalgamated national union of coalminers would result in significant improvement in wages and conditions. By July 1869 Halliday and Pickard had created the Amalgamated Association of Miners. Macdonald addressed a conference called to discuss the proposed new body; differences over strategy, however, prevented him from supporting the new organization which was formally launched the following month, with Halliday as its president. 
Although the Amalgamated Association soon attracted support in Lancashire and some other parts of England, it was in the rapidly expanding but largely un-unionized coalfield of south Wales that the amalgamated miners' union was to have its greatest impact and leave a profound legacy. Until 1870 there had been only sporadic and spontaneous forms of organization among the colliers of south Wales, with no permanent coalfield-wide or even district bodies to co-ordinate activities. Halliday and his amalgamated union provided the catalyst for the creation of effective trade union organization in the south Wales coalfield. Under the amalgamated union a structure emerged, based on lodges organized into district committees, each with its own full-time agent, which was to characterize south Wales mining trade unionism for sixty years. Halliday enjoyed considerable initial success, with two large and successful disputes in 1871 and 1873. With a weakening market for coal, and concerted action by the coal owners, however, the period after 1874 was one of rapid decline for the Amalgamated Association. A strike early in 1875 against major wage reductions in the south Wales coalfield bankrupted Halliday's union, and it never recovered from the effects of this dispute. There was also growing hostility to the lack of rank-and-file control over the executive of the Amalgamated Association, which led to a series of secessions by district miners' associations. In south Wales, the 1875 strike resulted in the creation of a sliding scale for wages administered by a conciliation board, and subsequently coalmining trade unionism in south Wales, where it existed, operated on a highly sectionalized, valley-based, district system until the creation of the South Wales Miners' Federation in 1898. Attempts in 1877 by Halliday to revive the Amalgamated Association failed. Halliday served briefly as the secretary of a reunited Miners' National Association, but by the late 1870s Halliday's career as a national leader of the miners was over and he slipped into an obscurity from which he never re-emerged. 
Halliday left no written records, and details of his personality and private life are very sparse. It is not known whether he was married. He must have possessed inspirational qualities; he certainly had a profound impact on rising miners' leaders in south Wales such as William Abraham (Mabon). It is a reflection of the dramatic impact he had on many Welsh miners, that Halliday was put forward as a Liberal candidate for Merthyr Tudful in the general election of 1874. He gained nearly 5000 votes, but proved unable to break the hold of the sitting members for that overwhelmingly working-class borough. 
For Halliday the Merthyr Tudful election was the high-water mark of his career. From 1880 he disappears from the annals of the British labour movement, thereafter he seems to have eked out an existence as a small businessman trading in the accessories of employment in the coal industry of south Wales. Halliday died in Cardiff on 24 November 1919. 


@@@@@


doc= 47361


Rant, William (1603/4-1653), physician, the second of the five sons of William Rant (1564-1627), a physician of Norwich, and his first wife, Mary, daughter of Edward Ward, of Kirby, Norfolk, was born in Norwich, and attended school there for five years under Matthew Stonham. In 1619 Rant and his younger brother, Thomas, matriculated as pensioners at Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, William Rant gaining his MB in 1625 and MD in 1630. On his father's death in 1627, he was bequeathed 'all my great books of physicke', and given a special charge 'that he be helpful (to the best of his power) to my sonne Edward in the study of physicke'. Edward (died 1636) was almost certainly the son of a second marriage; his mother was also provided for in the will. As a reward for this service to his half-brother, Rant received 'all Avicen with comment in three great volumes' and other especially prized medical books. In addition, he inherited a house in Needham Street, Norwich, and lands outside the city's St Giles's Gate (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/152, sig. 108). 
In 1630 Rant moved to London and built a thriving medical practice. He presented himself for examination at the College of Physicians in 1632; was elected a candidate in the college on 30 September 1633; and became a fellow on 30 September 1634. In the same year, Rant and his brother Thomas purchased a pedigree from the College of Arms during the heraldic visitation of London. 
Rant soon became an active and highly respected fellow of the College of Physicians. As a second-generation Caius physician, he was more steeped than most in the traditions of academic medicine. He was admired for his elegant library and for his generous benefactions to the college coffers. In October 1639 he delivered the first Goulstonian lecture in morbid anatomy, a lecture endowed by Theodore Goulston's will of 1632. Around 1640 he married Jane Dingley (died 1656), third daughter of Sir John Dingley, of Wolverton, Hampshire; they had a son, William ('b'. 'c'.1642), and a daughter, Jane. 
Despite having strong royalist sympathies, which led him to contribute financially to Charles I's cause, Rant faithfully attended college meetings in London throughout the civil war years, from 1642 to 1649, and was crucial in the college's functioning. He was a censor on four occasions, in 1640, 1645, 1647, and 1650, and was still active in the college in 1651, when he volunteered to give the anatomy lecture in place of a delinquent Edmund Smith. Some of Rant's prescriptions, dating from 1652 and 1653, were preserved in the Sloane MSS in the British Library. 
Rant was seriously ill in 1653 from what was called a 'marasmus', a general weakening or wasting away of the body, a body which, in Rant's case, was already tall and thin by nature. In his last days, he retired to Thorpe Market, in his native county of Norfolk, where he was reunited with his brother Thomas, who had himself withdrawn from London in disaffection with the Commonwealth. Rant died on 15 September 1653, and was buried in the parish church of Thorpe Market. His death was duly noted by the London obituarist Richard Smyth, who managed to confuse him with another college fellow, John Raven. Three years after Rant's death, on 1 February 1656, Thomas Rant presented the College of Physicians with six Arabic books which had been bequeathed to it by his brother. 


@@@@@


doc= 47363


Hepburn, Thomas (1796-1864), miners' leader, was born in February 1796 in the Durham pit village of Pelton. His father was killed in a mining accident, leaving a widow and three children, of whom Thomas was the eldest. Hepburn received a scanty education at the village school, and could read the 'Bible' when he began work at Urpeth colliery at the age of eight; he soon moved to another local pit, at Fatfield. He took every opportunity to extend his education by private study and by attending classes after work. He joined the Primitive Methodists, becoming an active local preacher, which developed his powers of persuasion, public speaking, and organization. Hepburn married in 1820 and soon afterwards moved to a colliery at Jarrow and then to the recently opened Hetton colliery. This pattern of moves within a small area was typical of the lives of skilled hewers, and Hepburn thereby gained experience of a variety of mining communities. Hetton was a large new colliery, with a newly gathered workforce ripe for the establishment of its own leadership. 
Although miners had often shown a capacity for effective collective action, formal trade unionism among them had never achieved long-term success. In 1830 Hepburn became involved in attempts to resuscitate a mining union, encouraged by the existence of a number of grievances, including the long hours worked by colliery boys and the existence of the annual 'bond' or written contract of employment which tied miners to a coal-owner's service for a year. Early in 1831 Hepburn took a leading role in mass meetings at which these grievances were expressed and steps taken to form a revived union. In early April, when the annual bond was due for renewal, thousands of pitmen refused to sign and the northern coalfield was crippled by a major lock-out which lasted more than two months. The coal-owners were unable to maintain united resistance and by the summer the miners had won a major victory, which included the concession of shorter working hours for boys. Throughout the campaign, Hepburn worked hard to keep the men together and present a moderate and law-abiding public front. Some of the other 1831 leaders, including other Primitive Methodist lay preachers, were cast in the same mould; their obvious honesty, moderation, and respectability helped to confer a favourable public image on the union. It was said that Hepburn 'many times prevented the men from running into excess and extravagance' ('Newcastle Weekly Chronicle'). The effect of these tactics on the authorities, and on uncommitted public opinion, was crucial in the miners' victory. 
The union remained in existence following the 1831 settlement, and in August 1831 Hepburn was elected as its paid organizer, after a short period in which he had tried to support his family by founding a small school. Thereafter things began to go awry for the union and its leader. Many employers were alarmed at the way in which the coal-owners had been coerced into concessions, fears shared in some influential quarters in local and central government. Hepburn was unable to maintain control of all of his followers. There was a continuing rash of local colliery disputes which imperilled the continuance of the 1831 settlement, since the concessions made had not ensured industrial peace on the coalfield. Another widespread dispute brought most of the northern pitmen out again in 1832, in an atmosphere that turned ugly. There were outbreaks of violence, including attacks on collieries and at least two murders, which played a part in turning the authorities and uncommitted public opinion against the miners. The union's unity proved fragile, and in face of the coal-owners' greater determination to resist coercion, and the threat presented by the import of many blackleg miners, 'Hepburn's Union' was broken by the end of the summer of 1832, leaving its leader in serious difficulties. Hepburn tried teaching again, without success, and then selling tea door-to-door in the pit villages. After years of hardship, he made a desperate appeal for employment to T. E. Forster, the manager of Felling colliery. Forster agreed to take him on, but apparently exacted a promise of abstention from union activities. For the rest of Hepburn's life, Forster supported and befriended him. Successive employments as a deputy overman, inspector of safety lamps, and master wasteman, enabled Hepburn to support his family respectably. 
Hepburn's public activities did not end with the union catastrophe of 1832. Although they coincided with the political crisis over parliamentary reform, there was little broader political inspiration behind the 1831-2 strikes, and the miners' case was mostly confined to immediate mining grievances. There were sound tactical reasons for this, though Hepburn himself was a keen supporter of political reform. After he had secured his Felling employment, he was prominent in the 1839 Chartist agitation on Tyneside. When the great mining strike of 1844 began, some miners begged Hepburn to join its leadership. His memories of 1832 remained sharp and he steadily refused 'as he had been forsaken by them and taken care of by Mr. Forster' ('Newcastle Weekly Chronicle'). In his last years, when Hepburn had been forced to give up work and his mental state had deteriorated, Forster continued to treat him kindly. He lived at Office Row, Hebburn, until he was taken to his daughter's home three months before his death in Newcastle upon Tyne on 9 December 1864. His funeral at Heworth was attended by few mourners, his part in the events of 1831-2 being by then largely forgotten. A few years later the publication of Richard Fynes's 'The Miners of Northumberland and Durham' (1873) revived interest in Hepburn's achievements. In November 1875 a headstone was erected on Hepburn's grave, extolling the way in which he had striven for 'shorter hours and better education for miners'. His significance as an early pioneer of trade unionism in that movement's heroic age has since been widely accepted. In 1974 Hepburn was included in a small group of early labour leaders selected for an issue of commemorative postage stamps. 


@@@@@


doc= 47364


Heywood, Abel (1810-1893), newsagent and publisher, was born on 25 February 1810 in Prestwich, Lancashire, the youngest son of the four children born to Betty and John Heywood, whose second marriage it was. John Heywood, a 'putter out' for weavers, died in 1812. In 1819 his widow moved to Manchester and the nine-year-old Abel began working for a local manufacturer, Thomas Worthington, at the weekly wage of 18died The energy and application which were to distinguish his long life were already evident and by fourteen he was in charge of sixty other boys and attending the Lion Hill Sunday school in Bennet Street. He left the Sunday school over a perceived injustice but continued his self-education by becoming one of the first members of the mechanics' institution. 
In 1831, having been summarily dismissed, Heywood took the bold step of opening a penny reading-room for the working class in Oldham Street. This was rapidly followed by his setting up as a wholesale newsagent and acquiring the agency for the 'Poor Man's Guardian'. Because this paper refused to pay the government stamp duty designed to make newspapers too expensive for the working class, its sale was deemed illegal and Heywood was duly charged and sentenced. He was fined $54, which he refused to pay because he believed the charge unjust. He was, therefore, sent to the Salford New Bailey for four months. His mother and family kept the business going and, when released, he returned to selling the illegal paper, incurring two further fines in 1834 and 1836, both of $18 -- which this time he paid. His commitment to cheap newspapers for the working class and resistance to the 'taxes on knowledge' continued unabated. In 1834 he printed almanacs on cotton handkerchiefs to avoid the tax and in 1838 he was selling 18,000 copies weekly of the 'Northern Star', the Leeds-based radical paper. 
Despite selling what one contemporary described as 'insurgent literature... for sans culottes' (Manchester City Library, cuttings file), Heywood's business prospered and the rental of his shop was enough to make him eligible for the post of a commissioner of police to which he was elected in 1836. He claimed that this -- and all his subsequent public work -- was undertaken in the interests of the working class who 'knew of my sympathy with them' (ibid.). He took a leading role in the bitter struggle for incorporation of the city and was elected to the new city council when it was finally created in 1843. 
For the rest of his life, Heywood was active on that council, as alderman in 1853 and twice as mayor, in 1862-3 during the cotton famine when he was on the Lancashire Relief Committee, and in 1876-7. In 1859 and 1865 he stood unsuccessfully for parliament as a Liberal. His major public work was, therefore, as a member of Manchester city council, particularly on the paving, sewering, and highways committee which he chaired for forty-seven years. His concern for the conditions of the poor was a motive force in overseeing Manchester's ambitious waterworks and sewage building programme and the later development of its tramway system. 
Heywood's other major achievement was in initiating and seeing to completion the building he hoped would symbolize Manchester's greatness, the new town hall, opened in his second period as mayor. The queen's refusal to attend the opening and to give Heywood an honour led to a storm of rumours about his publishing past which were indignantly refuted by his friends. Instead of a royal visit, there was a procession of trades in his honour and, at his invitation, citizens paraded through their new town hall. On 28 November 1891 he was given the freedom of the city, the third man to be so honoured. 
Despite his other activities, Heywood kept a close hold on the running of the Oldham Street business, which by 1851 was the largest wholesale newsagency in the country, as well as a general bookshop and publishing house, with a subsidiary interest in paper-making. When the 1851 parliamentary select committee on newspaper stamps met, Heywood provided detailed accounts of the sales of cheap periodicals in the Manchester region which his firm supplied. He handled probably 10 per cent of the national sales of the cheapest papers. Defending the quality of this press to the committee, he argued not only that the remaining tax on news should go but that the working class wanted good papers and would choose them in preference to immoral or seditious publications, if they could. Here the radical politician and the print entrepreneur were at one. 
With his publisher brother, John, Heywood also played a crucial role in regional culture, publishing local writers, both in standard English and dialect, and producing local periodicals including 'Ben Brierley's Journal'. Heywood took his son, also named Abel ('b'. 1840), into partnership in 1864 (and later his grandson), thus ensuring the family control of the business he had built up from his penny reading-room. 
Throughout his life, Heywood was a supporter of a range of social and political causes, a ready speaker at public events where he would be found on his legs, and notable for his fluency or long-windedness, depending on the nature of the debate. In private conversation, however, he was more taciturn, a trait which offended those who believed their status merited more regard. A rationalist, with an interest in the ideas of Robert Owen, Heywood promoted the Hall of Science at Campfield and was treasurer of the Rational Sick and Burial Club. 
Heywood was married twice, first to Ann Shelmerdine, and then to Elizabeth, widow of Thomas Goadsby, his fellow alderman. He had four children. A tall, somewhat gaunt though handsome man, Heywood was careless of his appearance and often looked dishevelled at public events. One contemporary described him as like some horses who are 'bad at grooming' but have plenty of 'go' in them ('City Jackdaw'). In the 1870s Heywood moved out from Manchester to the suburb of Bowdon in Cheshire. He died of heart disease at Summerfield, Rosehill, his home there, on 19 August 1893, leaving a reputation in the city as a true 'Manchester Man'. 


@@@@@


doc= 47365


Hicks, Amelia Jane (1839-1917), socialist and trade unionist, was born at 49 Little Surrey Street, Southwark, London, on 26 February 1839, daughter of Richard George Cox, bootmaker and Chartist, and his wife, Harriet, 'nee' Ford. Little is known of her early life. On 4 June 1860 she married William John Hicks, a pianoforte maker, the son of William Hicks, carpenter and joiner; they had six children. In 1865 they emigrated to Auckland, New Zealand, where Amie was employed in rope making. 
The family returned to England about 1880, and set up home in West Hampstead; this marked the beginning of Amie's involvement in socialist politics. By the spring of 1883 Amie, William, and their daughter, Margaretta, had joined H. M. Hyndman's Democratic Federation, renamed the Social Democratic Federation (SDF) in the following year. Amie, along with two other women (Eleanor Marx and Mrs Hyndman), was elected onto the SDF executive committee in 1884 and 1885. She played an active role in socialist affairs as an open-air speaker and lecturer. In the free-speech campaign of 1885 she was fined $20 for a breach of the peace while addressing a crowd in Dod Street, and she also took part with her son Alfred, a compositor, in the unemployed agitation of 1885-6. She stood unsuccessfully as an SDF candidate for the London school board in 1885 and 1888, giving her occupation as 'accoucheuse' (midwife). 
In 1888 Amie Hicks moved to Kentish Town and for the next two decades lived in a variety of homes in nearby Camden Town. She became involved in the labour unrest in London between 1888 and 1890, which led to a shift in the focus of her activities away from socialist politics towards women's labour issues. None the less, she continued to attend SDF meetings, and her links with the party were maintained through Margaretta Hicks, who stood as an SDF candidate for the board of guardians in St Pancras in 1904, set up the women's paper 'The Link' in 1911, and became the first woman organizer of the British Socialist Party (successor to the SDF) in 1914. 
In 1889 Amie Hicks became involved in a new organization, the Women's Trade Union Association (WTUA), which aimed to help female workers in the East End to form trade unions. She worked closely with Clementina Black, who had been secretary of the Women's Trade Union League, and Clara James, assistant secretary of the association, who was already a close friend and a member of the Hicks household. After convening a meeting of rope makers in 1889 Amie was elected secretary of a newly formed East London Ropemakers' Union, a position she held for ten years. Along with Clara James she pressurized the royal commission on labour to hear female witnesses, and in 1891 the two women were invited to give evidence about the work conditions for rope makers and confectionery workers. Amie noted that conditions for women were so bad in east London that an employer had only to say he wanted some work done, fix his own rate of pay, and he would always find women glad to take it. She appealed, therefore, for the appointment of women factory inspectors, for the medical inspection of women's work, government regulation of profit and wages, and amendments to the 'Employers' Liability Act'. 
The difficulties of organizing 'sweated' workers convinced the leaders of the WTUA that they should redirect their energies into a new organization, the Women's Industrial Council (WIC), established in 1894. The new group sought to undertake systematic enquiry into the conditions of working women, to influence public opinion, and to lobby for government policies which would improve women's employment position. Amie Hicks served on the executive of the WIC from its foundation until 1908. She was president of the Clubs' Industrial Association (CIA), which represented forty-five working girls' clubs and was intended to strengthen links between a predominantly middle-class leadership and working women. With her 'hands on' industrial experience and working-class background Amie Hicks had a better understanding of factory girls and what would appeal to them than many more philanthropically minded club workers. The association aimed to encourage leadership among working-class girls, to develop domestic ideals, and to improve physical conditions. Clara James, for example, ran classes in physical drill. The organizers hoped that working girls would take an active interest in civic life and Amie Hicks arranged lectures on industrial, social, and educational topics. She believed that this would enable working women to understand industrial law which might encourage them to assist factory inspectors. She also emphasized the need for training and education since she argued that this would enable women workers to demand better pay and to understand the benefits of trade unionism. 
Amie Hicks was joined in her work for the WIC by her daughter Frances Amelia Hicks, sometimes called Amy ('b'. 1861), who was secretary of the London Tailoresses' Society. Frances was elected to the London Trades Council executive in 1893, joined the technical education board of the London County Council in February 1894, and was appointed the first secretary of the WIC on $100 a year in 1895. She held this post for only six months, resigning on her marriage to Henry James, a mariner, in September 1895. She continued, however, as secretary of the organizations committee of the WIC, of which her mother was chair, and gave lectures on technical education and the 'Factory Acts'. She wrote two essays, 'Dressmakers and tailoresses' (in F. Galton, ed., 'Workers on their Industries', 1896) and 'Factory girls' (in A. Reid, ed., 'The New Party', 1895). She later joined the Women's Labour League and was secretary of the St Pancras branch in 1907. 
Amie Hicks's work for the WTUA and WIC brought her into contact with women from varied social backgrounds who were interested in improving women's work conditions. She opened her home to trade unionists and socialists such as Margaret Bondfield who later acknowledged her influence and support. In an account of the life of Clara James, Mrs Gilchrist Thompson, a member of the WIC, claimed that Clara 'came under the influence of a heroic Labour leader, Mrs Amie Hicks, who, when I came to know her, typified to me what must have been the aspect of one of the minor prophets -- denouncing the greed and cruelty of the society of his day' (Bondfield, 32-3). It was in Amie Hicks's garden that Mrs Thompson found out from the young Margaret Gladstone that she was to marry Ramsay MacDonald, who later claimed that Amie was one of the two women who most inspired his wife. He described her as 'a woman of some note as a socialist worker, with a strong motherly face, a firm independent character, a great store of good simple common sense, and above all the mother of children who doated ['sic'] upon her and admired her' (MacDonald, 137). 
During the 1890s Amie Hicks had a considerable reputation as a speaker on subjects relating to working women. She was appointed a delegate with John Burns and David Holmes (of the Weavers' Union) to the American Convention of Labour in 1894. A serious illness on arrival in America prevented her from attending the convention, but she addressed a strike meeting in Boston and lectured to the Twentieth Century Club on women and the labour movement. 
She attended the Socialist and Trade Union International Congress in London in 1896, where she presented a resolution calling for the prohibition of women working in factories for six weeks before and after confinement and for a maternity grant. She attended the 1897 Conference on Home Work and read a paper on 'child-bearing women' at the International Conference of Women held in London in June 1899. She was also a member of the London Reform Union, a non-party-political organization which was concerned with moral and social reforms, better housing, and improvements in the municipal government of London. 
Amie Hicks continued her association with the WIC until 1910, after which she became vice-president of the National Association of Girls' Clubs, which was formed in 1911 from an amalgamation of the girls' clubs and rest rooms committees of the National Union of Women Workers and the CIA. Amie Hicks appears to have spent her last years living with her daughter, Margaretta, at 21 Rochester Square, St Pancras. She died, after a long illness, in the Middlesex Hospital on 5 February 1917. There was an 'In memoriam' tribute to her in the WIC journal, 'Women's Industrial News', which recorded her 'personal note of sympathy for the particular case... her passionate sense of justice and... her eager, youthful spirit' ('WIN', April 1917), but there were no obituaries in the general press. And yet Amie Hicks was a well-known figure in the trade union and socialist movements and one of the few working-class women to achieve prominence as an organizer and speaker. 


@@@@@


doc= 47366


Hodgson, Sir Mark (1880-1967), trade unionist, was born on 19 November 1880 in Newington, Hull, the son of Joshua Hodgson, a boilersmith, and his wife, Lydia. His mother died when he was eight years old and his father left home when he was young, so he was brought up by relatives in Sunderland, where he attended Diamond Hall School before taking on an apprenticeship as a plater and continuing his education in evening classes at the local technical college. He became increasingly involved in the local affairs of the United Society of Boilermakers and Iron and Steel Shipbuilders, being appointed in 1913 as the Tyne and Wear representative on the executive council, and serving as chairman of the council from 1923 to 1936, and then as general secretary until 1948. 
In contrast to his distinguished predecessors, Robert Knight and John Hill, Hodgson had a relatively short and straightforward period as leader of the boilermakers. He nursed the union's recovery from the inter-war depression, and represented its interests effectively during the Second World War. He was involved in complex negotiations on overtime, relaxation of working practices during the war, dilution, and the development of a pioneering pay-as-you-earn income tax. He played the role in local affairs which had come to be associated with his office, as a magistrate, chairman of the Newcastle Co-operative Printing Society, and a leading light of Methodism. However, this was also a period of increasing state intervention, with expanding opportunities for union leaders to play a role in public administration at both local and national levels. Hodgson began in a relatively modest way as a member of the National Arbitration Tribunal and the North-East Industrial Development Association. Then in his so-called retirement he went on to play a major role in the development of post-war regional policy, through the North-East Housing Association and as chairman of the Northern Regional Board for Industry from 1949 to 1965. Moreover, he participated in the administration of the newly nationalized industries, through membership of an inquiry into the organization of the National Coal Board in 1948 and as chairman of the Railway Users' Consultative Committee from 1951 to 1955. 
Hodgson was a man of average height with dark hair and a moustache. In 1900 he married Elizabeth Jane Davis from Sunderland; they had a son and two daughters. No doubt affected by the loss of his own parents early in life, he had close and warm relationships with his family: his younger daughter worked as his secretary, and his son was the boilermakers' solicitor. However, beneath a modest, establishment appearance on the right wing of the Labour Party, Hodgson was highly energetic and independent. Following a long life of public service, for which he was appointed OBE in 1938 and a knighthood in 1945, Hodgson died on 17 October 1967 at his home, 31 Kenton Road, Kenton, in Newcastle, and was cremated in Newcastle. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 47367


Irving, David Daniel (1854-1924), socialist organizer and politician, was born in Birmingham on 31 October 1854, the son of Samuel Irving, a commercial traveller, and his wife, Susannah. He attended Dawson's national school, Birmingham, went to sea at the age of thirteen, and then in 1875 settled in Bristol. After a year as a warehouseman, he was employed by the Midland Railway, where he rose to the grade of foreman shunter. An accident cost him a leg, a down-grading of his employment, and a wage cut of 8's'. a week. This trauma and the response of his employer perhaps affected his political and religious views which hitherto had been Liberal and Baptist. Eventually he joined the Bristol Socialist Society. His shift was contemporary with the growth of new unionism and Irving became Bristol secretary of a gasworkers' union (later incorporated into the National Union of General Labourers). He was also involved heavily in attempts to organize so-called unskilled and women workers. 
Irving participated in the ethical mobilization sometimes characterized as the religion of socialism. He married Clara Brock, daughter of a Bristol house decorator, in 1879; they had two daughters. Late in 1891, the Irving house acquired a lodger, Katharine Conway, a Newnham-educated socialist. She characterized herself as Irving's 'spirit-wife'. Irving and another Bristol socialist, Enid Stacy, were nominated by Katharine Conway as members of a home colony to be developed at Starnthwaite in Westmorland by a Unitarian minister, the Revd Herbert V. Mills. This venture, part of a broader attempt to develop a rural alternative to industrial society, proved during the winter of 1892-3 to be a disaster. Eventually, Irving and Stacey led a revolt against Mills's appointment of a foreman without a democratic vote. The colonists were evicted. Lengthy legal arguments resulted in costs to all parties, a payment of $75 to Irving, and the end of any relationship with Conway, who had supported Mills. 
After a period as a socialist lecturer, in 1894 Irving was appointed full-time secretary of the Burnley branch of the Social Democratic Federation (SDF). Lancashire was a relative stronghold of the federation and Burnley was especially notable as the location of a sizeable branch. In the year of Irving's appointment, it boasted 1000 members. Thereafter the durability of the branch owed much to Irving's organizational skills. At the 1906 election, the SDF was 350 votes from victory. The candidate was the SDF leader, H. M. Hyndman, who contested Burnley on four occasions and was highly appreciative of Irving's organizational work. 
The political significance of Irving's activities is contestable. It would be simplistic to present Irving as the organizer of a Marxist and politically distinctive SDF presence. The federation branch fulfilled much the same role as the Independent Labour Party (ILP) in other towns; it was not a sectarian anomaly. When the national SDF broke with the Labour Representation Committee (LRC) in 1901 on account of the latter's lack of socialist commitment, Burnley, under Irving's leadership, continued much as before. His strategy included working with local trade unions in a broad alliance. 
Irving's attempt to expand socialist influence in one community can be seen as a variant on the theme of municipal socialism. He was a member of the school board from 1898 until its abolition in 1903; he spent two periods on the board of guardians. Most significantly he was elected to the town council in November 1902 and, with a one-year gap, worked assiduously in this forum until his defeat in 1922. Beyond his Burnley base, he was a significant figure in the SDF, sitting on its executive from 1897, propagandizing, and fighting elections. In the 1906 election he secured a creditable vote against the sitting Liberal at Accrington; in both 1910 campaigns he contested Rochdale, a town with some record of socialist strength. A more specially propagandist intervention came in the North West Manchester by-election of April 1908. All these candidacies were on a specifically Social Democrat platform independent of the LRC and its successor, the Labour Party. Irving's support from local trade unionists therefore varied, but in Lancashire where support for socialist unity was relatively strong there was often backing from ILP members. 
Socialist impatience with the Labour Party produced the formation, in 1911, of the British Socialist Party (BSP) as a left alternative. Irving was a member of its executive. Early optimism proved unfounded and by 1914 the BSP was moving towards affiliation to the Labour Party. War divided the BSP. Irving was already an advocate of national defence and he quickly moved to endorse a pro-war position. The recriminations culminated at the BSP conference of April 1916, when the pro-war delegates, outvoted on a procedural issue, withdrew. Irving was a signatory to the consequential statement which identified the prospects for socialism with the defeat of Germany; he helped to form a new organization, the National Socialist Party (NSP), which later adopted the old title of SDF. Under NSP auspices Irving was adopted as Burnley's Labour candidate for the 1918 election. Local reputation and wartime patriotism combined to give him a narrow victory in a three-cornered fight, a victory that was repeated in the elections of 1922 and 1923. Irving in parliament seemed a venerable figure almost from another age. Despite the limitations of the Parliamentary Labour Party between 1918 and 1922 he never made much of a mark. 
Irving died of a heart attack on 25 January 1924 at his London home, The Chase, Clapham Common; he was survived by his wife. His effects were valued at $471. Contemporary assessments of Irving varied. Some saw him as a dogmatic follower of H. M. Hyndman; in Burnley where he was given the freedom of the borough shortly before his death, he was clearly revered by many. The electoral slogan 'Dan's the Man' evoked familiarity; the thousands who paid their respects at his funeral showed the impact of a socialist on a community. 


@@@@@


doc= 47368


Jones, Benjamin (1847-1942), co-operative movement activist and manager, was born on 9 September 1847 in Salford, Lancashire, the son of Reuben Jones, a dyer's labourer, and Mary, 'nee' Brazier, who worked as a power-loom weaver. Jones entered employment at the age of nine, working as an errand-boy and bookkeeper before joining the Co-operative Wholesale Society (CWS) in 1866. Jones was successively assistant bookkeeper, bookkeeper, assistant salesman, departmental manager, and assistant buyer of butter and cheese for the CWS in Manchester. In 1870 he married Annie White (died 1894) at Altrincham. 
Jones was chosen to establish the London branch of the CWS which opened in March 1874, directing the first enduring co-operative wholesaler to serve southern England. By his retirement in 1902 the London branch had an annual turnover of $3.25 million. Jones also oversaw CWS extension, establishing sales depots at Bristol, Cardiff, and Northampton, new productive capacity through, among others, the Silvertown flour mill and the Luton cocoa works, and overseas depots providing supplies including Danish bacon and Spanish dried fruit. Such was his success that at least one private company attempted to poach Jones away from the CWS. 
The establishment of a wholesaler in London assisted co-operative growth in southern England. However, previous weakness was not immediately overcome and Jones was involved in supporting aspiring societies through the Co-operative Union. From 1874 until 1894 he was secretary to its southern sectional board and was a central board member from 1875. Jones was also the first secretary of the Guild of Co-operators, formed to stimulate propagandism in southern England. Jones's interest in producers' co-operation is reflected in his book 'Co-Operative Production' (1894). He was also secretary to the Co-operative Aid Association, formed to promote producers' societies, and chaired the board of the London branch of the Co-operative Printing Society. Jones disagreed, however, with Christian socialists among the southern co-operative leadership in doubting the viability of independent producers' societies, successfully advocating instead production by federal wholesale societies on behalf of consumers. 
Jones supported many other co-operative causes. He founded the Blackley and Harpurhey Co-operative Building Society in 1872 and a later housing society, the London Tenant Co-operators' Society of 1888. In 1884 Jones spoke for co-operation before the royal commission on the housing of the working class and again in 1887 to the town holdings select committee. He also encouraged the development of the Women's Co-operative Guild, in which his wife was involved until her death. In 1889 and 1896 Jones presided at the national Co-operative Congress. He also represented the co-operative movement abroad, including on a world tour in 1896. 
An advocate of co-operative education, during the 1860s Jones continued his own schooling with evening classes at Owens College and the mechanics' institute in Manchester. He subsequently served on the education committee of the Blackley Co-operative Society and was a Sunday school teacher at the ragged school in Harpurhey. Following discussion at the 1882 Co-operative Congress, Jones, with the academics Arnold Toynbee and A. H. D. Acland, planned a programme of instruction in co-operative principles. This was used at a class taught by Jones in London and was presented to the 1883 congress which established the education committee of the Co-operative Union. Jones also wrote 'Working Men Co-Operators' (1884), with Acland, as a textbook for co-operative classes. He later assisted Beatrice Webb with research for her book 'The Co-Operative Movement in Great Britain' (1891), greatly influencing her thinking about co-operation. 
Jones pursued wider educational interests as a member of the London Playing Fields Committee and the school board for London, and he was also involved with evening class provision and was chairman of a working men's club. His interests extended into the political arena. In 1876 he was a member of the Labour Representation League and while living in Norwood became involved in local radical politics, including the establishment of the Norwood Reform Club. Jones was also the first secretary to the parliamentary committee of the Co-operative Union. He supported co-operative representation in parliament and himself stood unsuccessfully for Labour at Woolwich in 1892 and 1895 and as a Lib-Lab candidate at Deptford in 1900. 
Jones retired to Bournemouth where he owned the Queen Hotel, several cafes, and a bakery. He died on 25 February 1942 at Bensholme Tuckton, Bournemouth, and was buried at the north cemetery of the crematorium, Bournemouth, on 2 March 1942. His wife predeceased him in 1894, but he was survived by his four children. Jones was a vigorous advocate of co-operative federalism, and his pragmatic view of co-operation shaped its development, particularly in southern England, during an important phase of growth in the 1880s and 1890s. 


@@@@@


doc= 47369


Kane, John (1819-1876), trade unionist, was born on 18 July 1819 at Alnwick, Northumberland. His father was the son of a Methodist minister and had served as an attorney but Kane's prospects of a comfortable upbringing were destroyed when he was orphaned while still very young. He started work in a tobacco factory at the age of seven and between the ages of nine and twelve he attended school in Alnwick. He was then apprenticed to a gardener but ran away after being beaten for refusing to take part in a contrived demonstration of welcome for the estate owner. Kane subsequently found work in the mills of Hawks, Crawshay & Sons, iron manufacturers, of Gateshead and soon became well known as a forceful speaker and astute negotiator in disputes with the management. In 1842 he formed a union in Gateshead and though it soon collapsed he remained convinced that it was possible to establish effective organization among the ironworkers and the rest of his life was dedicated to this end. 
The strongly cyclical nature of the industry and the ruthless opposition of the ironmasters kept Kane's ambition in abeyance for the next twenty years and during this time his restless energy was diverted into a variety of working-class causes. He was involved in the later stages of the Chartist movement on Tyneside and subsequently became a leading figure in the Northern Reform Union. He was also a founder member of the Cramlington Co-operative Society, helped set up a working men's reading room in Newcastle, and lectured on temperance (he was a lifelong teetotaller). 
Kane finally achieved his ambition to establish a lasting union in 1862, when he formed the National Association of Ironworkers with headquarters in Gateshead. He was elected the paid president at a salary of $140 per year and set out to extend the National Association into other ironmaking districts but in doing so he encountered fierce opposition from two unions based in south Staffordshire. There were some bitter battles until, in 1868, depression brought about the collapse of both Staffordshire unions, leaving the National Association as the sole focus of organization but with its membership and finances at a desperately low ebb. 
Kane set about rebuilding the union by taking the position of general secretary so that he could exercise tighter control over day-to-day administration, moving the headquarters to Darlington and launching a fortnightly newspaper, the 'Ironworkers' Journal', which he edited. These moves were followed by a massive increase in membership, which rose from under 500 in 1868 to 35,000 by the later months of 1873. This dramatic growth certainly owed something to Kane's drive and organizing ability but the main factor was the great industrial boom of the early 1870s which 'inter alia' carried trade union membership generally to unprecedented heights. Kane's wife, Jane, shared his union interests and 'laboured heart and hand with her husband in every sphere in which he was engaged' ('Northern Echo', 22 March 1876). From 1862 she was responsible for much of the administration of the ironworkers' unions. 
While overseeing his union's recovery Kane was also engaged in establishing a completely new relationship between the ironworkers and their employers. He said in evidence to the royal commission on trades unions in 1867 that strikes and lock-outs were very prejudicial to all classes and, like war, left a trail of misery behind them, and went on to advocate that conciliation boards should be set up in the iron industry. He found a powerful ally in David Dale, the Quaker managing director of the Consett Iron Company, and in 1869 the two came together to establish the board of arbitration and conciliation for the manufactured iron trade of the north of England. The rules did not allow union representation but Kane was appointed the paid secretary to the workmen's panel. The formation of the board was widely welcomed on both sides of the industry and in 1870 the ironworkers acknowledged Kane's contribution to leading them out of chaos by presenting him with a gold watch, gold guard and seal, an illuminated address in a gold frame, and a purse of gold sovereigns. His wife was also presented with a gold watch and gold guard, and a locket. 
During these years Kane was also active in the wider trade union movement. He was present at the Manchester conference in 1868 which inaugurated the TUC and subsequently became a leading member of its parliamentary committee, serving as joint chairman in 1875. The main concern of the TUC in its early years was the ambiguous legal status of the unions and Kane was among those who felt that direct labour representation in parliament was needed to remedy the situation. He accordingly contested Middlesbrough at the 1874 general election with the support of his union and the Labour Representation League, finishing a creditable second ahead of the Conservative in a three-cornered fight. 
By this time the great industrial boom was over and as it collapsed so did trade union membership. The ironworkers' union was no exception and Kane's ceaseless efforts to shore up its crumbling organization undermined his health and brought about his premature death. Kane died in Birmingham, where he was on union business, on 21 March 1876, following a stroke two days earlier. He was buried in the west cemetery, Darlington, on 24 March 1876. His wife and at least one son survived him. His obituary in the 'Darlington and Richmond Herald' on 25 March 1876 described him fittingly as 'an indomitable man'. 


@@@@@


doc= 47370


Knight, Robert (1833-1911), trade unionist, was born on 5 September 1833 in Lifton, Devon, the son of a blacksmith. He attended the village school until the age of twelve when he began his training in metalworking with his father. Following the customary tramp around the country to extend his skills, he settled in 1857 as an angle-iron smith at the Devonport Dockyard in Plymouth where he stayed for the next fourteen years, becoming increasingly involved in the local affairs of the United Society of Boilermakers and Iron and Steel Shipbuilders. Presented by his supporters as a vigorous leader of demarcation disputes against the shipwrights, he was elected as the union's general secretary in 1871, a post he held, first in Liverpool and then in Newcastle, until his retirement in 1899. Robert Knight was of average height with thick dark hair and a full beard; socially he could be charming, but his most notable capacities were for hard work, thorough preparation, and logical argument. He was married twice, his first wife having died in 1879, and had two sons and a daughter. 
At first Knight's responsibilities as general secretary were fairly straightforward as, although the Boilermakers' Society like many of the earlier craft unions was in need of improved administration, this was a period of low unemployment and growing union influence. He was therefore able to make an immediate impression on the boilermakers' organizational structure and benefit provisions, as well as to inaugurate unusually thorough and accurate annual reports on membership, finances, and branch activities in a format retained substantially intact by the union until the 1960s. Once again his reputation as an outstanding organizer spread beyond the area of his immediate responsibilities and in 1875 he was elected chairman of the parliamentary committee of the Trades Union Congress (TUC). As this coincided with the peak of the union campaign against the restrictive elements of the trade union legislation of 1871, Knight worked closely with George Howell and subsequently appeared on the platform at the victory celebrations, giving a speech which was notable for its ambitious vision of the role of trade unionists in pressing for further social reforms in the areas of education and housing. However, the fifteen years after 1875 were to be bleak ones for the unions, with persistently high unemployment eroding financial reserves and involvement in ill-timed industrial disputes leading to the collapse of many organizations. In this context Knight began to pursue an increasingly cautious and moderate policy, largely withdrawing from national labour affairs to focus on his own union's survival, and placing the long-term health of its finances above the temptation of short-term local wage increases. This led to friction with some of the branches, particularly in the shipbuilding districts where the bulk of the union's membership was now concentrated. As a result, the union's head office was moved from Liverpool to a special new building in Newcastle upon Tyne in 1890, allowing Knight not only to maintain closer links with his members in the shipyards but also to play a prominent role in the affairs of this highly democratic community: particularly in St James's Congregational Church, in the local Liberal Party, and as a magistrate. 
This combination of industrial caution and political Liberalism led the new generation of more militant, frequently socialist-influenced, union leaders who began to emerge after 1889 to see Knight as one of the leading figures of an outdated and unimaginative style of trade unionism. However, even in the 1880s he had been a keen advocate of the incorporation of neighbouring semi-skilled groups to secure the boilermakers' bargaining position, and he adapted rapidly to the improved economic conditions of the 1890s. He initiated co-operation between unions to reduce wasteful demarcation disputes, leading to the establishment of the Federation of Engineering and Shipbuilding Trades in 1890; he pressed the employers to set up fully recognized local wage-bargaining procedures, beginning on the north-east coast in 1894; and he pioneered trade union initiative over industry-wide agreements, most notably on the number of apprentices in 1893. This ambitious programme of co-ordinated labour action to regulate industrial conditions led the Fabian socialists Sidney and Beatrice Webb to praise Knight's progressive role in their 'History of Trade Unionism' (1894). 
Politically, however, Knight remained a confirmed radical Liberal and once again began to take a more active role within the TUC, this time as one of the most articulate opponents of the new generation of socialists: he preferred local collective bargaining to the statutory imposition of the eight-hour day, and he preferred constitutional reform to the public ownership of industry. Moreover, when the Conservative victory in the 1895 general election was widely blamed on the disruptive behaviour of the Independent Labour Party, Knight became one of the leading supporters of the rule changes which excluded the most prominent socialist activists from the TUC. This pushed the Webbs into changing their line, and in the opening section of 'Industrial Democracy' (1897) they painted an influential portrait of Knight as an autocrat whose power in the wider labour movement was based on the decay of democracy within his own organization. However, this relied on a distorted account of the internal arrangements of the Boilermakers' Society, as was immediately demonstrated by its members' approval of a major reform of its constitution in the face of forceful opposition from Knight. For its part, the Independent Labour Party began to move towards greater co-operation with the older generation of radical-Liberal trade unionists and, as one of this group's senior statesmen, Knight had a major role to play in the response. As a long-standing advocate of union federation he worked closely with 'new unionists' to establish the General Federation of Trade Unions in 1899, and as a long-standing advocate of greater union representation in parliament he worked along with other 'old unionists' such as W. J. Davis and Alexander Wilkie to build a co-operative relationship with Keir Hardie around the conference which founded the Labour Representation Committee in 1900. 
Following his retirement, Knight remained active in local affairs; he died from pneumonia on 17 September 1911 at 19 Highbury, his home in Newcastle, and was buried in St Andrew's cemetery, Newcastle. He was survived by his second wife and two sons and a daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 47371


Lawson, John James, Baron Lawson (1881-1965), coalminer and politician, was born on 16 October 1881 at Dobson's Buildings, Whitehaven, one of ten children of John James Lawson (died 1930?), a merchant seaman turned miner, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Savage (died 1929?). Although he knew material hardship in his early years, Lawson's childhood experiences in the small Cumberland villages of Kells and Flimby gave him an abiding love of the countryside and the seashore, while his elementary schooling at the Glass House national school, Whitehaven, opened the door to a lifelong enjoyment of books. When Lawson was nine, his family moved to Boldon colliery, in co. Durham; and on leaving the Boldon colliery school in 1893 he joined his father and older brothers down the pit, at a starting wage of 10died a day. He progressed steadily through the hierarchy of pit work to reach the elite grade of hewer in 1904; and on 22 February 1906 he married Isabella Graham (1882-1968), a domestic servant, daughter of Robert Scott, a machinist. They had three daughters. 
As a young miner, Jack Lawson was torn between two conflicting interests, gambling and self-improvement. However, at about the age of twenty he underwent a religious conversion and joined the Wesleyan Methodists; he was an active lay preacher for the rest of his life. At the same time his pursuit of knowledge through a mixture of private reading and public debate led to a growing interest in social problems and socialist solutions. By 1905 he had joined the Independent Labour Party and taken the first step towards a possible trade union career on being elected an assistant checkweighman by his fellow hewers. All this made him obvious material for Ruskin College, the recently established trade union college at Oxford. He was offered a scholarship there in 1906, and his wife went back into service to help support him. 'Thrilled and inspired beyond words' in 1937 by reading H. A. L. Fisher's 'History of Europe', Lawson recalled these early years when 'you kindly took me, with other obscure ones, into a special class... shall I ever forget those days of spiritual exaltation when I sat at your feet?' (Lawson to Fisher, 10 Jan 1937, Bodl. Oxf., MS Fisher 73, fol. 1). On completing his studies, Lawson rejected the possibility of making a new career in teaching or the ministry, and took the deliberate decision to resume his work as a miner. 
After returning to co. Durham, Lawson threw himself into local Labour politics. He acted as agent for the socialist Pete Curran at Jarrow in the general election of January 1910, and in 1913 he was elected to Durham county council, on which he sat for the next ten years. Following war service as a driver in the Royal Artillery, he was chosen to fight Seaham Harbour for Labour in the 'coupon' election of 1918, but lost to the sitting Liberal. However, in the turbulent post-war world the political tide in the British coalfields was running strongly in Labour's favour; and in 1919 Lawson entered the Commons in a by-election for Chester-le-Street. He held the seat continuously, rarely polling less than seventy per cent of the popular vote, until he retired in 1949. 
During thirty years as a member of parliament, Lawson's first loyalty was always to 'his own people', the pitmen of the north-east and their families. He dealt assiduously with his constituents' personal problems, especially in matters of pensions and benefits, and he was vociferous in demanding government action to deal with the wider regional issues of poverty and unemployment. Given his background, he was a strong contender for junior office in Ramsay MacDonald's two minority administrations. In the first Labour government of 1924 he became MacDonald's parliamentary private secretary along with Clement Attlee, and also served as financial secretary to the War Office; while in 1929-31 he was parliamentary secretary at the Ministry of Labour under Margaret Bondfield. As the jobless total rose inexorably in the aftermath of the 1929 Wall Street crash, Lawson's department came in for serious criticism from Labour's trade union allies for its unsympathetic handling of unemployment problems; but his personal reputation seems to have suffered little as a result. 
As one of the few survivors of Labour's electoral debacle in 1931, Lawson's future looked uncertain. Gradually, however, his career recovered. He joined the opposition front bench in 1937; and on the outbreak of the Second World War he was appointed deputy commissioner for civil defence in the northern region. This was a demanding job, both physically and emotionally, especially in the early years of the war, when the industrial north-east suffered heavy German bombing raids; and the accidental death of a young grandson, whom the Lawsons had brought up as their own, in the aftermath of one such raid was a personal tragedy from which perhaps he never fully recovered. 
Following Labour's landslide victory in 1945, Attlee -- with whom Lawson enjoyed a warm personal friendship -- offered him the cabinet post of secretary of state for war, charged with the urgent task of ensuring a swift, orderly, and equitable demobilization of the wartime armed forces. His duties included a 35,000 mile round trip to India and the Far East, during which he justified his policy at sixty mass meetings of troops eagerly awaiting their discharge. Within little more than a year of his appointment ill health forced his reluctant resignation from the government; but by then he had completed the immediate task to his own satisfaction. After three years on the back benches he retired from the Commons to become vice-president of the National Parks Commission; and in March 1950 he went to the House of Lords as Baron Lawson of Beamish. 
For much of his time in the Commons Lawson supplemented his salary by journalism and occasional broadcasting, dispensing homespun philosophy and personal observations in accessible, and often poetic, language. Among his more substantial writings were full-length character sketches of two older miners' leaders whom he had known personally: Durham's Peter Lee and the phlegmatic Yorkshireman Herbert Smith. However, his best-known and best-loved work was his autobiography, 'A Man's Life' (1932), which had sold over 30,000 copies by the time Lawson retired from the Commons. Its insights into working-class life, its individual style, and its author's patent modesty and sincerity marked it out as a classic of its kind. Not only does it provide the essential key to understanding Lawson's own beliefs and achievements: it was also influential in creating the enduring image of the Durham miners as the backbone of the British labour movement in the twentieth century. James Callaghan in 1977 gave 'the book I had admired for many years' to President Carter on his visit to Durham, and claims that Carter read it on his flight home (J. Callaghan, 'Time and Change', 1977, 482). 
Jack Lawson's socialism was always more sentimental than scientific. Pragmatic and patriotic, his good sense, moderation, and reliability won him friends and admirers in all walks of life and all political parties; for example, he kept up an amicable correspondence with the high tory historian Arthur Bryant. Once it had been realized that figures such as Lawson posed no real threat to the established order, his personal qualities made him a worthy candidate for public honours and non-partisan appointments. He was awarded an honorary DCL by Durham University in 1947, and the freedom of Sunderland in 1950; but he took particular pride in becoming, in 1949, the first pitman to be lord lieutenant of co. Durham. He filled the post with an easy grace for nine years, during which he claimed to have attended over 1500 functions and meetings. Yet if he enjoyed the recognition which came his way, he also remained unambitious and unspoilt. He never became a rich man, and for the last forty years of his life he lived in the same small cottage in Beamish, among the 'ordinary folk' whom he had sought to serve. 
Lord Lawson died in Chester-le-Street General Hospital on 3 August 1965, and was buried at West Pelton churchyard, co. Durham. A memorial service in Durham Cathedral on 13 September made an appropriate end to a career which epitomized the almost painless incorporation of the Labour Party into British public life during the first half of the twentieth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 47373


Macdonald, Alexander (1821-1881), trade unionist and politician, was born on 27 June 1821 at Dalmacoulter Farm, New Monkland, Lanarkshire, the eldest of seven children of Daniel McDonald and his wife, Ann, 'nee' Watt. His father was a former seaman in the Royal Navy, who was employed as an agricultural labourer at the time of Alexander's birth, and subsequently worked as a coal and ironstone miner. The spelling of the family name was traditionally McDonald; Alexander adopted the Macdonald form in the 1870s. The family moved around the Lanarkshire coalfield before settling at Wattston near Airdrie in 1840. Although Macdonald was a regular church attender in his early years and a pupil at the parish school, his religious faith seems to have faded in later life, and it would appear that he had no particular religious affiliation by the time of his death. Macdonald never married but he always maintained close and cordial relations with his extended family. 
After a brief spell at New Monkland parish school, from the age of nine in 1830 until 1846 Macdonald worked as a coal and ironstone miner. Although a hard-working and successful miner, working on occasion as an oversman, the lowest rung of the mining managerial ladder of the time, he also seems to have been active in attempts to organize the miners into trade unions, and suffered some victimization from employers as a consequence. He took one of the few routes out of the pit by extending his meagre education using his earnings to finance evening-class studies in Greek and Latin. This eventually allowed him to attend Glasgow University full-time between 1846 and 1849. Attending university in the winter, he worked as a miner in the summer months to fund his education. Macdonald did not take a degree, but his certificates of attendance allowed him to follow a career as a teacher. Life at university left its mark, and in later years when he had sufficient wealth he was able to bequeath $1000 to Glasgow University to provide two annual bursaries for young miners keen to pursue full-time studies at that institution. 
From 1850 to 1855 Macdonald made a living as a teacher and private tutor in Airdrie. His ability to engage easily with social groups outside the labouring classes was to become a key factor in his success as an advocate of organized labour, but it also brought accusations of social snobbery, and even betrayal, by some contemporaries and later commentators. Macdonald's involvement in colliery enterprises, which grew out of contacts he acquired at university and as a private tutor, always added to the suspicion that his commitment to organized labour was compromised by his status as an owner of capital. It was, however, the small fortune he accumulated from speculative investment in the mining industry which allowed him the time and security to engage in labour activism. An effective and engaging public speaker, he could be rather censorious about the perceived weaknesses of the working men he led, but he was also hostile to middle- or upper-class paternalism. 
Macdonald was among the first trade union leaders to achieve national standing, but he saw himself as an agent and advocate of labour working within, rather than challenging, the economic order. His rise to national prominence began in October 1855 when he created a unified Scottish coal and ironstone miners' union. While this union was little more than a co-ordinating body, with Macdonald as its sole paid official, it did try to convert the older traditions of Scottish mining unionism, which sought restriction of output and control over the entry of workers into mining, into a more formal regulatory relationship with the employers. It also established Macdonald's belief in lobbying parliament as a means of redressing the grievances of working men, especially in relation to long-standing abuses such as the truck system or raising the minimum working age. It was an outlook reinforced by a dispute which engulfed the coal industry in Scotland in 1856. Against Macdonald's advice, the Scottish miners came out on strike in the spring of 1856 seeking to reverse wage cuts imposed by the owners. By the early summer the strike and the newly formed union had collapsed. 
Macdonald's belief in negotiation and lobbying was to bring him into frequent conflict with union activists who sought a more confrontational strategy. It was a conflict of perspective and outlook which was to be exposed most starkly with the establishment of the Miners' National Association in 1863. This was the culmination of earlier attempts by Macdonald to create a union linking all the British coalfields. In 1858 an informal co-ordinating body headed by Macdonald had been established; this he used as a platform to lobby parliament and government ministers. It paid off in the enactment in 1860 of the 'Mines Act', which included the vital provision for the election by miners of a checkweighman at each pit to ensure fair payment of wages. The creation of this post was to give a great fillip to union organization in the coalfields. Despite Macdonald's success, there was often a feeling that the interests of the mine workers were being sacrificed by leaders who were too close to the owners in terms of mentality and lifestyle. In 1864 this debate over strategy resulted in a short-lived schism in the miners' ranks. Led by the radical journalist John Towers, and the former Chartist lawyer W. P. Roberts, critics of Macdonald withdrew from the National Association and established the Practical Miners' Association which tried to pursue a more aggressive industrial policy. This breakaway organization collapsed within two years, but there remained an undercurrent of suspicion and hostility to the leadership of Macdonald. His well-known friendship with the wealthy Scottish tory coal owner Lord Elcho did little to allay such misgivings. Yet despite this opposition, he does seem to have retained the confidence of ordinary members of his association, and was the recipient of a number of collections and donations subscribed by them. 
Macdonald was elected to the first parliamentary committee of the Trades Union Congress in 1871, and he served as chairman of the committee in 1872 and 1873. He lobbied the Liberal government over changes relating to trade union activities in the 'Criminal Law Amendment Act' of 1871, and the 'Mines Regulation Act' of 1872. In addition Macdonald accepted a place on the royal commission on trade unions which reported in 1875. However, he issued a dissenting statement, arguing for more extensive reforms of labour laws than the majority report had advocated. 
From 1869 Thomas Halliday and his Amalgamated Association of Miners, which recruited mainly in Lancashire and south Wales, provided another challenge to Macdonald's parliament focused strategy. However, relations between Macdonald and Halliday were never acrimonious and this threat to Macdonald's national supremacy also faded in the later 1870s. His enthusiasm for the parliamentary road to improved conditions culminated in Macdonald's election as MP for Stafford in 1874. As the endorsed candidate of the Labour Representation League, Macdonald is recognized, alongside Thomas Burt, the MP for Morpeth returned at the same election, as one of the first two overtly labour, albeit Liberal/labour, members of parliament. While he took the Liberal whip Macdonald always adopted a fairly independent stance, and made 'labour' questions and resolution of the Irish problem the focus of his parliamentary work. Towards the end of his life young activists in the Scottish coalfields, such as James Keir Hardie, again questioned Macdonald's collaborative strategy. Re-elected as MP for Stafford in 1880, he served briefly as a government back-bencher until his death in 1881. 
Towards the end of his life Macdonald purchased a small estate at Wellhall near Hamilton, where he died on 31 October 1881. He was buried in the churchyard at New Monkland on 6 November. While some of his critics, both contemporary and recent, have seen his leadership as flawed, he is rightly regarded as one of the founding fathers of mining trade unionism and labour politics. 


@@@@@


doc= 47374


McGhee, Richard (1851-1930), trade unionist and politician, was born at Lurgan in Ulster in late January or early February 1851, the eldest of three sons of protestant parents, Richard and Alice McGhee. He was baptized on 12 February 1851. His father was a poor tenant farmer on the estate of Lord Lurgan, but later opened a general store in Lurgan. After attending the local school in Lurgan, at twenty years of age Richard moved to Glasgow where he served a seven-year engineering apprenticeship. On 20 July 1880 he married Mary (1857-1949), the daughter of George Campbell, a pattern-maker, and his wife, Catherine; they had five sons and a daughter. In the same year as his marriage McGhee started an unsuccessful small engineering business with his brother George. He then became a commercial traveller in cutlery and stationery, a profitable activity that sustained him throughout his working life. 
In Glasgow, McGhee became involved in radical Irish and Scottish politics and in 1879 established a lifelong friendship with Michael Davitt, the Irish nationalist and founder of the Irish Land League. Henry George, the American radical, proved to be an even greater influence and McGhee remained a committed Georgeite throughout his life, supporting a single tax on land to end the excesses of landlordism. 
By the mid-1880s McGhee had established a reputation as a man of principle, acute intelligence, and singular debating skills in the cause of Irish home rule, the campaign for land reform, and the spread of Georgeite radicalism. He was a founder member of the Scottish Land Restoration League in 1884 in support of the crofters' agitation. The universality of George's message and his belief that the problems of the Irish could be solved only by alliance with the British working class encouraged McGhee to assist unorganized, unskilled workers in England and Scotland. 
McGhee became involved in trade unionism during the 1880s through the American Knights of Labor, a general union which established branches in Britain. He was briefly a Knights of Labor organizer assisting the nail- and chain-makers of Cradley Heath in the midlands from 1887 and was subsequently sent to Glasgow on a recruiting campaign. It was during a waterfront dispute there in early 1889 that the National Union of Dock Labourers (NUDL) was formed and McGhee was invited to become honorary president with Edward McHugh as general secretary. 
The new union rapidly established branches in Scotland, Ireland, and north-west England, surviving substantial disputes in Glasgow in 1889 and Liverpool in 1890. McGhee, unpaid and part-time, was less prominent than McHugh but he devoted considerable time and energy to the organization and policies of the new union. He played a part in developing ca'canny tactics in Glasgow and Liverpool and introduced the union 'button', a metal badge designed to fit into the lapel. These buttons were issued to paid-up members and changed quarterly: their absence identified non-members, encouraging them to enlist to avoid the hostility of fellow workers. 
In 1893 both McGhee and McHugh resigned from the NUDL claiming their work had been completed, but their departure was hastened by sectional jealousies and branch indiscipline. McGhee nevertheless remained involved in the organization of waterfront workers. He was an executive council member of the International Federation of Ship, Dock and River Workers, an ambitious venture founded by Tom Mann in 1896 which, although less successful than had been hoped, was ultimately revived as the International Transport Workers' Federation. McGhee was also associated with the seamen's union for many years, helping to secure the extension of the 'Workmen's Compensation Act' to seamen in 1906 and their inclusion in the 'Health Insurance Act' of 1911. He attended the union's annual conferences and was elected an honorary member of the executive council and a trustee in 1911, holding the latter position until his death in 1930. 
In spite of the time and energy McGhee spent in the cause of labour organization, his commitment to Irish nationalism remained unimpaired, and from the early 1890s he was involved in Irish parliamentary politics. In 1892 he was unsuccessful in securing the nationalist nomination for South Louth but, following the death of the successful candidate in 1896, he was nominated and won the seat in the consequent by-election. His campaign was based on the cause of home rule on advanced nationalist principles, the endorsement of Catholic demands on education, the complete abolition of landlordism, and support for labourers based upon his own 'humble efforts during the past ten years on behalf of the toiling masses'. He was unexpectedly defeated in the election of 1900 but was again returned to parliament as the nationalist member for Mid-Tyrone in 1910. McGhee retained his seat until 1918, when the four constituencies of co. Tyrone were reduced to three, and he did not stand in the contest. 
As an MP McGhee behaved as an orthodox nationalist member. He complained of the inequity of the taxation system and condemned the British during the South African War. During the First World War, however, the Irish nationalist party led by John Redmond lost credibility. McGhee loyally supported Redmond in his decision in 1914 to support the British war effort and in his condemnation of the Easter rising of 1916. The brutal reaction of the British government to the rising and the unsuccessful attempt to activate the 'Government of Ireland Act' of 1914 which would have granted some measure of home rule finally destroyed Redmond and the constitutional movement. In the circumstances it is not surprising that McGhee did not seek re-election in 1918. 
McGhee died at his home, 3 Hayburn Crescent, Partickhill, Glasgow, on 7 April 1930, aged seventy-nine, and was buried in Glasgow on 10 April. He had been in indifferent health for some time and, following a visit to England on seamen's business, he became ill and died of pneumonia within a fortnight. He was survived by his wife. His youngest son, appropriately named Henry George McGhee, was Labour MP for the Penistone division of Yorkshire from 1935 until his death in 1959. 
An important figure in the cause of Irish nationalism, McGhee also contributed to the development of an influential Georgeite movement in Britain during the 1880s. He believed strongly in bringing together the Irish and British working classes, whose common experience of exploitation was of greater importance than divisive factors of nationality and religion. His earlier career as a trade union organizer was also noteworthy. 


@@@@@


doc= 47375


Maddison, Fred (1856-1937), trade unionist and politician, was born on 17 August 1856 at Boston, Lincolnshire, the son of Richard Maddinson, a hotel worker, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Yates. When precisely the spelling of his surname changed is unknown. After a period of education at the Adelaide Street Wesleyan school in Hull, he served an apprenticeship as a compositor, and developed into a quintessential late Victorian radical craftsman. In 1879 he married Jane Ann Weatherill of Bewholme in Yorkshire; they had three daughters. 
When the Trades Union Congress met in Hull in 1886 Maddison acted as its president, a consequence of his position as president of the Hull Trades Council. He was a committed Liberal, a supporter of the eight-hour day and the payment of MPs. From 1887 he was president of the Hull branch of the Labour Electoral Association, with an agenda of securing the election to parliament and local authorities of working men under Liberal Party auspices. 
Maddison's most significant trade union activity began in 1889 when he became editor of the 'Railway Review', the organ of the Amalgamated Society of Railway Servants. He was an effective editor, and had a close association with the railway servants' general secretary, Edward Harford (1837-1898). Both were Liberals and became increasingly the target of criticism from those union activists who espoused independent labour or socialist politics. In 1897 Harford was dismissed; his successor, Richard Bell (1859-1930), although essentially a Liberal, was supportive of the union policy of a more assertive 'all grades' campaign for improved conditions. Maddison felt that a limited union membership made successful industrial action unlikely and argued thus in an editorial. Following criticism from Bell and the union's executive Maddison resigned, admitting his purpose had been 'to avert a general strike' ('Railway Review', 10 Dec 1897). This rift was a consequence of differences over union strategy, a desire by a full-time official and a union executive to control the behaviour of an employee, and a significant political difference between Maddison and several members of the society's executive. 
During the 1890s Maddison emerged as a vigorous anti-socialist and a defender of labour movement links with the Liberal Party. In 1892 and in 1895 he stood unsuccessfully as 'Lib-Lab' candidate for Central Hull. A violent dock strike in 1893 found Maddison attempting to conciliate between Liberal shipowners and trade unionists. One Independent Labour Party member characterized him as 'a paltry mean miserable party hack' (J. Northern to James Keir Hardie, quoted in Howell, 119). 
Eventually in August 1897 Maddison was returned to the Commons in a by-election for the working-class constituency of Sheffield Brightside. His Commons career was brief. He opposed the South African War as a campaign waged for the benefit of international financiers. His radical sentiments (flavoured with antisemitism) failed to gain endorsement from the Brightside electorate, many of whom were involved in armaments manufacture. Sheffield Liberalism was divided over the war and in the 1900 election Maddison was defeated. 
Maddison's response to the formation of the Labour Representation Committee in February 1900 was hostile and dismissive -- 'the shortest and surest path to Labour representation is by way of Liberalism' ('The Speaker', 593). In 1906 Maddison successfully contested Burnley in a three-cornered contest, but was run close not just by the Conservatives but by H. M. Hyndman of the Social Democratic Federation (SDF). In a town with a significant SDF presence, the contest saw a sharp juxtaposition of Lib-Lab and socialist rhetoric. His second period as an MP saw Maddison clearly at odds not just with Labour sentiment as articulated by the Parliamentary Labour Party, but also with Liberals prepared to consider some state intervention. In the Commons Maddison, unlike many Liberals, vehemently opposed the Labour Party's 'right to work' bill as 'the first fruit of the Socialist agitation' ('Hansard 4', 186, 1908, col. 32). 
The January 1910 election saw Maddison's defeat at Burnley by ninety-five votes; in December 1910 he unsuccessfully contested Darlington. After the war he stood unsuccessfully as a Liberal at Holderness (1918), South Dorset (1922), and Reading (1923). He continued with two enthusiasms characteristic of his radicalism -- industrial co-partnership and international arbitration. From 1897 he had been an organizer for what became the Labour Co-partnership Association and from 1908 was secretary of the International Arbitration League. Much of his later life was spent at Ealing and then at Hounslow. He died at the Grove Nursing Home, 18 The Grove, Heston, Isleworth, on 12 March 1937. His wife survived him. 
Maddison was a Victorian radical, strongly influenced by Giuseppe Mazzini. He responded vigorously to the socialist challenge in the 1890s; his ideas changed little and by the 1906 parliament he seemed somewhat outdated. His most productive years were perhaps as editor of the 'Railway Review' and his resignation from it arguably marked a critical deterioration in his relationship with the labour movement. 


@@@@@


doc= 47376


Wilson, John (1837-1915), trade unionist and politician, was born on 26 June 1837 at Greatham near Hartlepool in co. Durham, the son of Christopher Wilson, labourer, poacher, and tramping quarryman, and his wife, Hannah ('nee' Sponton). His mother died when he was only four and he spent much of the next seven or eight years accompanying his father as he moved around the country looking for work. His education was restricted to intermittent attendance at a series of dame-schools, but he had become a fluent reader by the age of six. His father died suddenly during the cholera epidemic of 1849 leaving the twelve-year-old Wilson a penniless orphan. Taken in by a local mining family, he began work underground at Ludworth colliery pushing tubs of coal weighing up to 10 cwt. By the age of sixteen he had become a hewer and worked in several different pits. It was a hard life; so too was the life of a merchant seaman which he took up for four years in 1856. 
In 1860 Wilson returned to co. Durham and pit work and on 5 October 1862, at Shotton church, married a girl whom he had known since he was sixteen, Margaret, daughter of George Firth, a miner from Sherburn. They made their home at Haswell, co. Durham, where Wilson was a hewer at the local mine. In 1864 the couple emigrated to America where their first two daughters, Elizabeth and Jenny, were born. Wilson worked in mines in Pennsylvania and Illinois but the family returned to co. Durham and Haswell colliery in 1867. They rented a house in Long Row, close to where they had lived when first married. In the following years three more children were born: a son, Christopher, and two more daughters, Margaret and Dorothy. 
From his early days as a collier, Wilson took a leading role in disputes between management and miners. He was prominent in the negotiations which led to the formation of the Durham Miners' Association (DMA) in 1869. As assistant to three local checkweighmen and part-time secretary of the Haswell co-operative store, he was easy to label as an agitator and was not re-engaged by the Haswell colliery management in 1870. His response was to become full-time at the local co-op but the colliery manager threatened miners on the committee with the sack if Wilson remained secretary. He moved to Wheatley Hill where he organized a branch of the DMA, but by 1877 he was again refused work at the colliery. With his wife he ran a stationery shop for a time but in 1878 he was selected by the Miners' National Association as an organizer for the midlands. The rest of his working life was to be spent in the worlds of trade union organization and politics. 
This decisive moment had not long been preceded by another, his conversion to Primitive Methodism. Like many northern miners' leaders, Wilson was an enthusiastic gambler and a heavy drinker. In the middle of a game of cards one pay Saturday he suddenly decided to give up gambling after, as he described it in his autobiography, 'a curious wave of sensation came over me' (Wilson, 202). He found life without drink more difficult, but by the early 1870s he had become a teetotaller and a Sunday school teacher. 
Wilson returned to Durham in May 1882 when he was appointed agent and general treasurer of the Durham Miners' Association. In 1890 he became the union's financial secretary and in 1896, not long before his sixtieth birthday, the general secretary, the highest-ranking official in the union. He was to hold this position until his death. Wilson was not one of those trade unionists who favoured aggressive action against both colliery owners and capitalism. He believed that industrial relations should be based on conciliation and he was in favour of the 'sliding-scale' system which pegged wages to the selling price of coal. He was also committed to the idea of local action and local independence. He took a leading part in opposing the agitation among trade unionists for an eight-hour day, the Durham hewers having negotiated a shift of seven hours in 1890, and he was instrumental in keeping the DMA out of the Miners' Federation of Great Britain (MFGB), set up in 1889. After joining for a few months in 1892, the DMA left in 1893 and did not return until 1908. Wilson opposed Rule 20 of the federation which facilitated nationwide united action in the event of dispute with the employers. He similarly opposed the idea of a single conciliation board for all British coalfields. It was 1943 before one was formed. 
When the household suffrage was extended to the counties in 1884 Wilson soon became one of the first working men to be returned to parliament. In the general election of 1885 he beat a local coal owner by almost 2000 votes in Houghton-le-Spring, a constituency dominated by Durham miners. Soon after, Gladstone declared his intention to give home rule to Ireland and in the election which followed in 1886, Wilson was defeated. Four years later, however, he became MP for Mid Durham, a seat he held until his death, being returned unopposed in 1906 and in both elections in 1910. 
Wilson was a Liberal and an admirer of Gladstone. He was in favour of free education, free trade, freedom of conscience, self-help, and self-improvement. In 1906 he could not prevent advocates of independent labour representation in Durham carrying a resolution committing the DMA to running all its further parliamentary candidates 'independent of all political parties' (Gregory, 73). When the MFGB decided to affiliate to the Labour Party in 1908 Wilson was one of three Lib-Lab MPs, all from the north-east, who refused to join. He once said that he would never vote for a working man who represented working-class interests only. He did not believe that 'a man should go to parliament for that and put himself on a level with the landowner and aristocrat' (ibid., 66). 
Wilson was a good speaker and impressed both Erskine May and President Cleveland of the United States who, after meeting him in 1897, asked, 'are such men as Wilson common among the democracy of Great Britain?' ('The Times', 25 March 1915). His autobiography was serialized in the 'Durham Chronicle', published by it in cheap book form and in a new edition entitled 'Memoirs of a Labour Leader' in 1907. Wilson's wife died on 8 May 1908. Wilson himself died on 24 March 1915 at 14 North Road, Crossgate, Durham; he was buried in St Margaret's cemetery, Durham, on 27 March. 


@@@@@


doc= 47377


Newton, William (1822-1876), trade unionist and journalist, was born in Congleton, Cheshire, the son of William Newton, a skilled engineer. He began an engineering apprenticeship at Kirk's foundry, Etruria, Staffordshire, at the age of fourteen, became a member of the Journeymen Steam Engine and Machine Makers' Society in 1840, and shortly afterwards moved to London. In 1842 he married Emma, daughter of Samuel Baxter, a labourer; they had one daughter. 
In the course of the 1840s Newton worked his way up the trade to the position of foreman but his prominent role in union affairs resulted in his dismissal in 1848. Newton then took over the Phoenix tavern, Ratcliffe Cross, which was already the meeting place of the east London branch of the Steam Engine Makers, and used this position both further to extend the influence of the union and to launch himself into politics. 
In his trade union activities Newton was a close colleague of William Allan, who became general secretary of the Steam Engine Makers in 1848, and together they led the movement towards the fusion of a number of craft organizations into the Amalgamated Society of Engineers (ASE) in 1851, with Newton's own contribution being largely that of a persuasive publicist. In 1851 and the early part of 1852 he published and edited 'The Operative', a weekly paper which pressed the case for amalgamation. On the ASE's executive council it was Newton who moved the pioneering motion 'that all engineers, machinists, millwrights, smiths and pattern-makers cease to work systematic overtime and piece-work after 31 December 1851' ('DLB', 2.270). This sparked off the widely publicized 'lock-out' by the employers, which began on 10 January 1852 with the employers in London and Lancashire closing their works. 
During the dispute Newton gave powerful speeches at important meetings throughout the country; a gathering at the Manchester Free Trade Hall was said to be 'the greatest indoor meeting ever held by the working class of England' ('DLB', 2.270). In accounting for the ASE's eventual defeat Newton later emphasized the contribution of hostile reports in the press. However, it is clear that the union was quite unprepared to withstand a long dispute. As a result of his experience, Newton became for several years a strong advocate of producers' co-operatives instead of unequal industrial conflicts. 
Though not directly involved in the union's affairs after its dramatic launch, Newton continued as a prominent spokesman for its case. He was active on the committee which secured the first legal recognition for trade unions under a friendly societies' act of 1855, and he gave evidence as an engineer before the select committee on masters and servants in 1856. During the London builders' dispute in 1859 a major attack on trade unions was made by the Edinburgh MP Adam Black in a lecture entitled 'Wages, trade unions and strikes'. A speech refuting Black's unsubstantiated allegations about the ASE was made by Newton in Edinburgh, and was later published. In 1867 Newton chaired the meeting called to formulate the engineers' response to the royal commission on trade unions. 
In his political activities Newton played a leading part in the earliest movements for labour representation, considerably aided by his talents for speaking and journalism. In the 1852 general election in the Tower Hamlets constituency he became the country's first independent labour candidate and, though he came bottom of the poll behind two sitting middle-class radicals and a Liberal, his involvement in the engineering trade's dispute and his personal appearances on the hustings gathered him over 1000 votes. He then floated the idea of a new 'national party' to press for manhood suffrage as the key to the solution of labour's problems but, though he received some support in trade union and Christian socialist circles in London, he failed to convince the national Chartist leaders of the value of collaborating with middle-class radicals in pursuit of a single issue at this time. 
Undaunted, Newton continued to press for political reform through his other newspaper ventures, 'The Englishman' (1853-4) and the 'East London Observer' (1858-76), becoming president of the Labour Representation League and an enthusiastic Gladstonian Liberal. In the 1868 general election he stood again for Tower Hamlets, this time as a radical Liberal with strong local support, but once again came bottom of the poll, this time partly because of faction fighting within the labour movement itself. His final unsuccessful attempt to enter parliament was in a straight fight against a Conservative at a by-election in Ipswich in 1875; his candidature testified to his national standing, reflected both in his having been invited by the local branch of the Labour Representation League and in the wider interest shown in his campaign speeches. 
Newton was much more successful in local politics. He was a member and subsequently chairman of the Stepney vestry, and from 1862 until his death served as the Mile End vestry's representative on the Metropolitan Board of Works, which he also eventually chaired. Both in his committee work on such public services as sanitation and water supply, and in his newspaper coverage of poor-law issues, he was a champion of coherent London-wide policies. One of his contributions to the debate on London local government in 1870, calling for 'one great central authority' ('DLB', 2.273), was widely circulated, and he consistently advocated the equalization of local poor rates to prevent the heaviest financial burdens falling on the districts of the city least able to pay. 
William Newton was an important pioneer of labour organization in both the industrial and the political spheres. He was a heavily bearded, thoughtful-looking man, remembered for his remarkable eloquence, which allowed him both to inspire masses of men with large ideas and to persuade committees about detailed schemes. However, little is recorded about his personal life. He died at his home, 41 Stepney Green, London, on 9 March 1876, having been ill for a while with a number of complaints, including Bright's disease. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 47379


Spencer, George Alfred (1873?-1957), trade unionist and politician, was born at Sutton in Ashfield, Nottinghamshire, probably in 1873, the second son in a mining family which eventually numbered eighteen children. His parents, John Spencer and his wife, Eliza, moved around a lot when Spencer was a boy and this may explain why no record of his birth has been found. The family moved to Worksop and at the age of eight Spencer was working on local farms. His parents later kept a public house at South Normanton in Derbyshire and the eleven-year-old boy worked as a half-timer at a coal mine in Pleasley. The following year he began work underground at Blackwell colliery. Spencer was later to compensate for an intermittent early education by attending evening classes organized by the Workers' Educational Association. He also became a Wesleyan Methodist preacher. 
In 1896 Spencer married Emma, daughter of Richard Carlin of Sutton in Ashfield. They had two children, one daughter and a son who later became a doctor. By this time Spencer was working at New Hucknall colliery where the miners elected him checkweighman. He soon became president of the local branch of the Nottinghamshire Miners' Association (NMA), a delegate, and then permanent official, and was of sufficient standing in the coalfield by 1910 to be nominated as an arbitrator when cutting machines were introduced at Eastwood collieries. He narrowly failed to be elected to the post of NMA assistant secretary in the same year but in 1912 became the union's president. 
Spencer had also become active in labour politics and was voted onto the urban district council in Sutton in Ashfield, eventually becoming its chairman. His support for the war was reflected by his membership of the local military tribunal. In general he was not on the left of the Labour Party, although he opposed intervention in Russia after the revolution and called for the withdrawal of British troops from Ireland. In the general election of 1918 he won Broxtowe in Nottinghamshire for Labour and held the seat at the elections of 1922, 1923, and 1924. He resigned the Labour whip in 1927 and did not stand in 1929. 
Like many miners' leaders Spencer believed strongly in the idea of the independence of the county associations. In 1915 he supported the attempt of J. G. Hancock MP to disaffiliate the NMA from the Miners' Federation of Great Britain (MFGB) and in 1918 he spoke strongly against a proposal for national wage negotiations. He was very conscious that Nottinghamshire was one of the most prosperous coalfields in contrast to the economic difficulties of most of the others. He was not always consistent, however, and at the annual conference of the MFGB in 1920 he seconded the resolution in favour of the nationalization of the mines. The turning-point in his career came with the general strike in 1926 and the long drawn out stoppage in the coal industry which followed. 
The miners' unions had barely recovered from the strike of 1921. In Nottinghamshire, 6000 miners were in arrears with their subscriptions and 23,000 were not in the union. Spencer hoped that the report of the royal commission on the coal industry, chaired by Sir Herbert Samuel, would form the basis for an agreement on its future. A strike began in May 1926, however, and by August there was growing contact between groups of miners and local colliery companies, and a steady drift back to work began in Nottinghamshire. Spencer did not instigate this movement but intervened in its later stages in order to get the best possible terms for the men. As this was not the policy of the MFGB he was summoned before their national conference where he was called a coward and a blackleg and expelled. He was suspended by the NMA. His decision to lead a breakaway union quickly followed and on 20 November the Nottinghamshire Miners' Industrial Union (NMIU) reached an agreement with the local coal employers. 
The Spencer union was anti-socialist. It was an industrial organization whose funds were not to be used for politics. Spencer characterized the miners' strike of 1926 as an 'experiment in elementary communism' (Waller, 111). The rules of the NMIU barred from membership communists or members of the Minority Movement. Nor was it a particularly democratic organization. The holding of branch meetings was at the discretion of the branch committee and difficult matters were often referred to the union's central office or to Spencer himself. The aim was to co-operate with the employers in a relatively prosperous coalfield. Spencer was especially concerned with the plight of the old miners and he persuaded the owners to subsidize a pension fund. He was well known for his handling of compensation cases and in 1930 alone won over $10,000 for NMIU members. He was often called in by branches to talk personally to colliery managements. It was not a bosses' union. As Spencer said, 'in my view there can be no improvement in the lot of the worker unless and until there is co-operation between the two, but while I am co-operating with the owners, I shall see to it that the workers get their share of the wealth that their joint efforts create' (Griffin and Griffin, 152). 
Outside Nottinghamshire, the non-political trade union movement had little success. Spencer became president of the Federation of Non-Political Unions but he was not a national leader, being much more concerned to do the best he could for Nottinghamshire miners. The national strength of the MFGB recovered with the economy in the second half of the 1930s, so much so that an attempt was made to re-form an NMA branch at Harworth colliery in 1936. The strike which followed provided the opportunity for the negotiations which led to the fusion of the Spencer union and the NMA as the Nottinghamshire Miners' Federated Union in 1937. The terms were largely dictated by Spencer. He became president of the new amalgamated organization as well as its representative on the MFGB. He was also able to insist that the existing district wages agreement should continue for five years and that there should be no strikes in that time. He retired in 1945. 
Spencer rose to be a member of the Nottinghamshire elite from the humblest of beginnings. He was deputy lieutenant of the county from 1941 and a member of the freemasons. He was interested in art and sport, and was president of Nottinghamshire County Cricket Club in 1949-50. He once scored eighty runs playing for the House of Commons at the Oval. He liked to dress in formal suits and had little time for the traditional cloth cap of the working man. He died in Nottingham City Hospital on 21 November 1957. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 47380


Smith, Francis Samuel (1854-1940), politician and Salvationist, was born in Chelsea, London, the son of Alfred John Smith. He was educated at Oxford House School, Chelsea, and apprenticed as an upholsterer in 1870. Four years later, on 28 September 1874, he married Elizabeth (died 1935), daughter of George Hall, a smith. 
Smith first became involved with the social and religious activism which was to dominate his life when he joined the Chelsea Mission, and through that the Salvation Army, in the late 1870s. He soon gave up his successful furnishings business in Sloane Street, London, to enter full-time into the Salvationist cause. As a propagandist and organizer for the army, Smith demonstrated the skills which he was later to use effectively in his political work, and developed a reputation for his calm, yet uncompromising, determination for a cause. He rose quickly in the movement, and was appointed to the rank of commissioner by General William Booth in advance of a mission to the United States during 1884. After returning from this trip, during which he had been influenced by the writings of the American radical Henry George, Smith increasingly moved the focus of his concerns towards the need for social reform. 
Smith came into close contact with a number of radical and socialist political leaders through his involvement with the Free Speech Committee associated with the 1887 Trafalgar Square and Hyde Park demonstrations. His social activism and religious commitment seemed for a time to be merged perfectly in his role as head of the Salvation Army's social reform wing, to which he had been appointed by Booth in May 1890, and he increased the army's involvement in food relief, shelters, and employment schemes. Smith, with W. T. Stead, has been credited with being central to the development of the social reform proposals published by Booth in 'Darkest England and the Way Out' (1890). Yet Smith came increasingly to be at odds with Booth over the relative importance of social and spiritual work, as well as the extent of autonomy which Smith wanted for the social reform wing of the army. Smith resigned from the Salvation Army over these issues in late 1890. 
Smith had written a number of articles on an egalitarian theme for the 'War Cry' before his resignation, and he turned to journalism as the means of spreading his now more fully formed political views. In early 1891 Smith joined the Fabian Society and also started the 'Workers' Cry', as an organ for the Labor Army, advocating collectivism and other radical means of alleviating poverty, but this ceased publication in early 1892. Through the press proprietor and MP, William Saunders, Smith gained work as the parliamentary reporter for the 'Eastern Morning News', and was later editor of the 'Weekly Dispatch'. 
In 1892 Smith sought election as an independent, but under the auspices of the Liberal and Labour associations, for both a London county council (LCC) seat in North Lambeth, which he won, and the parliamentary seat of Hammersmith, which he lost narrowly, standing on a platform largely of taxation reform and the abolition of the existing poor-law system. At this time Smith was developing a close association with James Keir Hardie, who assisted him in the Hammersmith contest. Smith and Hardie shared a very strong spiritual and idealist basis to their politics, and a continuing interest in mysticism and similar beliefs. Smith, whom Hardie called 'St Francis' ('DLB', 9.272), has often been seen as having encouraged Hardie's moves towards utopianism and political isolation. Hardie lived in Smith's house in Chelsea after his own election to parliament in 1892, and Smith continued to act as a part-time secretary and election agent for Hardie until the latter's death in 1915. 
Hardie encouraged Smith to stand in 1894 as the Independent Labour Party (ILP) candidate in a parliamentary by-election in Sheffield. The seat was won easily by the Liberals, but this was the first of a long line of electoral campaigns for Smith as a Labour candidate in which he stood for propaganda effect, rather than with a real chance of victory. He stood for the House of Commons a further eight times before winning a seat, Nuneaton, in 1929, which he held only until 1931. 
In 1901 Smith rejoined the Salvation Army after becoming disillusioned with aspects of political life, and he resigned his LCC seat. Yet by 1905 Smith had returned to political activism, as secretary of a Right to Work Council formed by Hardie and other ILP and Social Democratic Federation members, to pressure the Conservative government on unemployment. Smith also stood again successfully for the LCC in 1907, and attempted, less successfully, to form the 'Labour men' on the council into a distinct body, separate from the Progressive grouping. After the 1910 election, Smith, George Lansbury, and R. C. K. Ensor did form, at least temporarily, their own LCC Labour Party. 
During the First World War, Smith concentrated on the land issue, particularly focusing on the development of the allotment movement. He was appointed parliamentary private secretary to Lansbury, the new commissioner of works, in October 1930, and continued his interest in the plight of the unemployed. Apart from his many journalistic contributions, Smith also wrote a work on the removal of General Bramwell Booth by the Salvation Army's high council in 1929, and published a brief biography of Hardie in 1915. 
Although Smith was an important and respected socialist activist of the period, the intensity of his idealism, and the extent to which his religious and mystical beliefs continued to dominate his political approach, made him a somewhat unusual and distant figure within the socialist movement. He undoubtedly found his closest kindred spirit in Keir Hardie. Smith died on 26 December 1940 at his home at 67 Longley Road, Tooting, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 47381


Sitch, Charles Henry (1887-1960), trade unionist and politician, was born at Saltney, Chester, on 4 May 1887, the third son of 
While working in Saltney in 1889 Thomas Sitch formed the Chainmakers' and Strikers' Association of Saltney, Pontypridd and Staffordshire. This was a union for men who worked in factories making big chain, such as ships' cable. The innumerable varieties of small chain were made by outworkers, many of whom were women, so the trade was effectively divided into two branches. In the outwork section unremitting downward pressure on wages arising from intense competition for employment was not conducive to unionization. However, this was not the case in the factory section, and this allowed Sitch to build the Chainmakers' and Strikers' Association into an effective organization and in 1894 he was appointed its full-time general secretary. He then returned to Cradley Heath, the main centre of the chain trade, and became a widely respected public figure. He served with distinction on both Rowley Regis urban district council and Staffordshire county council, being chairman of the former in 1911, and in 1913 he was made a JP. Thomas Sitch died on 23 April 1923 at his home, Unity Villa, Sydney Road, Cradley Heath, which also served as the union office. He was survived by his wife. He was buried in St Luke's churchyard, Cradley Heath. 
Charles Henry Sitch moved to Cradley Heath with his parents when he was seven. He went to the local elementary school, leaving at the age of thirteen to work in a grocer's shop. With financial support from the Chainmakers' and Strikers' Association, however, he went to Ruskin College, Oxford, where he studied economics and related subjects for two years. This experience and his family background led naturally to a strong interest in trade unionism and Sitch subsequently played a leading part in union activity in and around Cradley Heath, particularly among the female outworkers in the chain trade. However, it was not until the National Federation of Women Workers (NFWW) began recruiting in Cradley Heath, soon after its formation in 1906, that real progress was made in the unionization of these casual workers. Sitch became secretary of the hand-hammered chain branch of the NFWW and, together with Mary Macarthur, mounted a vigorous campaign to secure statutory protection for the outworkers. The agitation ensured that small chainmaking was included in the 1909 'Trade Boards Act', which provided for the establishment of minimum wages in four sweated industries. Sitch was among the first members of the Chain Trade Board which within four years, in addition to setting a minimum wage, raised piece-work rates by up to two-thirds. 
The success of the Chain Trade Board led to other Black Country sweated industries being organized on similar lines and Sitch was a central figure in this process becoming, 'inter alia', vice-chairman of the Stourbridge and district firebrick wages and conciliation board and the women workers' representative on the Hollow-Ware Trade Board. In 1913 he was appointed assistant secretary of the Chainmakers' and Strikers' Association and from 1914 to 1918 he was president of the South Staffordshire and Worcestershire Federation of Trades Councils (he was exempted from military service on medical grounds). Away from work his main interest was amateur operatics. He acted as honorary secretary of the Cradley Heath, Old Hill and District Amateur Operatic Society for many years and was also a leading performer in its productions, often appearing with his wife, Mabel Jackson, who came from Goole. 
Sitch's work as a union organizer was the springboard for his political career. He was elected to the Rowley Regis urban district council as a Liberal in 1913 but switched to Labour in 1916 and at the 1918 general election he won the formerly safe Conservative seat of Kingswinford with a majority of 2888. He remained in parliament until 1931 but made little impression mainly because from the end of 1922 he had to devote most of his time to the affairs of the Chainmakers' and Strikers' Association following his appointment as general secretary in succession to his father. 
Sitch took over the union just as its membership and finances were beginning to decline. One consequence of this was that his wages were progressively reduced to only $2 per week and when he lost his parliamentary salary he could no longer afford the expensive tastes which both he and his wife had acquired. His solution was to use the union's funds, which he controlled virtually unsupervised, for his private purposes. His deception was eventually discovered and in 1933 he was found guilty of fraudulently converting the Chainmakers' and Strikers' Association's funds and sent to prison for nine months. 
The disgrace inevitably ended Sitch's public career and on his release from prison he moved away from Cradley Heath. He eventually settled in Leeds where, from 1937, he was employed by 'Reynolds News' (later the 'Sunday Citizen') as a collector and organizer for a scheme through which co-operative societies supported the newspaper. He continued to live in Leeds after his retirement in 1952 and died at his home there, 116 Harrogate Road, Chapeltown, on 13 June 1960 from pulmonary tuberculosis. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 47382


Beatson, William Ferguson (1804-1872), army officer, was born on 25 June 1804 at Rossend Castle, Fife, fourth and youngest son of Robert Beatson (1758-1805), lieutenant in the Royal Engineers, FRSE, and writer on windmills, of Kilrie and his wife, Jean (died 1816), only child and heiress of Murdoch Campbell of Rossend. He entered the East India Company's service in 1820 and joined the 2nd battalion 25th Bengal native infantry as an ensign. He served in several different regiments of the Bengal native army and was promoted lieutenant (1823), captain (1837), major (1848), lieutenant-colonel (1853), colonel (1864), and major-general (1865). He distinguished himself as a soldier and was a particularly fine horseman, unusually so for an infantry officer. While on furlough from India in 1832-7, he served with permission in the British Legion, raised and commanded by Colonel De Lacy Evans, to fight for Queen Isabella of Spain against Don Carlos in the first Carlist War (1835-6). Beatson commanded the 10th infantry regiment, or Munster light infantry, at the head of which he was severely wounded. He was awarded the cross of the Order of San Fernando for actions on 28 May and 6 July 1836, which he was subsequently permitted to wear. 
On his return to India in 1837 Beatson was promoted captain and employed in Bundelkhand, central India, then in a very disturbed state. He raised a local force, the Bundelkhand Legion, with which he captured many forts and subdued recalcitrant rajas and bands of dacoits, receiving for his services the thanks of government. In 1844 he volunteered the Bundelkhand Legion for service in Sind under Napier, and was commended by the latter for the legion's successful operations in the Bugti hills. In 1847 he was appointed to command the nizam's cavalry in Hyderabad, where he remained until 1851 in the local rank of brigadier. 
Beatson's reputation as a leader of irregular cavalry was such that on the outbreak of the Crimean War it was suggested that he should train a force of irregular Turkish cavalry. The Foreign Office offered his services to Omar Pasha, who commanded the Turkish forces on the Danube. He gave Beatson the rank of lieutenant-general in the Turkish army and command of a force of Turkish irregular cavalry, bashi-bazouks, about 4000 strong. They were mostly Albanians with a profound distaste for any form of military discipline, who wore their own native dress and were notorious for their brutality. These troops were rejected by Lord Raglan whose experience of irregulars during the Peninsular War had powerfully influenced him against them. Unpaid, the bashi-bazouks disbanded. Beatson was later awarded the gold medal of the imperial order, Nishan Iftikhar, by the sultan of Turkey for his service on the Danube. 
When Raglan's army sailed for the Crimea, Beatson offered to waive his rank in order to serve on the staff of the Hon. James Scarlett who was commanding the heavy cavalry brigade. He thus took part in the charge of the heavy brigade at Balaklava on 25 October 1854. 'Colonel Beatson... gave me all the assistance which his experience and well-known gallantry enabled him to do throughout the day,' reported Scarlett to the military secretary at the Horse Guards in London (Kinglake, 4.143). He recommended Beatson for recognition to Lord Lucan, commanding the cavalry division, but this was refused by Lucan. 
In the spring of 1855 Beatson was deputed to raise a fresh levy of 4000 bashi-bazouks, paid and equipped by the British government. Dubbed 'Beatson's horse', their unruly behaviour in camp at the Dardanelles soon brought them into conflict with the Turkish authorities, one of the chief complainants being J. H. Skene, a British vice-consul. As a consequence Beatson was placed under Major-General Robert Vivian, commanding the Turkish contingent of regular troops in British pay. Vivian had him replaced in September 1855, after an armed stand-off between Beatson's command and the Turkish forces. After Beatson had returned to England Skene accused him of inciting his bashi-bazouks to mutiny against his supersession. This Beatson denied, and he brought an action against Skene to clear his name of the charge. The trial took place in January 1860 and cost Beatson $3000. Although the jury found for Skene on purely legal grounds, they went on to censure him for failing to withdraw his statements after he had discovered that they were unfounded. Beatson might therefore claim a moral victory, albeit at considerable expense. 
Beatson had been promoted lieutenant-colonel in November 1853 and returned to India when the mutiny broke out in 1857. His services in the mutiny were confined to central India where he raised two regiments of irregular cavalry -- the 1st and 2nd Beatson's Horse. He dressed them in green with red turbans and cummerbunds, mounting the 1st regiment on stallions, and the 2nd on mares and a few geldings. They took part in the pursuit of the rebel commanders, Tantia Topi and the rani of Jhansi. One of their officers, Lieutenant Evelyn Wood, won the VC when commanding the 1st Beatson's Horse on 28 December 1859 (Beatson, by then a local brigadier-general, having relinquished command in September 1859). On 16 April 1860 his regiment was joined with Mayne's Horse to form the Central India Horse. 
Beatson was promoted major-general on 8 January 1865 to command the Allahabad division. 'Handsome in appearance, and dignified in bearing, he was a soldier of the austere and earnest type,' records the history of the Central India Horse (Watson, 46). 'He lived camp fashion, and very uncomfortably too. He was on horse back every morning before day-break, and, in order to be prepared for emergencies, he rode invariably with a supply of biscuits and sultanas in his wallets' (ibid.). He commanded in Allahabad from 1866 to 1869, and the Ambala division from 1869 until he returned home on leave in 1872. He died suddenly at the vicarage, New Swindon, Wiltshire, on 4 February 1872, aged sixty-eight. 
Beatson married on 12 February 1840 Margaret Marian Humfrays (or Humphreys), daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel Richard Humfrays of the Bengal Engineers. She died on 22 December 1866, at Allahabad, soon after Beatson took command there. They had two daughters, one of whom, Mrs McMullin, survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 47383


Filder, William (1789-1861), commissary officer, seems to have spent his whole professional career in the civilian commissariat department, an entrant to which officially began as a clerk before advancing through the rank structure. Filder's origins are obscure. Some secondary sources call him James, and it is highly likely that he was the James Filder born at 10 White Street, Bethnal Green, London, to Emily ('nee' Whiter) and an unnamed 'leather cutter'. When the birth was registered on 20 November, Emily lived at 43 Kelsey Street, Bethnal Green. William Filder first appears in surviving records as an assistant commissary-general (captain equivalent) on 10 August 1811, and he served in that rank throughout the Peninsular War to gain the war medal and nine clasps for Talavera, Albuera, Salamanca, Vitoria, Pyrenees, Nivelle, Nive, Orthez, and Toulouse. However, the battle of Talavera was in July 1809, which suggests that he held an unrecorded lower rank before 1811. Promoted on 22 October 1816, Filder served as deputy commissary-general (major equivalent for three years, then lieutenant-colonel) until going on half pay in 1832. He returned to full pay a year later, and advanced to commissary-general (brigadier-general) on 1 July 1840 when appointed to the West Indies. He moved to Canada in 1843, where he seems to have stayed for seven years, before going on half pay again with his appointment as CB (17 August 1850). 
In 1854 with war imminent, Sir Charles Trevelyan, Treasury assistant secretary and head of the commissariat, reappointed Filder to full pay as commissary-general in command of the commissariat 'attached' to Lord Raglan's 'eastern army', the Crimean expeditionary force, not therefore under Raglan's command. According to departmental practice, Filder placed contracts for supplies and transport in or near the theatre of war, not a reliable practice. Once the British had moved from near Constantinople to Bulgaria he asked Raglan for military escorts to prevent desertion of native drivers. It became clear, too, that the commissariat had insufficient personnel and many of them lacked field experience. When the troops landed in the Crimea in September 1854 the commissariat issued them no sugar, but supplied green coffee which they could neither roast nor grind. Filder's problems multiplied, especially when Sevastopol did not fall swiftly and siege operations were begun from upland to the south. A rough track, running almost 7 miles from the tiny port of Balaklava and climbing 700 feet onto the heights, provided Filder's only means of getting supplies to the camps and trenches. The commissariat could not cope, and broke down under the strain. It failed to deliver vital supplies to the troops in the field, causing suffering and death. Without resources in the Crimea, Filder requisitioned supplies from Turkey, the Mediterranean shores, and Britain. William Howard Russell, war correspondent of 'The Times', noted that in October Filder's efforts to establish reserves of 'food, corn and forage' with each division failed because transport was diverted to carry shot and shell. On 8 November Raglan informed Filder the army would be staying in the Crimea during the winter, and that he should make provision accordingly. Five days later Filder warned that Balaklava would be inadequate as a permanent supply base and the track to the upland would be impassable in bad weather. Next day, 14 November, a hurricane devastated the area. 
Filder faced sharp criticism. Raglan and other army officers repeatedly complained of him and his department. Major-General J. B. B. Estcourt referred to 'the rotten mess of Trevelyan's pet Commissariat' (Sweetman, 'Raglan', 268); Colonel McMurdo of the Land Transport Corps stated of Filder, 'I never... met so disagreeable a coxcomb and so utterly impracticable an official as this little viper' (Sweetman, 'War and Administration', 55-6). Senior government ministers including the duke of Newcastle, Sidney Herbert, and lords Panmure and Palmerston called repeatedly for Filder's removal. In June 1855 Sir John McNeill and Colonel A. Tulloch, sent to the Crimea to investigate the commissariat, strongly condemned him. Yet the commissary-general did not entirely lack support. Towards the end of 1854 Russell believed Filder deserved 'the greatest praise for his exertions' and did not warrant the 'base calumnies' directed at him ('The Times', 8 Nov 1854). In the new year Raglan defended Filder against ministerial onslaughts, noting that by the end of January 1855, a month in which the first roasted (as distinct from green) coffee arrived, only a single hay shipment had come from England instead of the promised fortnightly vessel. A floating bakery, also expected, had not even set out by March. 
Filder left the Crimea at the close of July 1855 and subsequently answered McNeill and Tulloch's charges in detail: failure to send hay and chopped straw had been crucial, urgent requests for supplies had been ignored in England, and Turkish contractors had persistently failed him. In 1856 a board of general officers declared that he 'was not, and is not, justly liable to the unfavourable animadversion, either expressed or implied' of 'the management of his department' (Sweetman, 'War and Administration', 57). He had, thus, apparently been vindicated for his efforts under difficult circumstances in the Crimea, from which he emerged with a campaign medal and four clasps (Alma, Balaklava, Inkerman, Sevastopol), plus the order of the Mejidiye, 3rd class. Early in 1857 he went on half pay for the last time. Filder had a residence at 57 Eaton Square, London, but on 9 December 1861 he died at St John's (parish of Wittycombe Raleigh), Exmouth. According to the death certificate, he had been suffering from consumption (tuberculosis) for 'some months' and asthma 'some years'. He was survived by his wife, Anne, and daughter, Charlotte Barbara. 


@@@@@


doc= 47384


Clarke, John (1757-1820), schoolmaster, is of unknown parentage and background. He first appears as an articled clerk to an attorney in Northampton. According to a story related by his son he gave up that situation after an unpleasant episode in which he spent an entire night trying to find a substitute to conduct a hanging, as the hangman and the sheriff were unavailable for that duty. By morning he had been successful but he realized that the law was not his calling. The erstwhile lawyer then applied to the noted Baptist preacher and teacher the Revd John Collett Ryland (1723-1792) for a position in his academy in Northampton. There he taught writing and arithmetic, and he was joined for a time by the scholar George Dyer (1755-1841), who taught classical languages. Ryland closed his school in 1785, upon moving to London. His son, who had taught there also, continued to minister to his father's congregation in Northampton. 
Ryland found a property in Enfield, where in 1786 he opened a new academy. Clarke went with the family to Enfield, having successfully courted the master's stepdaughter Ann Isabella Stott (died 1853). They were married in January 1787, and their first child, Charles Cowden Clarke (1787-1877), writer, was born at the school in December. The school became very popular, and Clarke assumed a major role in its operation, teaching upwards of a hundred pupils, who mainly were the sons of London tradesmen. The buildings had been constructed about a century earlier by a West Indies merchant. The schoolroom, formerly the stable and coach house, was set apart from the house, which Charles remembered as 'airy, roomy, and commodious, the grounds sufficiently large to give space for flower, fruit, and vegetable gardens, playground, and a paddock of two acres, affording pasturage for two cows that supplied the establishment with abundant milk' (Clarke and Clarke, 2-3). In the 1840s, after the school had closed, the house was converted to a railway station, and later still its distinctive brick facade was preserved in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London. 
When John Ryland died, in 1792, Clarke became the sole proprietor of the school. Charles became his father's assistant teacher just before the time that John Keats arrived as a pupil in 1803. Charles remembered his father as a progressive teacher, one who refused to cane his students and who in other respects was 'far in advance of his time' (Clarke and Clarke, 4). John Clarke devised a grading system by which the marks were recorded by each boy in an account book; these were tallied at every half-year interval, with rewards given for the best performance. Separate prizes were instituted for extra translations in French and Latin, which the young Keats remembered as a particular incentive to his developing interest in books. 
Clarke was familiar with some notable learned figures of his day, including Dr Alexander Geddes, the Roman Catholic translator of the 'Bible'; Joseph Priestley, the dissenting scientist and political theorist; and Richard Warburton Lytton, an enlightened gentleman who offered asylum to a number of French exiles, including an emigre priest, Abbe Beliard, who briefly taught at Clarke's school. In his recollections Charles remembered his father's interest in Leigh Hunt's liberal newspaper 'The Examiner', from its first issue in 1808. Clarke was sympathetic to the advanced political ideas of his day and, whether or not these views influenced his school or his pupils, he was an obviously successful teacher of a popular school when, in 1810, he retired and moved to Ramsgate. He died there, at his home, Belle Vue House, on 19 December 1820. 


@@@@@


doc= 47386


Taylor, George Francis (1903-1979), intelligence officer and banker, was born on 13 January 1903 in Windsor, Melbourne, Australia, the son of George Arthur Taylor, a merchant, and his wife, Annie Mary Ryan, both of whom hailed from Melbourne. Taylor attended Xavier College, Melbourne (1917-21), where he was 'dux of school' in his final year and excelled in debating. He read history, philosophy, and law at the University of Melbourne, taking a BA, an MA, and an LLB between 1925 and 1928. He continued to win prizes for debating and took up student journalism. By the time he left university Taylor's interest had shifted from law to international relations, and he aspired to a career in journalism. He wrote occasionally on foreign affairs for the Melbourne press between 1927 and 1929, but freelance journalism did not pay, and in 1930 he joined Shell Oil. 
Both the oil business and his ambition to write a book on British foreign policy brought Taylor to London in the mid-1930s. He married Vivian Judith Elizabeth Rose Price ('b'. 1915), the daughter of Vivian Franklin Lyon Rose Price, a Royal Navy officer, on 17 June 1937; they had three children. In March 1939 Taylor wrote to Rex Leeper, head of the Foreign Office news department, offering his services in the event of war. Later in the spring he was introduced by the mining magnate Chester Beatty to Colonel Laurence Grand, the founder of section D (for 'destruction') of the Secret Intelligence Service. Grand hired Taylor in July and made him head of D's Balkan network. 
Section D, the principal predecessor of the Special Operations Executive (SOE), had been established in 1938 to investigate 'every possibility of attacking potential enemies by means other than the operations of military forces' (SOE headquarters file 63). This meant sabotage and subversion, and south-east Europe was a prime target because of the importance then attached to interdicting the flow of Romanian oil to Germany. Taylor's contribution, however, lay as much in defining section D's (and later SOE's) strategy and tactics as it did in conducting operations from London or in the field. Before the fall of France, Taylor pressed for continuous, widespread, but small-scale sabotage of communications by local patriots under British direction. After June 1940 he was an architect of the 'secret army' strategy which led to the formation of SOE in July, and by which it was imagined that Britain might yet win the war through fomenting massive and co-ordinated uprisings by the peoples of occupied Europe when strategic bombing and blockade had prepared the way. This hope held sway until first Russia, and then America, entered the war. 
Hugh Dalton, the minister in charge of SOE, dismissed Grand but embraced both his ethos and his deputy. Taylor became chief of staff to Sir Frank Nelson, the first executive head (known as CD) of SOE, in the autumn. Having discovered that the only functional asset inherited by SOE from section D was Taylor's Balkan organization, Nelson and Dalton sent him to the region in January 1941 to take charge of preparations for countering the expected German offensive. According to Taylor, Churchill had told Dalton in December that the Balkan situation 'was the acid test for SOE' (Stafford, 52-3), which must make good its claim to represent a vital new instrument of warfare. After conferring at general headquarters in Cairo about help for the Greeks, Taylor set up shop in Belgrade, for without Yugoslav co-belligerency the defence of Greece would be hopeless. SOE agents worked both to stir up popular opposition to accession to the axis pact and to organize the overthrow of the government if it did accede. The Yugoslav government succumbed to German pressure on 25 March, but was toppled by a military coup two days later. Although SOE's links had been with the cheerleaders rather than the ringleaders of this putsch, its success redounded to SOE's credit. The acid test had been passed, notwithstanding the failure of the Balkan campaign which followed. 
Taylor returned to London as Nelson's chief of staff after two months' internment in Italy with most of Britain's Belgrade-based diplomats and agents. In March 1942 he was appointed director of overseas groups and missions. Although never relegated from SOE's first division, Taylor's status waned after Nelson's retirement in May 1942 and his replacement by Sir Charles Hambro. Embarrassment over a concordat on operational spheres which he negotiated in Washington in the summer of 1942 with SOE's American clone and rival, the office of strategic services, but which his headquarters repudiated in favour of a better deal struck in London, was followed in early 1943 by implication in a botched operation to seize axis ships in the harbour of the Portuguese colony of Goa which the Foreign Office had forbidden. Taylor returned as Hambro's chief of staff in mid-1943, but it was to professional soldiers rather than to civilians that the top jobs now went. Taylor served out the war as director of SOE's Far East group, enjoying the rank of local brigadier on his far-flung travels and being appointed (civil) CBE in 1943. 
Taylor was a short, dark man with sharp features and methodical habits. Julian Amery recalled how Taylor ordered identical meals when they dined together on three successive evenings at the same restaurant in the autumn of 1940. Asked why, Taylor explained that he always ate the same dishes until he grew bored with them, at which point he would choose something else from the menu for the same treatment (Amery, 211-12). Taylor was invariably described by both admirers and detractors as utterly ruthless. His friends added 'but brilliant'. He wrote vastly long memoranda and signals which brooked no opposition. The last CD under whom he served, Major-General Colin Gubbins, described him as 'a very able, quick-thinking officer, of great energy and persistence, who at times presses his points too hard' (SOE personal file of G. F. Taylor). 
Taylor joined the Bank of London and South America after the war, becoming a director in 1950, deputy chairman in 1966, and transitional chairman in 1970-71. He implemented the previously agreed merger with Lloyds Bank Europe and the formation of what was to be known (albeit briefly) as Lloyds and BOLSA International Bank. He returned with his wife to Australia in 1975 and they settled in Perth, where he died of heart failure at Shenton Park on 17 January 1979 and was buried two days later in Karrakatta Roman Catholic Lawn cemetery, Perth. 


@@@@@


doc= 47387


Davies, Francis Thomas (1906-1988), intelligence officer and industrialist, was born on 9 December 1906 at 39 Melville Street, Edinburgh, the son of General Sir Francis John Davies (1864-1948) and his wife, Madalen Augusta Lavinia Scott. The family home was Elmley Castle, near Pershore, Worcestershire. He was educated at Broadstairs and at Eton College, which he entered in the lowest form. When he departed his house captain wrote that Davies: 'was a very good footballer, immensely strong and quite unstoppable when really roused... He has left rather young to go into an Insurance office. Though not brilliant in work, we feel sure that he will have a great aptitude for persuading people to insure their lives, for his harrowing tales of various deceases ['sic'] were enough to terrify anyone. (private information, Eton College archivist)' Davies worked for different firms in France, Germany, and London before joining Courtaulds Ltd in 1929, where he became a director in 1937, with responsibility for exports and for factories in France and Germany. In September 1938 he wrote to the under-secretary of state for war, volunteering for intelligence work. He was interviewed in the War Office and asked to report on Germany's economic preparations for war. This led to espionage within Germany on behalf of the War Office and section D of the Secret Intelligence Service (SIS). During 1939 he was drawn into the work of a new War Office department, military intelligence (research), known as MI(R). On 7 August 1940 he married Eileen Cynthia Millicent Eva ('b'. 1912), daughter of Henry Charles Brougham, third Baron Brougham and Vaux. They had at least one child. 
In August 1939, while training with the 1st battalion, Grenadier Guards, Davies was called up from the Territorial Army reserve to serve as a staff officer in the British military mission to Poland. A colleague recalled how Davies 'in a Brigade of Guard's tie, stood disapproving and aloof' amid the hearty melee of departing officers at Victoria Station (Wilkinson, 68). Early in September 1939 General Adrian Carton de Wiart, the head of mission, sent Davies back to Britain with urgent requests for assistance in view of the disastrous situation developing in Poland. Davies left Poland on 5 September in a civil aircraft that was fired at by both Germans and Poles during its journey. On arrival in London he summarized Carton de Wiart's concerns in a report discussed by the chiefs of staff at their meeting on 9 September. Carton de Wiart urgently requested sufficient fighter aircraft to ward off the German medium bombers that prevented the Poles from mustering formations to carry out counter-attacks. Carton de Wiart also wanted light machine-guns and ammunition forwarded immediately before Poland's frontiers were sealed off. Davies reported that 'General Carton de Wiart asked me to impress upon everybody I met the absolute urgency for immediate action; there must be no delay' (Davies). But the concern and energy of Carton de Wiart and Davies could achieve virtually nothing for the Poles in the face of British impotence and inertia. 
Davies resumed work for MI(R) and travelled widely to seize objects of economic value in Europe before the Nazis marched in. Perhaps his most notable mission came in May 1940, when he made a hurried trip to Amsterdam and successfully removed or destroyed securities held in the national bank. Later in 1940 staff from MI(R) were absorbed into a new organization, the Special Operations Executive (SOE). Labour minister Hugh Dalton was chairman; he chose Sir Frank Nelson as his executive director and was given Gladwyn Jebb, by the Foreign Office, as chief executive officer. In his diary entry for 25 July Dalton noted that he saw Davies, 'who makes a good impression on me... [he] says there has been a lack of drive and direction. He obviously wants me to begin to supply these deficiencies' ('War Diary', 65). Davies joined SOE on 23 September 1940 as personal assistant to Nelson, with the remit of advising his chief on SOE's resources of staff and supplies. On 12 October he completed a report on training that established a programme for the provision of schools. His plan envisaged four stages: preliminary schools, where agents would be assessed without taking them very far into the secrets of the organization; paramilitary schools; finishing schools, which were to teach subversive warfare and would hold agents until required for operations; and lastly the final briefing of agents in London flats. 
Davies was the first to see the need for SOE representation in America. This was duly achieved through the British security co-ordination (BSC), under Sir William Stephenson, established in December 1940 to represent British intelligence in North America. BSC became important as a source of supplies, recruits, and training facilities for SOE -- matters at the core of Davies's role in the organization. In September 1941 Davies visited the USA for discussions with Colonel Donovan, head of the office for strategic services (OSS), the new American organization for subversion and espionage overseas. This crucial meeting established friendly relations and the basis for a relatively free exchange of information and facilities between SOE and OSS. Davies committed SOE to establishing a school in Canada to train both British and American personnel, and in return Donovan promised SOE supplies of materials and staff. In autumn 1941 Davies became director of research and supply, and held that post until the end of his SOE career. It gave him considerable influence behind the scenes, not least during the SOE palace revolution of 1942. In February of that year Lord Wolmer succeeded Dalton as minister for SOE, and the involuntary departure of Gladwyn Jebb soon followed. Dalton believed that Davies threw his weight in the scales against Jebb, who was resented by some SOE staff due to a tactless deployment of superior intellect -- an unfortunate trait that he shared with Dalton. In contrast, according to one contemporary, 'Davies didn't have much upstairs' (private information). Indeed he was a man of action rather than an intellectual, and so worked easily with the business and military men who formed the core of SOE. He was appraised by Colin Gubbins as 'an officer of great drive and personality, most efficient in his duties. He has any amount of initiative and willingly accepts responsibility... An outstanding officer' (private information, SOE adviser). Davies's work for SOE was not as adventurous as his earlier role in MI(R); rather, he played a vital part in strengthening the logistics of a new and sometimes chaotic organization. This was the most important contribution that he made during a life that was vigorous, versatile, and effective. 
In May 1945 Davies left SOE and returned to the business world. He rejoined the board of Courtaulds and, together with its chairman, Sir John Hanbury-Williams, was largely responsible for re-establishing its prestige overseas, especially in the USA. From 1948 he spent much of his time in the United States, overseeing projects there. At Courtaulds he was always referred to as Colonel Davies; he has been described by the company's historian as 'a vigorous and assertive man who liked issuing orders and getting things done' (Coleman, 88) and had a reputation for plunging in without thinking a problem out. An overseas business acquaintance described him as 'tres bousculant' (ibid.). Ill health forced him to resign from Courtaulds in January 1954 but he later served as a director of Gulf Oil (GB) and as chairman of British Enkalon. He died on 8 September 1988 at his home, Hill House Farm, Elmley Castle. 


@@@@@


doc= 47388


Grand, Lawrence Douglas (1898-1975), soldier and intelligence officer, was born on 10 August 1898 at 7 Rose Lane, Wavertree, Liverpool, the elder son of Douglas Henry Grand of Beckenham, a commission merchant, and his wife, Emma Gertrude Chamberlain. He left the sixth form at Rugby School in mid-1916 for a year at Woolwich, and was commissioned second lieutenant in the Royal Engineers on 28 September 1917. He saw no active service in the First World War, as he went on to the School of Military Engineering at Chatham, but saw plenty soon after it. He served briefly in north Russia in 1919, in 384 field company; on the north-west frontier of India and in the Iraq revolt in 1920; and with the Iraq levies in Kurdistan in 1923. For his work in this last campaign he was appointed MBE. 
Grand matriculated at Christ's College, Cambridge, in October 1923, but never went into residence and took no degree. After five years' routine soldiering in England he was promoted captain on 28 September 1928; he became major on the same date in 1937. He married on 6 November 1930 Irene Lola Hilda ('b'. 1902/3), daughter of Charles Theobald Mathew, a captain in the Indian army. They had a son, and a daughter who married the heir of the tenth earl of Bessborough. 
In April 1938 Grand was seconded to the Secret Intelligence Service to start up a new section, at first called IX, later known as D. His task was 'to investigate every possibility of attacking potential enemies by means other than the operations of military force' (Foot, 2), yet he was at first forbidden to instigate any overt action. 'Examining such an enormous task', he wrote in 1946, 'one felt as if one had been told to move the Pyramids with a pin' (ibid.). 
Grand had a country headquarters at The Frythe, near Welwyn, and set up an office in 2 Caxton Street, Westminster, where he accumulated friends, mostly from the City of London. One of them has testified to his fertility of ideas and powers of leadership (Sweet-Escott, 20), but results were meagre. He was tall, good-looking, elegantly dressed, with a heavy dark moustache, and exuded an air of mystery and command at once. He sent an agent out to reconnoitre the middle Danube, aiming at blocking the flow of Romanian oil to Germany, and had a few leaflets prepared by emigres aimed at seducing German voters from allegiance to the Nazis. Attempts to interfere with the supply of Swedish iron to Germany misfired. For some months J. C. F. Holland, who was preparing comparable tasks for the War Office, worked alongside him in Caxton Street, but while Holland thought Grand rash, Grand thought Holland over careful. Holland went back to the War Office when the Second World War began. 
Grand took over three upper floors of the St Ermin's Hotel next door, and expanded his section, but combining haste with secrecy led too often to muddle. D section's attempts in midsummer 1940 to arrange stay-behind parties, to disrupt the communications of a German invasion that was expected shortly, caused such confusion that the whole project was handed over to Holland. Grand had seventy-three officers under him by July (and claimed 140). His section, Holland's section, and a propaganda branch of the Foreign Office were all then absorbed into the new Special Operations Executive. He was not: he and his new master, Hugh Dalton, fell out irretrievably. Dalton thought him disloyal, dishonest even, and shed him back to the army in September, on condition that he was at once posted abroad. 
Grand went to India and resumed more professional engineering. In 1943, advanced to CBE, he became director of engineer resources at general headquarters in India. Not even Indian heat could dim his energies and he was created CIE in 1946. He returned home to become chief engineer, home counties district, in 1946-9. In 1949 he was promoted major-general and held his last army post, as director of fortifications and works in the War Office; he retired as a CB in 1952. In 1951 he joined the Institution of Civil Engineers. He worked in the 1960s with Epar (Engineer Planning and Resources) Limited, an engineering firm at 50 Pall Mall, and was involved with the construction of large hotels in the Levant. When posted to the War Office, he moved his home from Trebetherick on Padstow Bay in Cornwall to Delaford Manor, Iver, Buckinghamshire, where he lived until his death, from a motorway accident. He was declared dead on arrival at Putney Hospital, London, on 22 November 1975. 


@@@@@


doc= 47391


Spencer, Alice, countess of Derby (1559-1637), noblewoman, the youngest of eight daughters of Sir John Spencer (died 1586) of Althorp, Northamptonshire, and Katherine Kytson, eldest daughter and heiress of Sir Thomas Kytson of London, was born at Althorp on 4 May 1559. The family acquired great wealth through skilful land management and sheep farming, and all the daughters were amply provided for in their marriages. Alice lived in Spencer homes in Althorp, Wormleighton, and London, where she was probably schooled in music, literature, and religion. Musicians and minstrels made regular visits to the family. In her late teens she moved into court life with her elder sisters, who married nobles and landed gentlemen. 
Alice married Ferdinando Stanley, Lord Strange, heir to the earldom of Derby, secretly in 1579/80. Since he and his mother, Margaret, countess of Derby, were potential successors to Elizabeth I, the marriage caused considerable suspicion, especially as it had been promoted by the earl of Leicester (Fogle, 9-10). It brought Alice a significant dowry. They had three daughters, Anne (1580-1647), Frances (1583-1636) ['see 'Egerton, Frances], and Elizabeth Hastings, nee Stanley (bap. 1587, d. 1633). Anne went on to marry Grey Brydges, fifth Baron Chandos, and Mervin Touchet, the notorious second earl of Castlehaven. 
A beautiful, well-educated, and cultured woman, Alice entered the queen's household and became prominent at court. Ferdinando, one of the richest noblemen in the country, sponsored actors and playwrights and wrote poetry. She became particularly fond of Ferdinando's London residence in Holborn, and of the family seat in Lancashire at Knowsley, known as the northern court, which had a staff of 143 by 1590. She encouraged the visitation of acting companies in the 1580s, when the Queen's Men, Earl of Leicester's Men, and Earl of Essex's Men appeared there many times. 
After Ferdinando's death in 1594, his own company, Lord Strange's Men, became the Countess of Derby's Men. This was the company that merged with the Lord Chamberlain's Men in 1594, with Shakespeare as chief playwright. In the years 1584-94 Alice and Ferdinando were celebrated by Robert Greene, Thomas Nash, and Edmund Spenser as great sponsors of music, poetry, and literature. Spenser dedicated works to Alice and her sisters for their patronage, and to her daughters, thanking Alice for her 'private bands of affinitie'. She performed frequently in masques before the court, and was a masquer in Ben Jonson's 'Blackness', performed in the winter of 1605. A number of writers patronized by Alice and Ferdinando reciprocated by dedicating works to the noble couple. These included John Davies of Hereford, John Harrington, Henry Lok, John Marston, Greene, Nash, and Spenser. Alice received special dedications to herself from Davies, Harrington, Lok, and Spenser. 
Ferdinando died without male heirs, making Alice a highly eligible young dowager countess sporting three attractive unmarried daughters. While Ferdinando left his unentailed lands to Alice and his daughters, his younger brother William succeeded to an earldom that was deep in debt. He decided not to give over title to any Stanley lands to Alice and her daughters, and a series of bitter legal contests ensued that were not resolved until an act of parliament in 1609. After a complicated series of transactions in October 1600 Alice secretly married Sir Thomas Egerton, her daughter Frances being betrothed to his son and heir, John. Sir Thomas had a chancery decree confirm the descent of the Derby lands in the midlands to Alice for her life, passing to Frances and John and their heirs. Once the couple obtained the queen's dispensation, Egerton purchased for Alice in 1601 Harefield House in Middlesex, which she refurbished. They entertained Elizabeth at York House, London, in 1601, and in 1602 they hosted her royal progress at Harefield with one of the most lavish entertainments of the era that cost over $2000. 
Alice brought a number of books to Egerton's library, and shared in building the famous collection. She also used York House as her central London abode, entertaining ladies Bedford, Carey, Clifford, Montgomery, and others. The couple's relationship, however, was not always pleasant as Egerton, a careful counter of coin, did not appreciate her lavish spending and entertaining. He did, however, purchase the Stanley manor of Ellesmere in 1600 for the family title, and forced William, Ferdinando's successor, to settle $20,000 upon Alice and her daughters in 1600. William's inability to meet these stiff conditions led to Egerton's forcing his buy-out of the heirs for nearly $30,000 in 1609. This included Alice's alleged title to the descent of the Isle of Man (Coward, 45-9). 
After the death of Egerton in 1617 Alice lived at Harefield House as a 'rural queen'. She travelled between there and the estates of her daughters and sons-in-law (the countess and earl of Bridgewater and the countess and earl of Huntingdon) at Ashridge, Hertfordshire, and Ashby-de-la-Zouch, Leicestershire. Harefield House became a cultural community. Preparing her grandchildren for social and public life, she employed schoolteachers and musicians, and provided for lavish masques in which the grandchildren acted. Henry Lawes, a neighbouring musician, was hired as their music master. It has been suggested that Alice patronized the young John Milton for a non-clerical career (Brown, 12-14), and that the success of 'Arcades' for her seventy-fifth birthday on 4 May 1634 led to the family's approval of his collaboration on 'Comus' for Bridgewater's installation as lord president of the council in the marches of Wales at Ludlow Castle. Milton had written 'Arcades' in her honour near Harefield in 1632. When it was staged and directed by William Lawes at Harefield, Alice played a part in pastoral habit and was joined by her grandchildren. Milton wrote: '
Mark what radiant state she spreads, 

In circle round her shining throne, 

... 

Sitting like a Goddess bright, In the centre of her light. 

... 

Such a rural Queen All Arcadia hath not seen. 
('Milton: Complete Poems', 77)' Alice died in January 1637 at Harefield House and was buried at the church of St Mary the Virgin in Harefield, Middlesex. She wrote the directions for her burial in her will. A devout woman, she gave clothes and money to the poor of Cobham, Harefield, Hillingdon, and Weybridge, and created a charitable trust for a hospital for the poor with religious education to be built in Hillingdon with her arms as its seal. She also set out in the will whom her grandson George, Baron Chandos, would marry, and the monetary penalties if the marriage did not take place. Providing carefully for each of her servants, children, and many grandchildren, she charged them to live in peace without altercation. An independent woman who dedicated her life to bringing up her children and grandchildren, often in tragic circumstances, the countess pursued the cultural life with zest, striving to attain the highest standards of an Elizabethan woman in an age of declining moral values. 


@@@@@


doc= 47392


Dashwood, Sir Francis, first baronet (c.1658-1724), merchant, was the third son of Francis Dashwood (1619-1683), a member of the Saddlers' Company and Turkey merchant, and his wife, Alice (1621-1693/4), daughter of Richard Sleigh of Derbyshire. Francis and his elder brother Samuel ('c'. 1643-1705) were educated at home before joining their father in his silk business, which they inherited at his death. 
Samuel soon rose to power in the City of London, which he represented as MP in 1685-7 and 1690-95. During the 1680s both brothers invested in the Levant, Royal African, and Old East India companies (they held seats on the governing body of the last named company); Samuel was knighted in 1684. Francis was made free of the Vintners' Company in 1680. He married on 13 April 1683 Mary (died 1694), daughter of John Jennings of Westminster, a marriage which produced a son and two daughters. By the time of the revolution Francis's success in trade had enabled him to accumulate a sizeable fortune, and in 1690 he loaned the government $1000. To Sir Samuel he expressed a wish to obtain a government post, in which he was not successful. He established a residence at Wanstead, Essex, and in 1698 the brothers spent $15,000 on the manor of West Wycombe, Buckinghamshire. Queen Anne knighted Francis during the feast held for Sir Samuel's inauguration as lord mayor in October 1702. 
Dashwood's first involvement in politics came before the general election of 1705, when he was considered as a possible whig candidate for Coventry, standing in partnership with or in place of either of his sons-in-law, Sir Fulwar Skipwith, second baronet, or Sir Orlando Bridgeman. Dashwood, however, imprudently sought to intercede with Lord Brooke, the tory patron, on Skipwith's behalf, and although he then contributed to Bridgeman's electoral expenses, the whigs were defeated at both Coventry and the county polls. 
The year 1705 was a turning point in Francis's life. Samuel died, and on 30 May Francis married Mary (1674-1710), daughter of Vere Fane, the fourth earl of Westmorland and lord governor of the Cinque Ports, who brought with her title to the barony of Le Despencer. This union enhanced Dashwood's personal and political standing. It brought him another son, Francis Dashwood, eleventh Baron Le Despencer (1708-1781) and best known as a member of the notorious Hellfire Club, and a daughter, Rachel (died 1788), who married the politician Sir Robert Austin. In 1706 Dashwood was able to purchase for $15,000 from his nephew George Dashwood, who had inherited it, Sir Samuel's share of the manor of West Wycombe, and having transferred his Wanstead estate to Sir Orlando Bridgeman, he settled his family at West Wycombe. The following year a baronetcy was conferred upon him. 
Dashwood finally entered parliament without a contest in 1708 as whig MP for the Cinque Ports town of Winchelsea, where he contributed little beyond voting in 1709 for the naturalization of the 'poor Palatines' (German protestants) and in 1710 supporting the impeachment of Henry Sacheverell. He also voted in favour of the merger between the Old and New East India companies. The resulting merger opened up not only the oriental trade, but also that of the West Indies and America, to all English merchants. He had to dig into his purse to hold the contested seat again at the 1710 election, successfully defending accusations of bribery of the electorate. His allegiance wavered at this point, and he was one of those who uncovered the mismanagement of the previous whig government, but he came back into the fold to vote in 1713 against the 'French Commerce Bill', which would have affected his trading interests. He did not stand at the election held that year and retired from active political life. 
Following the death of his second wife, Dashwood married on 17 June 1712 Mary (died 1719), the daughter of Major (Charles?) King, who bore him two sons and two daughters. His fourth marriage, on 21 July 1720, to Elizabeth (1666?-1736), daughter of Thomas Windsor, first earl of Plymouth, was childless. About 1720 he bought the manor of Halton in Buckinghamshire, on the improvement of which he spent lavishly, at the same time beautifying his home at West Wycombe. He died at his town house in Hanover Square, Westminster, on 4 November 1724 and was buried at West Wycombe. Despite the expenditure of his latter years, Dashwood's personal estate was valued at over $34,000. The baronetcy passed to his son Francis, then aged fifteen. 


@@@@@


doc= 47393


Skeffington, Sir Richard (c.1590-1647), politician, was the younger son of William Skeffington (died 1635) of Fisherwick, Staffordshire, and his wife, Elizabeth ('nee' Dering) ('b'. 1567?), who came from Kent. His father, who gained a baronetcy on 8 May 1627, came from a family prominent in 'the great web of intermarried gentry of Warwickshire and Staffordshire' (Larminie, 74) and with branches in Leicestershire. Richard Skeffington matriculated from Magdalene College, Cambridge, in 1615, but did not take a degree. He acquired estates at Hawkesyard, Staffordshire, and at Arley near Coventry, and a house in the city itself. Knighted in 1624, he was returned as MP for the joint Warwickshire/Staffordshire seat of Tamworth the following year, apparently making no recorded mark whatever in that parliament. In 1626 he married Anne (1607-1637), youngest daughter of Sir John Newdigate (1571-1610) and his wife, Anne Newdigate (1574-1618), a liaison which confirmed and strengthened the respective positions of both families within midland society. 
There is evidence linking Skeffington with the circles around Robert Greville, Lord Brooke, and he has been described as a puritan. He sided with the parliamentarian cause with the outbreak of civil war, while his brother, Sir John Skeffington ('c'.1589-1651), who had inherited the main family estates at Fisherwick, went the other way, suffering sequestration for his allegiance. Having played little part in local government before 1642, Skeffington now emerged as a vigorous participant in the parliamentary administration of the county. One of the clique opposed to the predominance of the earl of Denbigh within the midland association, some years later, Richard Baxter praised Skeffington as one of the 'many very godly and judicious gentlemen' in charge of the Warwickshire committee during the war ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 43-4, cited in Hughes). He was a commissioner for Staffordshire and Warwickshire in respect of reform of the ministry, collection of taxes and sequestration of royalists, and was added to the Staffordshire bench after Naseby. He and Colonel John Needham, governor of Leicester, played a crucial role in securing the capitulation of Lord Loughborough's garrison at Ashby-de-la-Zouch in February 1646, mediating with parliament to secure preferential rates of composition for his lordship's party, they having been effectively driven out of Lichfield in the aftermath of a contest for command among the royalists there. 
Later that year, after a hotly contested election in August, Skeffington was recruited as MP for Staffordshire with the support of Sir William Brereton, whose second wife was Skeffington's sister, Cicely. Brereton, who thought his brother-in-law 'a most precious excellent man' ('Letter Books', 2.216), had previously failed to secure him a seat at Stafford town, where he had been defeated by a single vote. The margin at the county election was not very much wider. Once at Westminster he was appointed to a committee of the House of Commons to discuss officers' indemnity, as well as the publication of the 'Septuagint' Greek translation of the 'Old Testament' in October 1646, briefly excusing himself from the service of the house shortly thereafter. He took the solemn league and covenant on 9 December, and was added to the committee of privileges a week later. He was appointed to a committee to confer with the Lords about the attempt to convey the duke of York away from the earl of Northumberland in the same month. He was added to the committee of accounts in January 1647. 
Skeffington was denied the time or the opportunity to establish his political career on the national stage. He died on 2 June 1647 at Broxbourne, Hertfordshire, where he was buried. A memorial inscription commended in him 'that piety which is also peaceable' (Shaw, 1.366). His will was proved by Richard Newdigate, his brother-in-law, and Richard Pyott, two of his executors. Its overseers were Sir William Brereton, Michael Biddulph of Elmhirst, and his cousin, John Swynfen MP. The Skeffingtons had three daughters and three sons. The eldest son, John Skeffington (bap. 1632, d. 1695), succeeded his cousin Sir William Skeffington as fourth baronet, and then succeeded his father-in-law as second Viscount Massarene. 


@@@@@


doc= 47395


Forbes, William (1668x71-1745), lawyer and jurist, was born possibly in 1668 or between November 1670 and January 1671, the elder of two children of Thomas Forbes (1629-1687) and his wife, Isabel (1635-1715), daughter of David Edgar of Keithock, Forfarshire, and widow of James Pitcairn. Thomas Forbes was of an old Aberdeenshire family with good connections in the burgh and university of Aberdeen. He studied at Leiden and Padua and was professor of philosophy in the University of Pisa from 1658 to 1659 and of medicine there from 1659 to 1662, before returning to Scotland. 
Details of Forbes's early education are unknown; however, he did graduate AM from a university, probably St Andrews as a William Forbes matriculated at St Salvator's College there in 1685 and Thomas Forbes moved to St Andrews between January 1684 and May 1685, but the evidence is circumstantial. On 28 October 1688 a William Forbes, noted as a Scot aged twenty, matriculated at the University of Leiden. In 1690 Forbes prepared to compete for the position of regent in philosophy at Edinburgh, but was frustrated by ill health. He may then have remained in Edinburgh or returned to the Netherlands to study law; he was certainly in Edinburgh in 1694, when he prepared his mother's poll tax return. On 15 February 1696 he was admitted as a member of the Faculty of Advocates. 
On 25 January 1700 Forbes married Margaret, the daughter of Alexander Lindsay, an Edinburgh wool merchant. The couple had two children: Thomas ('bap'. 1702), who became an advocate, and Janet ('bap'. 1708), who married Alexander Carmichael, a landowner in Leith. By February 1700 Forbes had been appointed an examinator of the Faculty of Advocates. He was clerk of faculty from January 1702 to January 1703, and joint clerk from November 1705 until the end of 1714. In 1705 the faculty agreed that Forbes should collect court of session decisions (eventually published as 'A Journal of the Session' in 1714) and he was appointed joint keeper of the faculty library. 
Following his marriage, financial pressure on Forbes may have led him to turn to writing: 'A Methodical Treatise concerning Bills of Exchange... according to the Analogy of the Scots Law' appeared in 1703. The dedications and contents of the works show how Forbes tried to demonstrate his abilities not only to his colleagues but to politicians who he thought might be useful to him. 'A Treatise of Church Lands and Tithes' (2 vols., 1705) and 'The Duty and Powers of Justices of the Peace in this Part of Great Britain called Scotland' (2 pts, 1707-8) were dedicated respectively to Sir Hew Dalrymple of North Berwick, lord president of the court of session, and his brother Sir David Dalrymple of Hailes, then solicitor-general. The latter work devoted special attention to the extended duties of justices regarding customs and excise following the union with England, and appeared at the same time as Forbes was seeking the new post of auditor of the exchequer to deal with excise-related questions. A further work concerned with the consequences of the union was 'The Law of Election of Members of Parliament' (1710). 
In 1708 Forbes had decided upon his major task, the writing of a: 'complete body of the law of Scotland, containing the harmony thereof with, and differences from the civil and feudal laws; and shewing how far the Scots and English law do agree and differ; with incident comparative views of the modern constitutions of other nations in Europe. ('Minute Book of the Faculty of Advocates', 1.277)' This book, 'The great body of the law of Scotland', was never published; the manuscript is in Glasgow University Library. However, Forbes's interest in comparing Scots with English law was well known and was a factor in his subsequent appointment at Glasgow. 
In December 1713 Queen Anne assigned income in the sum of $90 for the establishment of the chair of civil law at the University of Glasgow. Soundings about suitable candidates resulted in the report that 'Mr. William Forbes, Advocat... is Esteem'd a man very well skill'd in the Civil Law and Capable to teach the same, and... thought the fittest for that post' ('minutes of meetings of faculty', 1701-1717, 28 Jan 1714, U. Glas., Archives and Business Records Centre, MS 26632, 113). Among his strongest supporters at Glasgow was the rector, Sir John Maxwell of Pollock. Forbes was elected the university's first professor of civil law in February 1714. His teaching remit was identified as civil, feudal, canon, and Scots law. 
On 18 February 1714 Forbes gave his inaugural lecture, on 'the nature, fortune, dignity, utility, and authority of the civil law'. He followed this with a series of classes on 'the civil and Scottish laws', comparing Scots law with Roman law and explaining the contrast with English law. These were the first classes on Scots law to be taught in a university; previously Scots law, less prestigious than Roman law, had been taught privately by advocates in Edinburgh. His teaching on Scots law led to 'The Institutes of the Law of Scotland', published in two volumes in 1722 and 1730, the first dealing with private, the second with criminal law. However, attendance at his classes in Scots law seems to have been low; in 1716 he offered only civil law, and he had almost certainly given up Scots law by the 1730s. 
Forbes's commitment to Scots law cannot be doubted but his professorship was controversial. He did not always teach at times required by the university, demanded full payment for teaching law to divinity students, and for some time feuded with his patron, Pollock, and the principal who had appointed him, John Stirling. He changed political allegiance several times, but by the 1730s had become an ally of Principal Neil Campbell and his patron, Archibald Campbell, earl of Ilay and manager of Scotland for Walpole. This possibly followed Campbell's appointment of Forbes's son, Thomas, as college advocate in 1728. Forbes was dean of the faculty from 1732 to 1734, and as library quaestor from 1736 to 1738 he acquired many Dutch and English texts. He represented the University of Glasgow at the general assembly of the Church of Scotland in Edinburgh in 1740. He died intestate at Glasgow on 27 October 1745, leaving $4145, and 14,800 marks in bonds. 


@@@@@


doc= 47400


Gonson, William (d. 1544), naval administrator, was a son of Christopher Gonson (died 1498?) of Melton Mowbray, Leicestershire, and his wife, Elizabeth. Another son, Bartholomew, became vicar there. Nothing is known of William's early life: he was possibly the Captain William Gonson who sailed in government service and later directed shipping movements. He was certainly a clerk in the navy storehouse at Deptford, Kent, receiving ropes and artillery pieces (1513) and armorial banners (1514) for ships. Thereafter his diverse duties and responsibilities are attested in official records: indeed, he was chief executive 'de facto' of the navy for almost twenty years, and after his death was -- in effect -- replaced by a 'navy board'. 
Gonson married Benet Waters (died 1545/6). They had six sons (David, Richard, Christopher, Arthur, Benjamin ['see below'], and Anthony) and four daughters (Margaret, Elizabeth, Avis, and Thomasine), and they resided in Thames Street, London, in the parish of St Dunstan-in-the-East. Gonson was well paid, both from his naval appointments and as one of Henry VIII's squires of the body, though his great wealth probably came through his commercial activities. In 1525 he was a warden of the Grocers' Company, and he may by then have owned the 'great 'Mary Grace'', which traded to the Greek islands. Thus, in 1530, he was one of twenty-two merchants trading with Candia (Crete); and about 1534 his ship 'Matthew Gonson' (300 tons), with his son Richard as captain, sailed with a consort to Chios (where Richard died) and Candia (Crete). In March 1539 foreign merchants' goods in an unidentified ship of Gonson's were valued at 50,000 marks sterling (over $33,000), and in 1541 he was assessed for subsidy on $1000. In 1524 he became keeper of the storehouses at Deptford and Erith, Kent, and an usher of the king's chamber, and for part of the period 1532-7 he handled sums of money totalling more than $15,589. Hence he was concerned with rigging warships, paying money for wages and victualling, purchasing masts, repairing Thames forts, building ships (for example, the 'Galley Subtile'), and (in 1539) sending a fleet to bring Anne of Cleves from Calais to Dover for her marriage to Henry VIII. He was vice-admiral -- the first in England -- of Norfolk and Suffolk from 1536 until 1543, and held courts at Kings Lynn and elsewhere. 
In 1540 Gonson made arrangements with his parish for his funeral. He was to have a memorial brass made and let into another man's gravestone, and, following interment in St Dunstan's, to have requiem masses performed annually for twenty years. In July 1541 his son Sir David, a knight of St John of Jerusalem, was executed as a traitor. Plainly, William Gonson's responsibilities imposed great strain, particularly with the Anglo-French war (1543-6), and in 1544 (before 5 August, when Benjamin was accounting) he 'feloniously killed himself' ('LP Henry VIII' 20/1, no. 125/7). A suicide's body had, by law, to be buried, with a stake through the heart, near local crossroads: Gonson was interred in his parish church, which suggests that matters were hushed up. No will or administration has been found. Gonson's value to his country was recognized, after his death, by the creation of a 'navy board' to replace him. The will of his widow, Benet, was made on 18 August 1545, the executors being her son Benjamin, to whom she left a few items of plate, and Thomasine's husband, Henry Tyrrell; probate was granted on 23 February 1546. 
Gonson lived in Tower Street, in the parish of St Dunstan-in-the-East, where he was assessed for subsidy in 1559 (on $180) and 1576 ($200), but he also owned property in Great Baddow, Essex. He married Ursula Hussey (died 1586), and his list of their fourteen children, born within the years 1547-67, supplies unusual detail. All were born and baptized in his parish except for Thomasine, who 'was born in the Queen[']s house at Deptford (wherein I dwelled)' in 1564, and was baptized in the local church (BL, Add. MS 15857, fol. 153'v'); their father's social standing is clear from the eminence of the godparents, who included Sir Thomas Lodge and the current mayoress of London. Gonson had been a promoter of the voyages of John Hawkins to Guinea for black slaves in 1562 and 1564, and his daughter Katherine ('b'. 1549) married Hawkins on 20 January 1567 at St Dunstan-in-the-East. The first husband of Thomasine was Edward Fenton. 
As treasurer, Gonson handled large sums of money ($28,285 for the year from Christmas 1555), and from January 1557 he was given an annual appropriation, initially of $14,000, instead. For example, during 1569 payments were made for wages, board, and lodging for men repairing major warships, and for sending 880 men to four ships; providing timber from Sussex; bringing a warship from Liverpool to Deptford, Kent; and for purchasing land in Kent, needed for Upnor Castle. 
In 1577 Gonson was taken ill: knowing that John Hawkins would obtain the treasurership, he told him, 'I shall pluck a thorn out of my foot and put it into yours' (Oppenheim, 145). Gonson died later that year (his accounts for 1576 and 1577 were rendered by his daughter Ursula and her husband), and was buried on 11 December at St Dunstan's. On 18 March 1578 administration was granted to his widow Ursula. Their son Benjamin ('b'. 1551) was clerk of the ships from 1588 to 1600. 


@@@@@


doc= 47401


Benjamin Gonson (c.1525-1577), naval administrator, followed his father into government service. His brother Christopher was the heir of their father (in 1545) and their brother Arthur of their mother (1546), so Benjamin was probably the fifth son. As he was of age to marry by 8 June 1546, he was born perhaps about 1525; he commenced his government work during 1540-41, doubtless as his father's assistant, so succeeded him, as from 5 August 1544. However, William's death underlined the chaotic situation, and in 1546 a 'council of marine' was established, Gonson being appointed surveyor of ships, from 24 April 1546, with a salary of $40 per annum. From 30 September 1548 he served as treasurer of the navy (though his patent is dated 8 July 1549), with a salary of $66 13's'. 4died These officers of marine causes (Gonson himself, William Holstock, Sir William Winter, Sir Edward Baeshe) -- able beneficiaries of William Gonson's reforms -- now met within the city of London, in a house on Tower Hill. In fact it was convenient for the nearby naval storehouses, the Tower's ordnance depot, and the shipyards downstream. 


@@@@@


doc= 47402


Hilles, Richard (c.1514-1587), religious activist, was the son of another Richard Hilles, who was master of the Merchant Taylors in 1504, and his wife, Elizabeth. In 1535 he was himself admitted to the freedom of the company, which was customarily awarded at the age of twenty-one. By his own testimony he was apprenticed to one Nicholas Cosyn on London Bridge. As an apprentice he seems to have embraced protestant views, and in 1532 fell out with his master for expressing forthright opinions on justification. In January 1533 he appealed for assistance to Thomas Cromwell from the refuge which he had sought at Rouen in Normandy; his mother, too, begged Cromwell to help her son. Hilles must have been reconciled with Cosyn in order to secure his freedom, but it is not known how that came about. His religious views seem to have become increasingly radical, and in 1536 he had a brush with John Stokesley, bishop of London, from which he was rescued by his mother. 
Following the 'Act of Six Articles' in 1539 Hilles felt his position to be increasingly dangerous, and in 1540 he used his business as an excuse to migrate to Strasbourg. In August of that year he initiated a correspondence with the Zurich reformer Heinrich Bullinger, to whom he wrote 'I have determined not to return thither [England], unless it please God to effect such a change as that we may serve him there without hindrance' (Robinson, 'Original Letters', 1.198), and in June 1541 secured a residence permit in Strasbourg, describing himself as a cloth merchant. He did not apply for citizenship, for fear of losing his status as a merchant tailor, but travelled extensively up and down the Rhine on business, visiting Bullinger at Zurich in 1542. He also became well known to other protestant Englishmen in the area and to the local leaders of reform, usually through his friendship with Bullinger. The letters which he wrote at this time represent his chief claim to fame and to evangelical credentials. In August 1548, having had time to assess the religious climate in England, he moved his family back to London. 
Hilles's former master, Nicholas Cosyn, was master of the Merchant Taylors in 1549-50, and this may help to explain why Hilles was called to the livery in 1549. By 1553 he seems to have been a member of the common council of London, and his children, born abroad, were naturalized by statute in March of that year. In June he was one of four merchant tailors who signed the letters patent in favour of Queen Jane. From this point on, Hilles gave his career precedence over his religious opinions, although he does not appear to have changed the latter. By November 1554 he was attending mass, a fact which he later made no pretence of denying. In 1555 he was a warden of the company, and probably senior warden the following year. Throughout Mary's reign the London livery companies conspired to defeat the vigilance of the ecclesiastical authorities, and Hilles's degree of conformity was quite sufficient to enable him to continue providing money and surreptitious support for protestants both at home and abroad. In 1561 he became master of the company and co-founder of the Merchant Taylors' School, London, donating $500 towards the purchase of the site. His active involvement with the company continued after his mastership, and he became auditor in 1569, a position which he retained until shortly before his death. After 1559 his protestant convictions could safely reappear, and he resumed his correspondence with Bullinger as though nothing had happened. He also became active in supporting godly ministers when the opportunity arose. He had resumed (or continued) his overseas business connections after 1548, but moved the focus from Strasbourg to Antwerp. He received a grant of arms in 1568, and about 1582 was listed as one of the hundred or so wealthiest and most 'substantial' citizens of London. 
At some point before 1538 Hilles had married Agnes, daughter of Christopher Lacey of Yorkshire, gentleman. His eldest son, John, was born in that year, and three others, Gerson, Barnabas, and Daniel, followed between 1540 and 1548. It is probable that Agnes, John, and Barnabas predeceased him, because when he came to make his will in June 1586 he referred only to Daniel, Gerson, and Barnabas's daughter Elizabeth. His major bequests were charitable, particularly land and tenements on Tower Hill, to be developed and used as almshouses for widowed and impoverished company members. Perhaps it was for that reason that after his father's death in the following January Daniel questioned the will, and was given a copy by the court of the Merchant Taylors on 3 February 1587. 


@@@@@


doc= 47404


Wyatt, George (1553-1624), landowner and writer, was born at Allington Castle, Kent, the youngest son of Sir Thomas Wyatt the younger (b. in or before 1521, d. 1554), soldier, and his wife, Jane (died in or after 1595), the daughter of Sir William Haute or Hart of Bishopbourne, Kent. The family was impoverished by Sir Thomas's attainder in 1554, and although Jane received lands and an annuity from Queen Mary in 1555 to a total value of about $200 per annum she never remarried, and her sons never obtained their father's or grandfather's place in Kentish society. The family was restored in blood in 1570, by which time George was the only surviving son. He was granted a small property at Wavering by the crown, and entered Gray's Inn in 1571. Although he left a number of writings, none of them was published, and only the skeleton of his career can be reconstructed with certainty. In 1582 he married Jane, the daughter of Sir Thomas Finch of Eastwell; they had five sons and four daughters. It can be deduced from his own words that he saw active service as a soldier, probably in the Low Countries, and was present at the siege of Bergen-op-Zoom in 1588, although in what capacity is not clear. The Mr Wiatt who was muster-master there from 1588 to 1591 was always referred to (and referred to himself) as Thomas, as was the 'Capten Wiatt' who assisted Lord Cobham and Sir Thomas Wilford with the Kentish musters in the late 1590s. George Wyatt had settled down in Kent by 1593, but, as he complained to Lord Cobham, 'mine estate forceth me to retire myself' ('Papers', 31). By 1618 he had at last inherited his mother's properties at Boxley and Southfleet, and in 1622 he recovered his family's possession of Boxley Abbey. He died there in August 1624 and was buried in the parish church. His wife survived him by twenty years, dying about 1644 at the age of over eighty. 
George Wyatt was the obscure son of a famous father, and the obscure father of famous sons. Hawte, who died in 1638, was the father of Edward, the progenitor of the Virginia Wiatts, and Wyatt's son Sir Francis Wyatt, who died in 1644, was the first royal governor of Virginia. George's main claim to fame is the papers which he wrote and collected in the latter part of his life, which provide some vivid and proximate insights into the careers of his father and grandfather, and into the military problems of late sixteenth- and early seventeenth-century England. One of the most interesting is his eulogistic treatise in defence of Anne Boleyn ('c'.1605), which contains a circumstantial account of Sir Thomas Wyatt's journey to Rome in 1527. George was born many years after his grandfather's death, but the story may have been handed down in the family. Another is his letter to his son Sir Francis written in 1622 and containing such comments as 'I see by the map I have of the last, and by your letter, your Plantation is d[r]awen out into long, weak and skattered inhabitation with smale and unapt defences' ('Papers', 113); it was written shortly after the destructive Indian revolt of the same year. Virtually everything which is known about George Wyatt derives from these papers, and particularly those which were put together into a commonplace book by his descendant Richard Wyatt in 1727. This commonplace book was edited for the Camden Society by David Loades in 1968. 


@@@@@


doc= 47407


Woodhouse, Sir William (b. in or before 1517, d. 1564), naval commander and administrator, was the second son of John Woodhouse of Waxham in Norfolk and Alice, the daughter of William Croft of Thorpe Market. Sir Thomas Woodhouse was his elder brother. As William's first service was as escheator of Norfolk and Suffolk in 1538-9, he must by then have been twenty-one. Nothing is known of his upbringing or education, but from the fact that he was a younger son, took to the sea, and was subsequently a member of the St George's Company of Norwich, it may be presumed that he was apprenticed to a Norwich merchant. In 1542 he commanded one of the king's ships against Scotland. In December 1543 he was in command of the 'Primrose', a 240 ton, middle-ranking warship, and in 1544 had been promoted to the 300 ton 'Minion'. He was knighted at Leith by the earl of Hertford in May of that year, and by the early part of 1545 was admiral of the narrow seas under Viscount Lisle as lord admiral, flying his flag on the 'Great Bark' of 500-600 tons. When the council for marine causes was established in 1546 he was appointed master of the naval ordnance, with a salary of 100 marks a year. 
In May 1541 Woodhouse was granted various minor offices in and around King's Lynn, and was described as the king's servant. It is clear that he was building up a substantial landed estate around Hickling in his native county, by grants and preferential purchases of former ecclesiastical lands. He bought the priory of Igtham from its incumbent prior ahead of its dissolution in 1535, which is fair indication of the sharpness of his business sense, and received other substantial grants by purchase and exchange in 1542 and 1545. He also held the advowsons of several Norfolk churches. From 1546 to 1550 he was keeper of Queenborough Castle in Kent, and in December 1552 he became lieutenant of the admiralty, or vice-admiral, in succession to Sir Thomas Clere. He remained second in command of the navy for the remainder of his life. In the early part of Elizabeth's reign he was responsible for reorganizing and improving the system of 'shipkeeping', the provision of skeleton crews for ships laid up on a care and maintenance basis. He did not invent this idea, which had been in use since the early part of Henry VIII's reign, but after the loss of the ancient but imposing 'Henry Grace a Dieu', which was burnt at her moorings in 1553, it became obvious that security would have to be improved. He commanded the channel fleet when war broke out with France in 1557, and was at sea again in 1562, to clear the channel of pirates. 
Woodhouse sat in the parliaments of 1545, 1547, and March 1553 for the borough of Great Yarmouth; as a burgess for Norwich in 1559; and as knight of the shire for Norfolk in 1558 and 1563. Rather surprisingly, he was not appointed to the commission of the peace until February 1554, but he served thereafter continuously until his death, being 'custos rotulorum' from 1561. He was also a founder member of the Muscovy Company in 1555, a sign of his business links with London. 
Woodhouse married twice. His first wife was Anne, daughter of Henry Repps of Thorpe Market. She had died by 1551 when he married Elizabeth, the daughter of Sir Philip Calthorpe, and widow of Sir Henry Parker. It looks very much as though his second marriage was a direct result of his improved wealth and status. According to the heraldic visitation of 1563, the children of his first marriage were Anne, Mary, Thomas, and Henry, and of his second Thomas, William, and Elizabeth, from which it may be deduced that the first Thomas did not survive infancy. He died on 22 November 1564, and was buried in Hickling church, where what is alleged to be his monument remains, although all the inscriptions are defaced. His brother, Sir Thomas, continued to occupy the family seat at Waxham, where he died in 1571, and his rather grander tomb (which does have an inscription) survives. 


@@@@@


doc= 47408


Vaughan, Cuthbert (c.1519-1563), soldier, is of unknown parentage. He began his military career in 1546, serving as a captain at Boulogne. One year later he was a captain at the siege of Leith. He continued this military service during Edward's reign, for which he was rewarded in late 1551 with the office of bailiff of the lordships of Marche and Oye in Calais. During Mary's reign he was involved in Wyatt's rebellion: on 13 February 1554 he was indicted at Westminster for offences committed in Middlesex, and for marching to London in order to seize the Tower. For this he was condemned to death. He then provided evidence against another of the rebels, Sir Nicholas Throckmorton, and was subsequently released on a bond of 300 crowns. He did not suffer much: although he lost some of his lands, he successfully petitioned Mary for their restoration after his release. This clemency may have been due to the intervention of Philip, who sought to reconcile many of the rebels to the state; by the end of the reign he was on Philip's pension list. 
In 1557 Vaughan was summoned to court to raise 300 men and lead them, as captain, to Berwick; the men were mustered at Tower Hill. Several of these men deserted in Scotland but were subsequently found and hanged. For his service in Scotland he received lands and further restorations. Vaughan married Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas Roydon and Margaret Whettenhall. She survived him by more than thirty years: she died on 19 August 1595 and was buried on 15 November at East Peckham church in Kent. Vaughan was her second husband, the first being William Twysden and the third Thomas Goulding. The recusant Jane Wiseman was said to be their daughter. Early in 1558 Vaughan became involved in a land dispute with the son of his wife's first husband, Thomas Twysden. Early in Elizabeth's reign he was again sent to command at Berwick. Lord Eure, the commander there, sent him home complaining that he was insubordinate; Vaughan had refused to deliver his muster book when demanded by Eure's clerk. On his way back to court he carried a report on the state of Scotland and the protestant rebels there, a commission organized by the earl of Westmorland so that Vaughan might retain some credit. The privy council reinstated him on 21 January 1559. He then took part in the English intervention in the Scottish Reformation crisis of 1559-60. In July 1559 he was sent to survey the fortifications at Aymouth, while in April 1560 he was involved in the siege of Leith. In late April he was praised for his valiant conduct in assaulting the town of Pelham, for which he received the appellation 'the general of Pelham', reported by Randolph ('CSP Scot.', '1547-63', 429-30, n. 826). He was later listed as one of the captains who had served best under Lord Grey. Cecil acknowledged his good services and saw that he was rewarded with a grant of marches in Kent and Sussex. 
In 1562 Vaughan was appointed as muster-master and comptroller of the English garrison then occupying Newhaven (Le Havre). On 28 September he and Sir Adrian Poynings left Portsmouth to take the first troops across to Newhaven. He argued over various matters with Poynings. Later rumours emerged in London that he was misappropriating money, and he was subsequently investigated, but was not charged. His work comprised musters, upkeep of fortifications, and general administration. On arrival at Newhaven he was quick to emphasize the strategic value of defending the town of Rouen. At one point he was asked to reform the church service used at the garrison: considered too radical, it was to be brought into line with the established service in England. He died on 23 July 1563, succumbing to the plague which was decimating the English garrison at Newhaven. Vaughan's religion seems to have been of the more 'advanced' sort. It is clear that he steadfastly opposed the reintroduction of Catholicism in Mary's reign, and his subsequent exile may have been important in the development of his religious beliefs. His wife, Elizabeth, was a noted puritan patron. Moreover, in December 1562 he expressed the hope that the parliament of the next year would make a more full reform of religion than that already in use. Despite his many years of loyal and valiant service, Vaughan was not the easiest man to work with. His opinions were strong, and he was not one to back down; he quarrelled extensively with Poynings, for example, as to what the best way for the English to enter the town of Newhaven might be. His career was dogged by accusations of insubordination and fiscal misappropriation. Nothing was ever proved, however, and he was held in some esteem by Cecil. Perhaps his firm convictions aroused ill feeling in others: he seems to have been a committed protestant and a solid military man. 


@@@@@


doc= 47409


Gifford, John (d. 1655), Independent minister, was best known as the minister who inspired John Bunyan, author of 'The Pilgrim's Progress'. Nothing is known about Gifford's birthplace or parentage, but his arrival in Bedford, conversion, and ministry are described in 'A brief account of the 1st gathering of the Church of Christ at Bedford' included in the modern edition of the minutes of the church. 
Gifford, the account records, was a Kentish man who served as a major in the king's army during the civil war and was taken prisoner by Fairfax's forces after fighting at Rochester in 1648. He was condemned to die but escaped, with the help of his sister and divine intervention, first to London then to Bedford, only to embark on a life of debauchery while he practised as a physician. He would later recall his murderous fantasies against 'brother Harrington, meerly from that great antipathy that was in his heart against the people of God and the holyness of the Gospell' (Tibbutt, 16). His conversion is recorded as following a conventional pattern. After losing heavily at gambling and having 'desperate thoughtes against God', Gifford was convinced of his sinfulness by reading a holy book by a Mr Bolton (ibid.). He subsequently sought the acquaintance of a group of puritan believers in Bedford who shared a dislike for 'the bishops and their superstitions' (ibid., 15) but had not yet separated from the open communion of the parish. These included John Grew, John Eston, and Anthony Harrington. Initial scepticism among the godly about Gifford's conversion from sinner to believer was overcome by his skill as a preacher. It is recorded that he made a convert, Sister Cooper, during his first public sermon. 
Gifford was a prime mover in organizing the Bedford puritans into a gathered church and was chosen as its first pastor in 1650 by his eleven fellow 'foundation stones', three men and eight women. The unprecedented religious freedoms of the 1650s, under the Commonwealth and protectorate, allowed this collective or congregational church to enjoy a brief period of toleration. In 1653 Gifford, who had never been ordained, was admitted to the mastership of the hospital and rectory of the church of St John the Baptist in Bedford. 
The only extant writing by Gifford is a letter sent to his congregation from his deathbed in 1655. The letter exhorts the faithful to avoid divisive arguments and disputes about matters like baptism, psalm singing, or 'any externalls', to follow the scriptures, and to 'submit to one another in love' (Tibbutt, 19). It also rejects discrimination on the basis of wealth or social status, advocates that leading members of the church act as examples in their 'faith, love and zeale', and reminds the congregation of the need for orderly behaviour (ibid., 20). Gifford's letter was traditionally read aloud to the congregation on new year's day until the twentieth century, including the more turbulent times of persecution under the Restoration regime. 
Gifford's ecumenism and insistence on equality and order may have influenced the thinking of his most famous successor as minister of the Bedford church, John Bunyan, who had been baptized and made a full member of the church just before Gifford's death. After Gifford's death the congregation nominated John Burton as minister, and after pressure was put on the mayor and corporation by Oliver Cromwell he was granted the living of St John the Baptist. Burton was in turn succeeded by Bunyan in 1672. 
There is little evidence of Gifford's life or family. He died on 21 September 1655 and was buried in St John the Baptist Church, having made a will on 2 August. His will designated his 'loving wife' Margaret as his sole executrix and established bequests to each of three children: to his eldest daughter, Mary, $55 on the day of her marriage or at the age of twenty-one, to his daughter Elizabeth $50 on the same conditions, and $50 to a child as yet unborn. This child was born the following year and named Martha. Gifford also seems to have had a son who died before him: a register in St Paul's Church in Bedford records the burial of John, son of John Gifford, on 30 June 1651. 


@@@@@


doc= 47410


Best, John (d. 1570), bishop of Carlisle, was supposedly born in Yorkshire of unknown parentage. He was probably of Halifax, referred to in his widow's will, and home to another early protestant of the same surname. Nothing is known of his schooling. A man of his name was a monk of Selby who in 1535 displeased the archbishop of York by his preaching, 'railing and jesting' at the hypocrisy of fasting. His preaching licence was revoked until he were 'waxed sadder' ('LP Henry VIII', 9, no. 742). Best was certainly at King Henry VIII College, Oxford, in 1538-9, when his preaching was again criticized, this time by a chaplain of the college, and he was found eating meat in Lent at the house of an Oxford bookseller, accompanied by three others of his college, including one of his own students. Little is known of his movements for the next twenty years, but he appears to have pursued his studies during this period. Bachelor of grammar at Oxford in 1534, he had apparently become MA of an unknown university by 1559, and a BTh by 1561. Oxford made him a DTh 'in absentia' in 1566. 
About 1550 Best married Elizabeth Somner (the date may be inferred from the fact of two of the four children in his widow's will of 1574 being then still under age). Her antecedents are as obscure as his own, but the fact that her poverty led to her being allowed to retain the episcopal residence of Rose Castle between her husband's death and his successor's appointment suggests that neither he nor she came from families with any private means. In 1553 Best was briefly canon of Wells and prebendary of Wedmore, but was deprived by Mary in 1554 for marriage. Not found among the Marian exiles, he may be identified with the Master Best who was one of four preachers occasionally smuggled into Lancashire to minister to a Manchester protestant conventicle, suggesting a likely membership of the protestant underground in Yorkshire. 
Best at last emerged from obscurity after the accession of Elizabeth. A select preacher in the north in 1559, he was rector of Romaldkirk, usually held 'in commendam' with the see of Carlisle, on 4 August 1559, and was restored to his Wells prebend with the rectory of Street with Walton, Somerset. He was not consecrated as bishop of Carlisle until 2 March 1561, the long vacancy after the deprivation of Bishop Oglethorpe in June 1559 being usually ascribed to the difficulty of finding anyone willing to accept the see. Even Bernard Gilpin, the Apostle of the North, refused his cousin Edwin Sandys's encouragement. 
Gilpin may have been wise. The problems Best faced at Carlisle were enough to make anyone wax sadder. His clergy were obstinately unreformed, the laity little better. Even in his initial cautious optimism he wrote to Cecil in July 1561 of the over-mightiness of Lord Dacre, describing the clergy under his influence as the 'wicked imps of Antichrist' (TNA: PRO, SP 12/18/21). Six months later he complained that the rulers and justices 'winked at all things', and, owing to the supremacy of Dacre and Clifford in his diocese, he could himself achieve nothing (TNA: PRO, SP 12/21/13). Rumours and expectations of a French invasion further impeded reform. Moreover, the bishop lacked the support from his dean and chapter, which made the reforming task of Pilkington at Durham so much easier. Sir Thomas Smith, restored in 1560 to the deanery of which he had been deprived by Mary, was an absentee government servant who was ambassador to France for much of the 1560s, and there was no love lost between him and his bishop. Writing to Cecil in 1565, Smith spoke caustically of 'that busy bishop of Carlisle', who had made turmoil among the prebendaries, and wished Best had as much goodwill as tongue ('CSP for.', '1564-5', no. 980 (7)). In fact Smith misjudged the situation. He was relying on his vice-dean to bring the house out of trouble, whereas Best's investigation showed that the near bankruptcy of the chapter was caused by illegal and simoniac leases in which the vice-dean was the ringleader. Best was aware by 1563 of the 'evil doings of the prebendaries' in Smith's absence (Lansdowne MS 6, fol. 125), and won the support of Edmund Grindal, bishop of London and a native of the diocese, in his attempts to control and reform his corrupt chapter, which he described as consisting of 'ignorant priests or old unlearned monks' (Lansdowne MS 6, fol. 86). 
Grindal accordingly supported Best's efforts to replace the prebendaries who died with committed reformers, men willing to tackle the Augean stables of the chapter as well as to undertake wider preaching responsibilities in the diocese. Even so, the saga of the chapter leases occupied much of the decade of Best's episcopate. In August 1567 he asked for an extension of his commendam of Romaldkirk to finance the needs of the church in Carlisle. 
Best's episcopal register reflects problems he faced in his efforts to reform his wider diocese. The first two pages deal with the deprivation of Hugh Hodgson, provost of Queen's, Oxford, of the rectory of Skelton; as Hodgson was then sheltered by Lord Dacre, and the living given to a Dacre scion who was a Marian ordinand, Best's intention was frustrated. If he was able to see a protestant of his choice preaching to the German miners at Crosthwaite, his register reveals all too clearly the general shortage of suitable ordinands, and the failure or refusal of too many to present candidates with truly protestant credentials. 
Best had few illusions about the leanings of most of the gentry. The covering letter to his report of 1564 on the JPs complains about the dead hand laid by the Clifford family on its hereditary shrievalty of Westmorland, of papists passing unapprehended and preaching in remote chapels, of JPs making a pretence only of favouring reform, and of tenants at risk of losing their farms if they declared their protestantism. The death of the fourth Lord Dacre in 1566, leaving only an infant heir, was a turning point; within two years there was a protestant rector at the Dacre stronghold of Greystoke and protestant converts in the parish. In December 1569, moreover, Best himself successfully resisted a last threat from the Dacres. Left as JP in charge of Carlisle in the absence of the warden of the west march during the northern rising, he was advised of a plan being made by the younger Dacres to capture the castle and assassinate him. Best strongly reinforced the garrison and faced the Dacres down when they arrived with a retinue and demanded an audience; by his firm stand in a tense situation he ended the possibility that they would reverse the new order in church and state. 
Best was also shrewd in his assessment of the shortcomings of the other leading families in his diocese. If in 1561 he had thought Lord Wharton 'very well loved' (TNA: PRO, SP 12/18/21), by 1564 he knew him to be 'evil of religion'. Others were 'verie unfytt' or 'to be admoneshedd'. It was the lesser gentry and new men whom he found 'good and meat to contynue... in Relligion good and wyttye men' (Bateson, 50-51). Here he was able to find some support for the reform of his diocese. 
In this last decade of his life Best emerged from obscurity to show himself a dogged and determined protestant, tackling with some success the task of bringing a conservative and reluctant diocese into line with Elizabeth's religious settlement. He died at Carlisle on 22 May 1570, and was buried in Carlisle Cathedral. Though he may have undervalued his own achievement, the delight of his successor, Richard Barnes, at the state of Carlisle diocese provides Best with an appropriate epitaph. 'Praise be to the Lord, who even in this utmost corner... has mightily prospered his gospel... there is not one within this little diocese that openly repines against religion, refuses... to come to church, or that shuns sermons, or openly speaks against the established religion. (TNA: PRO, SP 15/20/84)' And on another occasion Barnes wrote: 'I find these Cumberland and Westmorland commonality far more conformable pliable and tractable than ere I found the better sort in Yorkshire' (TNA: PRO, SP 12/74/22). 


@@@@@


doc= 47414


Paisley, Robert (1919-1996), football manager, was born on 23 January 1919 at 7 Avenue, Hetton-le-Hole, co. Durham, the second of four sons of Samuel Paisley (1894/5-1978), coal hewer, and his wife, Emily, 'nee' Bunker. His soccer talent was brought on at Barrington junior and Eppleton senior schools, but it began on the streets with him booting pigs' bladders donated by his uncle, a Co-op slaughterman. Though sturdy -- the physique was part inherited and part developed by pushing coal barrows uphill to his grandmother's -- Paisley was short; and he was rejected, after leaving school at fourteen, by Sunderland (of which he was a fan), Tottenham, and Wolves. He joined his elder brother at the mine as a surface worker; shortly afterwards he was shocked to see his father borne past with arm injuries so severe that he was unfit to work for five years. Like most pitmen, Sam Paisley wanted his sons to avoid mining and Bob became an apprentice bricklayer while continuing with his football. In 1937 he signed for Bishop Auckland, the top amateur club, to play for 3's'. 6died per match, the maximum expenses rules permitted; and he was in the team that won the amateur cup. Liverpool Football Club scouted him; he joined it on 8 May 1939 for a $10 fee and $5 per week. 
Paisley's formal first-team debut was deferred until 1946 because he was drafted into the 73rd Royal Artillery as a gunner in October 1939. For four years overseas from 1941, in the north African and Italian campaigns, Paisley spent his leaves playing football for his regiment and the combined services. A left half, he was noted for resoluteness, an aggressive tackler, defensively solid; but his distribution was generally uninspired. He was conscious of this, and also that even the best players of his generation appeared trapped within what he called 'their own skill bracket' (Keith, 29). 'There hasn't been a player yet without a weakness', he said (ibid., 336). This perception of what players lacked was the platform of his shrewd planning in building teams of complementary parts which disguised their individuals' lopsidedness and exploited opponents' frailties. 
Paisley made 253 league and 25 FA cup appearances for Liverpool, and scored thirteen goals. He earned a league championship medal in 1947 but he was mortified in 1950 when omitted from the FA cup final side, in spite of having played in every previous round. His reaction to his disappointment cannot be overestimated in the history of the club. Wembley appearances were pinnacles in every player's career. Liverpool lost in 1950, and Paisley was left pondering might-have-beens. At his nadir in spirit he considered quitting Liverpool; but he neither did that nor succumbed to press inducements to sell his story. The test of character was telling. When, as trainer and manager, he too dropped players from crucial games, they knew that he knew their feelings. He never shirked hard decisions. No player was allowed to believe himself bigger than the club. Ironically, an FA cup win also eluded Paisley as manager. 
Paisley was appointed captain in the 1950-51 season but a succession of struggling sides saw Liverpool relegated in 1954, the first time since 1904. Retirement beckoned. To re-start bricklaying at the age of thirty-five was unappealing, and a newsagency or greengrocery appeared no better. It was a director, later chairman of Liverpool Football Club, cotton broker Tom Williams, who invited Paisley to become reserve team trainer. Paid less than he had been as a player, Paisley was more importantly kept in the game. His wage was supplemented by his wife's as a primary school teacher. They had married on 17 July 1946, when he was twenty-seven and she, Jessie, daughter of Arthur Chandler, an organ builder, was aged thirty. They had two sons, Robert and Graham, and a daughter, Christine. 
Few football trainers in the 1950s were themselves trained. Having taken a correspondence course in physiotherapy, Paisley was more qualified than most. He proved to have uncanny diagnostic skills and magic hands, a practical grasp of psychology as well as of physiotherapy. The rejuvenation of Liverpool in the 1960s under Bill Shankly involved Paisley's promotion to first-team trainer, then to manager's assistant; a perfect partnership, according to those who played for them, with Paisley supplying steadiness and tactical subtlety to Shankly's messianic passion. 
Shankly's retirement in July 1974 was sudden, though not surprising in a man who lived on the edge. Paisley succeeded as manager of Liverpool F. C. without the job being advertised. Liverpool's boardroom knew their man, perhaps better than Paisley then knew himself. His reluctance to step out of the shadows was genuine and, at fifty-five, he did not expect to remain long. He was underestimated outside Liverpool. People saw an avuncular, even grandfatherly, figure, quietly spoken but generally lost for words. The image was not entirely false. There was no flashiness about Paisley. Normally a half of lager and lime was his tipple; and a meal out was to his local Chinese or chippy. Swanky clothes were not his style either. Relaxation at home involved looking -- nothing more -- at the garden and tinkering at an electric organ, on which he could pick out 'Amazing Grace'. His principal escape was to friends in the horse-racing world such as Frank Carr and Frankie Durr. He placed a bet daily but it was rationed, never more than $3 even when he was earning over $50,000 p.a. as the most successful manager in the country. And it appeared related to football: Paisley studied the training at stables and temperament and form in horses just as he did with players. His love of boxing was similar. His office under Anfield's main stand was, to put it mildly, modest. Brian Clough, manager of Nottingham Forest, compared it to 'a foreman's hut on a Wimpey site' (Keith, 212). 
Counting the trophies that Paisley's teams accumulated, it is easy to forget the problems and pressures. His first trial was dealing with the aftermath of an ill-tempered charity shield match against champions Leeds. The next months saw Shankly's reappearances at the training ground, where some players addressed him still as 'boss'; and a spell of eight games without a win caused Liverpool's slide down the league table, exit from the cup winners' cup, and a clamour for Shankly's reinstatement or promotion to director. The board stood firm; so did Paisley. What followed was an unprecedented record of nineteen trophies in eight years: three European cups, one UEFA cup, one European super cup, six league championships, three league / milk cups, and five charity shields. Liverpool was regarded as the world's best team at this period. Between January 1978 and January 1981 the team established a record of eighty-five consecutive matches unbeaten at 'Fortress Anfield'. Paisley was appointed OBE in 1977. Some suspected that the climate of soccer hooliganism cost him a knighthood. In popular estimation he was 'manager of the millennium'. 
Paisley's judgement of players was unrivalled. From his first signing, the full-back Phil Neal, a succession of talent was brought to Liverpool: Terry McDermott, Joey Jones, Kenny Dalglish, Alan Hansen, Graeme Souness, Alan Kennedy, Ronnie Whelan, Ian Rush, Bruce Grobbelaar, Craig Johnston, Mark Lawrenson, and Steve Nicol. Equally, local ability was nurtured, such as Phil Thompson, Sammy Lee, Jimmy Case, and David Fairclough. Paisley's teams, like Shankly's, were famed for durability. No first division club used fewer first-team players in the 1960s, 1970s, and 1980s -- some fifty-two per decade -- yet this continuity masked a readiness to remove players who had peaked. Paisley did not spare even the captains Emlyn Hughes and Phil Thompson, and attention was always paid to grooming reserves so that seniors battled for places. 'Nobody has the right to win anything they haven't earned', was Paisley's philosophy; and players chorused the credo that 'First is first, and second's nowhere' (Hansen, 22). 
Paisley was not just a driver of men. As Alex Ferguson reflected after his team of Scottish champions, Aberdeen, suffered 'annihilation' by Liverpool in the European cup in 1980, Paisley was 'full of cunning'. Sometimes this involved flattering the opposition before difficult games: what Paisley called 'giving them a bit of toffee' (Keith, 280-01). Dealing with the media was inescapable, though unloved by Paisley, whose preferred profile was low. He could show irritation and on occasion banned players from talking to reporters before matches, though he progressively cultivated a few such as John Keith of the 'Daily Express', who became his biographer. It was his understanding of players and tactics that mattered most, blending the best of continental European and British styles. 'Hold on to the ball, keep passing it, and let other teams do the chasing' (Keith, 282) was the strategy. At training players were schooled to operate as a unit, with an emphasis on positional intelligence. 
There was no rigidity in the Paisley method: 'It's not about the long ball, and it's not about the short ball; it's about the right ball', Alan Hansen remembered him saying (BBC1, 22 Feb 2001). Mental as well as physical fitness was what Paisley looked for in a player: not just wholeheartedness but those vital ingredients vision and anticipation. He impressed on them that, 'at the highest level, the first two yards are in the head' (Hansen, 77). Emlyn Hughes identified Paisley's 'greatest attribute as a manager... [as] dealing with strengths and weaknesses, the opposition's and your own... in plain and simple language' (Keith, 136). The gentle Geordie dialect helped keep spirits high. Players enjoyed mimicking Paisleyisms, especially his all-purpose deployment of 'doin's'. Tommy Smith recalled: 'He often left us doubled up laughing. But only because of his delivery. He always got his message over and you didn't cross him. He demanded that everyone played to their maximum and gave their best. He was uncompromising in that' (ibid., 115). 
Paisley preannounced his retirement during the 1982-3 season, to be succeeded by Joe Fagan, the next senior member of the bootroom staff, whose tradition of analysing play and players had been nourished by Paisley. Paisley now joined the board as a director. His dependability was again proved in a crisis. In 1985, in a crush at Heysel Stadium in Brussels before the European cup final, Liverpool fans precipitated the deaths of thirty-nine Juventus fans. The club was banned from European competitions and, his decade's work practically negated overnight, Paisley unobtrusively served as counsellor for two years to the novice player-manager Kenny Dalglish. Alzheimer's disease thereafter crept up on him. He resigned from the board in 1992, though the club made him honorary life vice-president. He died at Arncliffe Court Nursing Home, Arncliffe Road, Halewood, Lancashire, on 14 February 1996, from bronchopneumonia and dementia, and was buried at St Peter's Church, Woolton, Liverpool. He was survived by his wife and their three children. He was commemorated by the Paisley Gateway to the Kop entrance at Anfield, opened by his widow in April 1999. 


@@@@@


doc= 47416


Debenham, Sir Ernest Ridley, first baronet (1865-1952), department store owner, was born on 26 May 1865 at 42 Wigmore Street, Marylebone, London, the son of 
Frank Debenham inherited a thriving business in Wigmore Street from his father, William Debenham (died 1863). In addition to expanding retail sales, he also developed a considerable wholesale and export trade. A wholesale millinery department was instituted and a factory opened at Luton, as well as departments devoted to costumes, silks, gloves, ribbons, and tulles. Expansion also took place through the acquisition of a number of specialist retailers and manufacturers of fabrics and draperies. From 1851 the firm was known as Debenham and Freebody, the latter being the maiden name of William's wife, Caroline. In 1900 it became Debenham & Co. 
The idea of selling small amounts of fabrics to dressmakers was first introduced by Frank Debenham, and almost all the fashionable dressmakers flocked to his store. By the 1850s Debenhams had become the fashionable fabric business; and many of the dresses and hats for royal garden parties and presentations were supplied by it. 
As befitted a fashionable London retailer, Frank and Emma Debenham sent their eldest son Ernest to Marlborough College and Trinity College, Cambridge (1883-6). At the age of twenty-seven Ernest joined the family business and brought with him a fresh perspective to the running of the department store. His time at Cambridge had also given him a wide circle of friends which he used to good effect in his business dealings. 
At that time Debenhams was developing a lucrative business in the bulk supply of dresses, a factor which was to give it strong buying power with suppliers. However, competition was increasing among London department stores and Ernest reasoned that if Debenhams was to maintain its position it would be necessary to restructure operations and refurbish the London store. In his quest to achieve these ends he was greatly helped by his friend Frederick Oliver, an extremely able barrister, whom he had met at Cambridge. Debenham persuaded Oliver to join the firm and his rapid grasp of business practice proved invaluable. 
Ernest, aided by Frederick Oliver, oversaw a number of significant developments in the fortunes of Debenhams. Two separate limited companies were registered in 1905, as the retail and manufacturing operations were split: Debenhams Ltd was formed to own Debenham and Freebody (retailers), along with Debenham & Co. (wholesalers, manufacturers, and shippers). The London store was rebuilt after the architects William Wallace and James Gibson designed a grand new store in 1906. Frank Debenham was chairman until his retirement in 1912. Ernest then took over, with Oliver as his deputy. Frank Debenham died on 15 January 1917 at 1 Fitzjohn's Avenue, Hampstead, London. 
The First World War had great impact on the department store trade, especially the fall in the so-called 'luxury' trade. By 1916 a working relationship was established with another London retailer, Marshall and Snelgrove, with the idea of preserving retail operations in the war economy. Such a relationship was to become a basis for a full merger in 1919 when Marshall and Snelgrove were experiencing financial difficulties. In May 1919 Ernest successfully concluded the merger, arguing that competition between Debenhams and Marshall and Snelgrove had been wasteful. Later that year he also began talks with the eighty-year-old Harvey Nichols store which led to a take-over in 1920. Ernest's final years with Debenhams were marked by increasingly complex financial deals. These culminated with his retirement in 1927 when he sold off the bulk of his shares in the company for over $1.8m, effectively ending the family connections. 
Ernest Debenham was a paternalistic chairman whose policies materially benefited the working lives of his employees. The firm had for some time run benevolent societies for staff welfare, and in 1921 it went further and pioneered a low-cost dental service. It also established a school for employees. Ernest enlisted help from the Shop Assistants' Union to encourage his staff to participate in further education, and he also sent female employees to working women's colleges. Sadly, not all his activities were so well judged. His letters to his former employees serving at the front in the First World War are illustrative of his insensitive nature. He wrote informing the men that they would be required to have a medical examination on their return before they could be reinstated for work. 
In 1892 Debenham married Cecily, daughter of the ironfounder William Kenrick, and they had three sons and four daughters. The family home in London was a fine house in Addison Road, Kensington. Complete with a grand mosaic dome, this had been designed by his friend Halsey Ricardo. Debenham served on the London county council from 1912 to 1919. Away from business, however, his greatest interest was his farm in Dorset. To this he applied the same tireless energy he gave to his business, developing new methods for the intensive production of milk. He also initiated the method of marketing milk in disposable, sealed cartons. 
An alert and receptive businessman, Debenham oversaw the transformation of a fashionable London millinery business into a firm composed of a number of large (and still semi-autonomous) department stores. He made the most of his connections, and was created a baronet in 1931. Sir Ernest died on 25 December 1952 at Moor Lane House, Braintspuddle, Dorset. He was succeeded as baronet by his eldest son, Sir Piers Kenrick Debenham. 


@@@@@


doc= 47418


Holden, Sir Edward Hopkinson, first baronet (1848-1919), banker, was born on 11 May 1848 at the Bull's Head, Tottington, Lancashire, the elder son of Henry Holden (1823-1876), calico bleacher, and later beer seller, and his wife, Ann, 'nee' Hopkinson (1826-1891). He was educated locally at the Wesleyan elementary school in Summerseat, and on leaving school became a clerk in local shops and warehouses. His banking career started in 1866, when he began an apprenticeship at the Bolton branch of the Manchester and County Bank. After seven years he was promoted to a clerkship at the Manchester head office and remained there for another seven years. This seemingly slow progress belied an obviously determined young man, who attended evening classes in political economy, law, and logic at Owens College, Manchester, in a rigorous programme of self-education. 
In 1881 Holden answered an advertisement in 'The Economist' for the post of accountant at the Birmingham and Midland Bank at a salary of $300. Asked about his ambitions at his interview, he is reputed to have said, 'I want to be the manager of a big bank.' At that time Midland was still a small Birmingham company with only a scattering of branches in the region. However, the appointment of John Dent Goodman as chairman in 1881 heralded a policy of expansion within the bank, in which Holden was to be deeply involved. 
As accountant Holden proved his worth in a managerial role, overseeing bank premises and the recruitment of staff. In 1883 he was on the verge of leaving the bank; its lack of commercial progress did not fit his ambitions. The bank directors retained him by promoting him to secretary, and later in that year Holden jointly supervised the acquisition of the Union Bank of Birmingham. This venture was to be the first of many amalgamations over the next thirty years. The targets selected were usually joint stock banks from the north or the midlands which had strong industrial links. Among those banks which amalgamated with Midland under Holden's firm hand were the Preston Banking Company in 1894, the Leicestershire Banking Company in 1900, and the Yorkshire Banking Company in 1901. 
Holden was heavily involved in the process of amalgamation, both in picking suitable banks, and as a negotiator. His rise through the bank (sub-manager in 1887, general manager in 1890, and joint general manager in 1891) mirrored the success of the bank as it became an organization of national importance. In 1891 Midland entered London with its purchase of the Central Bank of London, giving the bank a seat in the London Clearing House for the first time. In 1895 the Midland's directors voted Holden 2000 guineas for his 'conspicuous ability in conducting and completing the recent amalgamations' (HSBC Group Archives, board minutes, 19 Feb 1895). In these negotiations, mostly held in railway hotels up and down the country, Holden was a formidable presence, meticulous in his scrutiny of bad and doubtful debts, and merciless with those bankers whose knowledge of their own balance sheets did not match his own. A director of the City Bank, on joining the board of Midland, stated: 'how glad I am to have him on the same side of the table as myself, for I know what it is to have a table between us' (HSBC Group Archives, report of the general meeting of shareholders, January 1899). This amalgamation with the City Bank in 1898 was the most risky of all Holden's acquisitions -- he conducted the negotiations alone, and for the first and last time he had to win over opposition from a section of his directors and shareholders regarding the price to be paid. This amalgamation brought Midland to a prestigious new headquarters in Threadneedle Street, and to its position as the fourth largest clearing bank in the UK. 
Promotion to managing director followed later in 1898, and Holden was to hold this position until 1919 at a salary of $5000. In the next ten years he concentrated on centralizing and unifying the structure of the bank; a necessary task, given that it was composed of different provincial businesses, each with its own traditions and methods. Uniformity in accounting was introduced throughout the branches, and all lending decisions were made in London. Holden's diaries show his meticulous attention to detail, even over the minutiae of decisions relating to staff and premises. A series of visits to North America in the early years of the twentieth century inspired him to modernize the bank's office systems -- a large internal telephone network was introduced, office machinery was more widely used, and printing and stationery was standardized. During one of these visits, one journalist described him thus: 'no dreamer, -- he moves quickly, thinks rapidly. Grey moustached and ruddy, he had a pair of decidedly electric eyes. He talks political economy as easily as some men talk horses' ('Toronto News', 24 Sept 1904). 
In the early years of the twentieth century, with the bank strongly placed in its home markets, Holden began to look further afield for new business. He used his American visits as an opportunity to extend the bank's correspondent network, and in 1905 the bank established a foreign exchange department in London, the first of the clearers to take such a step. The bank also became involved in loans and new issues for foreign governments and major international companies. Holden was especially interested in the opportunities in Russia; Midland issued bonds for a Russian railway loan in 1909, and in 1917 opened a branch office in St Petersburg. 
Holden became chairman of Midland in 1908. Although less involved in the day to day running of the bank, in amalgamations he continued to select targets and conduct preliminary negotiations. Important amalgamations during these years included the North and South Wales Bank in 1908, the Metropolitan Bank in 1914, and the London Joint Stock Bank in 1918. The last brought the Midland's total deposits to $349 million, making it the largest bank in the world. This amalgamation was opposed by some in the press and in parliament, on the grounds that such mergers would reduce competition between the banks. A parliamentary committee, the Colwyn committee, was appointed to investigate the issue. Holden replied characteristically that Britain should be mindful of the international banking world. If British banks were to compete in a world arena then they would need to be able to match the capitalization and deposits of their rivals. The amalgamation proceeded as planned and the government rejected the committee's proposal to legislate against further amalgamations. 
In his role as Midland's chairman, Holden was also a spokesman and leader of the banking community. His annual speeches to his shareholders were used to expound his views on financial policy and were eagerly awaited, both in England and on the other side of the Atlantic. He argued, against the Bank of England, that the clearing banks needed to hold their own gold reserves; he also argued that the country should maintain its own gold-based war chest. These views, backed by Holden's Liberalism and support of free trade, recommended him to Asquith. Holden had been MP for Heywood, Manchester, since 1906, but had kept a low profile, fearing that to seek success in politics would open the bank to criticism. However, in 1910 Asquith recommended him for chancellor of the exchequer. Lloyd George's threat to resign ensured the withdrawal of this recommendation, and later that year Holden did not seek re-election at the polls. Thereafter he remained an informal adviser to the government on financial matters. In the period prior to the outbreak of the First World War he returned to the issue of gold reserves, requesting that a royal commission be appointed to investigate the matter. On the outbreak of war, Holden recommended to Lloyd George the declaration of a moratorium on lending, and was credited with the idea of issuing currency notes. In September 1915 he joined Lord Reading in a special commission to New York to negotiate the stabilization of exchange rates. Following this, he helped to raise the Anglo-French loan of $100 million, for which the United States government agreed to waive collateral. 
Holden's influence had helped him to mobilize the support of the clearing banks for the Yorkshire Penny Bank in 1911, when it faced a crisis due to the depreciation of its securities. In 1916 he persuaded the Treasury to join the banks in guaranteeing the Penny Bank's reserves when they faced another crisis. Holden also campaigned for reforms in the Institute of Bankers, and was successful in his attempts to bring increased democracy and a greater range of activities for the ordinary members. 
By habit and by inclination, Holden was a hard worker who found it difficult to take holidays. Despite his sometimes autocratic style of management, his staff often found him to be a considerate and forgiving employer. Outside the bank, Holden had few interests. He established a freemasons' lodge in 1902, the Holden Lodge; membership was restricted to the bank's directors and staff. He was an omnivorous reader of books concerning finance, and a keen golfer and cyclist. 
Holden married Annie (died 1905), daughter of William Cassie of Aberdeen, on 6 January 1877; they had known each other since their youth at Summerseat. Their family home was The Grange, at Thorpe, Chertsey, in Surrey, where Holden was a church steward. They had two sons and a daughter. Their elder son, Cassie, continued the family influence in the bank, becoming a director and deputy chairman after a career as a barrister. Holden was created a baronet in 1909, and twice declined a peerage. He died suddenly, on 23 July 1919, at Duff House Sanatorium in Banff, of cerebral thrombosis and heart failure, after a week's illness. His will was sworn at under $100,000, and included an endowment fund for education in the principles and practice of international banking. He was buried in the Wesleyan chapel in Summerseat, Lancashire, with his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 47419


Freame, John (1665-1745), banker and lobbyist, was probably the second son in the family of at least three children of Robert Freame, a Gloucestershire clothier. In 1681 his father was one of the 'first purchasers' of Pennsylvania and some members of the Quaker Freame family emigrated there to escape religious persecution by the Gloucestershire magistrates. 
The young John Freame sought refuge in London: he was apprenticed in 1683 to Job Boulton, a leading Lombard Street goldsmith. Boulton was also an influential member of the Friends' Committee on Sufferings, one of the first lobby groups in British politics. Freame completed his apprenticeship in 1690 and set up as a banker in partnership with another young Quaker, Thomas Gould. He married Gould's sister Priscilla (1673/4-1727) in 1697 and they had seven children. The Freame-Gould business partnership (cemented also by Gould's marriage to Freame's sister, Hannah) lasted until Thomas Gould's death in 1728; Gould's own son set up an independent bank which went bankrupt in 1730. 
The Freame bank was one of the few seventeenth-century banks to survive well into the next century. Others among this select few (like Hoares or Coutts) evolved into West End banks for gentlemen, while Freame and Gould's business seems to have focused on the City's merchant community. They financed links not only with the English provinces but with Quaker traders in the American and Caribbean colonies and the Baltic. Among the enterprises in which they participated financially were the Enfield turnpike, Atlantic trading ventures, the Pennsylvania Land Company, the London Lead Company, and the Welsh Copper Company. The latter two Quaker-dominated companies developed the reverberatory furnace for lead smelting, which was financed by a $500 loan at 6 per cent interest from Freame and Gould; the bank also owned shares in the company and dealt in its by-product, silver, for the Royal Mint. 
Freame's career was clearly built on the religious connections forged during his apprenticeship. The Friends deposited their 'national stock' (that is, their central funds, amounting to $1100 in 1695) in his bank from an early stage, and he knew the Quaker luminaries of the day intimately. He was frequently called upon to arbitrate in Quaker business (as well as religious) matters and served as clerk to the Friends' supreme body, the yearly meeting, in 1711. The year after that he published 'Scripture Instruction', a textbook of morals much reprinted for over a century and used in the schools of the Quaker educational pioneer Joseph Lancaster. Freame was one of those Quakers who helped to entrench toleration after 1689 by diplomatically, but relentlessly, wringing from a reluctant Anglican establishment small cumulative concessions on matters such as affirmation (in place of the oaths of which they disapproved) or summary prosecution before magistrates (rather than the more vexatious church courts), thus reconciling his faith's many tender consciences to the requirements of civil society. 
Freame's daughter Priscilla married in 1723 the Quaker merchant David Barclay (1682-1769) whose son joined Freame's son, Joseph, in 1733 as a partner with a quarter share in the Lombard Street bank. The bank was a pioneer of the rediscounting of provincial bankers' bills in London and held large reserves at the Bank of England to support this position. John Freame spent more time on Quaker affairs after his son entered the bank. He also reconstructed the London Lead Company (of which he became governor), following revelations in the later 1720s of misuse of its funds by Quaker fraudsters in the South Sea Bubble affair. He died in 1745, his wife having predeceased him in 1727; his funeral at Winchmore Hill, in the burial-ground of the Quaker meeting-house near his country home, Bush Hill, north of London, was the Friends' equivalent of a Westminster Abbey interment. Apparently a man of self-effacing modesty, his quiet effectiveness had enabled him to become one of the more successful bankers, political lobbyists, and religious leaders of his generation. 


@@@@@


doc= 47420


Bevan, Robert Cooper Lee (1809-1890), banker, was born on 8 February 1809 at Hale End, Walthamstow, the eldest son of David Bevan (1774-1846), banker, and his wife, Favell Bourke Lee (1780-1841), who came from a prominent Caribbean slave-owning family. His father was a partner in the Quaker private banking firm of Barclay, Bevan & Co. of Lombard Street in the City of London. The writer Favell Lee Mortimer was his sister. In 1826 -- the year Robert left Harrow School to matriculate at Trinity College, Oxford -- David Bevan had to withdraw from the management of the bank after a paralytic seizure. A few years later, when his father's condition worsened, Robert ended his studies without a degree and took his father's place as a partner. 
The Bevans, unlike the other partners and many of their provincial banking correspondents, were not Quakers, for Robert's grandfather, Silvanus, had been disowned by the Friends for marrying a non-Quaker in 1773. However, in the course of the nineteenth century, secular and religious forces led most other Quaker bankers, including many of Robert's Barclay and Tritton partners, also to desert their faith. Bevan acquired all the apparently un-Quakerly trappings of the establishment at an early age: he was not only educated at Harrow and Oxford, but his religion was Anglican, and in politics he was a Conservative. Married twice, Bevan's first marriage, on 24 February 1836, was to Lady Agneta Elisabeth Yorke (died 1851), daughter of Admiral Sir Joseph Sydney Yorke and sister of the fourth earl of Hardwicke; and then on 30 April 1856 he married (Emma) Frances Shuttleworth (1827-1909) ['see 'Bevan, (Emma) Frances], daughter of Philip Nicholas Shuttleworth, the bishop of Chichester. There were fourteen children from the marriages, including the banker Francis Augustus Bevan (1840-1919), the conspiracy theorist Nesta Helen Webster (1875-1960), and the scholars Anthony Ashley Bevan (1859-1933) and Edwyn Robert Bevan (1870-1943). 
The owner of 3913 acres, Bevan had estates at Trent Park at New Barnet on the northern outskirts of London, and also in Wiltshire, as well as houses in London and at Brighton and, in later years, a villa in Cannes. Yet, after an evangelical conversion in his late twenties, Quakers could not wholeheartedly condemn him for 'conformity to the world', for he began to lead a far more religious life than others who had experienced this establishment conditioning. His wives shared his austere, uncompromising religiosity and his second wife became in middle life a member of the reclusive Plymouth Brethren sect. Robert Bevan arranged open prayer meetings daily at 12.30 at the bank's offices in Lombard Street; he gave up hunting (a favourite sport in his youth) on grounds of conscience; and he spent extensively on church building and other charities, including the foundation of the London City Mission. 
Barclays (as his bank was increasingly known) was at the centre of a network of (mainly Quaker) country bankers. The network proved its value in the financial crisis of 1824-5, while his father was at the helm. The Lombard Street bank then co-ordinated assistance to those firms short of easily accessible funds, but otherwise strong; while numerous insolvent banks failed, Quaker bankers and others with Barclay, Bevan & Co. connections generally did well. After Robert became senior partner of the Lombard Street bank, he faced similar tests. Perhaps his most difficult decision was in the mid-1860s, when his partners' Norwich relations, the Gurneys, attempted to rescue the once exemplary (but by then badly managed) London billbroking firm of Overend Gurney & Co. The ultimate collapse of Overend Gurney in 1866 ruined the Gurneys, but Bevan firmly refused either to back the Gurneys with the Lombard Street bank's resources or to recommend a Bank of England rescue of the insolvent (rather than merely illiquid) firm. However, the partners of Barclays did help individually on a charitable basis after the Gurney bankruptcies. 
Bevan became the doyen of conservative private bankers. By 1890 his firm was the second largest of the London private bankers (after Glyn Mills & Co.) by its balance-sheet size. Its profits had tripled during Bevan's fifty-year career as an active banker and ten as a sleeping partner (in later life he wintered in Cannes). His estate at the end of his life made him indisputably a millionaire. There were several richer nineteenth-century bankers, but the partners' rate of profit at Barclay, Bevan & Co. under his leadership was normally about 30 per cent, better than that achieved by leading merchant bankers. Bevan showed that conservative private banking could more than hold its own within the provincial correspondent banking and short-term business lending functions in which his firm excelled, against the (less profitable) joint-stock banks that grew to dominate English banking during his career. 
Robert Bevan died on 22 July 1890 at Trent Park, New Barnet, from gout and other debilitating illnesses. 


@@@@@


doc= 47421


Weyer, Deryk Vander (1925-1990), banker, was born on 21 January 1925 at Bridlington, Yorkshire, the second child and only son of Clement Vander Weyer, insurance company manager, and his wife, Harriet. He was educated at Bridlington School and in 1941 joined Barclays Bank. He served in the Indian army during the Second World War, where he reached the rank of major. On his return to Barclays, a company hitherto influenced by members of the families who had combined to form it in 1896, he was able to take advantage of the company's training courses for people from its ordinary intake who showed ability and promise. He married Marguerite Warden in 1950 -- they had a son, Martin, and a daughter, Linda -- and began his ascent of the ladder of promotion at Barclays. In 1956 he was made assistant manager in Liverpool, in 1960 manager of Barclays' Chester branch, and in 1965 a local director in Liverpool. 
The opportunity to create a distinctive role for himself came in October 1967, when Barclays seconded Weyer for six months to the Oxford Centre for Management Studies (later renamed Templeton College). His dissertation on marketing in banking, written while there, caught the attention of Derek Wilde, Barclays' senior general manager, and John Thomson, its chairman. No British bank then had a marketing department, and touting for business was anathema. Wilde and Thomson brought Weyer to Barclays' London headquarters, authorized him to establish a marketing and planning department, and promoted him to assistant general manager. His requests for facts and figures led to the creation of management accounting within Barclays, and he became a general manager in 1969, with both marketing and planning responsibilities. He approved of Barclays' adoption of 'management by objectives' techniques in its branches and welcomed the freer lending made possible by government acceptance of a 1971 Bank of England report on credit control. 
Weyer wrote occasional articles for 'The Banker'; they were lucid and forward-looking, and, while much that they contain could not be considered revolutionary, they were of great interest to people in other banks, who saw in them pointers to developments which became obvious only some eighteen months later. The articles enhanced his reputation as the thinking person's banker, and also the reputation of Barclays. Within the bank, the structure of a central bureau presiding over thirty local boards, peopled largely by those with family connections to the 1896 partnerships, seemed inappropriate to Weyer in the 1970s. As general manager of domestic banking in 1972, he orchestrated, with the support of Barclays' main board, a series of useful reforms of local boards. However, the boards were only finally abolished after he left office. 
Tall, lean, brisk in thought and manner, Weyer was later described as 'an achiever and by his own admission always ambitious' ('The Times', 21 June 1990). Much liked by the secretaries and chauffeurs who worked for him and appreciated his kindnesses, he was 'a quiet man with an impish humour but his authority was never in doubt' (ibid.). Inevitably the organizational changes he promoted, and his implicit criticism of those who resisted them, did not endear him to all. Nevertheless, his undoubted ability ensured his progression to senior general manager in 1973, board director in 1974, vice-chairman in 1977, and deputy group chairman in 1980. He was also chairman of Barclays' embryonic merchant bank and chairman of Barclays Bank UK from 1980 to 1983. The latter was intended as a logical counterbalance to Barclays Bank International, but in fact Barclays group board was in real control of Barclays' domestic banking. His task was to end Barclays Bank UK, consolidating authority within the group board (into which Barclays Bank International was also merged in 1985). He was only the third of Barclays' non- 'family' general managers to sit on the group board, and the second to be an executive director. However, he was not considered for the chairmanship, a post intended for Sir Timothy Bevan (from one of the founding families) long before. In 1983 Weyer resigned executive positions within Barclays, though he remained a deputy chairman. He became executive deputy chairman of British Telecom (BT), nursing it through privatization and, contrary to his centralizing mission in Barclays, chafing against over-centralization. 
As chairman of the chief executive committee of the Committee of London Clearing Bankers (1974-6) Weyer helped rescue fringe banks in the 1973-4 crisis. Valued by the Bank of England, he was made a director in 1986, and in 1987 a member of its new board of banking supervision. Ill health caused him to retire from BT in 1986, and from Barclays and the Bank of England in 1988. He served as a member of the royal commission on the distribution of income and wealth (1977-9), president of the Institute of Bankers (1979-81), and governor of the Museum of London (1978-83), and was made a CBE in June 1986. A lover of music, he was also on the board of the English National Opera. 
Weyer was proud of being a Yorkshireman and of his Flemish and Huguenot origins, and was a painter of local scenes in his spare time. He died at his home, Gatefield, High Road, Chipstead, near Coulsdon, Surrey, on 16 June 1990; he was survived by his wife, son, and daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 47424


White, Sir George, first baronet (1854-1916), businessman and stockbroker, was born on 28 March 1854 at Kingsdown, Bristol, the second son of Henry White, a painter and decorator, and his wife, Eliza, 'nee' Tippetts, a domestic servant before her marriage. After attending St Michael's Boys' School in Bristol, he joined a legal firm in the city, Stanley and Wasborough, in 1869, as a junior clerk. He soon impressed by his dedication and grasp of detail. Following the passage of the 1870 'Tramways Act', he played a major part in the promotion of the Bristol Tramways Company (1874) by Stanley and Wasborough on behalf of a group of local businessmen. He married Caroline Rosena Thomas (died 1915) in 1876; they had two children. 
In 1875 White left the law, and was appointed secretary of the Bristol Tramway Company, later serving as managing director and chairman. During his career, he was also involved in running tramway companies in Bath, Dublin, Middlesbrough, Reading, and York. In west London, White's London United Tramways, established in 1894, created a major suburban network along the main roads radiating from its Hammersmith terminus. In the later 1890s he was a pioneer of electric tramways, demonstrating that electrification, though very capital intensive, offered improved services for the general public and attractive returns for investors. His creation of major transport systems in Bristol and west London was among his greatest achievements. White's career was not confined to tramways, but encompassed all forms of mechanized transport. Under his leadership, the Bristol Tramways and Carriage Company began operating motor buses and taxis, entering vehicle production in 1908. By 1914 it was among the biggest employers in Bristol, with a workforce of over 2000. 
White managed many of his interests through his stockbroking firm, George White & Co. (established in 1875). His business was strongly regional in nature and very profitable. As well as dealing on behalf of clients, he often acquired an interest in ailing companies that were ripe for restructuring, or could profitably be sold to rivals. His many contacts with leading Bristol businessmen ensured that he had no difficulty raising capital for his ventures. Bristol companies in which he had a major interest included the Great Western Steamship Company, the Bristol Port and Channel Dock Company (which had built Avonmouth docks), and the Bristol and North Somerset Railway. In 1882-3 he played a leading role in the abortive scheme to provide Bristol with an alternative to the Great Western Railway's link with London. Like many Bristolians, he had strong ties with south Wales. He was chairman of the Main Colliery Company, and chaired the shareholders' committee of the Taff Vale Railway, in which he had a large shareholding. In 1891, when the Taff Vale's profits slumped, he removed the entire board of directors, replacing them with his own nominees. 
The crowning achievement of White's career was the establishment of the British and Colonial Aeroplane Company in 1910, and also of its sales arm, the Bristol Aeroplane Co. Ltd. The firm subsequently became better known by the latter name. Unlike other pioneers of aviation, who were engaged in developing and testing experimental models, or producing a few planes for rich private customers, White set out from the first to produce aircraft on a commercial scale. The Bristol Boxkite firmly established British and Colonial as a major manufacturer. White was well aware of the importance of publicity, participating in the competitions sponsored by Northcliffe's 'Daily Mail' and putting on flying demonstrations for overseas governments and the general public. Flying schools were set up to create a market, and by 1914 nearly half Britain's pilots had been trained on Bristol aircraft. The company went on to play a major role in the war effort. The Bristol Fighter, possibly the best allied aircraft of the First World War, went into production shortly before White's death, and more than 3500 were eventually produced. 
Handsome and impeccably dressed, and of an engaging personality, White was widely respected for his business acumen and integrity. He served as president of the Bristol stock exchange for many years. However, his hostility to municipalization of transport utilities and his manipulation of railway shares won him many critics, and he engaged in fierce struggles with the trade unions, insisting that he alone bore responsibility for employees' welfare. Away from business he was a major benefactor of the Bristol Royal Infirmary, the Red Cross, and other charities, and was made a baronet for his public service in 1904. A staunch Conservative, he served as a local councillor and JP but refused to stand for parliament, remarking that a seat on the back benches would be insufficient to interest him. Sir George White died suddenly of a heart attack on 22 November 1916, at his home, Old Sneed Park, Stoke Bishop, Bristol. 


@@@@@


doc= 47425


Henley, Michael (c.1742-1813), merchant and shipowner, was probably born at Rotherhithe. His origins are obscure though he may well have been the son of a Francis Henley from Ireland, who lived in Rotherhithe before being buried at Bermondsey in February 1785. Michael Henley married Mary Tonks on 4 August 1765 at St Clement Danes in the parish of Westminster. The marriage produced three daughters and two sons, the eldest, Joseph ['see below'], playing an active part in his father's business. In December 1790 or January 1791 Mary died, and was buried in the family's vault at St John-at-Wapping. Michael married his second wife, Ann Lacey, in 1792. The marriage probably took place in Derby, and she appears to have been an educated woman of independent means. 
Henley began his working life by serving an apprenticeship as a Thames waterman and lighterman. He was apprenticed to William Barrett of Bermondsey from 13 May 1757 to 12 July 1764. In the course of the following decade he appears to have made a success of his occupation as a London waterman, and then a coal merchant at Shadwell and Wapping. By 1775 he had expanded his operations through the purchase of a couple of old collier vessels, which were used to transport coal from Newcastle to London. In the following years he dabbled in related activities, including ship breaking and ship stores. However, Henley's shrewd entrepreneurial talents, and his experience of the mercantile and maritime sectors, alerted him to the cyclical influence of warfare upon the shipping industry. Thus the 1790s were a watershed in the evolution of the firm, when coal merchanting and most ancillary activities were abandoned, in order to specialize in shipowning, and thereby take advantage of the wartime booms in the shipping industry. By 1790 he owned nine vessels, a figure which had increased to fifteen by 1805. In 1810 the fleet reached its maximum size of twenty-two vessels with an aggregate tonnage of 5934. Henley's innovative nature also led him to deploy his vessels flexibly and widely across many trade routes including in the Baltic, the Mediterranean, and the Atlantic. Employment as government transport vessels provided further opportunities for Henley's fleet. 
By decoupling mercantile and shipping operations, Henley appears to have been one of the pioneers of specialist professional shipowning, which became more common in the first half of the nineteenth century. Another important feature of his approach was the emphasis upon sole ownership of almost all of the vessels, in contrast to the more common contemporary practice of fractional ownership. On the few occasions where Henley shared ownership this was with a master of long standing, who took on greater managerial discretion in operating the vessel. In spite of these considerable entrepreneurial achievements, Henley's level of educational attainment appears to have been quite modest, and his business papers suggest only a low level of literacy. Although he developed some accounting skills, probably through his apprenticeship, his second wife wrote most of his letters for him. 
The Henleys' eldest son, 
By 1805 Michael Henley had retired to Derby, and left Joseph with primary responsibility for the business, although the two communicated regularly on policy matters with the father offering frequent advice. In 1811 Joseph was elected a member of Lloyds, following its reorganization into a formal institution. With Michael Henley's death on 11 September 1813 at Friargate, Derby, Joseph was left to run the business on his own. Michael Henley was buried in a vault at St Werburgh's, Derby, where he had been a churchwarden, and left $125,000 excluding freeholds. After his father's death Joseph leased Waterperry House, near Wheatley, a few miles from Oxford; and he purchased it in 1830. Anne Henley died in Derby in 1833. 
Joseph received temporary support from his own son, Joseph Warner, before the latter went into politics. Although Joseph had served the office of high sheriff in 1817, his main commitment was to his business enterprise, but this was not the case for his son. Joseph Henley also received assistance from Edward Rule, a shipbroker, and several managing clerks including Thomas Dennis and W. Williams. However, lack of entrepreneurial continuity within the family, and the prolonged shipping depression of the 1820s, convinced the ageing Joseph of the need to contract his active shipping operations. A number of vessels were sold during the temporary economic upturn in the mid-1820s and by 1831 the firm appears to have ceased trading. Joseph died in 1832 in the middle of a commercial depression, and left $60,000 excluding freeholds. 


@@@@@


doc= 47426


Wright, Thomas (1839-1909), engineer and social commentator, was born on 12 April 1839 in Burlington Street, Liverpool, the eldest of at least three sons of Charles Wright, a blacksmith, and his wife, Catherine, 'nee' McArla. He attended local schools until the age of fourteen when he began a seven-year apprenticeship as an engineer. Once this was completed he set out on a particularly extensive version of the traditional 'tramp' around manufacturing centres in the north, midlands, and south of England, eventually settling in London where he lived in a series of rented properties in the more respectable parts of Deptford. At first he continued to work at his manual trade in the blacksmith's shop of a medium-sized engineering firm in Gravesend. He seems to have been a fairly active member of the appropriate trade union, the Amalgamated Society of Engineers, but was less interested in union or political affairs than in pursuing his own course of self-education through extensive reading and debates in the local Mechanics' Institute. By 1872 this equipped him to pass the relevant examinations and become one of the area's first school board visitors appointed under the 1870 'Education Act', staying in this reasonably secure, but not particularly well paid, non-manual position until his retirement in 1906. 
By the time of his transition into the lower middle classes, Wright had already established himself as an authoritative commentator on the ways of life of his colleagues among the manual working classes. Writing under the pseudonym of the Journeyman Engineer, he had begun with descriptive and anecdotal pieces for literary journals, such as the 'Cornhill Magazine' and 'Fraser's Magazine', but was soon working under his own name and producing sustained analyses for more heavyweight periodicals, above all the liberal and social-reforming 'Contemporary Review'. As a result of the increasing public interest in the implications of the extension of the franchise and the rise of the trade unions, combined with his unique position as a highly literate participant observer, most of his essays were immediately collected into three substantial volumes: 'Some Habits and Customs of the Working Classes' (1867), 'The Great Unwashed' (1868), and 'Our New Masters' (1873). 
Wright's approach was characterized by a typology of ranges of behaviour in each distinct area of experience, avoiding both simple polarization and the temptation to consolidate his findings into an overarching total structure. As his work contained sympathetic and thoughtful coverage of all aspects of life, from workplace customs and gender roles to popular leisure and political attitudes, it has subsequently been widely cited by historians of the period. Meanwhile, he was also busy on three novels, the first of which, 'Johnny Robinson: the Story of the Childhood and Schooldays of an 'Intelligent Artisan'' (1868), was apparently widely read at the time, but more for its autobiographical content than for its narrative power. 
Once employed as a visitor by the local school board, Wright was exposed to what was for him a whole new milieu: that of the poorer, casual labourers living in overcrowded slum dwellings along the banks of the River Thames. His social commentary therefore turned in this direction with a flow of articles under a new pseudonym, the Riverside Visitor, many for the social-reforming magazine 'Good Words'. Although he was something of a pioneer in this field before it was a subject of much public attention, his essays were soon collected in two volumes as 'The Great Army: Sketches of Life and Character in a Thames-side District' (1875). Almost twenty years later, when there was more widespread interest and a serious public debate about social conditions in the capital, he was well-placed to produce a further volume, 'The Pinch of Poverty: Sufferings and Heroism of the London Poor' (1892). As with his earlier work on the better-paid and more respectable groups among the manual working classes, Wright's essays on the poor contained detailed descriptions of housing conditions and ways of life, and approached their subjects as generally decent, hard-working and often religious, if not churchgoing, people who helped each other more than they were helped by the rest of society. In the ambitious multi-volume survey of metropolitan poverty, 'Life and Labour of the People in London' (1902), Charles Booth made use of reports from school board visitors, so it seems likely that Thomas Wright was the source of some of the evidence which was included for the Deptford area. 
Around the time he moved into white-collar work, Wright married, on 28 March 1872, Matilda Hopkins ('nee' Rogers), a widowed dressmaker already living at the same address with her young son. It does not seem that they had any more children together, but are recorded in the census as sharing accommodation with his niece, or living in flats in multiple-occupancy houses. Not long after his retirement Wright died of a stroke at his home, 46 Tyrwhitt Road, Deptford, on 19 February 1909. 


@@@@@


doc= 47427


Joseph Henley (1766-1832), appears to have become interested in his father's business from a relatively young age, and by the early 1780s he was playing an active role in it. He was bound as an apprentice waterman to his father in 1780, and as an apprentice farrier in 1784. In 1791 he married Anne Rooke (Nancy) at Wandsworth. They had two children, Anna Maria Rooke, who later died in childbirth, and Joseph Warner Henley, a Conservative politician. Like his father, Joseph Henley was a perceptive entrepreneur, and he played a prominent part in the further expansion of the firm in the first decade of the nineteenth century. Lacking his father's specialized interest in the coal trade, he was probably an important influence in the family's movement away from this activity. As the business expanded his father appears to have taken primary responsibility for the vessels, and Joseph for chartering and insurance. Additionally, Joseph appears to have improved the firm's system of accounting. 


@@@@@


doc= 47428


Holt, Alfred (1829-1911), engineer and shipowner, was born on 13 June 1829 at 2 Rake Lane, Liverpool, third of the six children of George Holt (1790-1861), cotton broker, and Emma, daughter of William Durning, a prosperous Liverpool merchant, and his wife, Jane. George Holt was born in Rochdale and bred to the family mill and dye-works, but in 1807 he was apprenticed to Samuel Hope, a leading Liverpool cotton broker. His marriage into the Durning family drew him into the influential circle of Unitarian businessmen. Having set up his own broking business, he helped to found the Bank of Liverpool and the Liverpool and London Assurance Company and became fully involved in the public life of Liverpool, especially in the dock and water committees. 
From childhood Alfred Holt showed an adventurous spirit (he once escaped from a dame-school). From 1838 to 1844 he attended a private boys' school kept by a Unitarian minister at Knutsford, Cheshire. One of the pupils was George Fairbairn, son of the engineer Sir William Fairbairn, who, by giving Alfred his own working model steam engine, generated his lifelong interest in steam. On 1 July 1846 Alfred began a five-year apprenticeship to Edward Woods, engineer to the Liverpool and Manchester Railway. During that time, in his own workshop, he made model steam engines and took lessons in mathematics, chemistry, and drawing, and also in literature, which may have accounted for the Homeric names of his ships. However, by the time his apprenticeship had ended the railway industry was in depression and job prospects bleak. Fortunately Holt was able to find clerical employment with the shipowners Lamport and Holt, in which his brother Philip Henry (1830-1915) was a partner. Alfred Holt soon learned the basic principles of marine engineering and, by sailing to the Mediterranean in the steamship 'Orontes' as supernumerary engineer, its practical aspects. In January 1852 Holt set up as a consulting engineer in an office in India Buildings (built by his father in 1834 and occupied by Holt until his retirement), finding work testing locomotives for his old master and supervising the construction of iron steamships. 
Holt soon abandoned locomotive work to concentrate on the problems that beset iron steamships in the early days, mainly connected with the screw propeller, the iron construction, and the compound engine. His golden opportunity came when Thomas Ainsworth of Cleator, Cumberland, sought his advice on the defective engines of his steam-powered hybrid brig, 'Alpha', built for the iron-ore trade between Whitehaven and Cardiff. Holt became engineer and agent to Ainsworth and, most importantly, got to know Isaac Middleton (died 1878), who became his pioneer captain in all his undertakings. Such mutual respect between managers and captains was to be a keystone in the Holt management style for a century. Holt's success with 'Alpha' led his father to invest with Ainsworth in another steamer, the 'Dumbarton Youth', of which Holt was also engineer and agent; its blue funnel became the symbol of the line that carried Holt's name around the world. Holt also designed the 'Cleator', built in Liverpool. 
In 1855 Alfred and Philip Holt invested in five larger vessels for the competitive and therefore risky West India trade. At one stage Alfred even considered giving up and going into the family cotton-broking business, but he held out until 1864 before selling out to a rival firm, keeping only the 'Cleator'. In January 1864 Philip left his partnership in Lamport and Holt and joined Alfred permanently. Together they considered possible trade routes and decided on China. Because of the vast distance involved China was considered beyond the reach of steamships, which required frequent rebunkering, but the thrill of beating the clipper, the most prestigious sailing ship of its time, appealed to Alfred's adventurous spirit. With American vessels out of the running because of the civil war, freight rates for tea rose dramatically. Alfred fitted the 'Cleator' with a new, compact, vertical compound tandem engine whose boiler could take a pressure of 60 lb p.s.i., a major breakthrough in that for the first time the Board of Trade accepted such high pressures at sea. The gains in practical and commercial efficiency were immense. After trials the first three steamers of the Ocean Steam Ship Company were ordered from Scotts of Greenock (at a total cost of $156,000) bearing the majestic names of 'Agamemnon', 'Ajax', and 'Achilles', Homeric heroes all. The company was registered on 11 January 1865, with 51 per cent of the shares held by the two brothers and the rest by family, friends, and the three captains. Each vessel carried about 3000 tons of cargo and could sail non-stop from Liverpool to Mauritius in thirty-seven days, some 8500 miles, carrying sufficient coal for an average speed of 10 knots. On 16 January 1866 the first public circular was issued. The route was to be Mauritius, Penang, Singapore, Hong Kong, and Shanghai, taking seventy-six days and returning via Foochow (Fuzhou); it was to be the mainstay of the business for more than a century. 
The opening of the Suez Canal brought the Mecca pilgrim traffic, but success bred rivalry and by 1876 competition was intense. Unlike their competitors, who acquired larger and faster vessels, Alfred and Philip kept to their original schedules as the China trade sank into depression. Although the Holts had been reared in the classic Liberal ethos of free trade, John Swire, Holts' Shanghai agent, was convinced that a conference system was desirable, so by 1879 an outward and homeward conference was formed, with Swire as chairman, to secure freight rates and a fair division of cargoes. The Holt brothers were slow to be convinced and, having joined, did not always play by the rules. In 1891 Alfred Holt met the competition by ordering faster and larger ships capable of carrying heavier and more varied freight, and twenty-two steamers were added to his fleet between 1894 and 1902. In 1895 direct trade with the Dutch colonies was secured by the formation of a subsidiary company registered in the Netherlands; paid managers were appointed, including Holt's nephew Richard Durning Holt ['see below']. Philip, who was responsible for the commercial side, changed the accounting system so that each voyage carried its own overheads. He promoted profitable feeder services and invested in banks and various subsidiary ventures before retiring in 1897. In 1902 Holts became a limited liability company, a move initially resisted by both brothers. Alfred retired in 1904. 
Outside work Holt's chief joy was sailing. His steam yacht, the 'Argo', built in 1875 and designed by himself, was originally intended to be a fast mail-carrier to the Far East in hope of getting the government contract. In 1876 it was used for a Liverpool Museum scientific expedition. The honour Holt most prized was his election as a member of the Institution of Civil Engineers in February 1875, earning him both a Watt medal and a Telford premium. He was also a member of the Institution of Naval Architects. Locally he was an active member of the Mersey Docks and Harbour Company, serving as its chairman in 1889-90, chairman of the Liverpool Underwriters' Register of Iron Vessels, president of the Liverpool Engineering Society, and a director of the Liverpool Institute, an educational foundation. He loyally supported the Unitarian churches and their social outreach through the domestic mission. Although not politically active he was a committed Liberal and long-standing member of the Reform Club. He felt the greatest affinity with John Bright, as a fellow businessman strongly opposed to government interference in the form of factory legislation. On similar grounds Holt opposed Plimsoll's 'Merchant Shipping Act' of 1875-6. His ships were all built to a higher class than Lloyds A1; indeed, 'Holts class' became an official designation, so he argued that attempts to enforce standards, even on humanitarian grounds, would result in standards generally slipping to the legal minimum. 
Holt also enjoyed fell-walking, shooting, theatre, horse races, and Christmas parties. He wrote a pamphlet about the burial-place of his hero, Oliver Cromwell, which was published in 1899. He was married first to Catherine Long on 20 September 1865. They had a daughter, Jane, who married Professor Sir William Herdman, eminent marine biologist and benefactor of Liverpool University; a son, George, who became one of the firm's managers; and another son, who died in his teens. After Catherine's death in 1869 Alfred Holt married her cousin Frances Long, on 4 July 1871, and had two more sons. Active to the last, he died of a seizure at his home, Crofton, Sudley Road, Aigburth, Liverpool, on 28 November 1911. He was cremated as one might expect of a founder of the local crematorium; his ashes were interred at Brook Street Unitarian Chapel, Knutsford. 
Philip Holt died in 1914, but ever since Alfred's retirement Richard Durning Holt had been senior partner and held the reins. 
Two years after being admitted to partnership Richard Durning Holt married Eliza Lawrence Wells, an American, and with their three daughters they shared an idyllic family life, though their hoped-for son was stillborn in 1904. Beatrice Webb noted that 'Dick... under the influence of a charming American wife [has] developed into a shrewd pleasant, public-spirited man'. However, she added 'he retains his parrot-like prejudices against all new ideas; in political intelligence he is still a child' (Dutton, xiv). Holt nevertheless remained very much the archetypal shipowner and very much a Liverpool man. In April 1939 he reflected in a speech at Liverpool town hall: 'It has been work that has been a real true pleasure, and I have enjoyed living in Liverpool. I was brought up to the idea that we were Liverpool people and that was where I was expected to work... if I didn't like it I had got to make myself like it and do it properly. (Falkus, 14)' 

In 1904 Holt debated whether he should seek a political career. In his political convictions he adhered to the creed of free trade Liberalism in which the family business had been nurtured. He was unsuccessful in Liverpool by-elections in 1903 and 1906, but in 1907 he won Hexham, Northumberland, joining a parliamentary party with a massive majority. In 1909 he recorded that 'Parliament is very attractive to me' (Dutton, 19). However, the Liberal Party was not wholly in agreement with his traditionalist views. Holt opposed Lloyd George's social policies, not because he lacked sympathy for the workers but because he disbelieved in government interference with business. None the less, he professed himself largely converted to the idea of a minimum wage in 1900. Likewise in 1929 he at first opposed the idea of public works to provide employment, contending that it would put up prices. Then, reflecting that it might result in the unemployed having to earn their keep, he changed his line. 
Holt's principal pre-1914 activity was organizing the 'Holt cave', a group of like-minded businessmen still wedded to Liberal watchwords of peace, retrenchment, and reform. During the First World War Holt opposed conscription and the government's controls. He even took the head of the Ministry of Shipping to court over the legality of the government's claim to command the services of shipowners. From 1916 he favoured peace negotiations and advocated milder terms of surrender for Germany. He rejected the idea of the 'knock-out blow', as a result of which he was rejected by the Hexham Liberal Party for the 1918 election. He made other attempts to recover a parliamentary seat without success. 
By now Holt thoroughly distrusted most of the leading Liberals, especially Lloyd George. He also saw that the Liberal Party was now the third runner politically and that without proportional representation, which he strongly advocated, it was doomed. He nevertheless had some sympathy for the grievances of workers and criticized the methods by which other shipowners repressed a strike in London in 1912. He advocated recognition of trade unions and, like his brother Lawrence, wished to end the degrading system of casual labour for dockers. 
As his political star sank Holt found increased satisfaction in his shipping interests. The takeover of the China Mutual Steam Navigation Company in 1902, the development of his firm's Australian, Pacific, and American trades, and the expansion of property holdings in the Far East had already been largely his initiatives. Holt played a key role at the time of the Royal Mail Shipping Group crisis, so that Elder Dempster, the west Africa shipping company, as well as Glen Line, came under his chairmanship in 1932. In 1923 he became chairman of the Liverpool Steamship Owners' Association and chairman of Martins Bank, which incorporated the Bank of Liverpool, of which his grandfather had been a founder in 1831. 
Holt was a JP for the county of Lancaster, made an honorary LLD of Liverpool University in 1933, and received a baronetcy in 1935 in recognition of his outstanding contribution to the shipping industry. Despite the strains of war and loss of profits in the subsequent depression, he brought his firm and with it, to some extent, Liverpool's shipping through both, largely on the basis of Victorian virtues rather than technical expertise. R. H. Thornton, a manager of Ocean until 1953, wrote of Holt as 'the dominating, outstanding personality of it all, shrewd, vigorous and witty, and a very warm heart... A man of extremely high commercial principles, dogmatic mind, ungracious in argument, invariably loyal in defeat' (Falkus, 22). Beatrice Webb's description of him as a conventional capitalist is unfair. His diary, which reveals both his strengths and his blind spots, shows how much he cherished principles as opposed to commercial expediency. 
Holt's main relaxation was shooting and fishing at Abernethy in the Cairngorms. Traditional, even in domestic life, he always dressed for dinner, was shaved by his valet, and never learned to drive his Blue Funnel blue Daimler. He also furiously disapproved of smoking. He remained a staunch Unitarian all his life and in 1918 was elected president of the British and Foreign Unitarian Association. He died at his home, 54 Ullet Road, Liverpool, on 22 March 1941. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 47429


Jempson, (Arthur) John (1904-1981), road haulier, was born at Strand Quay, Rye, Sussex, on 14 September 1904, the eldest son in a family of two sons and four daughters of Arthur Jempson (1877-1955) and his wife, Ruth Palmer (1876-1956), daughter of a seed merchant. The parents were Strict Baptists. Arthur Jempson had acquired a small haulage business from an uncle in the late nineteenth century, and the family home was next to rented stables where the firm's few horses and vehicles were kept. John Jempson went to local schools but left aged thirteen to join his father at a time of acute wartime labour shortage. As a schoolboy he was accustomed to delivering and collecting goods in his spare time, so he soon mastered the details of what was essentially a local business. 
Young Jempson's interests were in motors, however, and he soon owned his own motorcycle, which he used for both work and pleasure. In 1924, aged twenty, he persuaded his reluctant father to lend him $145 to buy a Ford Model T, which he ran himself as part of the business, sharing the proceeds with his father. Capable of carrying 30 cwt, though supposed to carry no more than 20, and faster than horse-drawn vehicles, this small motor lorry had greater earning capacity, but involved much more work for its owner-driver, as he shovelled stone, or loaded sacks, which then weighed up to 2.25 cwt each. Living simply with his parents, he soon built up a business, and was able to repay his father's loan within six months. In March 1926 he paid $800 for a 6 ton Thornycroft; other motor lorries soon followed. John Jempson made the transition to employer, though he continued to drive one of the larger lorries (with a mate) until 1934, with one of his sisters taking orders, and holding the office together, which she continued to do until her death. By 1934 seasonal traffic in fruit and hops, and all-year traffic in building materials, had been developed over the longer distance to London, providing door-to-door service at railway rates. Return freight, if available, was brought back the same day from the London docks. By 1937 turnover neared $14,000, and father and son could pay themselves not only their $6 per week wages but also $608 each out of the year's profit of $2776. John Jempson had become a man of substance in control of a flourishing business. On 9 June 1938, aged thirty-three, he married Adah Ruth Ashby, the daughter of a prosperous Romney Marsh farmer. They had a son and a daughter and lived at Romney Marsh until 1943, when they moved to Rye. 
Nationalization of road haulage proved advantageous for John Jempson. He agreed to manage the Rye depot of British Road Services, of which his former business was the nucleus, and was later promoted traffic superintendent at Tenterden, where he got to know new customers. On denationalization he put in a successful bid for the Rye depot, buying back a much larger business for considerably less than he had extracted in compensation earlier. This must have given him much satisfaction as a lifelong Conservative. Rapid economic -- and therefore traffic -- growth followed during the 1950s. The firm's profits allowed vehicles to be replaced by larger, faster, and more efficient models. By 1960, with this transformed fleet of only twenty-five lorries, revenue had grown by nearly 50 per cent, and costs by only 20 per cent. The firm was turned into a limited company, but was still wholly owned by Jempson and his wife. Economic conditions in the following years were less propitious, but by 1965 Jempson, then sixty-one, felt able to hand over day-to-day running to his 22-year-old son. 
Like his father, Jonathan Jempson had driven lorries in his holidays, but his father's success had bestowed benefits John himself had never had; Tonbridge School, followed by a degree in commerce at Edinburgh. Jonathan's outlook was rather different from that of his cautious father. He also believed in borrowing money to make more of opportunities and accelerate growth, and this new policy was very successful. By the early 1980s the company was running sixty up-to-date vehicles. 
John Jempson died at St Helen's Hospital, Ore, Hastings, Sussex, on 21 October 1981, survived by his wife. He was buried in Rye cemetery on 26 October. He had built up a business by careful and unceasing effort from small beginnings over forty long years; he handed it on to a son who was prepared to build on his success. 


@@@@@


doc= 47430


Levy, Lewis (1785/6-1856), farmer of tolls, was probably born in 1786, but nothing else is known about his early life. Until 1864-5, tolls were levied on the major roads leading into London. The resulting revenue was used to repair and sometimes light the roads, and to service the debts incurred during construction and maintenance work. Collection of the tolls was generally not carried out by the turnpike authorities themselves, but was let by auction. Levy bid at these auctions, often with partners, sometimes as lessee or joint lessee, sometimes as surety. However, he was the dominant partner in these transactions and he was so successful that he became known as Turnpike Levy. 
The earliest known record of Levy as a toll lessee dates from 1812. By 1825, he rented about three-quarters of the tolls in Middlesex and the neighbourhood of London, and in 1832 'The Times' referred to him as 'the master of nearly all the toll gates within 15 miles of London' (20 Aug 1832). In 1839, asked by the parliamentary select committee on turnpike roads whether he farmed them to a great extent, he responded 'Not so great an extent as I used to do. I used to farm $400,000 or $500,000 a year. I think I have had as much as $300,000 or $400,000 with Post Horse Duties' ('Select committee on the effect of the formation of railroads', qq. 204-7). He had not come prepared to say what the current amount was, but it was nothing like one fourth as much, he thought about $100,000. In 1854, however, he was again reported as leasing most of the tolls north of the Thames. 
Levy also lent funds to turnpike trusts to finance road improvements, although his offer to lend $10,000 to the commissioners of the metropolitan roads had been turned down in 1827. He told the same select committee that he 'unfortunately' was a creditor on a great many turnpike roads, meaning that they had defaulted on interest or repayment and that he had had to exercise his right to collect the tolls to recover the money owed him ('Select committee... formation of railroads', q. 220). 
Levy's name came before the public not only in newspaper reports of the auctions, but also in their reports of court cases, notably of one initiated by Cobbett in 1823, acting on behalf of 'several poor persons'. He claimed that Levy's toll-keepers were charging more than the law allowed for a one-horse cart. He was invited to sit on the bench. 'The Times' reported Cobbett as saying to Levy 'You are a Jew I suppose,' to which Levy replied 'I am a Jew, it is true; but you are neither Jew, Christian or any other religion. You are an atheist as everybody knows' (17 Oct 1823). Cobbett then complained: 'I abstained from abuse... But he called me an atheist. This Jew-dog called me an atheist, this Jew-dog did' (21 Oct 1823). In another case, Levy had his claimed right to charge king's messengers confirmed. In 1830, he petitioned the House of Commons, saying that he did not desire the franchise but wanted a law removing doubts as to the ability of Jews to hold landed property. 
Levy is known to have been married twice. His first wife was named Elizabeth, his second Rebecca. He died on 30 November 1856 at his home, 55 Tavistock Square, London. He had no children, but left half his fortune to his stepson Jonas, Elizabeth's son by her first marriage (to a Joseph Levy). Jonas, a lawyer, became vice-chairman of the London, Brighton, and South Coast Railway. The other half went to Levy's brother Nathaniel, who, like Jonas, had participated with Levy in turnpike contracting. The size of this fortune, amounting to approximately $250,000, testifies to the importance of Levy's business. 


@@@@@


doc= 47431


Read, Sir Alfred Henry (1871-1955), shipowner, was born at 10 Georges Road, West Derby Road, Liverpool on 18 July 1871, the son of Colonel Alfred Read of Chester, a partner in the coastal shipping firm of F. H. Powell & Co., and his wife, Emily Blanche, 'nee' Musgrave. He was educated at Liverpool College, and then in Switzerland and Paris, before being apprenticed to the Glasgow-based Anchor Line with services on the north Atlantic and to India. In 1893 at the age of twenty-two he joined the family firm, which then owned four small steamers. He gradually persuaded his partners to acquire more ships and Powells owned nine by the turn of the century. Read began to give all the ships names ending in 'Coast', and like other owners transferred some to single-ship companies to spread his risk. 
From the beginning of his career Read was keenly concerned to improve accommodation for crews on his ships, and also to ensure that new recruits were well trained, playing an active role in the management of the Lancashire and National Sea Training Home. He was twice married, first to Jean Charlotte (died 1919), daughter of Hugh Frederick Macneal, on 11 April 1918, then on 25 September 1920 to Elena, daughter of Henry Fisher and widow of Charles Vincent. 
By the turn of the century Alfred Read was a prominent shipowner in Liverpool, and was elected to the Mersey Docks and Harbour Board, on which he served until 1920, and he was chairman of the Liverpool Steam Ship Owners' Association in 1912. In that year Powells acquired the competing coastal business of John Bacon Ltd, and in 1913 merged with Samuel Hough Ltd to form Powell Bacon and Hough Lines, with a combined fleet of twenty-two ships. Freight rates rose during the First World War, and the coastal trades experienced serious competition from the railway companies, whose rates were kept artificially low by the government. Because most coasters were too small to be requisitioned for military service, coastal shipping was not controlled until 1917, when Read was appointed director of home trade services at the Ministry of Shipping. His contribution to the organization of coastal services during the unrestricted U-boat campaign and his commitment to training young seafarers were recognized with a knighthood in 1919. 
Powell Bacon and Hough Lines was sold in 1917 to the fast-expanding Royal Mail group of Sir Owen Cosby Philipps, who merged it with the British and Irish Steam Packet Company to form Coast Lines Ltd, with Read as managing director. The new company, designed to provide connections to the group's worldwide liner services, purchased six more coastal shipping concerns in 1919, including the City of Dublin Steam Packet Company and the Belfast Steamship Company. Other acquisitions followed -- the Glasgow-based G. & J. Burns (in which Sir George Burns was the key figure) in 1920; the London Welsh Steamship Company in 1923; British Motorship Company in 1925, and Dundalk and Newry Steam Packet Company in 1926. By the late 1920s it was the largest coastal shipping company in the United Kingdom, and although part of the Royal Mail group it was effectively controlled by Read. An autocratic figure, he directed the greatly expanded group with paternalistic despotism, frequently visiting offices 'without warning to the staff [to see] how the work was being done' ('The Times' 10 March 1955). His unrivalled knowledge of the United Kingdom's coastal trades rapidly made Coast Lines the dominant force in the industry. 
When the Royal Mail group collapsed in 1930, he quickly took action to save Coast Lines by taking independent advice from the distinguished accountant Sir John Mann. The complexity of restructuring the group made a stock market floatation impossible until 1934, and then only by the government of the Republic of Ireland agreeing to purchase all the Irish business. Read was managing director of the new firm until 1946, and finally retired as chairman in 1950. He also served as a member of the Port of London Authority from 1934 to 1941. He was a founder member of the Institute of Transport in 1919, acting as vice-president (1927-30) and president (1936-7). 
Widely regarded as the doyen of coastal shipping, Read was a private man and typical of the new generation of managers who characterized British trade and industry in the first half of the twentieth century. One of his interests was hunting, and he served as joint master of the Avon Vale foxhounds in the west country. Sir Alfred died on 8 March 1955 at the British Hospital, Lisbon, Portugal. He was survived by his second wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 47432


Williams, Charles Wye (1779/80-1866), developer of steam navigation, was born in Dublin, the second of four sons of Thomas Williams, secretary to the Bank of Ireland, and his wife. Although trained in the law and called to the Irish bar in 1812, his lifelong passion was the new technology of steam machinery. In 1806-7 he erected a large linen mill in northern Ireland, installed powerful machinery, and introduced cast-iron spur gearing, apparently not seen before in Ireland. While managing the mill, he became an avid student of chemical processes and their application first to linen, and later to fuel. His mentors were among the most eminent scientists of the day. 
Williams's interest in steam shipping began when his friend John Oldham constructed a new revolving paddle wheel. Williams grasped its significance and paid for its patent in 1818. With modifications, this wheel (later known as the Morgan wheel) became the standard for steamships until displaced by the screw. At this time, seagoing shipping driven by steam became viable and Williams perceived that this technology could transform Ireland's economy. 
Ireland had a maritime economy. Irish entrepreneurs grew rich by supplying naval stores for the wars fought in the Atlantic between 'c'.1750 and 1815, but after the peace Atlantic trade diminished dramatically. England was the obvious haven for trade; Irish foodstuffs and labour were readily exchanged for manufactured goods. The abolition in 1825 of duties on both sides of the Irish Sea furthered the integration of Ireland's economy with Britain's; the City of Dublin Steam Packet Company formed by Williams in 1824 speeded up the process with cheap, regular, and frequent transport. 
Irish merchants eagerly invested their idle capital in steam shipping and Williams's company expanded rapidly. Many shipowners followed in the wake of the Dublin company, but by 1830 Williams had effective control of all traffic plying between Britain and Ireland. Already the largest short-haul company in the United Kingdom, the Dublin company remained dominant until 1850. Long before that, the Irish Sea was the first seaway in the world to abandon sail for steam. 
Always seeking innovations, Williams commissioned the first iron seagoing vessels (1833-4) from John Laird, the Birkenhead shipbuilder. These were the first to be fitted with iron bulkheads for safety, also Williams's invention. After repairs and extensions while they were on inland waterways, Williams was able to carry cargo direct to Irish Sea ports in this fleet of canal and river steamboats, making the whole passage quicker, cheaper, and more convenient. 
Williams, and shipowners who followed him, looked beyond Liverpool for markets. Finding that ships with bigger hulls and powerful engines could make longer voyages more economically, he inaugurated a regular summer line as far as Bordeaux in 1827. In the later 1830s, technological advances in marine navigation made long-distance voyages possible; the only obstacle, the heavy operating cost, was removed when the government offered subsidies by way of mail contracts on Britain's major trade routes. A front runner in the competition for the north Atlantic, he set up the Transatlantic Steam Company in 1838, in partnership with two of the Dublin company's directors -- Joseph Christopher Ewart, a Liverpool merchant, and Francis Carlton, another Irishman -- and acquired two very large ships. This contract, however, went to Samuel Cunard, the Canadian shipowner. 
Williams was left with two expensive ships on his hands. Fortuitously, his friend Captain Richard Bourne RN, was badly in need of them. In 1837 Bourne, also an Irish shipowner, had been granted a mail contract for Iberian ports. He sold his Dublin and London Marine to Williams, who named it the British and Irish Steam Packet Company and worked it as a subsidiary to his Dublin company. For the service to Spain and Portugal, Bourne's new concern was called the Peninsular Steam Navigation Company. His ships made frequent calls at Gibraltar, the gateway to the Mediterranean, through which the anticipated route to India via Egypt would run. In 1839, the government unexpectedly decided to seek tenders for the mail contract for this new trade route before Bourne had time to build the necessary large steamers. He turned to Williams who agreed on a merger; the Transatlantic and Peninsular companies were subsumed in the new Peninsular and Oriental Steam Navigation Company (P. & O.). 
When P. & O. was launched in 1840, Williams was the only director on its board with experience of an incorporated company. From its inception, his Dublin company had limited liability under the 'Anonymous Persons Act' passed in 1783 by the Irish parliament. His own companies were so successful that his contemporaries recognized him as the first of a new breed of man in the shipping world: the professional manager. His guidance to the fledgeling P. & O. was of inestimable value; so, of course, was his capital in ships. Indeed, no individual made so marked a contribution to the development of the business of steam shipping in its infancy during the years 1820 to 1850. He set the pace, laid down the ground rules, and created precedents for others to follow. His peers honoured his achievements by making him an associate of the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1835 and of the Institution of Naval Architects in 1862. He also received a gold medal from the Royal Society of Arts in 1856. 
An Irish patriot, Williams did not believe that politics would solve Ireland's problems, and in 1830 he refused invitations from admirers in Dublin and Liverpool to stand for parliament. He was, however, willing to give evidence in innumerable parliamentary select committees, and he published several books and pamphlets on a variety of subjects connected with fuel and steam shipping, the last of them written in his eighty-first year. His skills, energy, and curiosity were prodigious: he could be engineer, naval architect, scientist, and businessman by turns. A thoroughly practical man, he was also an idealist. Having made steam transport on the Irish Sea available to all classes, he hoped that the reciprocal trade across the water would solve Irish problems, though in this he was mistaken. 
Williams retired from P. & O.'s board in 1854 and from that of his Dublin company in 1860. He was greatly admired, and had many warm personal friendships. He and his wife, Frances, whom he married on 16 December 1847, had one son who died young. Williams moved to Liverpool in the 1830s, and died there at his home, The Nook, St James's Mount, on 2 April 1866, survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 47433


Turnbull, Hugh (b. 1517, d. in or before 1566), dean of Chichester and administrator, was from Lincolnshire, born to an unknown family. He was admitted 'discipulus' of Corpus Christi College, Oxford, on 27 April 1532, probationary fellow on 10 January 1536, and fellow in 1538; he remained a fellow until 1543. His logic lectures, begun in 1535, attracted complaints to Archbishop Cranmer. Turnbull took the degrees of BA in 1536 and MA on 31 March 1539. Ordained subdeacon on 18 December 1540 and deacon on 12 March 1541, he took priest's orders on 2 April 1541 to the title of his fellowship. He was admitted BTh in 1545 and matriculated at Louvain on 12 July 1547. In 1551 he received his DTh degree from the University of Padua by grant from the count palatine Transalgardo Capoditista, using an imperial privilege; this allowed him to avoid swearing an oath to the pope. 
Turnbull tutored at Padua in both humanities and civil law, although he never took a degree in law. The civilians John Tregonwell and Anthony Hussey were his patrons, and he may have studied under or at least known the eminent legist Marco Mantova Benavides, since he wrote to Cardinal Pole the day after Mantova did in March 1555 congratulating him on the reconciliation of England and sending some lost questions on scripture, judged 'papistical' by the Stuart antiquary Brian Twyne. Turnbull had long been a successful pluralist by this time. He was rector of Acton, Middlesex, from 7 May 1542 (vacated by 1563) and of Batcombe, Somerset, from 6 April 1547 (vacated by December 1564); canon of Canterbury and ninth prebendary by royal nomination (30 March 1554; admitted 6 April until death); dean of Chichester from 27 April 1558 (until death); and canon of Salisbury and prebendary of South Grantham from 14 July 1562 (until death) by the patronage of Thomas Lodge and Benjamin Jonson, executors of Hussey's will. 
Turnbull's appointment to Chichester may well have been an effort to resolve persistent difficulties in the finances of the see, drawing on experience gained as treasurer and prebendary of Christ Church Cathedral (by 1557). He was first dispensed to hold an additional benefice on 25 February 1547, and by the pope for non-residence at an unknown date and on 5 July 1555 to hold incompatible benefices. Cardinal Pole named him a commissioner against heresy in the diocese of Canterbury on 28 March 1558 and occasionally used him as his proctor at Canterbury. Archbishop Parker had him excommunicated for contumacy at his visitation on 17 September 1560, but he was absolved on 9 October. 
Turnbull was dead by 21 November 1566, when his will was proved, although records at Chichester give the date of his death as 23 November. By it he left bedding to a large number of servants: William Fells, Richard Lane, John Brewer, Thomas Bowser, John Milles (perhaps a relative of Turnbull's fellow canon of Canterbury of the same name), and Thomas Raddish. 40 marks went to his nephew George Turnbull, and the residue of his estate to other nephews at Canterbury and Oxford; his sister was to have a similar portion. Lawrence Hussey (probably the son of Anthony Hussey the civilian), Turnbull's brother William, and William Cauthant, the husband of his sister's daughter, were named executors. He also gave a copy of Basil's 'Opera' (Venice, 1535) to Corpus Christi College, the edition in which Pole's household had been involved. 


@@@@@


doc= 47435


Madeleine (1520-1537), queen of Scots, consort of James V, was the second daughter and fourth child of Francois I of France (1494-1547) and his first wife, Claude (1499-1524), daughter of Louis XII of France and Anne of Brittany. She was born on 10 August 1520, at St Germain-en-Laye, and joined her elder sister, Charlotte, and brothers, the dauphin Francois and Prince Henri, in the royal nurseries. Claude had two more children, Charles and Marguerite, but died when Madeleine was four, and little Charlotte died that same year. The princes and princesses had their own household and in 1523 this comprised no fewer than 240 officials and servants, including five chamberlains, nine stewards, and twenty pages. After Queen Claude's death the children's upbringing was supervised by their paternal grandmother, Louise de Savoie. When she died in 1531 the king's mistress, Anne d'Heilly, later duchesse d'Etampes, and his learned sister Marguerite, queen of Navarre, took charge of the girls. 
Madeleine's daily companions also came and went. Her brothers the dauphin and Prince Henri were taken away to Spain as hostages and remained there for four years. They came back in 1530 and, three years after that, Henri's young bride, Catherine de' Medici, arrived from Italy. No mention was made, however, of a match for Madeleine. A charming childhood drawing of her shows a plump little girl clutching a rattle, but she seems to have contracted tuberculosis and was judged too sickly for marriage. In October 1536, however, James V (1512-1542), king of Scots, arrived at Dieppe in search of a French wife. As long before as 1517 the Franco-Scottish treaty of Rouen had promised the then five-year-old James 'a daughter of the French king already living or yet to be born' (Donaldson, 99). He had inherited the throne at the age of one, whereupon his nobility had engaged in bitter power struggles with each other and nothing had been done about the marriage. Now, however, he was ruling for himself, and he had forceful ideas about his country's future. His uncle Henry VIII had broken with Rome and was urging him to do likewise. He refused to listen, instead resolving to strengthen Scotland's traditional alliance with France. 
When he asked Francois for the promised bride, James was offered the duc de Vendome's daughter Marie. He went to see her for himself, incognito, but made the excuse that she was too ill-shaped. In fact, he seems to have been determined to have no less than a French princess, and set off for the French court which was then at Lyons. A portrait of Madeleine, probably painted that autumn, shows a rather sallow, serious girl in a jewelled French hood and a dark dress with ermine sleeves. James was handsome, highly-strung, and attractive to women. According to the Scottish chronicler Robert Lindsay of Pitscottie, when Madeleine met him she fell in love with him and persuaded her father, against his better judgement, to agree to the match. Whatever the truth of the matter, negotiations went ahead, in spite of her doctors' warnings that she would never survive the cold Scottish climate. 
The marriage contract was finalized in Blois on 26 November 1536. The court then proceeded to Paris, where James spent 1100 crowns on a great table diamond for his bride's spousing ring. The wedding took place at Notre Dame on 1 January 1537, the bridal party standing on a platform which was draped with cloth of gold just outside the cathedral. They then went inside to hear mass, and finished the day with a magnificent banquet. After lengthy celebrations the young couple set out for the coast. They were delayed at Rouen when Madeleine fell ill, but by May she had recovered sufficiently to set out on the long voyage to Scotland. She and James took up residence in the palace of Holyroodhouse while elaborate preparations were made for the ceremonial entry into Edinburgh and coronation of the new queen. Within weeks of her arrival, however, Madeleine fell ill once more, and although she seemed to be recovering in early June, she died in her husband's arms on 7 July 1537. 
Thomas Arthur, the royal tailor, laid aside the celebratory garments he had been making and started work on mourning gowns instead. James wrote to tell his father-in-law of the death of 'votre fille, ma tres chere compaigne' (Paris, Bibliotheque Nationale, Fonds Clairambault, MS 48, fol. 5971) and one of his officials began to list the young queen's belongings. There were gowns of cloth of gold, black velvet, and crimson satin, a kirtle of violet satin embroidered with gold, her silver cross and altar plate, and the two little gold cups made for her when she was a child. 
Madeleine was buried in Holyrood Abbey, and a few weeks later James sent an emissary to France to ask her father for a replacement bride. 


@@@@@


doc= 47439


Myers, George (1803-1875), builder and craftsman, known as 'Pugin's builder', was born in Kingston upon Hull, Yorkshire, the son of George Myers, whitesmith, (died 'c'.1823), and of his second wife, Mary Benson (died 1845). Family details are vague, including the religious affiliation of his parents at the time of his birth. Myers certainly died a Roman Catholic. Only one brother and one half-sister have been traced. As a boy Myers was apprenticed to William Comins, the master mason at Beverley Minster. He continued working there until 1829, and it was there, in 1827, that he first met A. W. N. Pugin, who had gone there to draw; they were not to meet again for ten years. 
In 1829 Myers returned to Hull and set up in business as a stonemason and builder. Expanding towns and cities, together with Catholic emancipation and the religious revival, created a need for more churches, and new wealth created a desire for new buildings of every kind. In Hull, Myers built the Wilberforce memorial (1834) as well as public baths, houses, mills, and churches. In 1837 he met Pugin again when he tendered to build St Mary's Church in Derby, not realizing that the architect was the young boy he had helped in Beverley Minster a decade earlier. Pugin, according to his biographer, Benjamin Ferrey, is said to have flung his arms round his neck and promised that he should execute all his buildings, a promise which he kept to the best of his ability. It has been said that Myers was the rock on which Pugin built the Gothic revival. Pugin described Myers as 'a rough diamond, but a real diamond' (Spencer-Silver, 61). It would have been difficult, if not impossible, for him to have found another builder with Myers's knowledge of medieval Gothic who was also capable of working from Pugin's sketchy drawings. They became true friends and collaborators, yet no evidence has come to light to show that Myers had any hand in the decorating or furnishing of the houses of parliament. Myers carried out about forty major contracts for Pugin. The grand finale of their work together was the medieval court at the Great Exhibition of 1851. Myers was awarded a medal for his sculpture. Pugin died the next year and it was Myers himself who carved the full length effigy on his tomb in St Augustine's Church, Ramsgate. 
In 1842 Myers had moved to London. In 1845 he took on the lease of Ordnance Wharf, Lambeth, just downstream from Westminster Bridge. Here he established workshops where his craftsmen carved, sculpted, made furniture and also made the patterns for some of the metalwork produced by John Hardman (1811-1867) of Birmingham. With his yards on the bank of the river and Waterloo Station nearby, transport was no problem and he was well equipped to take a leading part in the great building boom of the 1850s and 1860s. 
Myers's most spectacular works were carried out for architects other than Pugin -- in all, 240 of his contracts have been traced. He was involved in many government contracts. He built the first barracks at Aldershot, where the red-bearded, frock-coated contractor with his stove-pipe hat, driving his high-wheeled gig, was remembered for many years. He enlarged the Royal Military Academy at Woolwich, and built Netley Hospital on Southampton Water, the Herbert Hospital at Woolwich, and the Staff College at Camberley. He restored the Tower of London using stone from his own quarries, and also the Guildhall in the City; and he worked at Windsor Castle. He built asylums, including Colney Hatch and Broadmoor and he enlarged and modernized Bedlam (the Bethlem Hospital). In the City of London he built banks, offices and warehouses. He also constructed a number of small railways, in addition to building stately homes. 
Myers was the Rothschilds' favourite builder and built Mentmore in Buckinghamshire and Ferriere near Paris, as well as many of their other houses, both in London and in the country. He built nearly a hundred churches for all denominations, and one synagogue. His craftsmen's work travelled far: an altar table and lectern went to Newfoundland, a Pugin-designed tombstone for two babies was dispatched to New Orleans, and three model churches, which took to pieces, as well as church furniture in stone and tombstones, were sent to Tasmania. It is impossible to go far in London without coming across an example of Myers's work, and most counties in England can boast at least one of his buildings. 
On 10 May 1829 Myers married Isabella, daughter of William Patterson of Beverley, Yorkshire; they had two sons and his wife died in 1834 giving birth to a third son, who died soon after. On 18 March 1841 Myers married Judith, daughter of David Ruddock of Horbury, Yorkshire, who gave birth to three sons and three daughters. The youngest girl married her cousin Sir John Jackson (1851-1919) in 1876. In June 1873 Myers retired and handed over the business to David and Joseph, the two sons of his first marriage. In the spring of 1874, he had a stroke; he died of 'exhaustion' at his home, Thanet House, Montague Place, Lambeth, London, on 25 January 1875. He was buried in Norwood cemetery. The lease of Ordnance Wharf came to an end that year, and was not renewed. Judith Myers survived for another sixteen years. 


@@@@@


doc= 47441


Siebe, (Christian) Augustus (1788-1872), engineer, was born in Saxony, southern Prussia; the details of his parentage and place of birth are unknown. During the 1790s Augustus, as he was called throughout his life, moved with his family to Berlin, where he showed an aptitude for mechanical and handicraft skills. After leaving school he was apprenticed to a master caster in the capital and soon won medals at fourteen or fifteen for his work in modelling, chasing, and watchmaking. 
At twenty-four, according to his own account, Siebe served as an officer of artillery in the Prussian army and was wounded in the battle of the Nations at Leipzig in 1813. After leaving the army at the end of the Napoleonic wars he went first to Denmark and then to England to find employment. He worked for a time with Garrards of London, the royal jewellers, and then as an instrument maker. After a brief period as a manager for an engineering firm he decided to set up for himself as a watchmaker and silversmith at 145 High Holborn. 
After some success in mechanical inventions and in business, Siebe moved in 1829 to larger premises nearby -- at 5 Denmark Street, Soho. This substantial terraced house gave the Siebe family domestic accommodation as well as workshop space and a shopfront from where he could sell his many mechanical products. Among these were a rotary water pump, which was a great financial success, and the world's first dial weighing machine, which reputedly weighed and measured new recruits for the Crimean War. Siebe later manufactured under licence the Australian James Harrison's ice-making machine, which worked on the ether principle. In 1823 he won the Vulcan medal from the Royal Society of Arts for an improved screw threading tool. 
Siebe's major claim to fame, however, was to improve and develop an invention not his own. In 1827 he met Charles Anthony Deane, who in 1823 had invented a smoke helmet for use in firefighting. Deane commissioned Siebe to make up a few sets, and the design was very soon adapted for use as a diving helmet, developed in conjunction with Charles Deane's younger brother John. Before this, the centuries-old diving bell, a cumbersome and unwieldy tool, had been used for shipwreck salvage and other underwater work. The naval establishment and the wider maritime economy were ready for something better. The Deanes and Siebe provided the answer. In 1830 they collaborated in producing a complete diving apparatus kit, which consisted of a beaten copper helmet with windows fixed to a corselet. This metalwork was worn over an all-enveloping india-rubber suit, with chest weights and heavy boots. The helmet was supplied with air through a hose connected to a pump operated from above; the exhaled air bubbled out from the rim of the corselet and was known as the 'open helmet'. The 'closed helmet' incorporated a loose flange sealing the dress to the helmet around the edge of the corselet, a modification devised and given freely to Siebe by George Edwards, the engineer in charge of Lowestoft harbour in 1840. These suits gradually proved themselves over the next ten years or so, until in 1840 Siebe supplied a few suits to Colonel Pasley of the Royal Engineers, then engaged in removing the wreck of the 'Royal George', lost some fifty years before in the main anchorage of Portsmouth harbour. This government recognition firmly established 'Siebe's patent diving dress' as the accepted replacement for the outmoded bell system, despite Siebe's having no patent and being essentially a manufacturer and promoter. The apparatus was, however, greatly improved by the provision of a two- or three-cylinder pump of his own manufacture. The use of these instead of a bellows pump enabled air to be forced down to much greater depths. 
The invention was much copied in the United Kingdom and in other countries and remained in its use until the SCUBA-type equipment replaced it in the 1950s. Until the 1970s Siebe & Co. and the successor firm of Siebe Gorman & Co. published several manuals and other related books that became standard works in the industry. The company stayed in business until the 1990s, when the expanded nature of its business and a change of name effectively subsumed it. 
Augustus Siebe married Susannah Glidden (1796-1856) of Sherwell, Devon, at St Anne's Church, Soho, on 11 July 1819. They had six children of whom his second son, Henry Herepath, together with his son-in-law William Gorman, succeeded him in business on his retirement in 1868. 
Siebe died at his home in Denmark Street on 15 April 1872 and was buried in Norwood cemetery, London. The Institution of Civil Engineers described him in their 'Proceedings' as 'retiring, kind of heart, and upright and honourable in his dealings' (vol. 36, 1873). Although not the originator of either the closed or open diving helmet dress, Siebe certainly prompted its eventual improvement and development. One of the best and most imaginative machinists of his time, he took the novel but sometimes crude ideas of others and combined them in an improved form to produce what became known throughout the world as 'the standard diving dress'. Old Siebe helmet dresses can still be found in many countries and are a monument to his effort and genius. 


@@@@@


doc= 47443


George Bell (1814-1890), who was born on 12 October 1814, the fifth of thirteen children of Matthew Bell, bookseller, stationer, and bookbinder in Richmond, Yorkshire, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Fall. Bell went to the local grammar school run by the Revd James Tate. After leaving school he assisted his father for two years before he moved to London in 1832 and joined the wholesale booksellers Whittaker & Co. in Ave Maria Lane. There he lodged with his maternal uncle, George Fall, who was an accountant in the City. Having had some success with his shilling handbooks on chess, cricket, angling, and other sports, he set up on his own at 1 Bouverie Street towards the end of 1839, financed by his own savings and a loan from relatives. He married Hannah Simpson (died 1875) on 24 February 1840 and two months later issued his first catalogue. 
Early in his career Bell became the London representative for the academic publishers Parker, Vincent, and Slatter in Oxford and Deighton, Grant, Hall, Stevenson, and Johnson in Cambridge. Bell and the Macmillan brothers, Alexander and Daniel, started out in publishing at the same time and the three men were great friends. The Macmillans introduced Bell to the Scottish trade, and he commissioned six schoolbooks from Scottish schoolmasters. When the brothers moved to Cambridge in 1843 they co-published a book by William Hugh Miller with Bell, and he also issued Alexander Macmillan's anonymous biography of Percy Bysshe Shelley. 
An unfortunate partnership with Henry Wood in 1842 ended with Bell paying Wood's creditors after he went bankrupt. For a while Bell continued by himself. He established the corner-stone of his list about 1845 when he began his series of editions of classics with English notes for use in schools. The scholarship and advice of his former headmaster and his son James Tate gave weight to what became 'Bell's Grammar School Series'. In 1848 Whittaker & Co. bought a half share in the series, enabling Bell to make swifter progress with publication. Such financial assistance contributed in 1849 to a second series, the 'Bibliotheca Classica', which gained high standing through F. A. Paley's editions of Hesiod, Homer, Aeschylus, and Euripides. 
In 1847 Bell began the 'Journal of Education' and three years later established, at the instigation of W. J. Thoms, assistant librarian to the House of Lords, 'Notes and Queries'. About the same time Bell made an unsuccessful venture into bookselling, installing his brother John as manager of 80 St George Road, Brighton, bookseller to the college. His aim of having a retail outlet was fulfilled in 1854 when Bell purchased the business of J. and J. Deighton of Cambridge. 
Bell found another partner in F. R. Daldy in 1855. Daldy had been at Rivingtons and brought with him the custom of devotional publishers of suspending business on the principal feasts in the calendar. The partnership lasted until 1873 under the name Bell and Daldy. Together they published the 'Elzevier' series of standard authors, 'Pocket Volumes', select works of favourite authors, and 'Library of English Worthies'. On a business trip to America and Canada in 1869 Daldy obtained the English right to publish Mrs Beecher Stowe's 'Little Foxes'. While there he became an advocate for the rights of English authors especially in Canada and later became an authority on copyright, becoming an active member of the English Copyright Association founded in 1872 and giving evidence before the royal commission on copyright in 1897. After Daldy's departure the firm became George Bell & Sons. 
Bell established a reputation for books on art, architecture, and archaeology. He published the guides to art treasures by Henry Cole (pseudonymously Felix Summerly), including 'The National Gallery' (1843). Bell also worked in collaboration with Joseph Cundall, using photographical illustration. Together they produced 'Examples of Ornament' (1855) and 'The Great Works of Raphael Sanzio of Urbino' (1866). In 1865 Bell travelled to the south of France and Italy, and brought home photographs which were engraved and used to illustrate Robert Burns's 'Rome and the Campagna' (1871). Many of his art titles were printed at the Chiswick Press, under Charles Whittingham's management. After Whittingham's death the firm came up for sale and Bell bought it, installing his brother John as manager. About the same time Bell bought the publishing business of his former employer, Whittaker & Co. 
Within the profession Bell was called upon to judge trade disputes, and on one occasion at least was authorized by the High Court to do so. He regularly acted as referee on valuation of copyrights. After surveying Hardwick & Co.'s stock he was requested to endorse his valuation of Sowerby's 'Botany'. He bought the plates and reprinted the edition, but never revised the work. 
Under Bell's guidance the firm published an authoritative edition of Pepys's 'Diary' by Henry B. Wheatley. The firm's list also included Elrington Ball's critical edition of Swift's correspondence and Annie Raine Ellis's editions of Fanny Burney's novels and diary. Bell also bought most of Pickering's publications, including Samuel Weller Singer's ten-volume edition of Shakespeare, which he reissued in 1855. He acquired the 'Aldine' series of poets in fifty-two volumes revising many and extending the series to eighty-one volumes. However, his biggest purchase was in 1864, when he bought Henry George Bohn's libraries, more than doubling his stock. He paid $33,000 over a period of five years for 435,072 volumes, copyrights, and plates. The purchase was underwritten by William Clowes, the printers, and Spalding and Hodge, the paper merchants. The success of the libraries under his management was such that he soon added to them, establishing his own series. 
The firm published reference works including Ferdinand E. A. Gasc's 'French Dictionary' and Byran's 'Dictionary of Painters', and after 1865 became the British publishers of Noah Webster's dictionary. Its list included historical works by Agnes Strickland and Abbot Gasquet and the poetry of C. S. Calverley, Coventry Patmore, Adelaide Proctor, and later Robert Bridges. In the education field, Bell published Pendlebury's famous school arithmetics and the textbooks of Algernon Methuen Marshall Stedman until the author turned publisher in his own right. 
In 1860 Bell moved from his address at 28 Belsize Park Gardens to Westcroft, a neighbouring property, where he kept a menagerie of animals on 4 acres of land. In 1882 he moved again, this time to Bramerton, Hampstead Hill Gardens, where, on his uncle's death, his aunt joined him. He inherited much of his uncle's plate, pictures, and furniture. Together with a namesake (but no relation), George William Bell, he supported the Regent's Park Home for Boys, and he took an active role as a churchwarden in the parish. In 1888 he retired from business, dividing the bulk of his property between his six living children, and he died of bronchitis on 27 November 1890. His sons Edward and Ernest Bell followed him into the business. 
George Bell's son 


@@@@@


doc= 47444


Bogue, David (1807/8-1856), publisher and bookseller, was probably born and raised in Scotland. He worked as an assistant to the Edinburgh bookseller Thomas Ireland before moving to London in 1836. He then entered the shop of Charles Tilt (1797-1861), publisher and bookseller, at 86 Fleet Street. The corner shopfront had large multi-paned windows in which Tilt could display his stock of illustrated works. He 'had a genius for making money' (Vizetelly, 1.108). He imported French lithographic sheets that yielded over $100 a week and also published and sold children's books, reprints of novels, and scrapbooks and annuals embellished with steel engravings. After the stamp duty on almanacs was repealed in 1834, Tilt did a thriving trade in all sorts of almanacs, including one that would fit into a top hat (Browning, 296). He was a principal publisher of George Cruikshank's works -- several short-lived periodicals, brief illustrated stories, and the 'Comic Almanack' (1835-53), which began bravely with a circulation of 20,000 but lost customers to 'Punch's Almanack' and other rivals by the late 1840s. 
In 1840 Tilt, passing over his three senior employees, invited the youngest and newest clerk to join him as partner for a limited period, and then to buy him out. Bogue, a 'kindly and tolerant' man (Patten, 2.151), was flabbergasted to receive the offer, but he none the less accepted and devoted himself even more concertedly to justifying Tilt's faith in him. Three years later Tilt decided that the substantial assets he had amassed allowed him to retire from business and to travel. Bogue was able to purchase the firm for approximately $50,000 because Tilt made generous provisions for the long-term buy-out of his interest. Within a few years Bogue also bought shares in the 'Illustrated Times'. He married and had five children, including a son, David, who went into publishing as well, although he did not thrive, took bankruptcy in 1885, and was found dead on the beach at Folkestone in 1897. 
Bogue initiated a 'European Library' of classics reprinted in an inexpensive format and sold for 3's'. 6died a volume; in it he published historical biographies by Alexandre Dumas and John Galt, among others, and works by Francois Mignet, William Hazlitt, and Jules Michelet. The success of this enterprise prompted Henry Bohn, who dealt on a large scale with remainders and inexpensive series, to set up a rival 'Standard Library' collection in 1846. Among other purchases Bohn bought up the stock of an illustrated book on Lorenzo de' Medici; at that time copyright in illustrations travelled with the owner of the copyright in the book for which the plates were supplied. When Bogue reprinted these illustrations in William Roscoe's 'Life of Lorenzo de' Medici', Bohn sued. Bogue lost in the court of chancery, and within a few years Bohn purchased Bogue's 'European Library', folding it into the 'Standard Library', which eventually reached 150 titles. 
Bogue's fortunes declined after the mid-1840s. Although one of his assets was Cruikshank, their various publishing ventures failed. The graphic temperance series 'The Bottle' (1847) was 'a positive flop' (Cruikshank to C. P. Pitt, Patten, 2.251); so was its sequel, 'The Drunkard's Children' (1848), whose failure led Cruikshank to lament to his publisher 'that England is not California', then in the grip of gold-rush fever (ibid., 2.269). No more successful were comic novels written by Henry and Augustus Mayhew and illustrated by Cruikshank, including '1851', a story intended to capitalize on the Great Exhibition. Bogue experimented with multi-volume compendia ('Comic Natural History', 17 vols., 'Manuals of Utility', 8 vols., and 'Books for the Race, Road and Fireside', all 1847), and 'Traveller's Guides' (to Belgium and the Rhine, Paris and its environs, Switzerland and Savoy, as well as the 'Traveller's Dictionary', 1852-3). Bogue, who wrote children's stories anonymously, expanded the list of publications for the nursery: for example, eight 'Little Mary's Books' (1847-50, co-published with Joseph Cundall) and Cruikshank's 'Fairy Library' (1853-4), which died after Dickens savaged Cruikshank's temperance slant in a review, 'Frauds on the fairies' ('Household Words', 1 Oct 1853). Bogue also tried to combine strengths in his list, for instance by melding art with travel and landscape. William Makepeace Thackeray's 'Sketches after English Landscape Painters' (1850) was written to accompany reproductive engravings by his Parisian friend Louis Marvy, exiled by the French revolution of 1848. Another expedient Bogue attempted was to introduce the immensely popular French 'Physiologies' to Britain; Albert Smith wrote the 'phenomenally successful' first in a projected series of 'social zoologies', on 'gents', but when Bogue's printer Henry Vizetelly asked Thackeray to write as many of these little volumes as he pleased he declined because he did not want to be associated with Smith. 
Having suffered from heart disease, Bogue died at his home, 76 Camden Road Villas, Camden Town, London, on 19 November 1856, aged forty-eight. Charles Tilt resumed control of the firm and negotiated with numerous creditors. W. Kent succeeded to the stock and copyrights, but many of the profitable ventures had already been imitated or bought out by Bohn. George Bell of Bell and Daldy negotiated the sale of Cruikshank's temperance prints to W. Tweedie, and in September 1862 Frederick Arnold bought Cruikshankiana held by Bogue's executors against the artist's significant debts to the firm. 


@@@@@


doc= 47445


Chatto, Andrew (1840-1913), publisher, was born on 11 November 1840 at 55 Pratt Street, Camden Town, London, the son of William Andrew Chatto (1799-1864) and Margaret Roberts, daughter of Luke Birch of Cornhill, London. William was a writer who in the 1840s published books on wood-engraving, card playing, and fishing and was the editor of the 'New Sporting Magazine', a daily comic paper. Andrew Chatto, known throughout his life as Dan, was the third of five sons and three daughters. 
At the age of fifteen, Andrew Chatto joined John Camden Hotten's publishing firm at 74-5 Piccadilly, London. He rose to become publications manager, and after Hotten's death in 1873 he purchased the business from Hotten's widow for the sum of $25,000. One of Hotten's major coups had been the publication of Algernon Charles Swinburne's 'Poems and Ballads', but he had alienated the poet by paying him little if any of the profits from this strong seller. Chatto wooed Swinburne back by sending him a cheque for $50 and a formal request to publish his works. A further advance followed together with an agreement to publish Swinburne's 'Bothwell', which clinched the relationship. Hotten's legacy also caused Chatto some legal problems. His cavalier attitude to copyrights meant that some of the firm's works which Chatto had bought were plagiarized and others were not legally his property. 
Needing capital for his business, Chatto went into partnership with W. E. Windus, whose first book of narrative and lyric verses Hotten had published in 1871. Windus took little part in the business, leaving the day-to-day arrangements to Chatto, but the partners shared an enthusiasm for sailing which they indulged through Windus's membership of the Royal Thames Yacht Club. Chatto was also a frequenter of the Unity Club, whose members were a bohemian group of authors, singers, critics, newspaper editors, and publishers. There he met George Sims, whom he asked to translate Balzac's 'Contes drolatiques', which was published with pictures by Dore. Marketed to a general audience, the sale of the work caused a scandal and under threat of prosecution Chatto withdrew the work from circulation. 
Where Hotten had been somewhat shady in his business arrangements, Chatto sought to make clear agreements with his authors and protected their copyrights as best he could from piracy. He also performed various other services for his authors, from arranging the sale of subsidiary rights to organizing the shipping of personal belongings overseas, a favour he did for Marie Louise de la Ramee (Ouida). In return he expected reasonable adherence to deadlines, prompt return of proofs, and restraint when it came to authors' corrections. His businesslike dealings with authors resulted in considerable success. Frank Swinnerton recalled how 'according to Arnold Bennett he had a sure answer to any novelist who demurred to his terms for the purchase of a book. The answer was 'I have the cheque in my pocket'' (Swinnerton, 50). 
In the 1870s Chatto invested in many new copyrights, buying rights to all the existing works of best-selling novelists such as Wilkie Collins and Ouida. He successfully reprinted them in cheap editions, making them widely available and cornering a substantial share in the novel market. He relied on his own judgement in selecting the novelists and was his own reader, keeping touch with fashions in demand by personally taking subscription orders from the largest circulating libraries, Mudies and W. H. Smiths. Chatto was most successful at marketing his novels to appeal to the English public. Sometimes this merely involved a change of title, other times he reordered the text itself, as in a collection of American short stories that he resequenced. By employing such marketing techniques Chatto became 'a master in novel publishing' (Swinnerton, 50). 
Seeing periodicals as a vehicle for the firm's fiction, Chatto acquired from Mrs Braddon 'The Belgravia' and the 'Belgravia Annual'. From 1882 to 1911 he also published 'The Idler', an outlet for the essays of Jerome K. Jerome, and the firm also handled the 'Gentleman's Magazine'. 
Chatto selected and issued the first novels of Hall Caine, Grant Allen, W. H. Mallock, and David Christie Murray, and the 'yellow backs' that the firm published included the most popular authors of their day. Walter Besant, James Rice, Mrs Henry Wood, Anthony Trollope, George Macdonald, Charles Reade, and Justin MacCarthy all published with Chatto, and many of their works were sold in the firm's 'Piccadilly Novel' series. On the whole, his novelists remained loyal to their publisher, although he firmly resisted their attempts to meddle in the business of publishing, and was briskly frank about their profitability. For those whose popularity waned this was too much; Ouida 'never liked' Chatto and Windus (Weedon, 1999). For others his plain manner was a boon; R. L. Stevenson said in October 1884: 'To parody an old Scotch story of servant and master: if you don't know that you have a good author, I know I have a good publisher. Your fair, open and handsome dealings are a good point in my life. (Schneller, 113)' In 1875 Chatto made a deal with Samuel Clemens (Mark Twain) to publish 'The Adventures of Tom Sawyer' on 25 per cent commission. Despite losing an estimated $10,000 through a pre-emptive edition by Belford Brothers, who were Chatto's representatives in Canada, Clemens continued to publish with him. The firm also had a good working relationship with Harper Brothers, enabling them to offer simultaneous publication in the United States and Britain at a time when international copyright did not extend to America. 
A year after his deal with Clemens, Chatto purchased the remainder of Henry George Bohn's stock and copyrights (the Bohn's libraries had previously been sold to George Bell & Sons). This led to an expansion in the range of books published by the firm. They included poetry, criticism, history, and social science books, and a few titles in the arts and sciences. Some reference works had come his way and he published 'Walford's County Families of the United Kingdom'. This extra business led to extending the partnership to Percy Spalding, who gradually took over Chatto's role in the business, and to a move in 1880 to new London offices at 214 Piccadilly. In 1905 Philip Lee-Warner joined the firm as a partner and brought in Sir Israel Gollancz to supervise the 'Kings Classics' and the 'Medieval Library' series. The firm established a line of art books, setting standards for book production. 
In 1909 Windus retired, and three years later Chatto followed suit. At this time one of his employees described him as 'a gentle elderly man with a rolling walk, genially sweet in manner to every member of his staff, and much loved' (Swinnerton, 50). He was below average height, heavily built, and balding but with a bushy beard and a pince-nez. The eldest of his sons followed him into the business and became a nominal partner in the firm in 1893, although his real interests were outdoors. A younger son, Thomas, joined the antiquarian firm of Pickering and Chatto. Chatto was greatly interested in the progress of modern science and astronomy and spent much of his leisure time in this study. As a diversion he played the cello and gardened. He died at his home, Larkrise, Aldenham Road, Radlett, Hertfordshire, on 15 March 1913 and was cremated at Golders Green, Middlesex, on 18 March. 


@@@@@


doc= 47446


Scott, Sir Walter, first baronet (1826-1910), civil engineer and publisher, was born on 17 August 1826 in The Wheatsheaf inn, Abbey Town, Cumberland, the second of six children of Samuel Scott (1791-1833), innkeeper and farmer, and his wife Mary, 'nee' Martin (died 1877). Walter's parents were poor and after his father died, when Walter was seven years old, his education was minimal. At fourteen he was apprenticed to a mason and then found work on the Caledonian Railway. Railway work took him to Newcastle upon Tyne where in 1849 he established his own business as a builder and contractor. He specialized in large-scale contracts, mainly railway and dock construction. On 17 November 1853 he married Ann Brough (1825-1890), the daughter of John Brough, a husbandman. They had six children. 
Scott was engaged to build a printing factory for the Tyne Publishing Company, but the business failed in January 1882. Although Scott had no experience of printing or publishing, in August he appears to have taken over the business in lieu of payment for the factory. He appointed David Gordon, a bookbinder already working for Tyne Publishing, as general manager. Gordon was an excellent choice and gradually extended the publication programme. Tyne's list (mostly giftbooks, but also including a few biographies, a 'Bible', and miscellaneous titles) was kept in print, and a series of reprints of standard texts was introduced. Then came a series of selected editions, the 'Canterbury Poets', and the 'Camelot' series of prose works with Ernest Rhys as general editor. Original publications followed, including works by Bernard Shaw, W. B. Yeats, and George Moore. The first English translations of Ibsen began to appear in 1888. 
Building and contracting continued, with railway work still the mainstay. Scott built the first 'tube' underground railway in London, opened on 4 November 1890 by Albert Edward, prince of Wales. The line ran from King William Street under the Thames to Stockwell. His business interests widened and before he died he had a seat on boards of at least eighteen companies including steelworks, coalmines, and shipyards. His first wife having died in 1890, on 11 January 1892 he married a widow, Helen Meikle ('c'.1850-1923), the daughter of John Dykes, a farmer. Scott was a Conservative councillor in Newcastle from 1881 to 1890 and a JP for Northumberland. He was made a baronet in the king's birthday honours of 1907. He died on holiday at Hotel du Cap Martin, Menton, France, on 8 April 1910 and was buried in Menton on 11 April. He left just over $1,424,000, one of only fifteen truly self-made millionaires in Britain before 1939. 


@@@@@


doc= 47447


Smithers, Leonard Charles (1861-1907), publisher and antiquarian bookseller, was born on 19 December 1861 at 5 Infirmary Road, Sheffield, Yorkshire, one of several children of John Smithers, a dentist, and his wife, Martha, 'nee' Watson. He was reared in Sheffield, where he graduated from Wesley College for the Law in 1884. Having been admitted solicitor of the Supreme Court of Judicature, he was employed for several years by the firm of Messrs Meredith Roberts and Mills of Sheffield. While still a law student he had married Alice Edith Oldham on 11 October 1882; they had two children, a daughter, Lena, who died at the age of two in 1891, and a son, Jack, born in August 1891. 
Although Smithers gained his livelihood for a time as a solicitor, he was far more interested in books and art than in the legal profession. In his spare time he rummaged through the bookstalls and haunted the antiquarian bookshops of Sheffield and its environs, increasingly adept at ferreting out the odd rarity that he could afford. Books of erotica appear to have been his major interest. As his desire to pursue a career in books grew, Smithers came under the influence of the famous world traveller and diplomat Captain Sir Richard Francis Burton, whose fascination with sexual customs of oriental peoples was well known. Smithers was 'a young solicitor with a taste for erotic literature, frankly fascinated by sexual pathology' (F. Brodie, 'The Devil Drives: a Life of Sir Richard Burton', 1967, 319). He subscribed to Burton's unexpurgated edition of 'The Thousand Nights and a Night' when it first appeared in 1885-6; he thereby established a correspondence with the translator of other erotic books such as the 'Kama sutra' (1883) and the 'Ananga Ranga, or, The Hindu Art of Love' (1873, 1885). By 1888 Smithers, with the aid of a young Sheffield printer and book dealer, Harry Sidney Nichols, had established the Erotika Biblion Society, a fictitious organization modelled on Burton's own Kama Shastra Society. Under this imprint, Smithers and Nichols issued several erotic books, one of which was Smithers's translation of the Latin text of the 'Priapeia' (1888). Burton, who showed a great interest in this work, offered to add a poetic translation to Smithers's prose text, a project which was published in October 1890, after Burton's death, in a bowdlerized form demanded by Burton's widow, Lady Burton. The second of their two collaborations, the Smithers-Burton translation of the 'Carmina' of Catullus -- once again 'cleaned up' by Isabel Burton -- appeared in 1894. Despite Lady Burton's insistence on editing her husband's erotic books, Smithers and Nichols were able to gain control of 'The Thousand Nights and a Night', which they brought out in attractive and unexpurgated editions in 1894-5. 
Smithers and Nichols, having established a partnership in a rare book dealership and printing business in Sheffield in the late 1880s, moved their business to London in September 1891, the rare bookshop located at 174 Wardour Street, near Oxford Street, and the printing business located nearby at 10 Dean Street, Soho. Here they continued to issue erotic books under the imprint of the Erotika Biblion Society. Uneasy about Nichols's penchant for bringing out books of hard-core pornography, Smithers severed his partnership with Nichols at the close of 1894, establishing himself in business as a rare book dealer and as a legitimate publisher in quarters above his residential flat in Effingham House, 1 Arundel Street, the Strand, in 1895. As his business prospered, towards the close of 1896, Smithers moved his shop to 4 and 5 Royal Arcade, Old Bond Street, and later to premises at 5 Old Bond Street. 
On his own, Smithers prospered as a publisher -- the renowned bookman Bernard Quaritch toasting him as the 'cleverest' publisher in London at a publishers' dinner in 1897 (O'Sullivan, 117). His love for beautifully bound and illustrated books as well as his excellent taste in book design and typography made him, in the words of one critic, 'the most extraordinary publisher, in some respects, of the nineties, a kind of modern Cellini, who produced some wonderfully finely printed books and was himself just as much a part of the movement as any of its numerous writers' (B. Muddiman, 'The Men of the Nineties', 1920, 41). 
After Oscar Wilde went to prison, Smithers almost single-handedly saved the avant-garde writers and artists from extinction, providing them with both employment and encouragement. When in April 1895 John Lane of the Bodley Head succumbed to the ultimatum of his conservative, morally high-toned authors and dismissed Aubrey Beardsley as art editor of the 'Yellow Book', Smithers came to his rescue. He launched a rival journal, 'The Savoy', appointing Arthur Symons literary editor and Beardsley chief artist. The finest aesthetic journal of the nineties, 'The Savoy' included stories, essays, and poems by Symons, Ernest Dowson, Bernard Shaw, Max Beerbohm, W. B. Yeats, Edmund Gosse, Ford Madox Hueffer (Ford), Joseph Conrad, and Havelock Ellis, as well as artwork by Beardsley, Beerbohm, Joseph Pennell, Charles Conder, Charles H. Shannon, and James McNeill Whistler. 
Smithers declared that he would 'publish anything that the others [London publishers] are afraid of' (O'Sullivan, 113). That audacity enabled him to bring out some of the most important books of the nineties: Symons's 'London Nights' (1895) and 'Amoris victima' (1897), Dowson's 'Verses' (1896) and 'Decorations: in Verse and Prose' (1899), as well as Beardsley's finest illustrated books, for example 'The Lysistrata of Aristophanes' (1896) and Ben Jonson's 'Volpone' (1898), as well as the writings of others whom, like Beardsley, the public had erroneously associated with Wilde and treated as pariahs. As O'Sullivan later wrote, for the 'young poets' Smithers took under his wing, he was 'a benediction. They would have been hard put to it to find another publisher in London' (O'Sullivan, 126). After Wilde was released from prison in 1897, Smithers dared to publish 'The Ballad of Reading Gaol', a work no other publisher would touch. There is little doubt that without Smithers the avant-garde movement of the nineties might have foundered. 
During the later nineties Smithers was a familiar personage among the writers and artists of London, Dieppe, and Paris. He was a distinctive figure, described by Wilde as wearing ties 'delicately fastened with a diamond brooch of the impurest water -- or perhaps wine, as he never touches water: it goes to his head at once. His face, clean-shaven as befits a priest who serves at the altar whose God is literature, is wasted and pale -- not with poetry, but with poets, who, he says, have wrecked his life by insisting on publishing with him. He loves first editions, especially women: little girls are his passion. He is the most learned erotomaniac in Europe. He is also a delightful companion, and a dear fellow, very kind to me. ('The Complete Letters of Oscar Wilde', ed. M. Holland and R. Hart-Davis, 2000, 924)' But as Smithers poured large sums of money into finely produced books such as Honore de Balzac's 'La fille aux yeux d'or' (1896), illustrated by Conder, and Alexander Pope's 'The Rape of the Lock' (1896), decorated by Beardsley, he fell into financial difficulties. Partly as a result of his generosity to impecunious authors such as Wilde and Dowson, Smithers moved steadily downward towards bankruptcy, which occurred on 18 September 1900. 
After the bankruptcy, Smithers, in order to survive as a publisher, began pirating books to which he no longer had legal rights. Having vacated his fine premises in Bond Street (as well as his palatial home at 6A Bedford Square), Smithers set up an office at 14 Clifford's Inn, where he continued to do business under various surreptitious names, such as Hampden & Co. and Burton & Co. Moreover, he became associated with an underground printer, Alfred Cooper, with whom he published under the imprint Wright and Jones. After Wilde's death in November 1900, Smithers and Cooper published many pirated editions of Wilde's work. In 1904, under the imprint the Mathurin Press, Smithers published a pirated edition of Wilde's 'The Harlot's House' with illustrations by Althea Gyles. Also in 1904, Smithers brought out under the imprint Melmoth & Co. an edition of Wilde's 'Salome'. 
During his later years, Smithers's problems were augmented by what George Sims called 'muscular Rheumatism' (Sims, 297), the ravages of which drove him to alcohol and narcotics abuse. Smithers died in poverty at 4 Kent House, Peterborough Road, Fulham, on 19 December 1907. He was buried in an unmarked private grave in Fulham cemetery, London, on 27 December; his net worth at the time of his death was a mere $99. His wife and son survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 47448


Warburg, Fredric John (1898-1981), publisher, was born at 117 Gloucester Terrace, Paddington, London, on 27 November 1898, the only son of the three children of Jewish parents, John Cimon Warburg (1867-1931), amateur photographer, and his wife, Violet Amalia, 'nee' Sichel (1868-1925), who was born in South Yarra, Melbourne, Victoria. Educated first at home by Miss Coolie, a governess, Fredric John was sent at the age of nine to Wilkinson's preparatory school for boys, St Petersburg Place, Bayswater. At thirteen he won a scholarship to Westminster School. While he excelled academically, he described his years there, particularly the first two, as 'among the most hateful... of my life' (Warburg, 'Occupation', 30). As a Jew he felt an outsider and he often took refuge in books. 
In July 1917 Warburg enlisted in the Royal Garrison Artillery and received his commission as second lieutenant in October. Just after his nineteenth birthday he was posted to the 184th siege battery and sent to France, where he served in the Ypres salient until the end of the war. After being demobilized in 1919 he took up his exhibition at Christ Church, Oxford, where he initially read chemistry. Believing that 'words for me... were the stuff out of which I had to manufacture the fabric of my life', he switched to 'literae humaniores' in spring 1920 (Warburg, 'Occupation', 70). He took a second and proceeded MA in 1922. That year, with the recommendation of his brother-in-law, he became an apprentice at the publishing firm of George Routledge & Sons Ltd under the tutelage of the head of Routledge, William Swan Stallybrass, whom Warburg referred to as 'my Master' and the 'greatest scholar-publisher of his day' (ibid., 121). Warburg 'became a publisher by osmotic absorption, sucking in the wisdom of my elders through the sceptical filter of a mind trained in the metaphysical hair-splitting of an Oxford course in Greats' (ibid., 89). 
On 5 July 1922 Warburg married May Nellie Holt (1902-1997), daughter of Hellier Holt. They had three sons but were divorced in 1932. On 21 January 1933 he married the painter and designer Pamela Bryer, 'nee' de Bayou (1905-1978), a widow with whom he had a son who died of a cerebral haemorrhage only twenty-four hours after his birth. After Stallybrass's death in 1931 Warburg became increasingly dissatisfied with his job at Routledge. He attempted innovations, but in 1935 he was dismissed from the company. That year he and Roger Senhouse purchased the publishing firm of Martin Secker, which was in receivership, for $3100. With Senhouse looking after the finances and Warburg concerned with 'practically everything else' (Warburg, 'Occupation', 175), Secker and Warburg, as it was renamed, published the works of Thomas Mann, H. G. Wells, Andre Gide, Louis Mumford, and George Orwell. The firm quickly became known for its radical stance, but while it was anti-fascist, it was also anti-communist and thus in direct opposition to the ethos of many intellectuals of the day, especially those published by Victor Gollancz. When Orwell and Gollancz parted company over 'The Road to Wigan Pier' -- Gollancz was unhappy with Orwell's equivocal socialist beliefs -- it was to Warburg that Orwell took 'Homage to Catalonia'. Thereafter the firm published all of Orwell's work, and the author and the publisher became trusted friends. During the Second World War, Warburg served as a corporal in the St John's Wood company Home Guard; his sergeant was Blair (Orwell). 
In 1951, with its fortunes in difficulty, Secker and Warburg joined the Heinemann Group of publishers. In 1952 Warburg helped to found the magazine 'Encounter' and persuaded Stephen Spender to be its British editor. Intended as an English version of the French 'Preuves', a cultural magazine arising out of the Society for Cultural Freedom (of which Warburg was treasurer), 'Encounter' was first published in October 1953. It later came under fire from Spender and others when it was made public that much of the money to produce the magazine came from the CIA. Warburg defended this by saying that 'in the early fifties the C.I.A. was not by any means the hated organization it is today. Then the Russians appeared hostile... while the Bay of Pigs and the brutalities of the Vietnam involvement lay in the future' (Warburg, 'Occupation', 156). 
Warburg's ability to stand up to the establishment was tested in 1954 when he faced prosecution for publishing a supposedly obscene book, 'The Philanderer' by Stanley Kauffmann. He related his version of events in 'A slight case of obscenity', in the 'New Yorker Magazine' in April 1957. Although he was offered the chance to plead guilty and therefore incur a relatively modest fine with the injunction to destroy all copies of the book, Warburg opted for a much riskier -- and more public -- trial at the Old Bailey. The gamble paid off, and he was acquitted by a unanimous jury of all charges. The presiding justice's summing up became 'famous throughout legal and literary circles' (Warburg, 'All Authors are Equal', 188) for its common-sense approach to a difficult subject. It was printed as an appendix in later editions of 'The Philanderer'. The case opened the way for the changes to the 'Obscene Publications Act', long before the famous 'Lady Chatterley' trial in 1960. 
During the 1950s Secker and Warbug published the works of Simone de Beauvoir, Colette, Alberto Moravia, Gunter Grass, and Angus Wilson, as well as the translation of Pierre Boulle's 'La pont de la riviere Kwai'. William Shirer's 'The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich' (1960) marked the firm's entry into the new decade, which saw the publication of the novels of Melvyn Bragg and Julian Gloag. In 1961 Warburg was appointed a director of the Heinemann Group, a post he held until his retirement in 1971. 
Warburg published two volumes of autobiography: 'An Occupation for Gentlemen' (1959) and 'All Authors are Equal' (1973). His wife, Pamela, was a sustaining force in his life until her death in 1978. Fredric Warburg died of heart failure at University College Hospital, London, on 25 May 1981. 


@@@@@


doc= 47449


Secker, Martin (1882-1978), publisher, was born on 6 April 1882 at 24 Holland Road, Kensington, London, the only son of Edward Henry Klingender ('b'. 1853) and Julia Clark (1856-1906). A legacy of $1000 enabled him to enter publishing under James Eveleigh Nash in 1908. Nash employed him as a reader until 1910, when Klingender established himself as a publisher in the Adelphi, London. On 12 July 1910 he changed his name to Martin Secker by deed poll. He limited himself to non-fiction in his first year of business; the first novel he published, 'The Passionate Elopement' (1911), was also the first by its author, Compton Mackenzie. It had been refused by Nash and others, but went on to sell over 9000 copies in eight years, and Mackenzie later enjoyed further success through Secker with 'Carnival' (1912) and 'Sinister Street' (1913-14). In his 'Notes on Novelists' (1914) Henry James singled out Mackenzie, Hugh Walpole, and Gilbert Cannan as the most promising of the younger practitioners, and Secker published all of them. Sir Rupert Hart-Davis said he had 'fine taste in book design' and that the improvement in the design of general books had its origin with Secker before the First World War. In 1916 the novelist Rafael Sabatini became a partner in the business, which was known as Martin Secker Ltd from 1917. After the First World War Sabatini was replaced by Percival Presland Howe, who remained with Secker until the end. 
By the end of his first decade Secker had also published novels by Oliver Onions (who had previously been published by Nash), Viola Meynell, Francis Brett Young, Norman Douglas, Frank Swinnerton, Arthur Machen, and Rafael Sabatini, and poetry by D. H. Lawrence, Ford Madox Hueffer (later Ford), Emily Dickinson, James Elroy Flecker, T. W. H. Crosland, and Maurice Baring. The first titles to appear in Secker's 'Critical Studies' series were Arthur Ransome's 'Edgar Allan Poe' and 'Oscar Wilde'. Shortly afterwards Ransome transferred his rights in his published books to Charles Granville, and the next day Lord Alfred Douglas caused writs to be issued in respect of Wilde on Ransome and Secker; he later withdrew the writ against Secker, and the two remained friends. Some time in 1911 or 1912 Secker paid two advances to Douglas for a book to be called 'The Wilde myth': the text was set up in type, but the book was never published. 
After Secker had read D. H. Lawrence's 'The White Peacock' in 1911 he approached Lawrence for a collection of short stories. He became his British publisher in 1918 with 'New Poems' (a 'decidedly false title' according to Lawrence), and he took on 'The Rainbow', which Methuen had had to suppress in 1915. Secker continued as Lawrence's publisher until Lawrence's death in 1930. Despite Lawrence's occasional exasperation at Secker's timidity (over, for example, 'Lady Chatterley's Lover'), the relationship was friendly enough, extending to shared holidays in Italy, but never close. Secker may have sensed the distrust which Lawrence expressed in letters to his friends, but not, it has to be hoped, the opinion revealed in such epithets as 'scurvy little swine', 'of course... another Jew', and 'a shifty dog, as they [publishers] all are'. 
After Viola Meynell broke off their engagement in 1919, Secker married Caterina Maria Capellero (1896-1968) on 30 August 1921; they had one son, Adrian, born in 1924. By the mid-1920s Secker was the pre-eminent British publisher of European work in translation of his time, with novels by Thomas Mann ('Buddenbrooks'), Hermann Hesse ('Steppenwolf'), Arnold Zweig ('Sergeant Grischa'), Franz Kafka ('The Castle'), and Leon Feuchtwanger's 'Jew Suss', Secker's greatest financial success, published against Lawrence's advice. Although there were many successes, Secker's credit was overstretched by 1935 and he filed for bankruptcy. In 1936 his company was bought for $3100 by Fredric Warburg and Roger Senhouse; the new company took the name Secker and Warburg, and Secker stayed on for two years in charge of production. Ironically, Secker had signed up the new firm's success, Gabriel Chevallier's 'Clochemerle', before the take-over, and if he could have survived for another six months it would have saved him. Secker then created the Unicorn Press, which published Arthur Symons's book on Aubrey Beardsley, Robert Hichens's 'The Green Carnation', and a collected edition of Oscar Wilde. He bought the Richards Press in 1937, formerly run by Grant Richards, his only close friend in British publishing; among his publications for this press were works by Richard Le Gallienne, James Elroy Flecker, A. E. Housman, and (rather surprisingly) Enid Blyton's Noddy series (jointly with Sampson, Low, Marston). He continued to publish until 1962, when he sold the business to John Baker. 
Secker's first marriage was dissolved in 1938 and on 17 February 1955 he married Sylvia Hope Broadbent ('nee' Gibsone) (1916-1999), a writer. Secker was short, dark, quiet, and invariably cheerful (despite the onset of total blindness in 1971). He died on 6 April 1978 at Bridgefoot, Iver, Buckinghamshire, which had been his home since 1912; his ashes were scattered at Bridgefoot. 


@@@@@


doc= 47450


Richards, (Franklin Thomas) Grant (1872-1948), publisher and writer, was born on 21 October 1872 at University Hall, Hillhead, Partick, Lanarkshire, the first of two children of Franklin Thomas Richards (died 1905), at the time assistant to the chairman of Latin at the University of Glasgow, and his wife, Emily, 'nee' Jerrard. He spent his early years in Oxford, where his father by 1894 had assumed the post of fellow and tutor in Latin at Trinity College. He attended school at Langdale House, Oxford, from 1880, and later the City of London School. Known from his early years as Grant, as a child he remained emotionally distant from his family but was influenced strongly by an uncle, (Charles) Grant Blairfindie Allen (1848-1899), a prolific author of works of fiction and natural science. Grant Allen recognized Richards's interest in publishing and in 1888 arranged a job for him as junior clerk with the wholesale booksellers Hamilton, Adams & Co., and in 1890 obtained him a position with W. T. Stead on the 'Review of Reviews', where for the next six years he was involved with editorial work and reviewing. 
With financial backing from Allen, another uncle, and his father, Richards opened his own publishing house in January 1897 at 9 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London. Under the imprint of Grant Richards, his substantial list that year included the first volumes in Grant Allen's 'Historical Guides' series, 'Paris' and 'Florence', Allen's 'The Evolution of the Idea of God', E. V. Lucas's 'A Book of Verse for Children', and Stead's 'Real Ghost Stories'. In 1898 Richards published works by two of the major authors on which his reputation rests: G. B. Shaw's 'Plays Pleasant and Unpleasant', and A. E. Housman's 'A Shropshire Lad'. He was also married in 1898; he and his first wife, Elisina Richards, had three sons, Gerard, Geoffrey, and Charles, and a daughter, Gioia. Richards remained Housman's publisher throughout the rest of his career, but more commonly authors published a few books with his firm and then moved on to more prominent houses; G. B. Shaw, G. K. Chesterton, Alfred Noyes, John Masefield, Hector H. Munro (Saki), Arnold Bennett, and Maurice Baring were of this number. Nevertheless, Richards's inspiration, energy, and taste served in identifying rising or under-appreciated writers of fiction and poetry (such as Samuel Butler, whose 'The Way of All Flesh' he published in 1903), in producing expensive multi-volume collected works of Shakespeare and Jane Austen, and in initiating series including the 'World's Classics' and the 'Dumpy Books for Children' (which included Helen Bannerman's now infamous 'Story of Little Black Sambo' in 1899). He was particularly attentive to the design of his books, many of which featured a distinctive fleuron on the title-page. 
Richards's move in 1902 into larger London offices at 48 Leicester Square was a sign of his financial overreach, which led, in April 1905, to bankruptcy. Undaunted, he reorganized the firm, adding to his imprint the initial of his wife's name (trading as E. Grant Richards), and moving later that year to smaller offices at 7 Carlton Street. In 1908 the firm reverted to Richards's name and moved to 8 St Martin's Street. In the ensuing two decades Richards honed his already sharp eye for authors. In 1914, after nine years of sporadic negotiation with James Joyce over the blunt language of some of his short stories, Richards published 'Dubliners', and while declining Joyce's 'A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man', followed it with Joyce's play 'Exiles' in 1918. A critical and financial success despite similarly risque allusions was Thomas Burke's collection of stories about London's Chinatown, 'Limehouse Nights' (1916). Alec Waugh's revelatory novel of public-school life, 'The Loom of Youth' (1917), was a further success which led to his publication of six further books with Richards. Other authors of critical note that Richards published during these years included Osbert and Sacheverell Sitwell, Eden Phillpotts, and T. Sturge Moore. He published his own novel 'Caviare' in 1912, following it with seven other novels. In 1917 he began a series of distinctive advertisements in the form of chatty columns in the 'Times Literary Supplement'. 
Richards moved from London to Cookham Dean, Berkshire, after his bankruptcy, commuting via train to London. His first marriage ended in divorce in 1914, and on 2 July 1915 he married Maria Magdalena de Csanady ('b'. 1889/90), a widow, and the daughter of Emil Csanady, an officer in the Hungarian army. He entertained friends and authors at Sunday night dinner parties, spent a good deal of time travelling in France, and recorded his appreciation for the Riviera in 'The Coast of Pleasure' (1928). The monocle that he wore in his right eye for most of his adult life -- along with his taste in clothing, food, and wine -- manifested the social grace for which he was known, and which for him was inextricable from the conduct of business. 
Financial mismanagement led Richards for the second time into bankruptcy in 1926. The firm was renamed the Richards Press; Richards himself continued partial involvement for the next few years, but gradually left publishing to write his desultory but engaging memoirs 'Memories of a Misspent Youth, 1872-1896' (1932), 'Author Hunting by an Old Literary Sportsman: Memories of Years Spent Mainly in Publishing, 1897-1925' (1934), and 'Housman, 1897-1936' (1942). He sold his home in Cookham Dean in 1927, and lived at several addresses in London until moving to Moor Park, Surrey, in 1946. He died in Monte Carlo following a long illness on 24 February 1948; his wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 47451


Duckworth, Gerald L'Etang (1870-1937), publisher, was born on 29 October 1870, probably in London, five weeks after the death of his father, Herbert Duckworth (1833-1870). Herbert was a barrister whose family were landed gentry from the county of Somerset. His mother, Julia, 'nee' Jackson (1846-1895), had aristocratic connections and her aunts included Julia Margaret Cameron, the well-known photographer, and Sarah Prinsep, mother of the painter Valentine Prinsep. Gerald was his mother's favourite, a delicate and petted child who liked to write to her in baby language. His elder brother, George Herbert Duckworth (1868-1934), was at one time private secretary to Austen Chamberlain and was knighted in 1927; he married Lady Margaret Herbert (1870-1958), daughter of the fourth earl of Carnarvon, with whom he had three sons. His sister Stella (1869-1897) died just three months after marrying John Waller Hills (died 1938). 
Gerald's mother remarried in 1878. Her new husband, Leslie Stephen, was to become well known through his editorship of the 'Dictionary of National Biography' (1882-91). Together Leslie and Julia had four children, two boys, Thoby (1880-1906) and Adrian (1883-1948), and two girls, Vanessa Bell (1879-1961) and Virginia Woolf (1882-1941). Over the years the family divided their time between 22 Hyde Park Gate in London, and Talland House at St Ives in Cornwall. Gerald did not take kindly to his stepbrothers and stepsisters and was not above telling tales on the Stephen children, mocking them with his sneering, teasing, and treacherous laughter. Virginia Woolf's diaries suggest that both he and his brother sexually molested her over a period of years, starting when she was just six years old (Schulkind). 
Duckworth, like his brother and stepfather, was educated at Eton College and then went on to Clare College, Cambridge, but he was not given to hard work, preferring instead the pleasures of the stomach and the delights of London nightlife. Virginia Woolf likened him to 'a pampered overfed pug dog with white hair, hardly a gleam of life, let alone intelligence in his eye' and 'with no opinions, merely a seaweed drift in the prevailing current' (King, 242). 
In 1898 Duckworth decided to go into publishing, apparently believing it to be an occupation suitable for a gentleman. Gerald Duckworth & Co. was established at Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, and A. R. Waller, a literary adviser and bookman, left the firm of J. M. Dent to join the company. The first list included Leslie Stephen's Ford lectures, 'English Literature and Society in the Eighteenth Century' (1898); a translation of August Strindberg's 'Der Fater' ('The Father', 1899); Henry James's 'In the Cage' (1898); and 'Jocelyn' (1898) by the unknown John Sinjohn, an early pseudonym of John Galsworthy. 
It was at Waller's instigation that Galsworthy's fiction was published by Duckworth, though Gerald, a lifelong friend of the author, did turn down 'The Man of Property' (1906) -- the first of the novels that were to become 'The Forsyte Saga' (1922) -- with the words 'Stick to plays, my man, stick to plays'. Duckworth published all of Galsworthy's plays over a period of twenty years from 1909, and in 1929 produced a limited omnibus edition. Much to his horror, Galsworthy was required to sign all 1250 copies. On being told however that he would receive a royalty of 15's'. 9died on each copy, he placed his watch on the table and said: 'It will be interesting to see how long it takes me to earn $984 7's'. 6died' (Beare, 103-7). 
Despite Virginia Woolf's antipathy to her stepbrother, it was Duckworth & Co. that published her first two novels. She rewrote 'The Voyage Out' several times before submitting it, but Edward Garnett, who had joined the company in 1901 as a reader, was enthusiastic, and the book was published in 1915. Her second book, 'Night and Day', came out in 1919 and Woolf recorded her feelings, saying that 'I thought of my novel destined to be pawed and snored over by him... I don't like the Club man's view of literature... [yet] I can't think of stout smooth Gerald smoking a cigar over my pages without a smile. (King, 243)' On 2 March 1921 Duckworth married Cecil Alice Scott-Chad ('b'. 1891/2), the daughter of Charles Scott-Chad, a barrister. Virginia Woolf commented that he would either marry 'an older woman for money or a younger, sexually inexperienced woman for the same purpose' (King, 290). The marriage proved childless. Duckworth's publishing venture, however, prospered. Edward Garnett, considered by many to be the greatest reader of his time, stayed for nearly twenty years. He brought a number of authors to the firm including W. H. Hudson, Charles M. Doughty, and D. H. Lawrence. He initiated the 'Popular Library of Art' series (1902) which included volumes on D. G. Rossetti, and the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood, and the 'Studies in Theology' series (1907). 
Thomas Balston joined the company in 1921 and became a partner in 1923. His interest in avant-garde literature was reflected in the firm's publications of Evelyn Waugh and practically everything produced by Edith, Osbert, and Sacheverell Sitwell. He left Duckworth ten years later having never forgiven the company for the loss of Waugh's 'Decline and Fall' which had happened while he was away on holiday. The following year, 1924, the firm became a limited company. 
Anthony Powell joined as literary editor in 1926 and in his novel 'What's become of Waring?' (1939) the publishing firm of Judkins and Judkins is based on Duckworth's. Powell said that Gerald's interest in books, as far as reading was concerned, 'was as slender as that of any man I have ever encountered'. As for his appearance, he was at this time 'a big, burly man with a slight grey moustache, small baleful eyes behind steel spectacles, a vaguely dissatisfied air and he moved gloomily through the office, a haze of port-fumes and stale cigar-smoke in his wake' (Garnett, 198). 
Duckworth died on 28 September 1937 while on holiday in Milan. Apart from his publishing interests he was honorary secretary of the Savile Club and was remembered for his considerable zest and skill at billiards. E. Phillips Oppenheim, a popular fiction writer, described Duckworth as having a 'severe smile and a rather school mastery air which disappeared suddenly when he heard a familiar voice' (Phillips Oppenheim, 195). Of the few people who had a good word for him, Leonard Woolf said that he had found him to be 'a kindly, uncensorious man' (Garnett, 198). His publishing company continued to prosper and in 1969 it moved to a spacious Victorian building in Camden Town which was once owned by the piano makers Collard and Collard. It successfully celebrated its centenary in 1998. 


@@@@@


doc= 47453


Arnold, Edward Augustus (1857-1942), publisher, was born on 15 July 1857 at Lemon Street, Kenwyn, Truro, Cornwall, the only child of Edward Penrose Arnold (1827-1878), inspector of schools, and Caroline Augusta, 'nee' Orlebar (1831-1860) of Hinwick, Bedfordshire. His grandfather was Dr Thomas Arnold (1795-1842) and one of his uncles was Matthew Arnold (1822-1888). He was educated at Eton College and Hertford College, Oxford. 
In 1883 Arnold joined the publishing firm of Richard Bentley, simultaneously editing the magazine 'Imperial Federation'. In 1886 Arnold persuaded John Murray to publish a new magazine; he was appointed editor and the first issue of 'Murray's Magazine' was published in 1887. In 1888 he married Minnie Wakefield (died 1924), daughter of W. H. Wakefield of Sedgwick House, Kendal. They had three daughters. In 1889 he courteously rejected Hardy's 'Tess of the d'Urbervilles' because it contained 'immoral situations' and, having been declined a partnership at John Murray, he set up his own publishing business on 1 January 1890 as Mr Edward Arnold, publisher, at 18 Warwick Square, London. In April he published his first book, Lynch's 'Egyptian Sketches'; 1500 copies were printed and a reprint was required for November. 
In the first two years Arnold published fifteen general and sixteen educational books, commissioning and overseeing their production and promotion himself. In 1891 he moved to larger premises at 37 Bedford Street, and over the next two years Arnold published twenty-six general and forty educational books. His most influential book in that period was Viscount Milner's 'England in Egypt' (1892), the thirteenth and last edition being published in 1920. 
In 1894 Arnold took into partnership A. L. Mumm, who invested $7000. Although largely a sleeping partner, Mumm introduced many important exploration and mountaineering books, from D. W. Freshfield's 'The Exploration of the Caucasus' (1896) to 'The Epic of Everest' by Sir Francis Younghusband (1926). In 1895 Arnold established a New York office to protect his copyrights in the United States. It was closed in 1898 as Arnold then began licensing some of his titles to New York publishers. 
By 1900 Arnold, working largely alone, had published some 250 general and 250 educational books. The twenty or so works of fiction included one best-seller -- Mary Cholmondley's 'Red Pottage' (1899), which had thirteen impressions in two years -- and J. Meade Faulkner's classic 'Moonfleet' (1898), followed by 'The Nebuly Coat' (1903). Although not known in the office for his sense of humour, Arnold produced a number of humorous books, including Hilaire Belloc's 'More Beasts' (1897), 'The Modern Traveller' (1898), and 'A Moral Alphabet' (1899), and Harry Graham's 'Ruthless Rhymes for Heartless Homes', published in 1899 and still in print more than 100 years later. 
By 1902 Arnold's business had again outgrown his premises. During 1903-4 he personally supervised the design and building of a new office and warehouse -- probably the first in London built as a publishing house. The firm moved into 41-3 Maddox Street, Mayfair, in 1904. All this extra activity did not diminish Arnold's output. Up to 1914 he continued to publish over 100 books a year -- mainly travel, memoirs, politics, and a number of notable works of fiction, including M. R. James's 'Ghost Stories of an Antiquary' and 'More Ghost Stories of an Antiquary' (1911), and Leonard Woolf's 'The Village in the Jungle' (1913) and 'The Wise Virgins' (1914). In 1908 Arnold published E. M. Forster's third novel, 'A Room with a View'. Forster was attracted to Arnold partly because of more generous royalties, in some cases up to 25 per cent, but also because Arnold showed a keen critical interest in Forster's work. At Arnold's urging, Forster wrote 'Howards End', published in 1910. Forster's great novel 'A Passage to India' was published in 1924, when Arnold also took over Forster's first two novels from Blackwood, 'Where Angels Fear to Tread' (1905) and 'The Longest Journey' (1907). 
During the First World War, Arnold's output decreased, but several books concerning the war were published, such as H. Ingleby's 'A Zeppelin Raid in West Norfolk' and H. S. Souttar's 'A Surgeon in Belgium', both in 1915. He also consolidated his medical list with a number of books which became standard works. Two from this period which continue today as classic texts are Comyns Berkeley's 'Ten Teachers: Midwifery' (1917), in later editions retitled 'Obstetrics', and 'Ten Teachers: Diseases of Women' (1919), now retitled 'Gynaecology'. In 1921 Arnold took into partnership B. W. Fagan, for the university arts list and school books, and the science editor F. P. Dunn. Arnold remained in charge of memoirs, books on travel, religion, field sports, and the medicine list. In 1926 Mumm withdrew from the partnership, making a profit of $3742 on his original $7000 investment. 
When Arnold retired at the end of 1930, his company had 1500 titles in print, including about 600 school books; many remained in print, often with numerous new editions, for periods from twenty to seventy years. Fagan and Dunn paid $44,000 for Arnold's share of the partnership, not including the building, which Arnold owned personally. During his forty years as a publisher, Arnold was active in trade affairs, serving for several years on the Publishers' Association council, and as president in 1928-9. Although substantial and containing many important and long-lasting titles in many fields, Arnold's list was not comparable in size with some of his contemporaries' because, according to one obituary, it was Arnold's belief that 'a publisher should not publish more books than the number which he, like a faithful midwife, could treat as living entities' ('The Bookseller'). 
On 1 October 1930 Arnold married Christina Frances Azeline Burland ('b'. 1900/01), his first wife having died in 1924. Edward Arnold clearly followed Dr Thomas Arnold's ethic, 'Work -- not work at this or that -- but Work!' Nevertheless, he also loved travelling and outdoor pursuits, especially fishing. In 1892 he almost drowned while skating with his cousin H. O. Arnold-Foster on Virginia Water. Arnold fell through the ice. Arnold-Foster, attempting to rescue him, also fell through; he managed to get himself out but could not reach Arnold even with a ladder and ropes. Arnold-Foster offered a reward to any young lad who could get a rope to Arnold; one finally succeeded and they got him out just in time. Arnold-Foster and the boy were awarded Royal Humane Society medals for their bravery. Edward Arnold died at his home, Lilybrook, Little Knowle, Budleigh Salterton, Devon, on 6 November 1942. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 47454


Unwin, Thomas Fisher (1848-1935), publisher, was born on 24 January 1848 at 33 Lowgate Hill, London, the son of Jacob Unwin (1802-1855), and his wife, Isobel, 'nee' Hall. He was born into a family of printers and publishers: his father had founded the Gresham Press, and his mother was from the Miller family, who had published the 'Cheap Magazine'. He attended the City of London School, and in 1892 married Jane Cobden (1851-1947) ['see 'Unwin, (Emma) Jane Catherine Cobden], daughter of the politician Richard Cobden. 
After serving with Jackson, Walford, and Hodder, Unwin started his own London business in 1882 in Holborn Viaduct, buying Marshall, Japp & Co. for $1000. He established himself at 11 Paternoster Building in 1883. Annual profits averaged between $600 and $700 until about 1900, and the firm moved to Adelphi Terrace in 1905. By 1912 the business had expanded so much that it was taking in profits of $6000, and in 1920 it became a company. Unwin was considered generous to unknown writers but was notorious for refusing to increase the pay of those whose careers took off, and so although he published some of the most experimental writers of the period, many of them eventually left Unwin when they became famous: H. G. Wells, John Galsworthy, Somerset Maugham, Joseph Conrad, George Moore, and Ford Madox Ford. Unwin also first published the work of several aesthete poets and playwrights, including John Davidson, May Crommelin, Graham Rosamund Tomson, and Katharine Tynan. The risk of publishing unknown writers was balanced by the republishing of popular writers; Unwin handled colonial editions for publishers and acted as author's agent, serializing fiction for publication in the United States, for a 10 per cent commission. 
What distinguished the firm of Unwin was its publication of many series and its launching of new writers. Series ranged widely in subject from popular literature (prose and poetry), to history, to current politics and social issues of the day. The 'Pseudonym Library' was a series of eighteen-pence books, stiff-covered and paper-bound, and its writers included John Oliver Hobbes (Pearl Craigie), John Buchan, Mrs Humphry Ward, Edith Nesbit Bland, William Henry Hudson, Mark Rutherford (William Hale White), Vernon Lee (Violet Paget), Ouida (Louise de La Ramee), and Ethel M. Dell. Never one to flinch from controversy, Unwin also published the first novel of Olive Schreiner, 'Trooper Peter Halket of Mashonaland' (1897), which attacked the British South Africa Company, and accused Cecil Rhodes of murdering Matabele (Ndebele) envoys. 
The 'Story of the Nations Library', to which distinguished historians contributed, reflected Unwin's interests in foreign writers, liberalism, free trade, international affairs, and in combating the persecution of minorities. These books also reflected his wife's interests in abolition and suffrage. He published historical and political subjects by controversial writers such as Wilfrid Scawen Blunt. Unwin, who was pro-Boer, saw through publication the 'Memoirs' (1902) of former South African President Stephanus Kruger. He also supported the Aborigines Protection Society, publishing E. D. Morel's 'Red Rubber' (1906, 1907). His press also issued Annie Besant's 'Autobiography' (1893), Freud's 'The Psychopathology of Everyday Life' (1914) and 'Wit and its Relation to the Unconscious' (1916), works by Karl Besant, and translations of Russian novels by Constance Garnett. 
Many of Unwin's interests are evident from his publishing lists, but they are also seen in his many memberships and affiliations. He was not only a joint founder of the Publishers' Association (1896) but he was also joint founder and treasurer of the Friends of Russian Freedom and a member of the South African Conciliation Committee. He served both as treasurer of the library committee and chair of the political and economic circle for the National Liberal Club; he was also vice-president of the West Sussex Liberal Association, and governor of Dunford House (Cobden Memorial). His commitment to public service can been seen, too, in his founding of the Johnson Club, his treasurership of the Cobden Club, and his serving at various points as governor of Johnson House, the London School of Economics, and Carlyle House. 
By 1917 Unwin's firm had published twenty-seven series, including the 'Autonym Library', 'Independent Novels', the 'Welsh Library', the 'Idle Hours' series, the 'Children's Library', and the 'Literary History' series. Unwin's 'First Novel' series included 'Whose Body?' by Dorothy L. Sayers (1912). The 'New Irish Library', co-published with Sealy, Bryers, and Walker in Dublin, published works by W. B. Yeats. The 'Reformer's Bookshelf' series issued 'The Political Writings of Richard Cobden', and Edward Carpenter's controversial 'Towards Democracy' (1892). The 'Mermaid' series reprinted rare Jacobean and Restoration plays in new scholarly editions costing half a crown; participating editors included Havelock Ellis (general editor), J. A. Symonds, A. C. Swinburne, Ernest Rhys, Edmund Gosse, Herbert Horne, and Arthur Symons. 
The firm's periodicals also exemplify the internationalism that Unwin promoted in line with his liberalism and interest in world politics: 'Revue Bleue', 'Independent Review' (October 1903 to March 1907), and 'Compolis: an International Review' (1896-8). The latter was edited by F. Ortmans and featured such writers as Andrew Lang, W. Lebknecht (a close friend of Marx and Engels), G. B. Shaw, Henry James, Yeats, Conrad, George Gissing, Rudyard Kipling, George Meredith, Anatole France, Israel Zangwill, Tolstoy, and Edmund Gosse. 
Unwin himself was tall and upright in bearing; family members commented on his distinguished stature and characteristic erect carriage, and he was described by his nephew Philip Unwin variously as looking 'as if his neck and torso were encased in plaster' (P. Unwin, 39), and looking 'like a horse with a bearing rein' (ibid., 3). His irascible personality was well known in the publishing business, as were his sometimes eccentric habits, such as spitting in public. Although he was not really athletic, he had a keen interest in mountaineering, and once climbed the Matterhorn. His dress was consistent throughout his life, including his floppy, yellow bow-tie; even in old age he sported a full beard, and his piercing blue eyes lost none of their clarity. Unfortunately his publishing business lacked his vigorous stamina, and its final years were marked by financial decline. In 1926 Unwin retired to his Sussex home, and the firm merged with Ernest Benn Ltd. Unwin died of bronchitis on 6 February 1935 at his home, Oatscroft, Heyshott Road, Midhurst, Sussex. 


@@@@@


doc= 47455


Tilt, Charles (1797-1861), bookseller and publisher, was born in June 1797, the son of William Tilt, a confectioner of St Paul's Churchyard, London, and his wife, Mary. It is thought that the Tilt family originated in Worcestershire and had a connection with the family of Oliver Cromwell. Charles Tilt attended boarding-schools outside London, but after his father's death was apprenticed by his mother at fourteen to Mr Whitehead, a bookseller and stationer at Portsea, Hampshire. He returned to London in January 1817 and worked intermittently at Hatchards and other bookselling businesses, and from 1818 to 1819 at Longman & Co., where his brother Henry (died 1829) was also probably, by that time, an employee. He returned to Hatchards in April 1820 and continued there until September 1826. 
On 9 October of that year Tilt started his own extremely lucrative publishing and bookselling business at 86 Fleet Street, at the corner of St Bride's Passage or Avenue, where he remained until 1840. He shrewdly marketed richly illustrated books in a variety of formats appropriate for all classes. He frequently used the extensive side windows of his shop to display his offerings, which were often so popularly received that railings were required to hold back the crowds who came to view them, and their availability was reported in newspapers such as 'The Times'. Besides gift books, annuals, travel books, and children's literature, Tilt published novelty items such as an almanac which would fit neatly into the top of a man's hat, and a series, 'Tilt's Miniature Classics', which was sold with a satin or rosewood cabinet and a glass door and lock. On 16 December 1828 Tilt married Jane May (died 1858) of Reading; they had one daughter, also named Jane May, who married the physical chemist John Hall Gladstone (1827-1902). 
Like many in his trade, Tilt was regularly involved in copyright and remuneration disputes with authors, artists, editors, and his fellow publishers. Thomas Hood, George Cruikshank, William Makepeace Thackeray, J. M. W. Turner, and Mary Eliza Lamb were among those who were unhappy with Tilt's treatment of them at one time or another, but these disagreements were nearly always resolved to Tilt's benefit, while he maintained the persona of a genial commonsensical tradesman. His wealth from the 1830s onwards is often mentioned by contemporaries. The greater part of his success derived from his virtual monopoly of the early lithography market, which he achieved by importing at low cost sheets of elaborate designs from the continent. He was also well known for purchasing the rights to previously published prints by famous artists after copyright had lapsed, having them re-engraved on steel plates on a smaller scale by other less well-known artists, and selling the newer versions at comparatively inexpensive rates while retaining the original and usually much more famous artists' names on the new plates. J. M. W. Turner complained before the lord mayor of London about such treatment in regard to some illustrations that he completed for some of Walter Scott's works. But the account of the hearing in 'The Times' of 16 October 1833 gives Tilt the last word: 'Oh, Mr. Turner, you ought to let your brother artists have a little slice. (Laughter).' 
Tilt's collaborations with George Cruikshank and Thomas Hood were the most significant over the course of his career. Hood knew Tilt by at least 1827, when the author's mother-in-law Charlotte Reynolds published through Tilt 'Mrs. Leslie and her Grandchildren' under the 'nom de plume' Mrs. Hamerton. Tilt published the second volume of 'Hood's Whims and Oddities' (November 1827), Hood's 'The Epping Hunt' with illustrations by Cruikshank (September 1829), and an edition of his 'Dream of Eugene Aram' (November 1831). Tilt also published four volumes of Hood's popular 'Comic Annual', but after an intense quarrel -- probably over Tilt's unwillingness to publish Hood's novel 'Tylney Hall' -- the relationship ended with the publication in November 1833 of the 1834 'Comic Annual'. Hood died twelve years later, after feuding with several other publishers and persisting in his ill will towards Tilt. 
The association with Cruikshank also began as early as 1827, but took on a more significant character with the publication of Cruikshank's nine-part 'My Sketch Book' (1833-6) and his 'Comic Almanack' (1834-52), which was edited for its first four years by James Henry Vizetelly (Rigdum Funnidos). Along with a fictional co-publisher (Mustapha Syried [must-have-as-a-read] of Constantinople) Tilt issued 'The Loving Ballad of Lord Bateman' (1839) with famous illustrations by Cruikshank, and text almost certainly by Charles Dickens but long associated with Thackeray, who may have contributed the bogus scholarly apparatus to the book. Until Tilt's death he and his successors were Cruikshank's primary publishers, especially when the artist wanted complete control of projects such as 'My Sketch Book' and the later 'Omnibus' (May 1841-January 1842), edited by Laman Blanchard with contributions by Frederick Marryat, Horace Mayhew, and Thackeray. 
In 1840 Tilt chose from his employees a junior partner, David Bogue (1807/8-1856), who in 1843 assumed, according to Tilt's plan, sole ownership of the firm. The firm's imprint from late 1840 until 1843 was Tilt and Bogue, but then became simply David Bogue or D. Bogue. Tilt retired from publishing to his house at Clapham Rise and then travelled extensively on the continent and in the Middle East, writing for children a popular account of one trip: 'The Boat and the Caravan: a Family Tour through Egypt and Syria' (1847). 
After 1848 there were fewer trips abroad and Tilt now divided his time between Brighton, London, and Bath, where he was residing at the time of his wife's death in Southsea, Hampshire, on 27 September 1858. At the untimely death of his successor Bogue in November 1856, Tilt served as executor of his estate. Tilt was a short man, 'with dark curly hair, bright eyes and a square jaw' (Gladstone). He remained active in various philanthropic activities in Bath until his death from heart disease at his home, 28 Pembridge Gardens, Bayswater, London, on 28 September 1861, leaving Bogue's estate still not entirely settled. 


@@@@@


doc= 47457


Newby, Thomas Cautley (1797-1882), publisher and printer, was born in Cambridge, where he was baptized on 26 December 1797, the fifth son of John Newby (1760-1828), a coal merchant and clerk to the chapel of Trinity College, Cambridge, and his wife, Anne. In 1821 he acquired the business of the printer and bookseller John Rackham at Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk, where he married Anne Elizabeth Craig, with whom he had at least two daughters and one son. By 1843 he had offices in London at 65 Mortimer Street, Cavendish Square, a year later at 72 Mortimer Street, and from 1849 to March 1874 at 30 Welbeck Street, Cavendish Square. About two-thirds of the titles he published were fiction, the rest were non-fiction works such as history, biography, memoirs, travel accounts, translations, and a few works of poetry, drama, and music. 
Newby has won literary notoriety as the publisher of first novels by Emily and Anne Bronte (Ellis Bell and Acton Bell), 'Wuthering Heights' and 'Agnes Grey', in a single three-volume edition of December 1847. Newby first asked for a deposit of $50 to cover costs of publication, but kept the corrected proofs until the successful appearance of Charlotte Bronte's (Currer Bell's) 'Jane Eyre', published by Smith Elder in October 1847. Newby then printed fewer than the agreed number of Emily's and Anne's novels and left most errors uncorrected. When Anne sent him her second novel, 'The Tenant of Wildfell Hall' (1848), Newby offered it to Harper Brothers of New York for publication in America, implying it was by Currer Bell. Charlotte Bronte's biographer Elizabeth Gaskell had to be restrained from exposing Newby as a warning to other writers, initially naming him as one of the 'three people I want to libel'. She referred to him as 'the mean publisher to be gibbetted' ('Letters of Mrs Gaskell', 418). 
In 1847 Newby also published Anthony Trollope's first novel, 'The Macdermots of Ballycloran', after holding the manuscript for over a year. Newby had agreed to divide the profits after costs but evidently printed only enough copies to reimburse himself and barely advertised, so Trollope got nothing. 
Two other well-known writers lost money from Newby's publishing of their first novels: Eliza Lynn Linton with 'Azeth, the Egyptian' (1847) and Charlotte Riddell with 'Zuriel's Grandchild' (1855). On occasion Newby verged on plagiarism. In 1844 he published William North's 'Anti-Coningsby, or, The New Generation Grown Old. By an Embryo M. P.', a satire on Benjamin Disraeli's 'Coningsby, or, The New Generation' (1844) and in 1845 North's 'The Impostor, or, Born without a Conscience: by the Author of 'Anti-Coningsby''. After publication of George Eliot's highly lauded 'Adam Bede' (1859), Newby advertised 'Adam Bede, Junior: a Sequel', to be published in 1859, causing an angry exchange of letters in 'The Times': G. H. Lewes declared that Eliot was not the first to suffer from Newby's method of trading, but Newby blithely asserted his innocence with respect to the two Brontes. 
In spite of shifty practices, Newby satisfied a legion of minor writers who repeatedly offered him manuscripts; for example, he published about twenty-two novels by [Mrs?] Robert Mackenzie Daniel, about fourteen novels by George Payne Rainsford James ('Leonora d'Orco', 1857, became a best-seller), a number of sea romances by Francis Claudius Armstrong, and historical romances by Louis Alexis Chamerovzow. In non-fiction he responded astutely to contemporary interest in great men, foreign countries, the occult, self-help, scientific enquiry, the military, religion, sport, and the arts. 
Thomas Cautley Newby died on 14 June 1882 at his daughter's home, 12 Westbourne Gardens, Folkestone, Kent, aged eighty-four; he was survived by a daughter, the next of kin, Marion Garling. He was buried at St Peter's Church, Southborough, Kent. 


@@@@@


doc= 47459


Sir (John) Ernest Hodder-Williams (1876-1927), publisher, was born on 16 September 1876 at Bromley, Kent, the eldest of seven children of John T. Williams (1844-1931) and Mary Frances (1856-1931), only child of Matthew Henry and Frances Hodder. His father, nephew of Sir George Williams, founder of the YMCA, came from Dorset. John Ernest was given the third baptismal name Hodder and was known as Ernest. Williams attended Quernmore School, Bromley, and from 1889 to 1891 the City of London School. He spent a year in Paris and Berlin and attended the English course at University College, London, for one year before joining Hodder and Stoughton in 1894 under the tutelage of W. R. Nicoll. In 1901 he toured North America and studied its book trade. On 4 October 1902 he was made a partner of Hodder and Stoughton, and on 9 October he married Ethel (1872-1918), publisher's reader and younger daughter of John George Oddy JP, in Holt United Free Methodist Church, Norfolk; Matthew Hodder and John Williams provided a special train to carry guests from London. They had no children. 


@@@@@


doc= 47460


Chapman, Edward (1804-1880), bookseller and publisher, was one of the nine children in a family of six sons and three daughters of Thomas Chapman (1771-1833), a Richmond solicitor. In 1830 he went into business with William Hall (1800-1847) as a bookseller and small publisher, leasing double-windowed premises at 186 Strand, London. On 6 June 1830 they published the first number of a sixpenny compendium, 'Chat of the Week'; over the next five years they ventured cautiously into other, often joint, ventures. One evening in December 1833 a customer purchased a copy of the new 'Monthly Magazine' from Hall; the unremarkable event had important consequences for the firm two years later, when they were looking for a writer to supply text accompanying comic plates by the artist Robert Seymour. Having ascertained from Charles Whitehead, recently appointed editor of their new monthly 'Library of Fiction', the real name of Boz, the author of some admired sketches published in various London periodicals, they decided to ask Charles Dickens to pen the copy. When William Hall called upon Dickens on 10 February 1836, the author recognized the bookseller from their former transaction, and feeling that the coincidence was a sign, Dickens agreed to the general terms of Hall's proposal for 'The Pickwick Papers'. Of the many changes made in the course of publishing the novel, Chapman proudly took credit for the one that transformed the hero from the 'long, thin man' Seymour had originally drawn to 'a fat old beau' like a Richmond friend of Chapman 'who would wear, in spite of the ladies' protests, drab tights and black gaiters' (Forster, 1.91). From that point, Dickens was associated with, and to a large extent made the fortune of, Chapman and Hall, even though he broke with the firm in so far as new fiction was concerned in 1844, and did not return fully until 1859. 
Dickens became very friendly with Chapman's family, including his eldest brother Thomas (1800-1895), surveyor and land agent, and his sisters. He had more difficulty getting on with another brother, William (1802-1874), a solicitor in Richmond who served as legal counsel for the firm and in August 1841 drafted terms for Dickens's next serial so stringent and demeaning that Dickens threatened to quit. The Dickenses were also friends with 'Little Hall and his little wife' ('Letters', 1.358), on whose wedding Dickens based 'The Nice Little Couple' in 'Sketches of Young Couples' (1840). The bachelor friend who enviously observes the happiness of the newly-weds 'was Edward Chapman himself', according to Arthur Waugh (Waugh, 6). Shortly afterwards, while visiting his uncle, Michael Chapman, in Hitchin, Hertfordshire, Chapman saw over the garden wall the younger daughter of the next-door neighbour, a strict Quaker family, and fell in love with her. When communication was forbidden by her parents and elders of the society, Chapman bored a hole through an upstairs wall and into the neighbours' spare room through which he passed notes and whispers. Eventually Mary Whiting ('b'. 'c'.1820), spirited enough to defy authority, was read out of the society. She then travelled to a brother's house in Leeds, where she and Chapman were married on 22 September 1841. A year later the couple moved into a commodious house standing back from the Old Brompton Road, which they called Clareville Cottage and where they enjoyed a happy marriage. They had at least two daughters, Meta and Florence. 
By the end of its run in November 1837, 'Pickwick' was a triumphant financial as well as literary success. Recycling their capital monthly, Chapman and Hall made $14,000 from a novel that, had it been published in three volumes, might have yielded some hundreds. Dickens, whose remuneration was increased often during the serial run, was so pleased by the generous nature of his publishers that he playfully nominated them 'my periodical publishers, until I am advertised in the daily papers, as having been compressed into my last edition -- one volume, boards, with brass plates' ('Letters', 1.189). It was not easy being Dickens's publisher during his phenomenally swift rise, however. John Forster, a prosperous lawyer and literary critic, became the firm's literary adviser, as well as Dickens's, and managed, with Edward Chapman's good-natured financial collaboration, to buy out the projects Dickens had contracted with other publishers. Eventually the debts incurred by the firm on Dickens's behalf had to be repaid; Hall, the brisk businessman, hinted to Dickens in June 1843 that a reimbursement clause in the agreement of 7 September 1841 for 'Martin Chuzzlewit' (1843-4) might have to be invoked. Furious, Dickens turned in future to his printers, Bradbury and Evans. However, since Chapman and Hall shared in the copyrights of most of Dickens's previous books, they continued to sell his early works and, from 1847, collected editions. 
Chapman often tended to matters involving the illustrations and proofs. He was meditative, studious, and literary. His daughter described him as 'truth and sincerity and very broad in judgement and his views'; she did not, however, think he was 'a business man' (Waugh, facs. facing p. 4). In financial matters he vacillated between impulsive generosity and unsustained efforts at holding to contractual obligations. He steered the firm into two channels, one circulating sound literature and the other capitalizing on popular taste. William Makepeace Thackeray arrived at the door in 1840, contributed ten articles to the 'Foreign and Quarterly Review' in the two years 1842-4 after Chapman and Hall bought it from Black and Armstrong (Houghton), published with them his travel and Christmas books, and remained friendly with Edward and his cousin Frederic Chapman (1823-1895) after he left the firm in 1850. But his major serial fictions were issued by Bradbury and Evans, who also published 'Punch', to which Thackeray was contributing. In 1843 Forster brought Thomas Carlyle to the Strand. He was not at first a valuable addition and grumbled about his 'hard-fisted, cautious bibliographer' (Waugh, 119), but his reputation and sales rose markedly from the 1850s. Other mid-century authors Chapman published included William Harrison Ainsworth, Robert and Elizabeth Barrett Browning, Arthur Hugh Clough, William Allingham, and Elizabeth Gaskell. Charles Lever came at the height of his career in 1844; Dickens served as intermediary between Lever in Italy and the firm in the 1860s, when Lever's popularity plummeted. Chapman and his wife sustained cordial relations not only with George Henry Lewes's legitimate family, but also with George Eliot, whom Mary Chapman addressed as 'Mrs. Evans Lewes' ('George Eliot Letters', 3.195-6). 
Chapman's daughter Meta ('b'. 1842), later Mrs Gaye, recalled in her eighty-eighth year that she 'used to wonder what he did at the office as when ever Mama took me to 193 Piccadilly, Papa was standing with his back to the fire' (Waugh, facs. facing p. 4). So he was standing one day in the spring of 1858, in the premises to which the firm had moved six years previously, when Anthony Trollope stormed in, saying what he had to say to Chapman 'in a quick torrent of words... Looking at me as he might have done at a highway robber who had stopped him on Hounslow Heath... I remember that he held the poker in his hand all the time that I was with him; -- but in truth, even though he had declined to buy the book ['Doctor Thorne'], there would have been no danger. (Trollope, 99)' From that point on, the firm issued thirty-two of Trollope's titles, and in 1869 Trollope paid $10,000 for a third interest in the firm for his son Henry Merivale Trollope, who stayed in the partnership for about three years. 
Between 1847, when Hall suddenly died, and 1864, when Chapman retired, his cousin and Frederic Chapman rose to the status of partner. The firm enjoyed some good years. The expansion of railways, circulating libraries, and middle-class leisure improved book sales; Dickens's full-scale return to Chapman and Hall in 1859 afforded Frederic an opportunity to issue a new Dickens periodical, 'All the Year Round', and new serial fictions, and to reissue in new formats older titles and multiple collected editions -- all of which eventually turned a profit; and Dickens's renewed association brought to Chapman and Hall rising authors such as Wilkie Collins. When Forster retired in autumn 1860, he was replaced by George Meredith, who served as a conscientious and 'fastidious' literary adviser for more than thirty years (Waugh, 139-40). While Meredith turned down a few hugely popular works, he looked after the standards of quality and soundness that Chapman had established. 
In retirement Chapman travelled throughout Europe for nearly a decade. Poor health brought him back to the home he had built in Tunbridge Wells. On 20 February 1880 he died at Elm Lodge in Hitchin, the town where some four decades earlier he had wooed and won his bride. 


@@@@@


doc= 47462


Ailbe (d. 534?), a bishop and church founder, was the most significant of these saints. His feast day was celebrated on 12 September, according to the martyrology of Tallaght and 'Felire Oengusso'. He was a member of the Dal Cairpri Arad, a relatively minor Munster people. Ailbe's most important church and burial site was Emly (Imlech Ibair), the chief church in Munster for several centuries. The abbot of Emly is mentioned as an authority on the paschal question in Cummian's seventh-century letter to Segene, the abbot of Iona. Undoubtedly, Emly was bolstered by the support of the Eoganachta. The annals record abbots drawn from Eoganacht Aine, Eoganacht Locha Lein, Eoganacht Airthir Chliach, and Eoganacht Chaisil. 


@@@@@


doc= 47464


Cathal mac Finguine (d. 742), king of Munster, was a member of the Eoganacht Glendamnach dynasty. Like his father, Finguine mac Con-cen-Mathair, and his son, Artri mac Cathail, he was king of Munster, and he was the first to be involved in warfare against the dominant Ui Neill dynasties of the north of Ireland. Although he is of great significance on this account, his importance has been exaggerated by his reputation later in the middle ages. He was probably not the Cathal active in the midlands in 733, as claimed by some historians. 
Cathal may have acceded to the kingship as early as 713, when Cormac mac Ailella, king of Munster, was killed. Although Eterscel mac Maele-Umai, also king of Munster, survived until 721, it seems that he had abdicated his office long before, probably even before the reign of Cormac mac Ailella. Therefore, when Murchad mac Brain, king of Leinster, led an army to Cashel (the seat of the kings of Munster) in 715, he may have been intending to subdue Cathal mac Finguine. 
Six years later, Cathal's first appearance in the chronicles shows him devastating the plain of Brega in partnership with the same Murchad mac Brain. Brega was the homeland of the Ui Neill dynasty of Sil nAeda Slaine and included Tara, the symbolic seat of those who claimed supremacy over Ireland. It may be that Cathal was the junior partner in this enterprise, if a possibly interpolated annal entry can be relied upon, which says that Fergal mac Maele-Duin, the high-king of Ireland, undertook a revenge raid later that year against the Leinstermen (not the Munstermen). The annals of Inisfallen have their own view of this episode: they indicate that Cathal acted alone in the devastation of Brega, and state that Fergal mac Maele-Duin submitted to Cathal, and that Cathal became king of Ireland. However, the entry is eleventh century and seems to be an artificial promotion of a favoured historical character. 
The following year, 722, the battle of Allen, north of Kildare, took place between Fergal mac Maele-Duin and Murchad mac Brain. In a twelfth-century version of a story about this battle, Cathal mac Finguine is given an obviously contrived role: he was angered by the battle having occurred in his absence and the Leinstermen brought Fergal's head to him in the hope of placating him. Cathal returned the head to the Ui Neill and appointed a new king for them. 
The element of truth in this is that Cathal did not take part in the battle. Indeed, he does not reappear in the chronicles until 735, when, apparently in alliance with the Osraige and the Deisi, he was defeated in a battle against the Leinstermen (although the ever-favourable annals of Inisfallen and the tale of the battle of Allen claim that Cathal was victor). Two years later, he and Aed Allan, the Ui Neill high-king of Ireland, held a meeting at Terryglass (Tipperary), approximately where Munster bordered the Ui Neill territories. The two kings seem to have discussed the dues of the Patrician churches, for that same year the chronicles say that 'The Law of Patrick was in force in Ireland'. There may also have been an anti-Leinster pact, for the following year there was another major battle between the Ui Neill and Leinster, again without Cathal's involvement. It is possible that he later came to take hostages and treasures from the defeated king of Leinster, but the accounts of this are not consistent regarding the name of the king who submitted to Cathal, and the position and language of the entry give further grounds for reckoning it a late addition to the chronicles. The annals of Inisfallen do not report the incident, which may therefore be a misplaced and garbled version of Cathal's alleged victory over Leinster in 735. 
Cathal was married to Caillech 
(or Cellach; died 732)
, daughter of Dunchad of the Ui Liathain dynasty of Munster. He died in 742 and was buried in Emly (Tipperary). 


@@@@@


doc= 47466


Summerson, Sir John Newenham (1904-1992), museum curator and architectural historian, was born at Barnstead, Coniscliffe Road, Darlington, co. Durham, on 25 November 1904, the only surviving child of Samuel James Summerson (died 1907) and Dorothea Worth Newenham (died 1963), and the grandson of Thomas Summerson, the self-made founder of a railway works in Darlington. His mother belonged to a branch of an Anglo-Irish family of some distinction. His father, who worked in the family firm, died in 1907. His widow concentrated a small private income and all her love on her son. 
After a lonely childhood moving with his mother round England and the continent Summerson spent contented years at a preparatory school at Riber Castle, near Matlock, the crazy architecture of which immediately appealed to him. At Harrow School from 1918 he was moderately happy, achieved little distinction in work or games, but became an organist of outstanding quality. Organs led to an interest in church architecture, and when P. C. Buck, the school's distinguished music master, dissuaded him from embarking on the limited life of a professional organist, he chose instead to train as an architect. In 1922 he enrolled in the Bartlett School at University College, London. Over the next eleven years it may have seemed that he had taken a wrong turning. He made little mark at the Bartlett, at a succession of architect's offices, or teaching at the College of Art in Edinburgh in 1929-30. He could not bring himself to hurt his mother by ceasing to live with her. A feeling of failure led, as he put it, to 'grinding and consuming unhappiness' (Summerson, typescript autobiography, chap. 5, p. 10). On the other hand in these years he made many friends, had the first of many affairs, travelled extensively in Europe visiting buildings old and new, became a campaigning member of the MARS (Modern Architectural Research) Group, and began to make a mark as an architectural journalist. 
In 1934 Summerson steeled himself to the necessary but painful break with his mother. Meanwhile 10's'. spent in 1933 on a folder of drawings from the bargain bin of a Bloomsbury shop had at last set him on the road to success. Identification of the drawings as by John Nash and Humphry Repton encouraged him to embark on a biography of Nash. It was published in 1935 and was outstandingly successful. The declaration of war put work on a projected book on Georgian London to one side, while he concentrated his energies on founding what became the National Buildings Record, originally set up to record buildings threatened by bombardment. He became assistant director early in 1941. In 1945 he was appointed curator of Sir John Soane's Museum, and remained there until 1984. During his long curatorship he changed an agreeable, if largely inaccessible, curiosity into a small museum of international repute. Its inadequate private endowment was replaced by public funding, though it preserved independence under its own trustees, and it expanded into the adjacent no. 12, also designed by Soane, which was purchased in 1968. Summerson's conducted tour of the museum, open to all comers every Saturday afternoon, became famous. His first years at the museum saw the publication of a book of essays, 'Heavenly Mansions' (1949), and of his two most important books: 'Georgian London', finally published in 1946, and 'Architecture in Britain, 1550-1850' (1953). Both went into numerous revised editions. 
Summerson was knighted in 1958, received the Royal Institute of British Architects royal gold medal in 1976, and was created a Companion of Honour in 1987. He sat with distinction on many committees and public bodies. As chairman of the National Council for Diplomas in Art and Design he presided over a controversial reduction in the number and composition of art schools. Although he was an effective advocate of listing and state support for historic buildings, his commitment to contemporary architecture prevented him from ever becoming an out-and-out conservationist. He caused dismay in some quarters by supporting a new building in Dublin in 1961, and new designs by Mies van de Rohe and James Stirling in the City of London in 1984 and 1988, as of higher quality than the Georgian and Victorian buildings which they would replace. But after the mid-1950s he wrote little about contemporary architecture; a degree of disillusionment had set in. His posthumous reputation must rest less on his career as a public man or on his advocacy of the modern movement than on his brilliance as an architectural historian. 
Summerson led the way in changing English architectural history from an agreeable recreation for practising architects to a serious academic discipline. Although he had no academic training, he acquired with impressive ease the skills of a professional historian. He was influenced by the continental art and architectural historians who had taken refuge in England, but was an innovator, not a disciple. 'Georgian London' broke new ground in analysing the influence of landownership and building regulations on the architecture of a great city. 'Architecture in Britain, 1550-1850' laid the foundations on which all subsequent architectural historians have built. Summerson saw 'curiosity' as his driving impulse; he had the gift of asking worthwhile and sometimes unexpected questions, finding convincing answers, and embodying them in prose of outstanding ease and distinction, enriched by the occasional memorable phrase. 
Although Summerson produced no subsequent books of the stature of his two masterpieces, a steady output of articles, short books, reviews, lectures, and programmes on radio and television, all marked with the same distinction of thought and form, maintained his position at the head of his profession. In essays collected in 'The Unromantic Castle' (1990) he documented the previously amorphous figure of John Thorpe, brilliantly reconstructed Wren's second design for St Paul's Cathedral, established the villa as one of the dominant types in Georgian architecture, and illuminated aspects of Soane and the Victorians. His short 'The Classical Language of Architecture' (1964), written for a general readership, deservedly went into many editions and translations. His essay on Thorpe led to a catalogue of his drawings, published as volume 40 of the Walpole Society in 1966. Two meticulously researched volumes (1976, 1982) covering the period 1485-1660 in the 'History of the King's Works' took up perhaps too much of his time. 'The Life and Work of John Nash Architect' (1980) was a virtual rewriting of his first book. An unfinished and unpublished autobiography tails off after an illuminating account of his first forty years. 
Tall, elegant, assured, courteous, and outstandingly handsome, Summerson was by no means as aloof or unapproachable as he could seem on first contact. To serious scholars he was unfailingly helpful. When relaxing with congenial friends he could be gay and delightful company. He had a soft spot for rakes and eccentrics, and many friends among artists, writers, and creative people. On 31 March 1938 he married Elizabeth Alison, daughter of H. R. Hepworth; she had trained as a dancer and was the sister of Barbara Hepworth, the sculptor. They had triplet sons, born in 1946. In the 1970s a long affair with the artist Nancy Culliford Spender (1909-2001), widow of Michael Spender and former wife of William Coldstream, nearly destroyed his marriage. He broke off the relationship, and lived peacefully with his wife until her death in 1991. By then he was in the advanced stages of Parkinson's disease. He died on 10 November 1992 at 1 Eton Villas, the house near Chalk Farm into which he and his family had moved in 1949. 


@@@@@


doc= 47467


Hackett, Maria (1783-1874), philanthropist, was born in Birmingham on 14 November 1783, the only child of Joseph and Grace Hackett. Her father died when she was four months old, and in October 1787 Grace married Samuel Capper, the son of a Birmingham cloth merchant, and bore him two sons, John and Samuel James. Capper died in 1790, and about the turn of the century Grace and her children moved to London. Here they lived with Capper's unmarried brother George, a provision broker and agent in the City, who had a country home at Snaresbrook, Essex, and a town house at 8 Crosby Square where, by 1809, Maria Hackett was residing. 
Maria Hackett, who never married, devoted her time and money (the latter of which was probably inherited from George Capper) to a campaign to improve the living and educational conditions of boy choristers in the cathedrals and other Anglican choral foundations. Her active interest in the welfare of choristers began in 1810, when she enrolled her seven-year-old orphaned cousin Henry Wintle as a chorister at St Paul's Cathedral. The boys were not receiving proper housing, education, or supervision, and were routinely hired out, to the singing master's profit, to perform at public concerts and dinners with little thought for their safety or moral welfare. Maria Hackett undertook a study of documents in the muniment room at St Paul's and in the British Museum to determine the cathedral authorities' responsibilities towards the choristers. In January 1811 she sent the bishop of London a detailed account of her findings. His evasive reply prompted her to write to other cathedral dignitaries, but with no more success. In 1813 she, George Capper, and her half-brothers initiated legal proceedings that had to be abandoned prematurely because of expense. Nevertheless, a court order of August 1814 restored some of the funds that had been diverted from the choir to other purposes. 
Maria Hackett continued her letter writing and research, and her efforts began to meet with some success. She published her 'Correspondence and evidences respecting the ancient collegiate school attached to St Paul's Cathedral' (1811-32). Meanwhile her attention was extended to all the choral foundations of England and Wales, resulting in the publication of a 'Brief account of cathedral and collegiate schools with an abstract of their statutes and endowments' (1827). 
Never an aloof benefactor, Maria Hackett took a personal interest in the choristers, richly deserving her informal title the Choristers' Friend. She often visited the choristers of St Paul's Cathedral, where she worshipped regularly, and brought them treats. For more than fifty years she made autumn visits to other choral foundations, calling on each at least once in three years, noting the names of the choristers in her diary and presenting to each boy a book, a purse, and a new shilling. Her lifelong efforts were crowned at the age of ninety, when she was shown the new St Paul's choir school in Carter Lane. 
In 1831 Maria Hackett established the Gresham prize for cathedral composition. A patron of promising musicians, she funded John Stainer's organ studies after he left the St Paul's choir. She was a keen student of London history, publishing in 1816 'A Popular Account of St Paul's Cathedral', which went through some twenty-one editions by 1833. The manuscript of her unpublished novel, 'Wharfdale, or, A Legend of St Nicholas', is in the Guildhall Library. In 1832 she, her half-brothers, and some friends formed a committee for the preservation and restoration of Crosby Hall, an imposing fifteenth-century structure adjoining her house. It became an important musical and educational venue. 
At the time of her death, on 5 November 1874, Maria Hackett was living with her half-brother John and his family at 77 Amhurst Road, Hackney. A devout member of the Church of England, she expired during a communion service held at her bedside. She was buried at Highgate cemetery. In 1877 a cenotaph in her memory was placed in the crypt of St Paul's Cathedral with funds raised by subscription from the nation's cathedral choristers. 


@@@@@


doc= 47471


Atkyns, Charlotte (c.1758-1836), actress and political activist, was probably born in co. Westmeath, Ireland about 1758, according to her later biographers Frederic Barbey and E. E. P. Tisdall. She was the youngest of three daughters of Robert Walpole (died 1803) of Athlone, co. Westmeath, probably the same Robert Walpole who was made a JP in that county in 1771, and his wife, Blancy, 'nee' Peach (1741/2-1826); her father's name, however, is elsewhere given as William or as Thomas Walpole. She made her stage debut as Leonora in 'The Padlock' by Isaac Bickerstaff at the Crow Street theatre in Dublin in January 1776. In April she transferred for performances at Smock Alley, returning to Crow Street from May until the end of the season. She is known to have appeared in Cork between 7 October and 10 December of that year; in the final weeks of 1776 and into 1777 she returned to Dublin and engagements at Fishamble Street and at Crow Street. 
Walpole made her London debut at Drury Lane on 2 October 1777, when she played Rosetta in Bickerstaffe's 'Love in a Village'. She was with the Drury Lane company throughout the 1777-8 season, when she is known to have played Gillian in Charles Dibdin's 'The Quaker', Jessica (when she was billed 'with a song') in 'The Merchant of Venice', Polly in John Gay's 'Beggar's Opera', Wilhelmina in Dibdin's 'The Waterman', Euphrosyne in George Colman's 'Comus', and the Widow Brady (when she performed the 'Epilogue Song') in 'The Irish Widow' by David Garrick. For these services she was paid $4 per week but in addition she made $48 5's'. for her benefit on 1 May 1778. 
After the close of the London season Walpole spent the summer at Bath, where she was puffed as a rising star and as being particularly adept in breeches roles. 'Felix Farley's Bristol Journal' said: 'She is a good Singer, an excellent Actress, and it is a matter of dispute with the young Londoners in which characters she appears to most advantage, male or female' (Barker). Certainly her repertory at Bath included a number of major travesty roles, including Sir Harry Wildair in George Farquhar's 'The Constant Couple', Macheath in 'The Beggar's Opera', and Lord Foppington in Richard Brinsley Sheridan's 'A Trip to Scarborough'. 
'The pretty Miss Walpole of Drury Lane' returned to that theatre for the 1778-9 season. In what was to be her final season on the stage she expanded her repertory to include Sylvia in Garrick's 'Cymon', Clarinda in 'The Double Gallant' by Colley Cibber, and an unnamed role in Thomas Francklin's 'The Contract'. In addition she created the role of Nancy (a character described as 'in love with William -- disguised as a man') in a musical entertainment assembled by Richard Tickell, 'The Camp'. For her benefit on 16 April she appeared as Sir Harry Wildair and presented a dance after the main part of the programme. 
On 18 June 1779 at St James's, Piccadilly, Walpole married Edward Atkyns (1757/8-1794) of Ketteringham Hall, near Wymondham, in Norfolk, the son of Edward Atkyns, a Hamburg merchant, and great-grandson of the judge Sir Edward Atkyns, and retired from the stage. The couple had a son, Wright Edward Atkyns, who was born in 1780; he was later a captain in the 1st dragoons, or Royals, and died, unmarried, on 16 November 1804. Charlotte Atkyns may have retired from the stage but the ensuing phase in her life would lead to her becoming a character in a successful stage play of 1896, 'Pamela, marchande de frivolites', by Victorien Sardou, and part of the folklore surrounding the French Revolution. Atkyns and her husband had left Ketteringham for France by November 1784, probably to escape creditors. They entered court circles at Versailles and, after her move to Lille at the end of 1789, Charlotte Atkyns described herself as a pensioner of France, suggesting favour at court. Information on her career as an emigre activist is difficult to verify. Of the two books dealing with her career the second, E. E. P. Tisdall's 'Mrs 'Pimpernel' Atkyns' (1965), is heavily dependent on the first, Frederic Barbey's 'Une amie de Marie-Antoinette: Madame Atkyns et la prison du temple, 1758-1836' (1905), translated into English as 'A Friend of Marie-Antoinette' (1906). Barbey's book is reliant for many details on papers apparently placed by Atkyns with her notary in Paris, Achille Nicolas Rene Tourin, and given to Barbey by Tourin's successor. The subsequent whereabouts of these documents are unknown. It appears that Charlotte and Edward Atkyns returned to Ketteringham in 1791. Charlotte gradually extended her contacts among French emigres, the most important of whom at this stage was the journalist Jean-Gabriel Peltier, and about August 1793 she departed for France, where she engineered a brief meeting with Marie-Antoinette in the Conciergerie. The queen asked her to concentrate on saving her son the dauphin, regarded by royalists as Louis XVII, following the execution of his father. 
The death of Edward Atkyns at Ketteringham on 27 March 1794 probably increased Charlotte Atkyns's freedom of movement; if she did visit France to rescue Louis XVII it was that summer. The letters reproduced by Barbey suggest that she believed that she and her fellow conspirators had done so, although they could not explain what had happened to the dauphin after his supposed rescue from the Temple. Atkyns continued to promote the emigre cause and mortgaged Ketteringham in 1799 to raise funds. She was also involved in domestic politics, sharing in the management of John Wodehouse's unsuccessful campaign to be elected member for Norfolk in 1806 and organizing the petition that overturned the election, although Wodehouse declined to stand again. 
Following the restoration of Louis XVIII in 1814 Atkyns petitioned for a payment of between $30,000 and $40,000 to cover her expenditure on the Bourbon cause. Her insistence on including expenses incurred in the supposed rescue of Louis XVII provided the French government with a reason to deny her compensation. Atkyns continued to live in France, latterly at 65 rue de Lille, Paris, and made over Ketteringham to her sister-in-law Mary Atkyns, in return for an annuity, in 1824. She died at 65 rue de Lille on 2 February 1836 and was probably buried in Paris. 


@@@@@


doc= 47472


Armitstead, Elizabeth Bridget (1750-1842), courtesan, was, according to an entry in her journal, born on 11 July 1750. Her parentage, place of birth, and reason for changing her maiden name to Armitstead are unknown, as are the circumstances surrounding her emergence as a prominent courtesan. About 1774 she became the mistress of Frederick St John, second Viscount Bolingbroke (1734-1787), who encouraged her to try the stage. She appeared four times at Covent Garden in 1774 and twice, in 1777, at the Haymarket. About 1776 she embarked on an affair with the United East India Company soldier and politician Richard Smith (bap. 1734, d. 1803); in July of that year the couple were included in the 'tete-a-tete' series of profiles and caricatures in the 'Town and Country Magazine'. Smith set her up in her own house in Bond Street, London, and apparently made her a settlement. Later that year she switched her affections to John Frederick Sackville, third duke of Dorset (1745-1799), and, possibly, to the whig man of fashion and army officer Richard Fitzpatrick (1748-1813). Henceforth she was identified with Charles James Fox's whigs and his friends at Brooks's. Her own political convictions at this period are unknown, but it can be assumed that they reflected those of her patrons. In 1778 and 1779 she divided her attentions between Edward Smith Stanley, twelfth earl of Derby (1752-1834), and Lord George Cavendish (1727?-1794); on 23 February 1778 Fox wrote to Fitzpatrick: 'I... dine at nine o'clock at Derby's who is become a great vagabond and is desperately in love with Mrs Armitstead' (Davis, 31). Once again she was profiled in the 'Town and Country Magazine', this time with Derby. 'They seem perfectly well pleased with each other, and his lordship has had so complete a surfeit of matrimony, that this probably may be a lasting alliance' ('Town and Country Magazine', March 1779, 125). According to Charles Pigott's 'The Jockey Club', Cavendish supplied her with her second settlement. In January 1781 she succeeded Mary 'Perdita' Robinson (1758?-1800) as the mistress of the prince of Wales (later George IV): 'About this time a ridiculous affair happened... Ld George was returning one night to Mrs Armitstead's, rather drunk. In going into her room he perceiv'd some unaccustomed light in another, and much against her entreatys went in. The room seem'd empty, but willing to examine everywhere he soon found there was a man conceal'd behind the door. He stretched out his arm with the candle in his hand close to the person's face, and to his great surprise found it was the P. of Wales. ('Georgiana', 291)' The newspapers gave the relationship a political complexion, stigmatizing Mrs Armitstead as a tool of Fox's whigs: 'There cannot be a stronger proof of the miserable shifts to which opposition are driven, than the reports they so industriously circulate, of a connection between that 'High Priestess of Patriotism', Mrs A -- d and a certain heir apparent' ('Morning Herald', 24 Jan 1781). The affair continued until the summer of 1781, when Mrs Armitstead left London for France, spending a further two months at Spa and two months in Italy. During her travels she shared her affections with George James Cholmondeley, fourth earl of Cholmondeley, and John Hanger, second Baron Coleraine. 
After returning to London in May 1782 she resumed her affair with the prince, then, about September, turned exclusively to Fox. For a while Mrs Armitstead appears to have been uncertain about their relationship, and it was not until the late summer of 1783 that she committed herself to him irrevocably. Henceforth Fox spent most of his time away from politics at St Anne's Hill, Mrs Armitstead's rural retreat near Chertsey in Surrey, which he rented on her behalf and then bought from the duke of Marlborough. The couple's life at St Anne's Hill was reputedly idyllic. They read together, gardened together, explored the countryside together, and entertained Fox's friends and relatives, including his nephew Henry Richard Fox, third Baron Holland, a favourite of both. In 1788 they toured Europe and met Edward Gibbon in Lausanne; Mrs Armitstead, he told his friend John Baker Holroyd, first Baron Sheffield, somewhat misleadingly, was merely a 'cypher' ('Private Letters', 2.180). In fact, she was an intelligent woman, dedicated to self-improvement, as demonstrated by her wide reading of classical and modern literature. Fox could meaningfully express not only his emotional needs to her, but also his political frustration, as his surviving letters to her show. Her taste and sense gradually moderated Fox's uncouth behaviour. Fox frequently professed his dependence on her, and on 28 September 1795 he married Mrs Armitstead at a private service at Wyton in Huntingdonshire. Seven years later he revealed the marriage to his family and friends, apologizing to his niece Caroline Fox for the secretive nature of the arrangement. She was never completely accepted as Fox's wife by his family, with the exception of Lord Holland, who welcomed and defended the marriage. Other members of Fox's circle were divided, Georgiana, duchess of Devonshire, writing to congratulate him, but Harriet Ponsonby, countess of Bessborough, noting 'all his friends are very angry with him' (Foreman, 357). The reason given for the announcement was Fox's wish that she be presented as his wife on their visit to Paris in October 1802. There they were received by Napoleon and Josephine Bonaparte, but Mrs Fox's presence in Parisian society caused consternation among other British visitors, ladies being reluctant to accept her as an equal but at the same time unwilling to be the first to snub her. In British society her status as Fox's wife could never be recognized at court, and this deterred potential visitors to St Anne's Hill; when she gave a ball in London in 1806 'it was described in a 'bon mot'... that 'there was all the world, but little of his wife'' (Mitchell, 181). Fox remained devoted to her until his death on 13 September 1806, despite his scepticism allowing scriptural readings at his bedside to please his religious wife. 
Mrs Fox outlived her husband by nearly thirty-six years, devoting the remainder of her life to her garden and friends; a companion Elizabeth Marston lived with her. She died at St Anne's Hill on 8 July 1842 and was buried a week later in All Saints (now St Peter's), Chertsey. During her days as a courtesan she was described as an attractive, tall, vivacious woman. Apparently she left no descendants, and St Anne's Hill was inherited by her husband's great-nephew Henry Edward Fox, fourth Baron Holland. 


@@@@@


doc= 47473


Bell, Aubrey FitzGerald (1881-1950), Portuguese and Spanish scholar, was born on 20 August 1881 at the vicarage of Muncaster, Ravenglass, Cumberland, the son of the Revd Henry Bell (1838-1919), rural dean of Gosforth and subsequently canon of Carlisle Cathedral, and his wife, Katherine, daughter of Sir Peter Fitz-Gerald, knight of Kerry. At the age of five he moved with his mother to St Jean-de-Luz where he was educated privately before going as a classical scholar to Keble College, Oxford, in 1900. He took a second in classical moderations (1902) and graduated with a third in 'literae humaniores' (1904). 
Between 1905 and 1908 Bell was assistant keeper of printed books at the British Museum. After leaving the British Museum he travelled in Spain and Portugal, settling eventually at Manique de Baixo, near Estoril, in 1911. He may have had his years of travel in mind when he wrote in a letter to Sir Idris Bell: 'I saw many beautiful & interesting things but in hardships, noise & general weariness I paid amply for every one of them' (28 Aug 1925, Idris Bell papers, fol. 69). His first book, a collection of poems entitled 'Songs of Rest', was published in 1911 under the pseudonym of A. F. Gerald. He used this pseudonym on three other occasions and once employed a Hispanicized version, Alvaro Giraldez, though most of his work was published under his own name. 
In Portugal Bell became correspondent for the 'Morning Post' and wrote regularly for other journals, including 'The Athenaeum', and the 'Times Literary Supplement', which became his principal source of income. Although he lived a retired and almost reclusive life he took a keen interest in contemporary events, as can be seen in works such as 'Portugal of the Portuguese' (1915), where his comments on Portuguese politics were direct, incisive, and unflattering. The Avenida da Liberdade in Lisbon had never become popular, he wrote, because 'It seems to be too far from the centres of gossip: before you had walked [from one end to the other] a ministry might have fallen' ('Portugal of the Portuguese', 41-2). His activities as newspaper correspondent more than once aroused the suspicion of the authorities in Spain as well as in Portugal and he served a term in a military prison in 1912. 
While living in Portugal Bell wrote a succession of major scholarly works. 'Portuguese Literature' appeared in 1922 and 'The Oxford Book of Portuguese Verse' in 1925, both enthusiastically reviewed. In 1933, during a spell in the British Hospital in Lisbon, he met and subsequently married a nurse, Barbara Lindsay Wilkie from Edinburgh. They had two sons who, Aubrey wrote, would have to be brought up as 'illiterate peasants [as] there will be no money to educate either of them' (1 July 1936, Idris Bell papers, fol. 74). In August 1940, shortly after the outbreak of war, the family moved to Toronto. Before he left Portugal, the ministry of education awarded him the order of Santiago. Bell sold his library to the Instituto Espanol in Lisbon, which eventually disposed of it to the University of Salamanca. 
From Toronto the Bells moved to Victoria, British Columbia. There, in 1947, Aubrey completed his last major work, 'Cervantes'. He died at Saanich, Victoria, British Columbia on 7 May 1950. His ashes were brought back to Ravenglass. His wife subsequently moved to California and resumed her career as a nurse. 
Aubrey Bell never held any academic post, or indeed any salaried position at all, after he left the British Museum, and his scholarship was entirely self-taught and self-generated. He was a prolific writer and in all published thirty-five books on Spanish and Portuguese topics. Some of these were printed privately in very limited editions. He wrote important critical studies of the major classical Spanish and Portuguese authors as well as a number of more general works of travel, history, and bibliography. He was also a regular reviewer for the 'Times Literary Supplement', the 'Bulletin of Spanish Studies', and the 'Modern Language Review'. His work is characterized by a highly individual and original style of writing and by meticulous attention to bibliographical scholarship. He was also a translator of note, and included in his writings many of his own translations into English verse. 
Aubrey Bell's particular distinction lay in his pioneering study of Portuguese literature. Before he wrote, the English-speaking world knew little about any Portuguese writers except Camoes. Bell introduced English readers to Gil Vicente, many of whose plays he translated, to the historians Lopes, Correa, Barros, and Couto, and to the early Portuguese poets. In particular he drew attention to the medieval 'Cantigos do amigo' and 'Cantigos de amor'. He had a nostalgic admiration for early Portuguese literature and for the purity of language which he believed existed in the early Renaissance: 'The restoration of the Portuguese language to its original purity is an essential condition... since it is vain to hope to gather figs from thistles' ('Portugal of the Portuguese', 151). His work was always carefully crafted so that even such slight historical works as his 'Portuguese Portraits' (1917) can be read with pleasure. Among his other writings were 'In Portugal' (1912), 'The Magic of Spain' (1912), 'Poems from the Portuguese' (1913), 'Lyrics of Gil Vicente' (1914), 'Portuguese Bibliography' (1922), 'Spanish Galicia' (1922), 'A Pilgrim in Spain' (1924), 'Contemporary Spanish Literature' (1933), and 'Castilian Literature' (1938). 
Bell was a shy and reclusive person, though well known to the small circle of scholars of Portuguese and Spanish literature. He cultivated a lifestyle that verged on the eccentric -- rising regularly in the middle of the night to do his writing. As well as his studies of literature, Bell was a keen gardener, as his father had been, and wrote attractively about the gardens and flowers of Portugal. 


@@@@@


doc= 47474


Brawne, Frances (1800-1865), fiancee of John Keats, was born on 9 August 1800 in the West End of London, the first of five children of Samuel Vernon Brawne (1778-1810), a businessman 'of no commercial reputation' (Motion, 324), and Frances (1772-1829), daughter of John Ricketts. The main event in Fanny's life as far as posterity is concerned was her love affair with the poet John Keats (1795-1821) from the time of the beginning of his 'annus mirabilis' of autumn 1818 until his death in 1821. 
Fanny Brawne came from a middle-class background and was reasonably well educated, at least in literature and languages, speaking French and undertaking translations from German. She first met Keats in the late autumn of 1818 in Hampstead and by June 1819 they had an 'understanding' which, probably by October, had become an official, albeit secret, engagement. In view of Keats's poor financial situation and Fanny's youth, her mother disapproved of the affair. In fact, Fanny's mother was by no means the only person to disapprove of the relationship: Charles Brown apparently considered Fanny to be 'superficial and vain' and 'flirtatious' with 'every man she met' (Richardson, 31), and a number of other friends of Keats, including J. H. Reynolds and his family, Joseph Severn, and Charles Dilke, similarly regretted the attachment. For Keats, though, while he described Fanny in December 1818 as 'elegant, graceful, silly, fashionable and strange', 'monstrous', 'flying out in all directions', a ''Minx'' with a 'penchant... for acting stylishly' ('Letters of John Keats, 1814-1821', 2.8, 13), she was the 'one passion' of his short life (Houghton, 1), a passion which was to be characterized by an intensity of emotion which often slid into jealousy. When Keats's candid and passionate letters to Fanny were published in 1878, the insecurity and jealousy that they expressed, although evidence of a certain emotional instability on his part, none the less contributed to her reputation as a fickle and superficial lover of the increasingly famous poet. As her biographer notes, nineteenth-century commentators 'drew Fanny Brawne as they wanted her to be: a common, shallow, faithless, calculating flirt' (Richardson, 144), and her reputation was rescued only after the publication of her letters to Fanny Keats in 1936. Both Keats's sense of distrust and the ensuing disapproval were exacerbated by the poet's tuberculosis which, from the autumn of 1819 onwards, made him seem to be the helpless victim of Fanny's apparently wilful and unfaithful nature. Even when he was living next door to the Brawne family in Wentworth Place, Hampstead, the nature of Keats's illness often meant he found it distressing either to be with Fanny or to contemplate her being away from him. After he left for Italy in September 1820 he became so distressed by his feelings for Fanny that he was able neither to write directly to her nor read her letters to him. There seems to be little doubt that, fuelled by Keats's early death, the often painful emotions expressed in his letters to her, and the antagonism of his circle towards her, Fanny's influence on the poet was misrepresented as profoundly negative by a romanticizing later nineteenth century. In fact, it is significant that Keats wrote many of the poems for which he is most well known soon after meeting Fanny, and it is undoubtedly the case that his relationship with her was influential in the shaping of his greatest work. 
After Keats's death, Fanny remained in Hampstead and mourned him through the 1820s, befriending his sister as she had promised him she would. After her mother's death in 1829 Fanny became financially independent and, on a visit to France in 1833, in Boulogne met Louis Lindo 
(later Lindon; 1812-1872)
, whom she married on 15 June 1833. Of Spanish or Portuguese extraction and from a wealthy Jewish merchant and banking family, Louis Lindon seems to have held a number of positions, including working as an officer for the British Legion in Spain and as a wine merchant in London later in life. Until the 1850s, when they settled in London, the Lindons lived on the continent, especially in Germany, where they can be traced in Dusseldorf, Heidelberg, and Freiburg, and where Fanny gave birth to two sons and a daughter. Fanny died at 34 Coleshill Street, Pimlico, London, on 4 December 1865. She was buried in Brompton cemetery on 9 December. 


@@@@@


doc= 47475


Crawshay, William (1764-1834), ironmaster and merchant, was the only son, in a family of one son and three daughters, of the ironmaster Richard Crawshay (1739-1810) and his wife, Mary Bourne (1745-1811). Little is known of Crawshay's early life and education, only that he joined his father's business as a young man. It was the beginning of a tempestuous career. Like his father, William Crawshay was a masterful character and he found it difficult to work under the direction of a man of Richard Crawshay's autocratic temper. This led to repeated estrangements. A visitor to the Crawshay ironworks at Cyfarthfa, near Merthyr Tudful, in 1797 reported that the two 'would not sit in the same room together -- the young one however kept possession of the parlour, & the old gent took possession of the counting house & the business they were about was transacted by letters sent from the old Crawshay in the counting house to the young one in the parlour & vice versa. (Gilbert Gilpin to William Wilkinson, 19 July 1797, Shropshire Records and Research Centre, 1781/6/25)' About 1784 Crawshay married Elizabeth (Eliza), 'nee' Couzens (1760-1825); they had three sons, Richard (1786-1859), William Crawshay (1788-1867), and George (1794-1873), and two daughters, Elizabeth (1790-1877) and Mary (1793-1881). Increasingly, William Crawshay was entrusted with running the firm's merchant house at George Yard in London, while his father remained at Cyfarthfa. Their physical separation could not, however, ameliorate relations completely. A fresh quarrel in 1809 led to the old man's revising his will. William Crawshay was replaced as his father's executor and residuary legatee by Benjamin Hall (1778-1817), his brother-in-law, and left without a share in the ironworks. A belated reconciliation ensured William Crawshay's partial reinstatement, but he still acquired only a three-eighths share in the Cyfarthfa works upon his father's death in 1810, an outcome he described as 'disinheritance'. 
For much of the next decade Crawshay strove to reverse this humiliation and make himself the undisputed master of Cyfarthfa. His cousin Joseph Bailey (1783-1858), who had inherited a two-eighths share in the works, was bought out for $32,000 in 1813. Hall was more difficult to dislodge and Crawshay does not seem to have acquired his share in the works before Hall's death in 1817. Crawshay had more success in his dealings with Anthony Bacon, the illegitimate son of Anthony Bacon ('c'.1717-1786), the founder of Cyfarthfa, to whom a royalty on the works' output was due. Through a mixture of intimidation and bluff -- including a deliberate running down of production at Cyfarthfa -- Crawshay persuaded Bacon to sell his interest in the site for $95,000 in 1814. 
The Cyfarthfa ironworks was the largest in Britain, producing 24,200 tons of pig iron from eight blast furnaces in 1823, yet the functioning of the Crawshay firm was far from smooth. William Crawshay adhered to the policy of his father, that George Yard should be the exclusive outlet for iron produced in Merthyr. Unfortunately, his partners in the London house saw no reason why they should carry large stocks of Cyfarthfa iron when trade was slack. And his manager at Cyfarthfa, his son William Crawshay, had no wish to be tied to George Yard if he could command a higher price as an independent seller. Yet Crawshay was committed to using the financial resources of the merchant house to stockpile iron for which there was no immediate market, allowing the Crawshay firm to stand aloof from the price wars which afflicted the early nineteenth-century iron trade. It was a policy which fomented dissension within the Crawshay firm until William Crawshay's death -- an event which his partners and sons awaited with ill-disguised eagerness. 
William Crawshay, the Iron King, died on 11 August 1834 at his suburban mansion at Stoke Newington, Middlesex. He was afterwards a rather forgotten figure. Normally resident in the vicinity of London, he did not live on in the folk memory of south Wales as his father and his son were to. Nevertheless, Crawshay's guile and ruthlessness were characteristic of the Crawshay clan and he used these qualities to the full to maintain the family's position at the head of the British iron trade. 


@@@@@


doc= 47476


Edington, Thomas (1742-1811), ironmaster and merchant, about whose early life little is known, joined the Carron Company about March 1764 as a travelling salesman. Apart from selling Carron's products, Edington served as the eyes and ears of the company in other iron-working districts. Carron had purchased Cramond ironworks on 21 December 1759, and Edington became its manager in February 1765. Cramond was engaged on rolling and slitting bar iron, and Edington applied to its operations the lessons he had learned at Bedlington slit mill (1764) and at Ambrose Crowley's Winlaton works (1766). 
The key to Edington's later career was his association with the Cadell family. William Cadell (1708-1777), of Prestonpans and Cockenzie, shipmaster, merchant, and industrialist, was a founding partner at Carron, and his son, also William (1737-1819), became general manager. In October 1770 the Cadells exchanged their Carron shareholding for the Cramond works; Edington had clearly impressed them with his technical knowledge and business skills and remained as manager. This alliance was firmly cemented when Edington married, on 13 November 1772, Christian Cadell, daughter of William senior; they had nine children. During this time Edington also became 'joint proprietor' of Cramond. 
Edington improved and extended Cramond ironworks, adding a furnace for producing steel (possibly the first in Scotland). Initially, the main products were hoops for wine and spirit casks, handle iron to be fitted to cast-iron products at local foundries, pan plates for the saltworks of the Forth, and, most importantly, rod iron for nails (300 tons being produced annually in the 1770s), sold to the nailers of Fife and Stirling and exported by Glasgow merchants. In the 1780s a wider product range included spades and shovels, plough socs, files, and a great variety of nails. 
Cramond ironworks depended upon imported Swedish and Russian bar iron, which rose in price, thereby encouraging the younger William Cadell and Edington to seek cheaper supplies by investing in blast furnaces and associated bar-iron plants. The first venture was the Clyde ironworks, which became Edington's responsibility. A contract of copartnery (19 December 1786) specified a capital of $6000, split into twenty-four shares, of which Edington took eighteen ($4500) while the resident partner, John Mackenzie of Strathgarve (Ross-shire), had six ($1500). On 7 April 1787 Edington transferred six shares to William Archibald Cadell (1775-1855), but these were controlled by his father, William. This syndicate was also involved at Omoa ironworks through John Mackenzie. 
Clyde was built under Edington's supervision on 600 acres of the Carmyle estate near Glasgow. This ironworks was dependent upon local supplies of coal and ironstone, under the control of James Dunlop (1741-1816) of Garnkirk who contracted to supply Edington with 20,000 tons of coal annually, but his bankruptcy (1793) led Cadell and Edington to open new coal seams with Dunlop's agreement (1795). Meanwhile, John Mackenzie's death (2 December 1788) caused Edington to move from Cramond to Glasgow. However, he retained his minority shareholding (8/28) in a capital valuation which increased from $13,286 in 1772 to $30,148 in 1792. 
Three malleable-iron companies -- Smithfield, Dalnottar, and Cramond -- formed a partnership in 1787 to exploit Ayrshire minerals at Muirkirk ironworks. Muirkirk became a major source of bar iron for Cramond, but like Clyde it was heavily engaged in armaments production during the French wars. Gradually, Edington withdrew his investments in Clyde, Muirkirk, and Cramond and turned to engineering and foundry work; and about 1797 he opened the very successful Phoenix foundry in partnership with two of his sons, James and Thomas. 
In association with members of the Cadell family, Thomas Edington played a key role in the development of a coke-fired iron industry in Scotland on a large scale in the last two decades of the eighteenth century. A member of the Church of Scotland and a trustee of Anderson's Institution for scientific education, Edington, and his sons James and Thomas, also joined the Glasgow Highland Society (1809). Edington died in Glasgow in May 1811. His heir was not one of his sons in the iron business but Lieutenant John Edington of the 12th regiment of dragoons. 


@@@@@


doc= 47478


Hayford, Denis (c.1635-1733), iron- and steelmaster, whose exact parentage is not clear, was probably born at Ferrybridge in Yorkshire. However, he is known to have been the nephew and residuary legatee of William Hayford of Round Green, Silkstone (died 1674). Both came from Ferrybridge, near the Aire River. Several members of the family, including William's father, Denis Hayford (who died about 1646), grandfather of the ironmaster, had been postmasters there. William Hayford became steward of Francis Rockley of Rockley and Worsborough, who had been left greatly impoverished by the steadfast support of his father, Robert Rockley (died 1644), for Charles I. William Hayford conspired, together with his sister Margaret (wife of Thomas West), John Spencer, William Wilkinson, and others, to have his master outlawed and cast into gaol in 1659; there he ended his days twenty years later. Included in the estate was Rockley furnace, built in 1652 by the ironmaster Lionel Copley (died 1675). 
Although the terms of the lease allowed the lessor to cast 40 tons of iron at Rockley annually, there is no evidence of William Hayford's involvement in the iron trade. However, Denis Hayford was soon in partnership with William Simpson, who had taken the lease of Wortley forges in 1676. In 1678, soon after the death of the elder Lionel Copley, in partnership with Francis Barlow they took over the Copley interests in the iron industry, which, in addition to Rockley furnace, included the duke of Norfolk's works (Chapel furnace, Attercliffe and Wadsley forges, and Rotherham slitting mill). Hayford and Simpson also partnered William Cotton of Haigh Hall in running Bank furnace in conjunction with Knottingley forge. 
In 1684, again in partnership with Cotton, Hayford acquired Lord Paget's works (Abbots Bromley and Cannock forges and Rugeley slitting mill) and, around the same time, the Cheshire ironworks (Lawton furnace, Warmingham forge, and Cranage forge and slitting mill). They could now supply rod and bar iron to Lancashire, north Wales, and the Birmingham markets in addition to the Sheffield area. Although the Paget works were disposed of in 1692, Hayford's marriage in 1689 to the heiress Gwyn Millington (died 1730) of Millington consolidated his position in Cheshire. A new furnace at Vale Royal, which drew supplies of haematite ore from Furness, was built in 1696. 
In 1698 Hayford withdrew some of his Cheshire capital, perhaps to finance his involvement in Derbyshire and Nottinghamshire. Together with Barlow, Simpson, and John Fell (clerk of the duke of Norfolk's works), he acquired the former Sitwell works (Staveley and Foxbrook furnaces, Staveley and Carburton forges, and Renishaw slitting mill) together with Roche Abbey forge. About this time Hayford transferred his residence from Millington to Staveley and later to Romeley, in Clowne parish, Derbyshire. 
It is as a pioneer of the steel industry on Tyneside through the 'Company in the North', in which Cotton, Simpson, and Fell were all involved, that Hayford deserves wider fame. About 1687 Hayford acquired Blackhall mill on the River Derwent, where he made steel by the cementation process. This move must have been prompted by the establishment in 1686 of the Hollow Sword Blade Company at Shotley Bridge, upstream from Blackhall. Ambrose Crowley (1658-1713) had used the cementation method of steel manufacture at Stourbridge by 1682, with Swedish bar iron among his raw materials. By 1686 there was a cementation furnace at Abbots Bromley, which Hayford could have known, and the north-eastern location would have favoured his use of Swedish iron. However, local non-phosphoric ores were suitable for steel production and in 1692 Hayford acquired the lease of Allensford furnace and forge, further upstream from Shotley Bridge. This lease was not renewed in 1713, following around $1000 worth of rebuilding work at Blackhall, and when the Swede Kalmeter visited Blackhall in 1719, a German, William Bertram, was operating the steel mill for Hayford. Bertram is reputed to have been shipwrecked on the coast about 1693, but this date so neatly coincides with the beginning of steel making in the area as to cast doubt on the tradition. 
Blister steel, made by cementation, was converted into shear steel by welding and forging; 'Hayford steel', double shear steel, also known as Newcastle or German steel, was made by repeating this process. Double shear came in five qualities, though not all raw materials were capable of such refinement, and the Hollow Sword Blade Company continued to prefer Hayford steel even after the Crowley works was established at Winlaton in 1701. 
In 1727 the aged Hayford's ironworking interests in the Sheffield area were taken over by his son Millington Hayford; another son, Denis, became a Newcastle merchant, but predeceased his father in 1732; a third son, Francis, became a London ironmonger. His daughter Ann was alive in 1732. Hayford himself died in 1733 and was buried at Rostherne, Cheshire, on 26 February of that year. 


@@@@@


doc= 47479


Humfrey, William (c.1515-1579), mining promoter and assayer, about whom nothing is known before 1560, was a central figure in the Elizabethan government's attempt to revitalize the country's mining and metallurgical industries. In 1560 Humfrey is known to have been a member of the Goldsmiths' Company and a resident of St Vedast's parish in the city of London. His involvement in national affairs owed much to the patronage of Sir William Cecil, with whom he corresponded regularly. Despite evidence to the contrary, Cecil continued to regard Humfrey as an expert on metallurgical matters and provided both financial backing and political support for his projects. In 1561 Humfrey was appointed assay master at the royal mint, where, in 1565, he was implicated in a robbery. 
At the mint Humfrey came into contact with the German technologists who had been recruited to assist the recoinage. Both Humfrey and Cecil were convinced of the superiority of German metallurgical techniques, which they believed could be imported to develop new industries in England. In accordance with this policy, two joint-stock companies were incorporated under royal charter in 1568. The Mines Royal Company, which mined copper at Keswick, was financed by Augsburg bankers and operated by German technologists. The Company of Mineral and Battery Works, however, owed its origins to Humfrey's initiative in recruiting the Saxon, Christopher Schutz, to develop brass manufacture and battery in England. The company took over the patents that Humfrey and Schutz had obtained in 1565 covering the manufacture of brass, brass and iron wire, battery (the hammering of metal into plates and utensils), and the introduction of new mining and smelting technology. 
Attempts to use German technology to stimulate English industries in this fashion failed. Although deposits of calamine (zinc ore) were discovered in Somerset, Schutz was unable to manufacture brass from English copper and zinc ores. Battery manufacture was similarly abandoned and the iron-wire mills erected at Tintern struggled to survive. In 1569 Humfrey, smarting from the company's criticism of his extravagant lifestyle at Tintern, leased back part of his original patents and turned his attention to the expanding lead industry. 
About 1570 Humfrey and Schutz built a water-powered lead-smelting furnace at Beauchief, near Sheffield, and also introduced a German sieve for processing ore on the Derbyshire mines. Humfrey hoped to persuade the local smelters to adopt his new furnace under licence, but most preferred to retain their traditional wind-powered smelting boles. In response to Humfrey's initiative George Talbot, sixth earl of Shrewsbury, invited smelters from Somerset to erect a Mendip-ore hearth furnace in his park at Chatsworth. Humfrey complained to Burghley that this new furnace, which used foot-powered bellows, infringed his patent. Between 1581 and 1584 the court of exchequer set up four commissions to investigate this complaint and subsequent allegations. 
Humfrey's furnace did make lead successfully, but only after he replaced his German workmen with a Mendip smelter. The water-powered smelting mill, as it came to be called, rapidly ousted both traditional boles and footblasts. Despite assistance from Burghley, Humfrey could stop neither the widespread adoption of the smelting mill by the local gentry nor the unlicensed use of his sieve by the miners. The new furnace consumed only half as much fuel as the bole and was far more convenient to operate. It enabled the industry to expand dramatically after 1570 when lead became a major export commodity. Humfrey did not live to see this development or the eventual failure of his patent action. When he died he had already lost interest in Derbyshire and had embarked upon a silver-mining project in Cardiganshire. Humfrey died intestate in July 1579 leaving a wife, Alice, and two daughters. Elizabeth, the elder daughter, married Robert Ledger, a merchant tailor, at St Vedast's on 30 July 1570; Alice, the younger, married Alexander Fownde, an embroiderer. 


