@@@@@


doc= 47480


Sitwell, George (bap. 1601, d. 1667), landowner and ironmaster, was born at Eckington, Derbyshire, where he was baptized on 15 March 1601, the eldest son of George Sitwell (1569-1607) and Mary, daughter of Thomas Walker of Derby, who later married Henry Wigfall, also of Eckington. The Sitwells rose steadily during the sixteenth century from freeholders to gentry through the acquisition of land in Eckington and neighbouring parishes, a transition completed by George Sitwell, who was a JP, served as high sheriff of Derbyshire in 1653, and received a grant of arms in 1660, which he produced, together with a pedigree, at Dugdale's visitation of the county two years later. The family's rise was confirmed by the building of Renishaw Hall at Eckington, probably in the 1620s, which became the centre of their estate and remains their home today. 
Sitwell, in common with many landowners of his day, supplemented his income from land through the exploitation of minerals beneath his estate, in his case chiefly iron. His involvement in the industry probably began with the building of a blast furnace at Plumbley, near Eckington, in the 1630s, jointly with his stepfather, Henry Wigfall. This partnership came to an end in 1649 and three years later Sitwell alone built a new furnace at Foxbrooke, close to Renishaw, which by the 1660s was the nucleus of the most extensive group of ironworks anywhere in Derbyshire or Nottinghamshire, including two other furnaces (at Staveley and North Wingfield) and forges at Staveley, Pleasley, Clipstone, and Cuckney. Sitwell also made saws at Pleasley and in 1656 installed near Renishaw the first rolling and slitting mill in the east midlands, the rod iron from which supplied a large number of local nailmakers. 
Sitwell remained in personal control of his works until his death and a letter-book covering the last few years of his career shows that he was in business on a large scale, producing pig and bar iron, castings, saws, nails, and other finished goods for sale both locally and in London, where a cousin acted as his factor. Some products, including rolling mills for the West Indies sugar plantations, went abroad. Sitwell sent iron to London both by water (via the River Idle at Bawtry) and by road, employing his own private carrier as well as using public stage wagons. His correspondence also shows how closely a country landowner could keep in touch with public affairs in the capital through his commercial contacts; in addition, although by this date in his sixties, Sitwell visited London regularly. At home, he made extensive purchases of wood from both the crown and private owners in Sherwood and elsewhere, and was an important figure in an extensive regional credit network. He was also much involved in administrative business as a JP at parish and hundred level and to a lesser extent in the county as a whole. 
Sitwell, who married Margaret, the daughter of Hugh Childers of Carr House, near Doncaster, was buried at Eckington on 2 August 1667; his wife died in 1658 and was also buried at Eckington. Of their five sons and two daughters who survived into adult life the eldest son continued his father's iron-making activities from his seat at Renishaw and two others became London iron merchants. In the 1690s, however, the works were leased and, although they retained direct management of their collieries until the mid-eighteenth century, the family were henceforth principally landowners, merely drawing rent from industrial enterprises on their estate. Wealth accumulated from both land and industry would later enable Sir G. R. Sitwell (1860-1943) and his children, Osbert, Sacheverell, and Edith to pursue their various literary careers. 


@@@@@


doc= 47481


Tanner, David (bap. 1743, d. in or after 1805), ironmaster, was baptized on 27 December 1743 at St Mary's parish church, Monmouth. He was the fourth child of David Tanner (1702-1754), ironmaster, and Mary (died 1797), the daughter of Walter Davis of Mitcheltroy, Monmouthshire. The three eldest children died at an early age and David's birth was followed by that of three other children. The youngest, William (1754-1806), became a junior partner in some of David's enterprises. Their grandfather was a cooper and then a timber merchant. Tanner's father died when he was eleven and he was brought up by his mother and her brother, the Revd Dr John Davis (1721-1798), vicar of Monmouth. As a young adult Tanner became involved in local politics. He became a burgessman and a member of the common council of Monmouth. Elected mayor in 1782, in 1792 he was appointed sheriff of Monmouthshire. Monmouth, situated on the navigable River Wye, was just upriver from the charcoal furnaces at Redbrook and Tintern and was in close proximity to long-established charcoal ironmaking centres in south Wales, the Forest of Dean, and Herefordshire. It was from around Monmouth in 1769 that Tanner, at the age of twenty-six, obtained the right to extract iron cinder which could be sold to local ironworks for resmelting. This was the start of a self-made industrial career that was to earn him the reputation of being the last of the great charcoal ironmasters. 
In south Wales large amounts of money were being spent on mineral leases and on the construction of large coke-fired furnaces. Tanner did not have this level of finance. Initially he and his mother obtained money by acquiring land and then mortgaging it. This was a strategy that he continued to employ by himself throughout his career. He concentrated on obtaining leases of charcoal furnaces that could be had relatively cheaply and required very little capital investment. Although they were smaller and less than half as productive as the average newly erected coke-fired furnaces in south Wales, Tanner was able to partly compensate for this by importing large amounts of haematite from Cumberland to some of his furnaces. The haematite contained up to twice the content of iron as local ores and produced iron that he could sell at a premium. Because the quality of local outcrop coal to be found in the Forest of Dean was too poor to use in coke-fuelled furnaces, and the supply of wood from the forest was readily available, there was little incentive for Tanner to invest in coke-fuelled furnaces. Tanner leased his first furnace at Tintern in 1772. A few months later, he leased the Ynysgedwyn Furnace, situated 60 miles away, at the head of the Swansea valley. He also worked in the Forest of Dean and at various times leased Lydney Furnace and its two forges, Rowley, Clanna, and Barnedge forges, Redbrook Furnace, and Lydbrook Upper and Middle forges. 
In 1784 Tanner leased a foundry at Cyfarthfa, Merthyr Tudful, which he relinquished to Richard Crawshay in 1786 to concentrate on his acquisitions from Jane, the widow of John Hanbury of Pontypool. This was composed of the lease of the furnace, tinworks, and forges at Pontypool, the furnace at Llanelli (Brecknockshire), and a forge at Caerleon. The lease was to run from 2 February 1786 to 2 February 1797, during the minority of her oldest son. Tanner paid the first instalment of the lease but refused to pay further instalments until he could finance them from profits. Jane Hanbury retaliated by denying that a formal lease had ever existed and tried to recover her property. A long case ensued in chancery that was effectively won by Tanner. During his period at Pontypool, Tanner erected two coke-fired blast furnaces on freehold land at Blaendare, partly to pressurize Jane Hanbury into dropping her case against him. In addition to iron, tin, and wire, Tanner manufactured cannon for a period of at least ten years. This chiefly took place at Tintern, as well as for a short period at Cyfarthfa; but most of his cannon failed Board of Ordnance quality standards. 
By 1796 Tanner was experiencing serious financial difficulties. He was tricked by two local solicitors into appearing to commit an act of bankruptcy and was declared bankrupt in November 1798. He and his brother William were committed to the king's bench prison. Tanner's proven debts of $85,000 may well have actually exceeded $100,000, which would have made him one of the largest known bankrupts outside London up to that time. In December 1799, before Lord Kenyon and a special jury, Tanner was found not to have committed an act of bankruptcy but the bankruptcy commission was not rescinded. This was probably because many of his assets had already been disposed of and, since he had lost his manufacturing base, he would have been financially incapable of continuing his operations. In August 1801 Tanner left to join his friend Harford Jones (later Sir Harford Jones Brydges), the East India Company's resident at Baghdad. He was accompanied by his son John, who remained at Basrah. Tanner set out for India in March 1803 and proceeded to Bengal in May. No report of Tanner's death has been found in India and it is not known when he died. He seems to have returned, as it was reported at Bath in 1805 that he had been found wandering shoeless and starving. 


@@@@@


doc= 47482


Vivian, John Henry (1785-1855), industrialist and politician, was born on 9 August 1785 in Truro, the second surviving son of John Vivian (1750-1826), mining and copper-smelting entrepreneur, and his wife, Betsy, 'nee' Cranch (died 1816). He was educated at Truro grammar school and Lostwithiel School, and at the age of sixteen went to Germany to study languages. In 1803 he became a student at the Mining Institute of the University of Freiberg as a pupil of the geologist Abraham Werner. In 1806, at the age of twenty-one, he was appointed manager of the Pen-clawdd copper-smelting works of the Cheadle Brass and Wire Company in south Wales, in which his father was a partner. In 1809 he became a partner of Vivian & Sons, together with his father and brother Richard Hussey Vivian, and was appointed manager of its Hafod works in Swansea. 
In 1816 Vivian married Sarah Jones (1799-1886), daughter of Arthur Jones of The Priory, Reigate, Surrey. They had nine children, who were brought up in the family home, Marino, near Swansea, which was greatly extended and remodelled in a Gothic style and later renamed Singleton Abbey. 
While Richard Hussey Vivian pursued a military career, and as his father became less involved in the direct running of the firm, John Henry Vivian devoted himself to the development of the family business. He was involved in a secret cartel of copper smelters, which operated in the 1820s to control the price of copper. He applied his technical knowledge of smelting to improve production methods and was largely responsible for the growth of Vivian & Sons into one of the major firms in the industry, developing Hafod into a works town known as 'Vivian's Town' or 'Trevivian'. In 1835 the firm diversified into zinc smelting and shipping; in 1838 the firm acquired the Margam copper works from the English Copper Company; and in 1839 Vivian founded the Swansea Coal Company, both to supply his smelting works and to trade independently. In 1842 Vivian & Sons began to manufacture 'Yellow Metal', an alloy of copper and zinc. Following the death of Richard Hussey Vivian the same year, Vivian bought out his late brother's estate to retain family control of the firm. 
Vivian took particular interest in the atmospheric pollution or 'copper smoke' problems associated with copper smelting, and during the 1820s employed Michael Faraday and Richard Phillips to develop a means of reducing the emission of pollutants. The firm was also involved in several court cases concerning pollution from smelting works. 
Vivian had strong interests in science and education. In 1818 he established a select reading society in Swansea with his friend the industrialist Lewis Weston Dillwyn, and in 1835 they were founder members of the Philosophical and Literary Society, which later became the Royal Institution of South Wales. Vivian was the institution's first vice-president. His published account of the 'Welsh process' of copper smelting and his scientific interest in copper production led to his being elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1823. He was also an early member of the Geological Society and a founder member of the Cambrian Archaeological Association in 1846. Vivian enjoyed travelling and in 1815 met the exiled Napoleon Bonaparte on Elba while dressed in the uniform of the Cornish militia, in which he served. An account of their conversation was later published. 
Though apparently shy and a poor public speaker, Vivian was involved in public affairs. He became deputy lieutenant for Glamorgan in 1820, high sheriff in 1827, and as a whig was elected MP for Swansea in 1832. Described as an assiduous worker on committees, he remained in parliament until his death. Through his political involvement, he was instrumental in establishing in Cornwall in 1830 the newspaper the 'West Briton' to counter the tory 'Royal Cornwall Gazette'. He served as a justice of the peace, and, as a trustee of Swansea Harbour Board, he was involved in the major development of the town's port facilities. Vivian contributed to many charitable causes in the Swansea district and, with his son Henry Hussey Vivian, established an Anglican church and school house in Sketty. 
Vivian died at Singleton Abbey, Swansea, on 10 February 1855 and was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 47483


Wilkinson, Isaac (bap. 1695, d. 1784), iron-founder, was baptized on 6 May 1695 at Washington, co. Durham, the son of John Wilkinson and his wife, Margaret Thompson. He was the fifth child, his mother dying after his birth. His father having died by 1704, Isaac was brought up by his elder brother John, a wool merchant. His education is unknown; he had a rough literacy and could keep accounts, sometimes creatively. He was apprenticed to the iron trade, probably at the Swalwell works near his home. About 1721-3 he moved to Little Clifton furnace near Workington, where he stayed until 1735. On 9 November 1727, described as iron-founder, he married Mary (died 1786), daughter of Henry and Margaret Johnson of Briggham, Cumberland. She was a dissenter, and Wilkinson is henceforward referred to as a Presbyterian. Their seven children included the ironmasters John Wilkinson and William Wilkinson, and Mary (1743-1796), who later married the theologian and natural philosopher Joseph Priestley (1733-1804). 
A highly skilled iron-founder, Wilkinson commanded high wages before going to Clifton. The furnace there had converted to smelting with coal and charcoal; and Wilkinson cast on contract. In 1735 he moved to Backbarrow furnace, again smelting with coke as a specialist founder. As well as casting on contract, he bought iron from the firm, casting for sale on his own account. In 1738 he obtained a patent, partly for cast box smoothing-irons, though he must have known that Baddeley of Birmingham had a similar 1722 patent, which had lately expired. Isaac, with his brother John as partner, subsequently bought a mill for finishing the irons. However, he cheated his brother over the profits due to him, and their partnership in consequence ended. He had additional works, possibly a furnace, at Wilson House, Cartmel, where he now lived. 
In 1747, with the Rowlinson family and others, Wilkinson set up the Lowwood iron company on a site very close to Backbarrow. In the course of the following year he ceased to cast for the Backbarrow Company. In 1749 he withdrew from the Lowwood Company too, but bought iron for casting from them. He went to law with the Lowwood Company and others over his box iron patent and their enticement of his workers, when it became clear his patent was not original. In 1753 Isaac Wilkinson left Lancashire and took over a furnace at Bersham, near Wrexham, Denbighshire, earlier used for both charcoal and coke smelting. His elder son John became superintendent of the coke-iron furnace; and Isaac's partners were his brother-in-law William Johnson, the Liverpool merchant Samuel Green, and the Shrewsbury capitalist Edward Blakeway. Railed ways, air furnaces, and mills for working iron were built, while a nearby furnace at Ruabon was bought. As well as overseeing these developments, Isaac continued to charge separate fees for casting. 
In 1757 Wilkinson took out a patent for a cylinder-blowing engine. Its development is obscure, but originally the blast was to be produced by water columns, recalling the French 'trempe' system. The blast could supposedly be provided by pipes at some distance from the power source. Tried at Bersham, New Willey, Shropshire (where his son John was a partner), and at the furnaces Isaac later used in south Wales, it does not appear to have been effective. Yet Charles Wood, the manager of the Cyfarthfa ironworks, saw Wilkinson's cylinders in action at neighbouring Dowlais in 1766 and was impressed: 'they are by much preferable to any Leathern Bellows, & require much less water in proportion to their Blast' (Charles Wood's journal, 22 May 1766). John Wilkinson had ironed out the problems by the mid-1770s, however, when he was successfully using steam-powered and cylinder-blown blast in his furnaces. Isaac Wilkinson's Bersham partner Blakeway went bankrupt in 1759, and the latter's shares passed to his sister-in-law Mary Lee. She became the main shareholder in 1762, and married Wilkinson's son John in 1763, giving him control at Bersham. The works there subsequently acquired an international reputation for quality castings, especially for steam engine cylinders and solid-bored cannon. In 1758 Isaac took out a patent for dry sand moulding in a flask or box, which seems to have had real originality. 
As early as 1762 Wilkinson sued his partners, including his son John, over his remuneration for casting. When the partnership broke up in the post-war depression Isaac sued the others over the finances. He then moved to Bristol, and Bersham was put up for sale. However, John Wilkinson emerged as effective owner in 1766. Isaac was awarded over $1000 and costs, but after renewed litigation settlement was reached in 1767. At the same time John Wilkinson agreed payments to his father for his casting and blowing patents, though Isaac remained in legal dispute with another partner. 
Isaac Wilkinson was subsequently an iron-founder at Bristol, but had brief but interesting involvements with the Dowlais and Plymouth ironworks in south Wales. He also introduced the Guest family to the south Wales industry. Local master colliers supplied him with coal for his furnace at Cyfarthfa, but this led to further lawsuits, which showed Wilkinson in financial difficulties. In the 1770s he sued the Bersham and New Willey companies, both now run by his son John, over patent fees; and as late as 1779 he was again at law about a bad investment in a Gloucestershire furnace. He died in London on 31 January 1784, but was probably buried at Bristol. 
Isaac Wilkinson's career was long, complex, and often fraught. A great craftsman, his business sense often did not equal his technical skill, and he was invariably involved in disputes that led to litigation. His headstrong nature was inherited by his more famous sons, John and William. Wilkinson had some genuine inventive talent; and the frequency with which he was admitted to new coke-smelting partnerships in the 1750s, 1760s, and 1770s, though he had very little in the way of money to contribute, suggests that his new blowing technology, to which his partners gained privileged access, was seen as having value. 


@@@@@


doc= 47484


Wilkinson, William (1744-1808), ironmaster, was the youngest son of the iron-founder Isaac Wilkinson (bap. 1695, d. 1784) and his wife, Mary Johnson (died 1786), and brother of the more famous John Wilkinson. At the time of his birth his parents were living at Backbarrow in Lancashire. He entered Joseph Priestley's school at Nantwich, Cheshire, probably in 1759, and followed Priestley to Warrington Academy in 1761. In 1762 Priestley married Mary, sister of John and William. William's training was probably at the family ironworks at Bersham, Denbighshire, where in 1774 his brother John admitted him to a partnership on very favourable terms. The works had already a great reputation for the casting of steam engine cylinders, guns, pipes, and many other products. William briefly became managing partner at Bersham, though the advanced technology applied there was developed by John. 
In 1775 the French brigadier Marchant de la Houliere, who was trying to develop iron smelting with coal in France, visited John Wilkinson at his New Willey (Broseley, Shropshire) works. He was particularly interested in John's achievement in the boring of cast-iron guns from solid, and wished to bring him to France. John could not go, but proposed the services of William, who agreed enthusiastically. 
William Wilkinson made a preliminary visit to France within weeks. It was probably at this early stage that the Isle of Indret on the Loire near Nantes was identified as a site for water-powered mills to bore cannon. Early in 1777 he returned to France, Indret works was built, and Wilkinson was granted 12,000 livres salary, soon rising to 50,000. He supplied all the plans for Indret, but quickly had difficulties with French associates who complained of 'le despotisme anglais'. However he established better relations with the engineer Pierre Toufaire, who executed the works Wilkinson planned in France. The 2 million livres Indret had cost produced but few cannon, and this failure was investigated. The great artillery expert Jean-Baptiste Vaquette de Gribeauval recommended Ignace de Wendel, an artilleryman, and from a great family of ironmasters, to examine the situation. He took over Indret and decided that the problem was caused by the lack of coke iron for solid-bored cannon, not obtainable when England and France were at war. The answer was to be the creation of a great coke ironworks in France, and Wilkinson was considered to be the only man available to accomplish it. 
The site chosen was Le Creusot near Montcenis in Burgundy. Wilkinson's payment was to be 216,000 livres, plus living and travelling expenses. His contract showed that he would need to consult his brother John and to refresh his knowledge of the rapidly changing technology in England. Le Creusot as finished had four coke-iron blast furnaces with steam-powered blast, reverberatory furnaces, large coking facilities, and 5 leagues of iron railway. Curiously Wilkinson was only on site for nine months during its building over 1781-4. The Wilkinsons supplied three steam engines at high prices. The investment was enormous and the crown a major shareholder. The furnaces came into blast in 1785 but the iron made was poor, and within a few years the cannon-boring mills there were occupied with charcoal iron and bronze cannon. For several decades Le Creusot was a 'contre-exemple' (Woronoff, 335), dissuading the further take-up of British coke-iron technology in France. 
After a return to Britain in 1786 Wilkinson made some further extensive European journeys, finally settling again at Plas Grono near Wrexham in 1789. He soon quarrelled with his brother John over the management of Bersham, and particularly his accrued profit from his share in this highly successful works during his absence abroad. Lawsuits began in 1794, and he was at law with John Wilkinson and other family members until his death. Wilkinson objected to John's continued development and diversification of his own industrial interests outside Bersham, and wanted the maximum return from Bersham and associated enterprises. During the dispute Wilkinson became an ally of Boulton and Watt, with whom John had long worked as a supplier of cylinders for their engines. Their interests changed, they were no longer allies of John Wilkinson and his friend Thomas Williams in the copper trade, they had just discharged a large debt to John, and were now ready to sue him over his illegal 'pirate' sales of their patent engines. They hoped William Wilkinson would be of use to them in creating their own engine-making works at Soho, Birmingham, begun in 1795. He made available to them John's newly invented cupola furnace. John arranged to sell Bersham, moving much equipment to his new works at Brymbo. William set about seducing Bersham workers for Boulton and Watt. The case went to arbitration, and the works were put up for sale, being taken over by Thomas Jones, nephew to William and John, with capital supplied by John. Subsequently there were bitter lawsuits of great complication between the brothers over their north Wales lead-mining interests, William Wilkinson being a partner with John in the Minera mine. There were smelters at Bersham and Brymbo, the latter owned solely by John. Eventually John sold his share of the mine, ceding it to his partners. Wilkinson and his associates were not very successful in its subsequent management and it was again under John's control at the time of William's death. 
Wilkinson married late in life, in 1791. His wife was Elizabeth Kirkes (died 1808) of Liverpool, a widow, and daughter of James Stockdale of Cark Hall, Cartmel, a district with which the Wilkinsons had long associations. The Stockdales had extensive business interests, including a cotton mill. A daughter, Mary Anne, was born in 1795, and a second daughter, Elizabeth Stockdale, in 1799, the elder marrying Matthew Robinson Boulton, only son of the great Birmingham industrialist, in 1813. 
William Wilkinson is significant for his part in the attempted transfer of a large part of British coal-iron technology to France. While eventually the cannon-boring technology devised by his brother was successfully transferred, the great iron smelter at Le Creusot was largely a failure, and Wilkinson's supercilious and overbearing manner and his failure to give enough personal supervision must take some blame. Like his father he seems to have pursued litigation too readily, and he at least matched his brother in his arbitrary disposition, while having none of his inventive or innovative ability, or the capacity to manage a large and diverse business empire. He died at Plas Grono in March 1808, having appointed the younger James Watt to be guardian to his daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 47486


Cadell family (per. c.1740-1934), coal and ironmasters, engineers and geologists, came to prominence with 


@@@@@


doc= 47487


Champion family (per. c.1670-1794), metal manufacturers and merchants, came to prominence with 


@@@@@


doc= 47488


Cookson family (per. c.1700-1863), industrialists and bankers, came to prominence with 


@@@@@


doc= 47489


Coster family (per. c.1685-1764), copper smelters, came to prominence with 


@@@@@


doc= 47490


Dixon family (per. 1770s-1880), iron and coal masters, were for three generations deeply involved in the coal and iron industries of western Scotland. They came to prominence with 


@@@@@


doc= 47491


Foley family (per. c.1620-1716), ironmasters and government contractors, traces its origins to 


@@@@@


doc= 47492


Verbruggen, Jan (bap. 1712, d. 1781), gun-founder, was baptized on 4 March 1712 in Enkhuizen in the Netherlands, but little is known about his origins or early years. He was taught by the Dutch seascapist Jan van Call the younger. He married Eva van Schaak (died 'c'.1739) in 1734; they had three children. Appointed master founder of the Dutch admiralty's Enkhuizen cannon foundry in 1740, in 1754 Verbruggen also took over the recently modernized state ordnance foundry at The Hague. However, after a few years he was suspended because of accusations of hiding flaws in guns. 
In 1763 Verbruggen offered his services to the British government, without success; yet by 1769 circumstances had changed in Britain. Andrew Schalch, master founder, scarcely cast any guns, while, more seriously, the Board of Ordnance's two contract founders, Richard Gilpin and William Bowen, were reaching the end of their careers. It appeared that within a year there would be no one in Britain capable of casting brass guns. On 12 January 1770, in consequence, Jan and his son, Pieter ['see below'], were appointed master founders of the royal brass foundry at Woolwich at a joint wage of 12's'. a day, the same rate as that at which Schalch had been engaged in 1718. They arrived in May 1770 and embarked on a programme to modernize the royal brass foundry. Their most important innovation was the introduction of horizontal boring for guns cast solid; previously guns were cast round a core and reamed out vertically. Solid boring for brass guns had been developed by the Swiss founder Jean Maritz in 1712 and adopted at The Hague in the 1750s. Other changes included rebuilding the furnaces and casting pits and the use of precast moulds for cascables, which permitted larger numbers of higher-quality guns to be cast more quickly. 
The first Verbruggen guns passed proof in April 1774. Their cannon, mortars, and howitzers had a much better proof record than those of past founders. For the first time since its early years the royal brass foundry was able to provide all the brass guns required by the British services, and produced over one hundred guns a year during the American War of Independence. The Verbruggens carried out other services for the board, making machine parts, boring up foreign guns, and analysing metal from brass and iron guns. 
Jan Verbruggen died at Woolwich on 27 October 1781 and was buried in the Dutch church at Austin Friars in the City of London. His son, Pieter, continued as master founder. 
A remarkable series of water-colours depicting the royal brass foundry under the Verbruggens, which have often been attributed to Jan or Pieter, has survived in the possession of the family. However, the high standard of water-colour technique, use of perspective, and fine detail are unlike the conventional Dutch seascapes Jan normally painted. Moreover the drawings seem to depict father and son at work. A more likely attribution is to one of three water-colourists associated with the Board of Ordnance: Paul Sandby, professor of drawing at Woolwich; Thomas Sandby, from the drawing office in the Tower of London; or Michael Angelo Rooker, who carried out highly detailed engravings of experiments for the board in 1778. 


@@@@@


doc= 47493


Pieter Verbruggen (1735-1786) was born on 12 March 1735 at Enkhuizen, in the Netherlands, and educated in law at the University of Leiden. He subsequently worked with his father at The Hague. Under Pieter Verbruggen the royal brass foundry reached its apogee, finishing a total of 237 guns in 1782. However, with the ending of the American war there was a severe reduction. In 1783 147 guns were cast, but between 1784 and Pieter's death the annual total never rose above 13. From October 1783 the skilled workforce assembled by the Verbruggens began to be dispersed. Moreover, Pieter was in dispute with the board over payments; in September 1785 he complained he had had no money since 1782. Pieter Verbruggen married Wynefrede Kooystra on 21 September 1785 at Austin Friars; they had no children. He died on 20 February the following year, at Woolwich. He also was buried at the Dutch church at Austin Friars. His sisters, Catherine and Maria, took two years to settle his affairs with the board and returned to the Netherlands. The Verbruggens had been training a successor, Frederick Groves from the drawing office at Plymouth. However, after Pieter Verbruggen's death the royal brass foundry was reorganized; the position of master founder was abolished and the foundry came under the control of Thomas Blomefield, inspector of artillery. Groves resigned in disappointment. 


@@@@@


doc= 47494


Fuller family (per. c.1650-1803), gun-founders and landowners, came to prominence with John [i] Fuller (1617-1679), the son of Samuel Fuller, of Waldron, Sussex, and his wife, Joan, daughter of Stephen French, of Chiddingly, Sussex. He married Ann, the daughter of John Nutt, of Selmeston, Sussex. In 1650, together with Sir Thomas Dyke, he obtained from his maternal grandfather the lease of Stream iron furnace, Chiddingly, where ordnance was cast in the 1660s. He was succeeded by his second son, John [ii] Fuller (1652-1722), a major in the trained bands, who continued to work the furnace at Stream until 1693, when he leased land at Heathfield, Sussex, on which he built a new furnace in the same year. 



@@@@@


doc= 47495


Harford family (per. c.1700-1866), merchants, brass manufacturers, and bankers, came to prominence with Charles Harford (1631-1709). He and his immediate descendants were Quakers. Charles Harford, the first Harford to enter trade in Bristol, was the son of Mark Harford (1570-1652) of Marshfield in Gloucestershire. He was active in soap-boiling in the 1680s and 1690s, and in plans to set up a brassworks in 1700. In an eventful life he was among many Bristol Quakers imprisoned for not attending national worship, and in 1691 he was fined heavily for customs fraud. By his first marriage in 1656, to Mary Bushe (died 1667), Charles Harford had six children. His second son, Charles Harford the younger (1662-1725), merchant, was the father of Trueman Harford (1704-1750), father of James Harford (1734-1817), iron and tin-plate manufacturer. His eldest son, Edward, was the head of the three branches of the family in brass-making and banking. 



@@@@@


doc= 47497


Harrison family (per. 1715-c.1790), gun-founders, came to prominence with 


@@@@@


doc= 47498


Hawks family (per. c.1750-1863), iron manufacturers and engineers, formed one of the most notable industrial dynasties on Tyneside in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. Until its closure in 1889 the family's New Greenwich ironworks at Gateshead was the town's largest employer, and several members of the family firm were prominent in local politics. 
The Hawks firm was established by 


@@@@@


doc= 47499


Homfray family (per. 1702-1833), ironmasters, of Wollaston and Penydarren, came to prominence with 


@@@@@


doc= 47500


Kendall family (per. c.1700-1807), ironmasters, of Staffordshire, Furness, and Brecknockshire, together with the kindred families of Cotton and Hall, played a leading role in the development of the iron industry in Britain between the mid-seventeenth and the early nineteenth centuries. Members of the family were closely involved in the extended partnerships which dominated iron production in Staffordshire, Cheshire, and the north-west of England. 
The family came to prominence with 


@@@@@


doc= 47501


Knight family (per. c.1680-1897), ironmasters, came to prominence with the activities of 


@@@@@


doc= 47502


Nevill family (per. c.1793-1973), copper smelters and colliery proprietors, was founded by 


@@@@@


doc= 47503


Walker family (per. 1741-1833), iron, steel, and lead manufacturers, came to prominence with Jonathan, Samuel, and Aaron Walker, the three sons of 


@@@@@


doc= 47504


Grey, Thomas de, second Baron Walsingham (1748-1818), politician, was born on 14 July 1748 and baptized on the 17th at St Clement Danes, Westminster, the second but only surviving son of William de Grey, first Baron Walsingham (1719-1781), chief justice of common pleas, and Mary ('bap'. 1719, died 1800), daughter of William Cowper ('c'.1689-1740), clerk of the parliaments. He was educated at Eton College from 1760 to 1765, was admitted to the Middle Temple on 24 August 1764, and in 1766 became a fellow commoner of Trinity Hall, Cambridge, taking his BA degree in 1769. In 1770-71 he travelled in France, Italy, and Germany, on the grand tour. In May 1771 George III appointed him a groom of the bedchamber and it was probably that year that his father, having become a judge, resigned to him the sinecure office of comptroller of first fruits and tenths. On 30 April 1772 he married, at her father's house in Lower Grosvenor Street, Westminster, the Hon. Augusta Georgina Elizabeth Irby (1747-1818), daughter of William, first Baron Boston, chamberlain to the princess dowager of Wales, and his wife, Albinia Selwyn; they had two sons and two daughters. 
Like many of his immediate ancestors, de Grey entered parliament, sitting for Wareham from January to September 1774 and being returned for Tamworth at the general election later that year. He seconded the address of thanks for the speech from the throne on 5 December 1774 and thereafter spoke occasionally in support of Lord North's ministry. In July 1777 he became a lord of trade and from January 1778 to October 1780 he additionally served as an earnest under-secretary to the secretary of state for the colonies, George Germain. Having transferred to Lostwithiel at the 1780 election, he again seconded the address on 6 November. In December that year the king thought him an unsuitable candidate for the position of vice-chamberlain to the queen, remarking that 'his manner is certainly not quite genteel and from his hurry he might fill the office but awkwardly' ('Later Correspondence of George III', 5.172). 
On the death on 9 May 1781 of his father, who had been awarded a peerage in the previous year, de Grey succeeded as second Baron Walsingham, and he took his seat in the Lords on 21 May. In the following month he inherited the family's ancestral estates at Merton Hall, near Thetford in Norfolk, from his uncle and namesake, who had been MP for Norfolk (1764-74). On 27 November 1781 he seconded the address, urging continuation of the war against the American colonies' European allies, and by the end of the year he had tardily relinquished his junior ministerial salary. He spoke and voted against Lord Shelburne's peace preliminaries on 17 February 1783 and Fox's 'India Bill' on 17 December 1783, and thereafter supported Pitt's administration. On 31 December 1783 he was sworn of the privy council, which he attended frequently; he was both a friend and a near neighbour (at Leather Lake House, Old Windsor) of the king. In March 1784 he became a member of the privy council committee for trade and plantations and was appointed joint vice-treasurer of Ireland. In that year he also joined the India board (serving until 1791) and, a frequent speaker on departmental matters in the Lords, he seconded the address in January 1785 (as he did in December 1792 and October 1795). In July 1787, having given up all but one of his other offices and declining to be named ambassador to Spain, he became joint postmaster-general, in which capacity he proved himself to be a diligent and reforming administrator. He sided with ministers during the regency crisis in 1789 and on 13 April 1795 spoke in defence of Warren Hastings, whom he voted not guilty on all but one of the impeachment charges ten days later. 
Walsingham, whose family had several connections with the parliament office and with the management of the upper chamber, seems to have long coveted the office of chairman of committees in the Lords. A procedural expert, he hoped to replace Lord Scarsdale in July 1783 and, having served an apprenticeship as one of his deputies (notably in the 1784 session), was presumably disappointed to be passed over on Scarsdale's retirement in 1789. It was not until late in 1794 that Pitt, as part of a government reshuffle, gave him the post, which carried a salary of $1500, and provided a pension of $1200 in favour of his sons as compensation for giving up the higher remuneration of the postmastership. 
Building no doubt on the initiatives of his legally trained predecessor Lord Cathcart and the general climate of parliamentary improvements which brought about many procedural refinements in the 1790s, Walsingham rapidly established an absolute ascendancy in the management of committee business. This was probably made easier by the fact that the most senior official in the chamber was his first cousin Henry Cowper, the clerk assistant. Within a few years he was chairing all but a handful of grand (of the whole house) and select (private bill) committees, which had the effect of ensuring that private parties could no longer secure the passage of self-interested legislation. Such was the assiduity and rigour with which he handled the committee stage of bills that it became common practice for those supervising legislative measures to seek his prior approval of them. Indeed, perhaps because of the absence of a Commons counterpart, this extended also to the lower house and in May 1796 he observed that 'they Send to me all private Bills whilst they are in the He. Comms., that I may suggest any alterations I think fit, lest such alterations should lose the Bill in the Commee of the Lords' (BL, Add. MS 38231, fol. 31). 
Largely at Walsingham's suggestion, and reflecting his concern for what he privately and publicly termed the increasing 'weight of property' requiring legislative consideration (BL, Add. MS 58935, fols. 151-2), his office was for the first time placed on a formal footing by resolution of the house on 23 July 1800, and his salary was raised to $2500 per annum. He had a formidable reputation, not least for the inflexibility with which he applied his 'de facto' policy of standardization in the drafting of statutes. He also attracted adverse criticism; a typical comment was Francis Horner's (in relation to the 'Scottish Schoolmasters Bill' of 1807) that Walsingham 'is more strict than intelligent, and gives unnecessary vexation' (Horner, 464). Nevertheless, on his retirement on the grounds of ill health in November 1814, the House of Lords voted him a unanimous address of thanks, which praised his 'Ability, Integrity, Impartiality and indefatigable Industry' ('JHL', 50.8), and recognized his enormous personal contribution, over a period of twenty years, to the process of scrutinizing -- particularly private -- legislation. He was granted a pension of $2000 a year. 
Walsingham, who in later life suffered badly from gout, died at Old Windsor on 16 January 1818 and was buried at Merton on the 30th. He was succeeded in his titles and estates by his two sons in turn: Lieutenant-General George de Grey, third Baron Walsingham (1776-1831), who died with his wife in a fire at the family's London town house at 30 Upper Grosvenor Street, and the Revd Thomas de Grey, fourth Baron Walsingham (1778-1839), who was archdeacon of Surrey. 


@@@@@


doc= 47507


Richard [ii] Gillow (1733-1811) was born in Lancaster on 29 December 1733. He was apprenticed in London to a Mr Jones, an architect, during the 1750s, and in 1753 was sent by his father on a voyage to Barbados in the West Indies. In 1754 he subscribed to Thomas Chippendale's 'Gentleman and Cabinet-Maker's Director'. In 1754-5 he became a freeman of Lancaster, and on 1 January 1757 he joined his father as an equal partner in Robert Gillow & Son. From September 1758 all the firm's apprentices were bound in his name, and from the late 1750s he also prepared new furniture designs based on sketches supplied from London by his cousin James Gillow ('b'. 'c'.1732) ['see below']. He married Sarah Haresnape (1734/5-1783), said to be the daughter of Robert Haresnape of Thurnham, on 11 February 1761 at the priory church of St Mary, Lancaster. Richard and Sarah had eight children, five daughters and three sons; Robert [iii] Gillow; George [ii] Gillow; and Richard [iii] Gillow ['see below'], all joined the family firm. When Richard [ii]'s father retired from business in 1769 and his brother Robert [ii] joined him as a partner, the brothers declared their intention: 'to equal (if not to surpass) the port of London, or any other in the export of furniture' (GA, 344/161, 26 Feb 1769). During Richard [ii] Gillow's long period with the firm, Gillows developed from thriving provincial cabinet-makers to one of the best London upholsterers. His main role was to run the Lancaster business, but he encouraged and advised his cousin Thomas Gillow ['see below'] when in 1769 he declared his intention to start a London cabinet-making business. Richard [ii] also informed customers of the latest London fashions, and counselled them wisely and tactfully on matters of taste and practicality in furniture and interior design. In 1807 Clarke recommended 'Mr Gillow's extensive ware-rooms' in Lancaster 'stored with every article of useful and ornamental mahogany furniture', as 'well worth the attention of the stranger; as they are said to be the best stocked of any in this line, out of the metropolis' (Clarke, 64). Richard [ii] Gillow acquired a house in Margate and established the first Roman Catholic mission in the town, and a small chapel was erected by his generosity in 1801. He retired from the firm in 1800, and died at his Lancaster house in Thurnham Street 'of dropsy' on 14 August 1811, aged seventy-seven. In his obituary he was described as 'formerly a cabinet-maker and upholsterer; a man who spent a long life of business with honour and integrity, and as a son, husband, and member of society, in the performance of every Christian duty' ('Lancaster Gazette', 17 Aug 1811). He was buried in St Mary's churchyard near the tomb of his brother Robert [ii] Gillow. 
Richard [ii] Gillow's brother 


@@@@@


doc= 47511


Garnsey, Sir Gilbert Francis (1883-1932), accountant, was born on 21 March 1883, the fifth son of William Samuel Garnsey, a butcher in Wellington, Somerset, and his wife Emily, 'nee' Gibbings. He was educated locally at Wellington School, and his headmaster later recalled that Garnsey learned bookkeeping and had an uncanny way of getting very high marks in mathematics. He began to study for his accountancy qualifications during his final years at Wellington. The Revd E. C. Harries, the second master, introduced him to the Walsall firm of chartered accountants, Muras, Harries, and Higginson, where he became an articled clerk. Garnsey's intelligence and aptitude were revealed in 1903 when, at the age of twenty, he came first in the intermediate examination; he repeated this achievement two years later in his finals. Between 1902 and 1904, he played soccer for Aston Villa's second eleven as an amateur, though it is possible he was financially rewarded by the club, and used the money to pay for his articles. 
Being of an ambitious disposition, Garnsey wrote to three of the leading accountancy firms in the City of London for a position. Price Waterhouse engaged him in 1905 at a salary of $2 per week. Initially, he worked almost exclusively for Nicholas Waterhouse, the most recent admission to the partnership, and made an excellent impression. Waterhouse considered his investigation of Cornells, a Smithfield business seeking public flotation, masterly. Although only in his early twenties, Garnsey detected irregularities which resulted in a prolonged but successful litigation. Shortly after joining Price Waterhouse, Garnsey was sent to Paris to assist with an investigation of the New York Life Insurance Company, and his ability to work efficiently under pressure drew him to the attention of other partners. 
Inexhaustible energy, combined with high intelligence and a natural skill for accountancy, resulted in Garnsey's being made a partner in 1913, aged thirty -- a remarkable achievement in an era when experience and family connections were valued. He had developed an uncanny skill with numbers and once observed: 'to me figures have always possessed individuality. I can remember a figure connected with an individual long after I may have forgotten his features and form' (obituary, 'Evening News'). In the years before the First World War, Garnsey travelled extensively on the continent on audits and investigations for Price Waterhouse. In 1914 he volunteered for military service but was rejected on health grounds. In 1915 he married Miriam Howles BSc, daughter of John Howles, a cotton-mill manager; they had a son and a daughter. The following year he joined the finance department of the Ministry of Munitions in an honorary capacity and in 1917 was appointed director of internal audits and controller of munitions accounts. He eventually served as chairman of the finance committee and the finance member of the Munitions Council, and in June 1918 he was made a KBE for his war work. 
While controller of munitions accounts, Garnsey met leading politicians, including Churchill, and had an opportunity to demonstrate his administrative and financial expertise to senior civil servants. As a result, he was in demand to serve upon government committees and investigations; in 1919 these included the Demobilization Board, the Munitions Council for the liquidation of contracts, the Ministry of Health committee on the government housing scheme, and the Treasury committee of inquiry into the accounts of aerodrome construction works. He was later a member of the Ministry of Health inquiry into the affairs of the Metropolitan Water Board (1920), the Lawrence committee on the administration of accounting for army expenditure (1922), and (in 1924) the Treasury committee on the accounting methods of government departments, the Board of Trade committee on the 'Assurance Companies Acts', and the court of inquiry into the remuneration of doctors under the 'National Health Insurance Acts'. In 1925 he was appointed a member of the National Food Council, and in 1930 he served as chairman of the marketing and distribution consumable commodities committee of the Economic Advisory Council. He became chairman of the British industries fairs, sites, and buildings committee in 1931. 
This public role reflected not only his own eminence, but the increasing significance of the accountancy profession. The network of connections that Garnsey had established led to Price Waterhouse being entrusted with a succession of special assignments. The companies with which the firm had close links included: Marconi Wireless Telegraph Company; Farrow's Bank; Armstrong, Whitworth & Co.; Liptons; Cable and Wireless; Spillers' Milling and Associated Industries; and William Beardmore & Co. Appointment as a company's auditor often followed intensive work on a prospectus or reorganization. As a result, Price Waterhouse flourished throughout the 1920s, generating sustained growth: its fee income rose from $102,398 in 1918 to over $300,000 by 1930, making it one of the largest practices in the UK. 
Appreciating the limitations of the 'Companies Acts', Garnsey was one of the first accountants in Britain to call for reform of reporting procedures. In December 1922 he read a paper entitled 'Holding companies and their published accounts' to the London members of the Institute of Chartered Accountants, publishing the text in the same year. He recommended the presentation of 'a consolidated balance sheet of the whole undertaking amalgamating the assets and liabilities of all the subsidiaries with those of the holding company and a consolidated profit and loss account embracing the profits and losses of all the companies' (Garnsey, 'Holding Companies', 1923, 10). 
An exceptionally hard worker himself, Garnsey demanded the most of his assistants, whom he chose with care. He was also ambitious for Price Waterhouse and in 1929 put pressure on Sir Albert Wyon, the senior partner, to surrender some of his shares in the firm. Length of service governed the principle of succession and Garnsey had no immediate hope of executive authority. However, he continued to challenge Wyon and it was agreed that from 1 July 1932 the latter would retire to become a consultant and Garnsey would assume the senior partnership. Then on 26 June, five days before he was to take the post, Garnsey collapsed and died, aged forty-nine, of a pulmonary embolism, at Saint Hill House, his home at East Grinstead. A brilliant career was thus ended just when its greatest potential was about to be realized. Lengthy obituaries in the financial press and national newspapers nevertheless fittingly described him as a 'business doctor', a 'master of figures', and an 'unusual man of destiny'. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 47512


Garton, Sir Richard Charles (1857-1934), chemist and brewer, was born at 11 Richmond Place, Bedminster, Somerset, on 8 October 1857, the eldest of five sons of William Garton (1832-1905) a brewer, and his wife, Ellen Miller, 'nee' Littleton. William Garton's company, Garton Hill, pioneered the production of saccharin, or invert sugar, at Southampton in 1855. Richard was educated at Owens College, Manchester, and at Marburg University, Germany, where he studied the problems of fermentation in brewing. He made an early study of chemistry, and later became involved in the application of modern chemistry to the brewing and sugar industries. He was a pioneer in the manufacture of liquid glucose (corn syrup), the development of which, in the confectionery trade, he did much to foster. A practical brewer of great ability, his knowledge and advice were sought by many companies. He provided financial assistance to institutions founded to advance the science and practice of brewing, such as the Institute of Brewing, of which he was vice-president, the School of Brewing at the University of Birmingham, and the Sir John Cass Institute of London. He provided financial support and gave advice to the council of the Brewers' Society and the National Trade Defence Association, and encouraged brewery companies to adopt a policy of public-house reform. In 1902, when the brewing industry was experiencing difficulties, Garton was invited to join the board of Watney, Combe, Reid & Co. Ltd as a director. He was appointed deputy chairman in 1924 and chairman in 1928, but ill health forced him to relinquish the post in 1932, though he remained on the board. He was also a director of E. Lacon & Co., a brewery in Great Yarmouth, permanent governing director of Garton, Sons & Co., and a director of Manbre and Garton Ltd, brewing-sugar manufacturers of Battersea. Considered a financial expert, he was for some years a director of Lloyds Bank Ltd. 
In 1900 Garton unsuccessfully contested Battersea as a Conservative. A staunch unionist, he was president of the Haslemere branch of the Unionist Association, and of the Constitutional Club. In 1912 he established the Garton Foundation for the study of international relations, especially the relation of military and political power to social and economic advantage. Knighted in 1908, he was created a GBE for his war services in 1918. Although he took a minor role in the public life of Haslemere, he was a generous supporter of local organizations and institutions. Garton had married in 1883 Nellie (died 1925), daughter of Andrew Durrant of Bishops Hall, Chelmsford. They had two daughters. In memory of his wife he built the children's ward of Haslemere Hospital, and later added a nurses' hostel. He presented the town with a steam fire engine, which he later replaced with a motorized one. 
Sir Richard was one of the founders of the British Empire Cancer Campaign. His gift of $20,000 set the campaign up in 1923 and he thereafter served as its honorary secretary and chairman of its finance committee. In 1928 he paid for the entire cost of the International Conference on Cancer, which was attended by over 600 delegates. In connection with his investigations into cancer, he established the Garton prize of $500 and medal in 1931. He was honorary secretary and treasurer of the King's College for Women department of household and social science in the University of London. 
Sir Richard made a hobby of collecting seventeenth- and eighteenth-century drinking glasses, which were exhibited at the Educational Museum, Haslemere, in 1932. Yachting and horse-racing were his chief sports, and he later devoted much time to the breeding of racehorses. Not long before his death he took over the Brook stud at Newmarket, intending to breed on a large scale, but he became very ill and died at his home, Lythe Hill, Haslemere, on 22 April 1934, survived by his daughters. He was buried at Haslemere parish church on 25 April. 


@@@@@


doc= 47513


Reynolds, Stephen Sydney (1881-1919), writer, was born on 16 May 1881 at 63 New Park Street, Devizes, Wiltshire, the first of the two children of Frank Reynolds (1855-1927), a businessman and farmer, and his first wife, Clara (1858-1891), daughter of George Cox, a butcher, and his wife, Ann. His childhood was troubled: his mother died when he was ten and he was constantly at war with his father. He was educated at Devizes College and All Saints' School, Bloxham, where he became a devout Christian, a promising pianist, and, in his final year, head boy. From 1899 to 1902 he read chemistry at Owens College, Manchester, where incipient tuberculosis hampered his studies and he emerged with a third-class degree. 
At Owens he came under the influence of the writer and critic Thomas Seccombe and determined to become a writer himself. In the winter of 1902-3 he went to Paris to study at the Ecole des Mines and write for the 'Weekly Critical Review'. But poverty and illness drove him back to England where at Sidmouth in the autumn of 1903 he suffered a major breakdown which nearly killed him. He was nursed back to health by his old schoolmistress, Ada Bennett, at Devizes College. He abandoned Christianity for a mystical pantheism. 
In Devizes from 1904 to 1906 he wrote his only novel, 'The Holy Mountain' (1909), a satirical attack upon the Northcliffe press, revivalism, and the petty politicking of his home town. Edward Garnett thought it 'the strongest and most pungent satire' for many years (Scoble, 177), but as a novel it is marred by the weakness of its characterization. Through Garnett and the Tuesday lunches at the Mont Blanc restaurant in Soho, Reynolds became close friends with Edward Thomas and Joseph Conrad. 
In August 1906, on a walking holiday with his Great Dane, Margot, he stopped off for a few days in Sidmouth to stay with Bob Woolley, a fisherman friend he had met there in 1903. Robert William Woolley (1865-1947) had lived since 1900 in the tall brick cottage in Bedford Square where he brought up the eight survivors of his fourteen children. Through Reynolds, his catchphrases, like 'you works an' slaves an' worries, an' never gets no for'arder' ('Seems So!', 186) came to symbolize the frustrations of the Edwardian working class. Reynolds was overwhelmed by the spontaneity and resilience of this large working family as it faced the privations of poverty -- what he later called his Sidmouth revelation -- and decided to share their lot as both writer and fisherman himself. He lived with them from 1907 until just before his death. 
Reynolds wrote a book about this new experience. 'A Poor Man's House' (1908) is an Orwellian picture of working-class life from the inside, and its almost anthropological detail provides a mine for sociologists and historians. In it Reynolds first outlined his virulent opposition to Fabian social reform, which destroyed the resilience of working people by forcing middle-class values upon them. But it is the acute observation and living portrayals of the Woolleys, interspersed with the narrator's confessional asides, that turned the book into a minor classic. Joseph Conrad called it 'a book for which one seems to have waited all the time' ('Collected Letters', 4.134). 
Its publication in October 1908 made Reynolds a national figure overnight. He was to be seen regularly in London, a short, sturdy man, with neatly parted hair and small round glasses, dressed in fisherman's jersey, blue serge trousers, and sea boots. Deeply neurotic, he got on well with those who showed sympathy and understanding, most often outsiders like himself, but attacked injustice and self-importance with a fierce temper, inherited from his father. He was homosexual and never married. In 1915 he met Harry Paynter (1894-1958), a young St Ives fisherman, who remained his partner until his death. 
Reynolds's second most successful book, 'Seems So!' (1911), a collaboration with Bob and Tom Woolley, sought to give a genuine working man's view of the social and political questions of the day. In it he developed in popular form the political themes of 'A Poor Man's House': the superiority of working-class culture, its necessary conservatism, the need to protect it from the depredations of social reformers. He celebrated the instinctive libertarianism of working people, and exposed the hurt of bourgeois class prejudice. His attack upon elementary education caused a political uproar. The book built him a reputation as the voice of working-class opinion and in the pre-1914 industrial unrest he interpreted the strikers to the nation. Much influenced by Henri Bergson and the philosophy of intuition, he saw working-class dissatisfaction as a matter of feeling rather than economics. 
His literary success was critical, not financial, and his later books had to be written first as newspaper articles. 'Alongshore' (1910) is a lyrical evocation of life where sea and land meet, and 'How 'Twas' (1912), a collection of short stories and sketches, though variable in quality, provides a synoptical overview of his writing life. His last work, articles for the 'Nation' entitled 'Wealth and Life' (1913-14), developed an intriguing new theory of the philosophy of work which he labelled 'psycho-economics'. 
The pressures of writing for little financial reward played havoc with Reynolds's nerves, and a further breakdown constantly threatened. Gradually, writing took second place to political support of his fishermen friends. Through his membership of the Harmsworth committee of 1913 and the inshore fisheries committee of 1914 he secured almost single-handed a revolution in longshore fisheries policy: co-operation in marketing, harnessing of motor power, new insurance systems. All of this he personally implemented in the south-west, first as fisheries adviser to the Development Commission and subsequently, after the outbreak of war, as resident fisheries inspector (the idea for which he had developed himself) for the Board of Agriculture and Fisheries. 
Worn out by war work and his own relentless drive, he succumbed to the third wave of the influenza pandemic of 1918-19 and, after a six-day illness, died in a nursing home in Seafield Road, Sidmouth, on 14 February 1919. He was buried the following day in Landpart cemetery. 
A post-war generation was startled by his 'Letters' (1923), edited by Harold Wright, which resurrected his unique voice; and the republication by Edward Garnett in 1928 of 'A Poor Man's House' in the popular 'Travellers' Library' ensured its survival through the twentieth century. The emotional power of its narrative, together with the stylistic brilliance of 'Alongshore' and many of his short stories, has secured Reynolds's place in literature. 
The growth of social history in the 1960s revived Reynolds's reputation as a social observer. For with 'A Poor Man's House' and 'Seems So!' he also takes his place in the English tradition of middle-class observation of working-class life, stretching from Henry Mayhew in the 1850s to George Orwell and Mass-Observation in the 1930s and 1940s. Like Martha Loane and Lady Bell, whose work he admired, he was a cultural investigator rather than a quantifier, though he rejected their emphasis on cultural 'improvement' as the solution to working-class problems. 
As a social explorer Reynolds is unique. He was not driven by motives of class guilt or the desire for quick journalistic copy, academic reputation, or political solutions. He went to live with the poor because he disliked the cold sterility of middle-class culture, and welcomed the honest warmth of the family that was to give him his first real home. For Reynolds it is not working-class, but middle-class, life that is the problem. Unlike other writers in the tradition, he made his whole life with the poor and wrote from the inside looking out. 
Reynolds's fishery reforms were overtaken by the industrialization of fishing and have become a part of history, though such a champion would be welcome to fishermen in any age. His sharp journalistic eye and crystalline prose survive in all his works, but it is his human sympathy, in writing and in life, which is arguably his greatest legacy. As Hilaire Belloc wrote, 'He loved the poor: he understood the sea. He was a brother and a support to sailing-men, and he had charity, humility, and justice in equal poise' (Belloc, 130). 


@@@@@


doc= 47514


Gartside, Thomas Edmund (1857-1941), cotton spinner, was born at Park Lane, Royton, 2 miles north of Oldham, on 9 February 1857, the only son of Alice Gartside. His birth occurred at a most propitious time, since Oldham became the world's leading mill town during the 1860s, and so opened up opportunities for the young and enterprising. Gartside went to the Methodist school in Royton and later took evening classes at Royton Temperance Seminary. He began work at the age of twelve and gained experience in half a dozen different posts, rising from shop assistant in 1869 to clerk in 1876, and to company secretary in 1889. In 1883 he married Harriet (1855-1937), daughter of William Travis, a waste dealer; they had two sons and two daughters. Only when he became a director of the Shiloh Spinning Company in 1891, and its manager in 1894, did Gartside embark on his real business career. The seal was set upon his ascent in 1891, when he became a member of the Manchester Royal Exchange, and so joined the elite of the cotton world in the largest of markets for cotton yarn and cotton cloth. 
Gartside's first task was to restore Shiloh to financial health and to a position befitting its auspicious name. Founded during the boom of 1874 as one of Oldham's limited-liability spinning companies, it had proved to be one of the least successful of ventures. Its dividend record was appalling and its debit balance had trebled in the decade from 1885 to 1894. Gartside infused a new spirit into the administration of the company, pursued a shrewd financial policy, and established tight control over the purchase, spinning, and sale of yarn. He liquidated the debit balance by 1897, and so restored the confidence of investors. He raised the proportion of loan capital to 76 per cent of the total capital by 1902. Not merely did he resume the payment of dividends from 1899, for the first time since 1885, but he also raised their level by paying a low fixed interest to the loanholders. He endowed Shiloh with a new mill (1899-1901) and installed mules manufactured by Platts, which proved more productive than those from Asa Lees. He depreciated his plant at the same high annual rate of 6 per cent as his fellow businessman John Bunting (1839-1923). He bought cotton cheaply and in bulk, and enlarged his storage facilities in order to avoid being held to ransom by speculators in the raw cotton market. Shiloh joined the elite of the 'Oldham limiteds' in 1906 when it ceased to publish accounts, and so passed from the realm of public scrutiny to semi-private status, its shareholders remaining content with the regular payment of 10 per cent dividends for the twenty-two years from 1904 to 1926. 
The abilities of Tommy Gartside were recognized by his appointment, by 1899, as a director of three other companies, by which time he had laid the foundation for the construction of a group of associated companies. The formation of that group took place in two phases, during the Edwardian boom of 1904-8, and during the years 1916-23. Between 1904 and 1908 he became the chairman of three companies, including Shiloh itself in 1907. From 1908 he was attending the regular weekly meetings of eight different boards of directors. By 1914 his three core companies controlled six mills, with 284,325 spindles. By 1923 he had become the chairman of nine companies, with fourteen mills and 962,780 spindles, some 44 per cent of the total number in Royton. The construction of the Gartside group was complete. Until 1922 all the companies were located in Royton itself, so easing the task of supervision. All save two had built new mills rather than operating the old mills favoured by Bunting. Gartside himself confined his interests to the cotton trade, becoming a director of the local board of the London and Lancashire Insurance Company and of John Hepworth & Co., yarn agents. In 1914 he became a member of the committee of the Oldham Master Cotton Spinners' Association and of the Federation of Master Cotton Spinners' Associations, both bodies which Bunting shunned. In 1919 he served as one of Oldham's five delegates to the World Cotton Conference in New Orleans. In 1923 he became vice-president of the Oldham Master Cotton Spinners' Association. 
During the boom of 1919-20 Gartside avoided the temptation to recapitalize his companies in the extravagant mode adopted by other limiteds. He undertook a conservative recapitalization of Shiloh in 1920, but used the opportunity to end its reliance on loan capital. The group registered its best performance for the year 1925 when Shiloh paid a dividend of 12.5 per cent and the rest of the group averaged 31 per cent, an abnormally high level caused by the 115 per cent distributed by the group's Grape Mill. The performance of Shiloh was indeed outclassed by that of the other Gartside mills for twelve years from 1921. In 1916 Gartside had first introduced high-speed ring spinning into the Park and Sandy Lane Mill, but he remained loyal to the Lancashire mule, the proportion of ring spindles in his mills averaging only one-third the proportion in the Oldham district as a whole. He built the Elk Mill in 1926-7 out of Shiloh's reserve funds and equipped it with 107,000 mule spindles supplied by Platts. That mill, together with the Holden Mill built at Astley Bridge to the north of Bolton, were the last mule mills to be built in Lancashire: both were built by cotton magnates who had begun their working lives in their shirt-sleeves. The year 1926 marked the climacteric of the textile industry in Lancashire and in the world. Thereafter dividends declined, especially after 1931, to reach a nadir in 1934-5, and averaged during the 1930s only one-third of their level in the 1920s. The price of Shiloh shares sank below par from 1930 and did not rise above par until 1939. 
The mills of Royton spun coarse counts of yarn, or Royton counts, for the home trade, and successfully preserved their independence, while other mills were reluctantly forced by their dependence on loans into large combines. Gartside remained fiercely independent and declined to join the Cotton Yarn Association formed in 1927. In 1933 he did negotiate with his local rival, Will Cheetham (1869-1942), the Royton coarse counts agreement, which was the first price-fixing agreement reached within the industry since 1909. He refused to join the Lancashire Cotton Corporation which had been formed in 1929 in order to rationalize the American spinning trade by closing down mills. Nor would he conform to its policies for regulating the market: 'He is an impossible fellow... He will creep under the general price just so long as he is allowed to' (minutes of the board of directors, Lancashire Cotton Corporation, 30 May 1934, 4). Thereby Gartside performed a valuable social service: he excluded outside influence from Royton and maintained local employment opportunities when they were shrinking elsewhere. Two of the Gartside companies, the Roy and the Willow Vale, ceased to pay dividends after 1922, but were kept in operation as machines for processing cotton and for paying wages. Even burdened by such millstones, the Gartside group averaged a dividend for the years 1908-41 of 8.9 per cent, while Shiloh itself paid one of 8.6 per cent (1902-41), or one quarter higher than the Oldham average. By 1941 Shiloh was paying a dividend of 20 per cent and its shares stood at a premium of 35 per cent. Thus Gartside fulfilled his responsibilities to Royton as well as to his shareholders: in return he secured the intense loyalty possible only within a small community. He also served as vicar's warden at St Paul's Church, Royton, from 1903, as a Lancashire magistrate from 1913, and as a Liberal councillor on Royton urban district council (1906-15). The whole of Royton mourned his passing when he died, at the age of eighty-three, on 8 January 1941, at his home, Highlands House, Royton. He was buried at Royton cemetery on 11 January. 
Gartside was succeeded at Shiloh first by his son, Colonel J. B. Gartside (1897-1964) and then, from 1965, by his grandson, Edmund Gartside. Under that dynasty the Shiloh group achieved a unique status within Lancashire. First, it survived through the pursuit of a shrewd policy of product diversification, while other groups disintegrated and disappeared. It successfully preserved its independence of the giant corporations which invaded Lancashire during the 1960s. Second, it remained under the administration of the same family for three generations, in flat defiance of the local proverb 'From shirt-sleeves to shirt-sleeves takes three generations'. Third, it maintained a highly effective paternalist tradition which created 'the Shiloh breed' of workpeople and integrated the members of 'the Shiloh family' into the service of a continuing enterprise. 


@@@@@


doc= 47516


Gee, Henry Simpson (1842-1924), shoe manufacturer and businessman, was born on 6 April 1842 at Lowerhead Row, Leeds, the eldest son of George Walker Gee, linen draper, and his wife, Ellen, 'nee' Simpson. He was educated privately at Grange School, Thorp Arch, near Leeds. After working briefly for his father, in 1863 he joined the successful leather tanning and dressing business of Stead and Simpson, which had been founded in 1834 by Edmund Stead and Gee's uncle, Edward Simpson. 
Gee's appointment coincided with significant technological innovations in the footwear industry, notably the application of sewing and riveting machines, which facilitated the rapid expansion of factory production of ready-to-wear boots and shoes in the last third of the nineteenth century. Recognizing the importance of this, the firm had opened new boot factories in Leicester and Daventry, and in 1864 Gee moved to Leicester to oversee them. Under his control the business expanded rapidly. By the mid-1880s the Leicester factory alone was producing 30,000 pairs per week, and the firm employed over 1750 workers on various sites. In 1889 the partnership was converted into a private company, Stead and Simpson Ltd, with Gee as chairman, and after closing the original leather processing works in 1892 it concentrated entirely on footwear production and distribution. 
By this time Gee had diversified into retailing to secure outlets for the firm's products, opening a network of more than 100 shops by as early as 1889. These adopted pioneering marketing strategies common to other emerging multiples of the time -- using central locations, vigorous selling methods, low prices, and minimal fixtures. By the end of the century, therefore, Gee was responsible for one of the largest vertically integrated footwear businesses in the country. He was also personally involved with other leading firms, notably Freeman, Hardy, and Willis, of which he was a board member and later deputy chairman; its chairman, Edward Wood, was a member of Stead and Simpson's board. 
Gee's interests, however, extended well beyond the footwear industry. He was 'a master of management well nigh in every field of industry and speculation' ('Leicester Mail', 24 July 1924), and 'by far the most prominent and interesting personality in local commercial circles for nearly half a century' ('Shoe and Leather News', 25 July 1924). From 1874 he was chairman of the Leicester Horse Tramway Company and, in 1886, successfully negotiated its takeover by the corporation. He was elected to the board of the Leicestershire Banking Company in 1878, became its chairman in 1890, and was instrumental in initiating and conducting negotiations which led to its amalgamation with the London City and Midland Bank Ltd (later the Midland Bank) of which he also became a director. He was also chairman of the Bagworth Colliery Company and of Richard Hornsby & Sons Ltd, agricultural engineers of Grantham. As a commercial magnate he acquired a reputation for being able to turn round struggling businesses, which led to numerous directorships in fields as diverse as engineering, grocery, dress, drapery, and shipping. As a businessman Gee had a reputation for being something of an autocrat who did not relish challenges to his authority, and this occasionally led to bitter boardroom battles. Nor did he suffer fools gladly or sadly, sweeping the slacker and trifler from his presence 'without the slightest regard to their position or connections' ('Leicester Mail', 21 July 1924). 
Gee's involvement in local affairs was restricted to spheres in which he had particular interests. He was briefly Liberal town councillor for the North St Margaret's ward between 1878 and 1881, but he resigned due to pressure of business. In 1889 he became JP for the city and county of Leicester. He was a passionate advocate of vocational education, promoting the Leicester technical schools and leaving $20,000 in his will, the largest single bequest, to the endowment fund of the Leicester, Leicestershire, and Rutland College, later the University of Leicester. He was also president of the Leicester Trade Protection Society, the Leicester chamber of commerce, and the board of governors of the Royal Infirmary. He was firmly discriminating in his support of charities, approving in particular the work of the Charity Organization Society. Initially a Liberal, he became a unionist as a result of the home rule crisis, but he remained a committed free-trader. His political conversion was mirrored by his religious affiliation, for he abandoned the Wesleyan Methodism of his youth to become a staunch Anglican. 
Gee was married three times: on 5 May 1870 to Isabella Gorham, daughter of John Gorham, surgeon, of Tonbridge; then to Mary Blanche, daughter of James Dalton of Fillingham Manor, near Lincoln; and finally to the widow of Mr S. R. Wykes, who survived him. He had four sons, all of whom eventually joined the board of directors of Stead and Simpson: Harry Percy, George Cecil, Ernest Gorham, and Charles Dalton. He also had four daughters, one of whom married Dr Astley V. Clarke, a prominent promoter of university education in Leicester. 
Gee died on 20 July 1924 at his fashionable residence of Knighton Frith at Knighton, near Leicester, aged eighty-two. His funeral service was held on 24 July at St John the Baptist Church, Leicester, and he was interred at St Mary's, Knighton. 


@@@@@


doc= 47517


Gestetner, David (1854-1939), inventor of duplicating machinery and industrialist, was born on 31 March 1854 in Csorna, Hungary, the first son of the four children of Sigmond Gestetner, a small businessman, and his wife, Theresa Figdor. He left school at the age of thirteen and in 1871 moved to Vienna to work in the office of a stockbroker before emigrating to the USA in 1873. He struggled to make ends meet in a variety of occupations in both New York and Chicago before returning to Vienna and entering into a partnership making equipment for hectographs (apparatus for copying documents using a gelatin plate). This partnership was dissolved in 1879 and he moved to London where he became an assistant at Fairholme & Co., stationers, in the City. Gestetner had an inventive frame of mind and was preoccupied with the problems associated with copying from his original days in Vienna. In 1879, in London, he filed the first of his many patents in connection with copying. His most fundamental patent, filed in 1881, was concerned with the invention of the Cyclostyle, a pen with a small, sharp-toothed, rotating wheel at its tip which could be used to write and draw by perforating a new kind of stencil; the latter was based on a Japanese tissue with which he was familiar from a period during which he sold kites in Chicago. The pen and the stencil used in conjunction enabled office duplicating to be done for the first time in quantity, at speed, and with good quality results, and Gestetner can with justification be called the founder of the worldwide office copying and duplicating industry. 
On 18 August 1885 Gestetner married Sophie Lazarus (1862-1933), daughter of Ralph Lazarus, a government store contractor. They had one son and six daughters. His main interests were his business and his family. At different stages he employed his brother, his brother-in-law, various cousins, nephews, and nieces, as well as his son, three sons-in-law, and several grandchildren. He was a devout Jew who devoted any spare time to communal activities, especially connected with a congregation of like-minded believers he had been instrumental in founding. He never retired and continued to be involved in the firm he founded until his death, going daily to his laboratory in the main factory. The only exception to this routine was an annual two-month winter break in the south of France, from whence he communicated on a regular basis with his assistants in London. He died in the Hotel Ruhl, Nice, on 8 March 1939, during one of these breaks, and was buried in Nice. 


@@@@@


doc= 47518


Gibbs, Herbert Cokayne, first Baron Hunsdon of Hunsdon (1854-1935), merchant banker, was born on 14 May 1854 at Frognal, Hampstead, Middlesex, the fourth son of merchant banker Henry Hucks Gibbs, first Baron Aldenham (1819-1907), and Louisa Anne (1818-1897), daughter of William Adams. After schooling at Winchester College (1868-71), he attended Trinity College, Cambridge (BA, 1877). Following a course of training (1877-9), in 1879 he joined Antony Gibbs & Sons, the family firm, at 22 Bishopsgate, London. He married Anna Maria (1862-1938), daughter of Richard Durant, of High Canons, Hertfordshire, in 1885. The couple had three sons and three daughters. 
Founded in 1808 the Gibbs firm originally had connections with Spain, and by 1820 it had adopted the west coast of South America as a field for its activities. Guano became its main interest from 1842, transforming the house from a small mercantile establishment to a prominent City merchant bank. When Gibbs joined, output of guano was declining, successfully substituted by the new nitrate fertilizers. The firm became a major participant in the financing, production, and trade of Chilean nitrate when Chile annexed the rich Peruvian province of Tarapaca during the Pacific War at the end of 1880. Gibbs was sent to Valparaiso (March 1880 to 1881) to supervise the closure of the Peruvian branches and the investment in nitrate 'oficinas'. After 1881 the house also had widespread interests in Australasian businesses, mainly in shipping, import trading, and mining; and it later became involved in other mining ventures elsewhere, through participation in the Exploration Company. 
During the second half of the nineteenth century Antony Gibbs & Sons underwent substantial transformation. In the 1860s it had carried on an enormously profitable commission business, with annual profits of up to $137,000. Later it was forced by a decline in this trade into enterprises in which it had no experience. Its main staple remained nitrate but this was extraordinarily speculative and unprofitable, especially in the last two decades of the century when annual profits dropped as low as $15,000. Over the same period there was also a sharp decline in the capital base of the firm (due to heavy withdrawals by partners). 'Could any depositor who was not a relation leave his money with us if he knew the position?' argued Gibbs in 1902 (Gibbs MS 11044/2, fol. 284). His father had entered parliament in 1891, representing the City of London; and other Gibbs partners were similarly distracted by parliamentary commitments. This dangerous lack of active leadership was to be ended by Herbert Gibbs: a full partner and director from 1882, he was to be the key figure in the company from 1900 to 1933. He was responsible for the nitrate side of the business, which became the supplier of thousands of tons of nitrate required by the Ministry of Munitions during the First World War. When the Nitrate and Soda Executive was formed to co-ordinate purchases among the allies in 1917, Gibbs was appointed director of purchases for Europe, and the firm kept its complicated accounts without charge. In recognition of his war services the French government conferred on him the Legion d'honneur in 1918. He was created Baron Hunsdon of Hunsdon in 1923. 
Under Gibbs's firm leadership, the fortunes of the firm recovered. By the early 1920s the capital of Antony Gibbs & Sons stood at over $2 million. However, in 1920, when wartime demand had ceased, the nitrate industry was suffering a severe crisis. While supply increased rapidly, consumption stagnated. To counter the threat of German synthetic nitrate, to stabilize prices, and to improve consumption, Gibbs organized a pool of European nitrate-holders in February 1921. He was elected chairman and his firm appointed as agents. Of the million tons held by the pool only 100,000 tons were sold in the first half of 1921. After unsuccessful negotiations with the Chilean Association of Nitrate Producers concerning prices, in the face of a deteriorating social and financial situation in Chile President Alessandri invited Gibbs to an emergency meeting. Gibbs sailed on 25 August 1921 and in October an agreement was reached: the association would reduce prices to 14's'. to stimulate sales, but it would compensate the pool by reimbursing $1.5 million. 
These and related events constituted a major difficulty for Antony Gibbs & Sons. The firm suffered a severe loss of working capital, and new developments were sharply restricted. In 1930, under a special act of the Chilean government, the Compania de Salitre de Chile (Cosach) was organized; this became the sole producer of nitrate and iodine. Nationalization put an end to what was still the main business of the house, the management of 'oficinas' and supply stores. Exports of nitrate were also monopolized and the firm ceased to have any interests in nitrate business, except as credit managers for the group of London banks who helped to finance Cosach's activities and as agents for the sale of iodine. 
In addition to his role in the family firm, Gibbs was chairman of the Alianza Nitrate Company from 1895 to 1928, and of the Pan de Azucar Nitrate Company from 1901 to 1926. He was a director of the Rio de Janeiro City Improvement Company from 1884, and its chairman from 1905 to 1935. From 1908 he also sat on the board of the Australian Mutual Provident Society. 
A dynamic member of the business community, Gibbs was described as 'shrewd and capable, but above all transparently honest' ('The Times', 27 May 1935). Active on behalf of the Conservative Party, Gibbs was also chairman of the City of London Conservative Association from 1912 to 1932. He shared his political interests with his wife, who was president of the women's branch of the association. From 1924 to 1932 he was president of the 1912 Club, his brainchild, created to combat socialism and radicalism in the East End constituencies. Under his leadership, in 1924 the association protested against the formation of a Labour government; and it denounced the depressing effect of the December 1923 general election on the real value of the British government's long-dated securities, as a warning to the Liberals over collaboration with MacDonald. 
In 1914 Gibbs had opposed Irish home rule: 'No compromise is possible in this question. The 'Home Rule Bill' must go; for the only alternatives are national dishonour or civil war' ('The Times', 8 April 1914); and he raised funds for the Ulster Union Defence League. He combated modern social legislation which 'relieved individuals from responsibility and weakened the character of the nation' ('The Times', 3 April 1924). The changes introduced since 1907 by successive governments in taxation methods were also regrettable, according to Gibbs. He condemned the heavy consequences of death taxes and of super-tax for British industry and trade, and favoured a constitutional review that would put an end to the Commons' sole control over finance. 
Gibbs took part in the parliamentary delegation sent to Russia in 1912, returning the visit of the Duma. In 1919 he was member of the Indemnity Committee, concerned with war debts, and the war cabinet agreed he should be one of the delegates to the Paris peace conference; he was replaced at the last moment by Lord Sumner. He then delivered a speech on German indemnity, and a copy of this was taken to Paris by the delegates. In 1926 Gibbs helped to create and was first chairman of the Empires Industries Association, to increase trade within the empire after the dissolution of the British Commonwealth Union. A commissioner of the Public Works Loan Board from 1884, he served as deputy chairman in 1908, and chairman from 1921. Some sixty-five Labour MPs voted in 1930 -- unsuccessfully -- against the continuance of Gibbs in this office, remembering that during the 1926 strike he had said that the miners were the enemies and that starvation was a proper weapon to be used against them. 
Gibbs published a number of works dealing with genealogy, currency, and taxation. In 1908 he had bought a country house, Briggens, in the manor of Hunsdon, near Ware, Hertfordshire. This fueled his interest in local history, and led to his publication of 'The Parish Register of Hunsdon' (1915) and the 'History of Gibbs of Fenton, in Dartington' (1925). Although more concerned about the practice of business than about economic theory, Gibbs was a convinced bimetallist, writing 'A Bimetallic Primer' (1894), 'Address on Bimetallism' (1895), and several letters and articles. He shared his views with his father, a fervent advocate of bimetallism, and founder, along with Henry Riversdale Grenfell, of the Bimetallic League in the early 1880s, and later its president. 
Appointed an income tax commissioner in 1886, Gibbs became increasingly interested in fiscal matters, publishing on the subject several pamphlets, articles, and letters in the press. In 'The Incidence of Income Tax and Wasting Securities' (1904), he exposed the anomalies of the law over assets which became exhausted after a period of time, such as quarries or mines, and campaigned to bring up the question of these depreciating funds. In 1920 he gave evidence on 'wasting assets abroad' before the royal commission on income tax. In these questions and many other public topics he was a valued correspondent of 'The Times'. 
Like his brother Vicary Gibbs, Herbert Gibbs was an accomplished gardener and an excellent shot. A lifelong fly-fisher he later took up painting watercolours and sketching. He was a Hertfordshire magistrate and also served as high sheriff of the county in 1913. Gibbs died after a short illness on 22 May 1935 at his home, Briggens, Hertfordshire. He was buried at St Dunstan's Church, Hunsdon, on 25 May. 


@@@@@


doc= 47525


Gomme, Ebenezer (1858-1931), furniture manufacturer, was born on 12 April 1858 in Nettlebed, near Henley, the son of John Gomme and his wife, Hannah Grimsell. His father's occupation at his birth was described as 'fellmonger', a feller of trees. An ancestor was James Gomme (1726-1825) of High Wycombe and Hammersmith, who was a furniture maker, a member of the Society of Antiquaries, and a friend of Edmund Burke. The family moved to High Wycombe in 1864, and the father was employed by the firm of Cox & Co., chairmakers of that town. 
Ebenezer Gomme was apprenticed to Cox & Co. as a chairmaker at the age of thirteen, in 1871, and served a five-year apprenticeship with them. As a 'journeyman' he broadened his experience by working for the next few years with Goodearls and with William Birch, both firms in the town of High Wycombe, as a 'best chairmaker'. His first venture on his own behalf was in Exeter in 1881-2, but this failed and he returned to High Wycombe and to work for William Birch. In 1886-8 he worked in partnership under the name Gomme and Mendy, but this too was unsuccessful. 
In 1881 Gomme married Isabella Alice Pierce (1853-1954), daughter of William Pierce, foreman of a coal wharf. The couple had two sons, Frank ('b'. 1883) and Ted ('b'. 1890). Continuing to work as a chairmaker Gomme tried again to start up his own business, in 1898, from his garden shed in High Wycombe, in partnership with his brother-in-law, Tim Pierce. The business was successful, though the partnership was dissolved in 1901. Gomme had progressed in business sufficiently to open his first factory in Leigh Street, High Wycombe, in 1909, and by 1914 he was employing 200 furniture makers. He went on to add another factory to the group in 1927, at Spring Gardens, High Wycombe, a fire having destroyed the premises at Leigh Street in 1922. 
The firm of E. Gomme Ltd built its reputation on the concept of 'whole house furniture'; in other words it made dining, upholstery, bedroom, and occasional furniture, in the same style and idiom. The building of the Spring Gardens factory also meant that it could work on batch production in advance of orders, with 250 cabinets and 1000 chairs (each of the same design) being made in one production run. The economies of scale that this produced ensured the company's place in the market when many others were having difficulties in the late 1920s and 1930s. Gomme's sons joined the firm and by 1918 Frank, who had started his working life in the civil service, was in charge of administration. He was dispatched to the USA in the same year, to buy the latest woodworking machinery and to bring back American production methods. Ted, who had started his working life with war service in the navy, joined the firm in 1918 in charge of production. 
Ebenezer Gomme died on 4 November 1931 at his home, The Crest, Totteridge, High Wycombe, having retired in the previous year. He was survived by his wife. The firm, headed by his sons, continued to prosper, becoming one of the largest manufacturers of furniture in the UK. However, since its products were retailed by others, it did not become a household name. 
During the Second World War the Gomme factories made Mosquito aircraft. The skills of precise engineering, and the extensive use of very accurate jigs moved the firm's already high production standards forward, and with the demise of the controls and utility furniture in 1950 the company introduced a range of designs based on a pre-war product known as the bachelor suite. Initially called in the factory the Brandon suite, the furniture was designed for very large production runs. Carefully engineered and jigged, it was renamed G-Plan and was a popular success. 


@@@@@


doc= 47527


Gordon, Henry Panmure (1837-1902), stockbroker, was born on 22 October 1837 at Killiechassie, Perthshire, the son of Henry George Gordon, a director of the Union Bank of London. Baptized Panmure-Gordon, he dropped the hyphen from his name later in life, and was universally known as 'P. G.'. He was distantly related to Lord Byron and later bequeathed his collection of Byron memorabilia to Harrow School, where he had been educated before going on to Oxford University and then spending a year in Bonn. In 1856 he was commissioned into the 10th hussars, but resigned his commission in 1860 following the bankruptcy of his father. 
Gordon went out to China, where he joined Lindsay & Co. of Shanghai (later part of Jardine Matheson & Co.), and served under General Gordon at the time of the Taiping rebellion, raising and commanding the Shanghai mounted ranger volunteers. He returned to London in 1865 and became a member of the stock exchange and a junior partner in J. and A. Scrimgeour & Co., in Old Broad Street. In 1876 he founded his own firm of stockbrokers, Gordon & Co., in Hatton Court, Threadneedle Street. This became Panmure Gordon & Co. a year later. In 1885 it became Panmure Gordon, Hill & Co., and in 1902 it reverted to Panmure Gordon & Co. Gordon married, late in life, Carrie Hall (died 1913), daughter of Thomas Beverley Hall, of Beverley, in Yorkshire. His wife was some twenty years his junior, and there were no children of the marriage. 
Panmure Gordon & Co. became one of the largest and most active firms of stockbrokers in the City, being particularly well known for underwriting numerous issues of stock by both British and United States breweries, as well as many loans on the part of Far Eastern and South American governments, including China and Japan and several of the states of Brazil. Gordon was awarded the Grand Officer's Star of the royal order of Jakovo in 1898 for arranging a Serbian loan, and the order of the Rising Sun for his services as sole broker to the Japanese government. Other companies for which the firm acted included the Mashonaland Railway Company and Shell Transport and Trading Company. He is said to have pioneered industrial preference shares and when Liptons was floated on the stock exchange in 1898 he was the first to issue shares at a premium. 
For many years Gordon lived in Brighton, at 34 Adelaide Crescent, travelling to London every weekday by train. Later he lived at Charles Street and 5 Carlton House Terrace in London, and leased a country house at Loudwater Park, near Rickmansworth. The extravagance of his personal lifestyle became legendary. He once remarked that he spent $2000 a month on himself, this being the cost of the bare necessities of life for a gentleman, with any luxuries costing more. At Loudwater he accumulated the largest collection of carriages in the world, brought red deer from Scotland for the park, and kept a gondola on the lake. He was a good shot, renting moors in Scotland almost every year, and a keen angler. He bred collie dogs, and kept a large stable. He entertained upon an expansive scale: the prince of Wales, later Edward VII, was a frequent visitor to Loudwater. Gordon's wardrobe was equally legendary; a fire at Loudwater was said to have destroyed 1100 of his ties alone. At the time of his death he was reputed to have owned 900 pairs of trousers and over 300 greatcoats. He travelled widely, publishing in 1892 'The Land of the Almighty Dollar', an account of a visit to the United States. He was a founder member, and in due course president, of the Scottish Kennel Club, but resigned the year before his death after losing an action brought in the Scottish courts over the unnatural manipulation of the ears of a collie dog. 
Gordon's domestic life became clouded in his last years, as he found it increasingly difficult to adapt his bachelor ways to the demands of a young and socially active wife. He died suddenly on 1 September 1902, apparently of heart failure, at Bad Nauheim, in Germany, where he had gone to take the cure, and he was buried there. Three years later his widow married Frank Geiger; she died in 1913. Gordon's obituarist in the 'Financial News' (3 September 1902) wrote that 'he had a cheery smile and bright word for all who came in contact with him'. Gordon was one of the most successful stockbrokers of his day, especially in the sphere of new issues. One of the most talked-about men in the City of London, he has been described as 'the extrovert 'par excellence' of an extrovert community' (Kynaston, 1.359). 


@@@@@


doc= 47529


Gray, Sir William (1823-1898), shipbuilder and shipowner, was born on 18 January 1823 in Blyth, Northumberland, one of five children of Matthew Gray and his wife, Ann Jane Bryham. His father was a draper and shipowner. He received his schooling at Bruce's academy, Newcastle upon Tyne, before he learned the drapery business under his father. He also spent several years in London before, in 1844, he set up on his own account in Hartlepool. On 15 May 1849 he married Dorothy (died 1906), daughter of Captain John Hall RN. Although at that time they were living at Lewisham, Kent, the Hall family had strong connections with north-east England. The couple had five daughters, including the politician and philanthropist Julia McMordie, and two sons. 
Gray invested his spare capital in ships, building his fortune 'in shop and by ship' as his father had done. In 1863, having withdrawn from the drapery business, he formed a partnership with John Punshon Denton, an established builder of wooden ships, in Hartlepool, to build iron vessels at Denton's Middleton yard. Gray was initially the junior partner in the firm of Denton, Gray & Co., but in practice there was equality between the two men. With the demise of Pile, Spence & Co., a larger yard in West Hartlepool became available and the business was transferred there in 1869. Denton died at the end of 1871 and a disagreement between Gray and Denton's sons over the terms of the partnership went to litigation. The dispute was finally resolved in 1874 and the business that emerged was William Gray & Co. Gray took his son Matthew into partnership in 1877. 
The yard prospered and in 1878 it achieved the distinction of launching the largest tonnage of any shipyard in the world, a feat to be repeated on a number of occasions. The ships were largely medium-size cargo steamers of the well-decked type built in the Hartlepools. These ships were viewed with suspicion by the Board of Trade and Gray initiated an insurance club with the specific goal of fostering public confidence in them. He had already set up, with George Pyman, the East Coast Iron Steamship Association in 1868. Specialization in cargo steamers was part of the reason for the company's success. However, as demand for oil tankers developed the firm secured a share of that market, building the 'Bakuin' (1886), the first tanker for a British owner, and the 'Murex' (1892), the first tanker to navigate the Suez Canal. The latter vessel was the first of a number built for Marcus Samuel, founder of Shell Transport and Trading. Another factor in the yard's success was Gray's willingness to offer extended credit to shipowners, or to take an interest in vessels himself. 
In 1884 Gray moved away from dependence on other builders of marine engines, with the opening of the Central Marine Engineering Works. Three years later the demand for larger ships led to the opening of the Central shipyard, with three berths capable of allowing ships up to 450 ft to be built. Repair facilities had always existed and were further developed. The undertaking became a private limited liability company in December 1888. 
Gray was active in public affairs, serving the Hartlepool port and harbour commission for many years, latterly as chairman. He was mayor of Hartlepool in 1861 and was re-elected the following year. On the incorporation of West Hartlepool in 1887, he was its first mayor; later he became the first person to receive its honorary freedom. He was knighted in 1890 and made president of the chamber of shipping in the following year. He also served on the parliamentary load-line committee and was a director of the North Eastern Railway. He was denied the opportunity to represent Hartlepool as its MP when, standing as a Liberal Unionist in 1891, he was narrowly defeated by Sir Christopher Furness. He served as a JP for many years and in 1892 was made high sheriff of the county of Durham. Gray was also a considerable philanthropist. A staunch Presbyterian, he largely cleared the debts of the churches in the presbytery of Darlington, as well as of all the nonconformist places of worship in the Hartlepools. 
On the death of his son Matthew, in 1896, Gray took over the rolling mills of the West Hartlepool Steel and Iron Company. By now his own health was failing and he died of a paralytic stroke at his home, The Cottage, Greatham, West Hartlepool, on 12 September 1898. He was buried at West Hartlepool on 15 September. His surviving son, William Cresswell Gray (1867-1924), continued the family involvement in the business, becoming chairman of the company. He was created a baronet in 1917. 
Like many businessmen of his era, there seems to have been little to distinguish Gray's public life from his private one, so involved was he in business, civic, and religious matters. The esteem in which he was held was evidenced by the erection of a bronze statue in West Hartlepool, of whose development he had been the principal agent. His worldly success was attested to by his personal fortune, which exceeded $1.5 million. 


@@@@@


doc= 47530


Edward Greene (1815-1891), Benjamin's third son, was born at the Westgate Brewery House in 1815. Trained in his father's brewery, he completely transformed the business between 1840 and 1870. His success, achieved entirely in the free trade before 1865, was based upon a system of agents and travellers working across East Anglia. Doubtlessly he was aided by the railways after 1845 and rising beer consumption even in agricultural districts between 1830 and 1880. At first producing the traditional heavy, vatted, strong Suffolk ales, after the 1850s he successfully brewed a Burton-type pale ale (the in-vogue beer of Victorian Britain) which he sold cheaply. By the 1870s the output of the Westgate Brewery had increased to more than 40,000 barrels a year, realizing its proprietor in some years an income in excess of $10,000 a year. In 1887, in the wake of Guinness's spectacular capitalization, Edward Greene merged his brewery with that of his pushy neighbour, Frederick William King. The new company, Greene King, was generously valued at $555,000. Ownership was almost entirely confined to eight individuals in the Greene and King families with Edward becoming the first chairman of the new company. His (and F. W. King's) policy of acquiring tied public houses, which went back to the late 1860s, was pursued with an increased vigour. Owning and leasing about 200 on the merger of the two firms, the company possessed no fewer than 460 in 1919. 
Edward Greene's interests were predictable enough for a member of his class and calling. He became MP in the Conservative interest for Bury St Edmunds in 1865, representing the town for twenty years before transferring to the Stowmarket division of Suffolk, 1886-91. He was also an active justice of the peace and deputy lieutenant of the county. In parliament, where he spoke quite often at the outset of his career, he was an authority on agriculture (especially horses -- he was master of the Suffolk hunt, 1871-5) and housing. A well-built man of middle height, his speeches were delivered in a harsh Suffolk accent. Invariably they possessed a loud evangelical directness. Disraeli reckoned him to be 'the fiercest Protestant in the House' ('The Letters of Disraeli to Lady Bradford and Lady Chesterfield', 1928, 2.62). Clearly a figure of some fun among metropolitan parliamentarians he was for thirty years an extremely popular speaker in Suffolk on the themes of farming, progress, the work ethic, and paternalism. All were couched in homely terms and larded with examples taken from his own experiences of business and landowning. He was at this level an effective communicator, appealing across the broadest spectrum of political opinion from Lord Bristol to the humblest agricultural worker. He never lost the common touch in a patently straightforward approach to life. 
Agriculture was Edward Greene's other great pursuit after the mid-1850s. In 1865 he set the seal on his election to parliament by renting the Ixworth Abbey estate where he farmed on an extensive scale. Nine years later he bought Nether Hall, Pakenham (which he rebuilt), with 850 acres. He was a bold innovator in experiments with the application of steam-driven ploughs in the 1860s and was a county representative to the national chamber of agriculture after 1867. In 1870 he founded the Ixworth Farmers' Club, which for a generation was the liveliest talking shop for agriculture affairs in East Anglia. He was also chairman of the Bury and Thetford Railway Company, 1865-76. With his experience in business, farming, and parliament there was no greater recognized authority on rural issues in west Suffolk in the 1865-90 period. 
In private life Edward Greene's agenda was that of the typically successful brewer. Both his marriages were into families rather better connected than his own. His first wife, Emily Smythies (1820-1848), whom he married in 1840, was the daughter of a Huntingdonshire parson and magistrate, the Revd H. Y. Smythies; his second, Dorothea (1827-1912), daughter of C. Prideaux-Brune, belonged to a Cornish landowning family and was the widow of Rear-Admiral Sir William Hoste, bt (died 1868). Greene and his first wife had a son and four daughters; his marriage to Lady Hoste, whom he married in 1870 and who retained her title, produced one daughter. When he died on 15 April 1891 at Nether Hall, Pakenham, it was generally reckoned that Edward Greene was among the most successful country brewers of his generation, and his fortune ($360,000) revealed the prosperity enjoyed by Victorian brewers. He was buried in the churchyard at Pakenham. 
Greene's only son, 


@@@@@


doc= 47533


Greg, Henry Philips (1865-1936), industrialist, was born at Lode Hill, Styal, near Wilmslow, Cheshire, on 13 August 1865, the only son (there were also five daughters) of Henry Russell Greg (1832-1894) and his wife Emily 'nee' Gair. His childhood was spent at Lode Hill, and he was educated first at Rugby School and later at Trinity College, Cambridge. In 1898 he married Jane Emily, daughter of Frederick Lewis Diblee, a civil engineer. They had one son and four daughters. He was a Unitarian, and was treasurer of Manchester College, Oxford and a trustee of the 'Hibbert Journal'. 
Greg began work in 1887 at Albert Mill, Reddish, near Stockport, a mill built in 1847 by his grandfather, Robert Hyde Greg, for spinning and doubling cotton. In 1856 Robert Hyde Greg was joined in partnership by his third son, Henry Russell Greg. On Robert Hyde Greg's death, in 1875, H. R. Greg took control, in partnership with Charles Sharpe Parker. On Henry Russell Greg's death, in 1894, Henry Philips Greg became sole partner in R. Greg & Co. of Reddish. He expanded and modernized the mill, shifting production towards fancy yarns used in upholstery, and replaced flyer throstles and mule spindles with ring spindles. These moves later ensured the mill's competitive success in the 1920s and 1930s. 
A Liberal in politics Greg was a committed free-trader who, for many years, was treasurer of the Knutsford Division Liberal Association, and an active member of the North Western Free Trade Union. He disliked government intervention of all kinds, and was especially opposed to any idea of state intervention to alleviate the problems of over-capacity and obsolescence, which beset the cotton industry in the inter-war period. It fixed internal minimum prices, established the Cotton Industry Board as the means of control, and as the institution for orchestrating change in the industry. Deploring any measures that would restrict competition, Greg believed instead that the way forward lay in the fundamental modernization of the industry. 
Greg was, therefore, in the vanguard of technological innovation in the cotton industry at the beginning of the twentieth century. In 1904, on behalf of Ashton Brothers Ltd of which he became chairman in 1907, he visited the United States and arranged for 500 automatic looms to be imported. As a result of this initiative the British Northrop Loom Company was established, and Greg became its chairman. Keen to enhance the competitiveness of the British cotton industry by improving the quality of research and development, he was instrumental in establishing the British Cotton Industry Research Association. In addition he was involved in setting up the research laboratories at the Shirley Institute at Didsbury in south Manchester. In an article in the 'Journal of the Textile Institute', co-authored with W. Morton and entitled 'The cotton textile industry in the United States', he outlined what he saw as the virtues of the 'American System' of manufacturing as it applied to the cotton industry. He traced the organizational, managerial, and technological features of cotton manufacturing in the United States and pointed to the productivity advantages which this brought. 
Greg believed that business efficiency depended on both technological superiority and human capital investment. In line with family tradition, he was a paternalist in his labour and community relations. In Styal he fulfilled the role of the local squire and, at the time, when Quarry Bank Mill (his cousin Edward Hyde Greg's mill) was being run down, and when morale in the village was low, he tried to revitalize the community by setting up the Village Club. This was intended to provide an alternative source of entertainment to the local public house, The Ship inn, which he had inherited from his father -- somewhat to his embarrassment -- as he saw excessive drink as the major social curse. Accordingly, he limited all customers to two glasses of beer, using the profits to fund the club, where villagers could read, play games, attend debates and classes, and give concerts. He valued the Styal community, and allowed no speculative building. As a consequence, somewhat ironically for one so keen on modernization, he bitterly opposed the building of the new Ringway airport, which after the Second World War was to become Manchester airport, and which involved the compulsory purchase of some of his land. At Reddish, for his own workforce, he developed a range of welfare schemes, adding playing fields and a recreation room, and appointed a welfare secretary in 1915. He died at his home, Lode Hill, Styal, on 3 June 1936, and was buried at Dean Row Chapel in Styal. 


@@@@@


doc= 47534


Croft, Thomas (c.1435-1488), customs official, shipowner, and patron of Atlantic exploration, was the son of William Croft (died 1439) of Croft Castle, Herefordshire, and Isabella, presumably a second wife. He was born during the 1430s, the youngest of four brothers, including Sir Richard Croft (1429/30-1509), John, and another Richard. He was probably serving in the household of the sons of Richard, duke of York, at Ludlow in 1454. York's defeat in October 1459 probably accounts for his admission to Lincoln's Inn, in autumn 1459. The Yorkist victory of 1461 brought him, jointly with the younger Richard Croft, lands and offices in Oxfordshire and the designation 'king's servant'. He was sheriff of Merioneth in 1464, though he claimed never to have exercised the office. An unidentified Croft was clerk in the royal signet office from November 1461 to July 1470. Thomas Croft was readmitted to Lincoln's Inn in Trinity term 1469. In April 1470 he was commissioned to seize the lands of the rebels Warwick and Clarence. The Croft brothers lay low during Henry VI's readeption, but resumed their Oxfordshire offices on Edward IV's return in 1471. In 1472 Thomas married Elizabeth (died 1500), the daughter (probably of her mother's second marriage, to John Wysham) and one of three coheiresses of Margaret Beauchamp (died 1452x6), who had inherited the estate of her father, Sir John Beauchamp, of Holt, Worcestershire (died 1420). The marriage was probably arranged by Sir Walter Skull, Margaret's last husband, and former guardian of the Crofts. Thomas Croft was seneschal of Llantwit, Glamorgan, in 1474, and MP for Leominster in 1478. 
Croft became a customer of Bristol in 1472, adding responsibility for the wine customs at Exeter and Topsham in 1475. In 1482 he was accused of not rendering account for his Merioneth shrievalty of 1464 or for the commission of 1470, and of improperly engaging in trade while a customs officer. He produced a licence to trade issued in 1480 and claimed that his share in two ships in 1481 was not for commerce but was 'to serch and fynd a certaine Ile callid the Isle of Brasile' (Carus-Wilson, 164). This substantiates William Worcester's evidence of early Bristol involvement in exploration. Worcester records a search for the island of 'Brasylle' to the west of Ireland in 1480 ('Itineraries', 308-9). Croft's venture of 1481 was also unsuccessful. But these voyages were part of a continuing and possibly successful Bristol enterprise. Reporting on the Cabot voyage of 1497 to a Spanish admiral, possibly Columbus, John Day mentioned the admiral's prior knowledge of the earlier discovery by Bristol men of the isle of 'Brasil'. 
Croft retained his offices under Richard III, but disappeared from the Bristol scene about the end of 1484. He may have joined Henry Tudor in France, perhaps handing over the customs revenues. In 1486 Henry exempted him from accounting at the exchequer for the Bristol customs, and remitted all arrears. His nephew and namesake fought for Henry at Bosworth. Croft was not reappointed customer by Henry VII, but retained estate offices and property in Oxfordshire. He was trading with Seville in 1486. By his will, made in October 1485, the bulk of his property, lands at Woodstock and South Weston in Oxfordshire, and tenements in Bristol, was left to found a chantry at Woodstock, with lodging for a priest and two poor men, worth $8 9's'. gross when it was suppressed in 1548. Croft died, leaving no children, in 1488 (his will was proved on 15 November), and was presumably buried in his foundation. His widow, Elizabeth, subsequently married Nicholas Crowmer and died, still childless, in 1500. 
The younger Thomas Croft was a bastard of Sir Richard Croft. For his part at Bosworth, he was granted property in Hereford after the battle of Stoke (1487), and is later designated 'armiger' and 'gentleman of London'. His offices and property were confiscated by act of parliament in October 1491 after he allegedly committed a murder. He was dead by 1509. 


@@@@@


doc= 47535


Croft, Sir Richard (1429/30-1509), royal official, was the second son of William Croft of Croft Castle, Herefordshire, and of his wife, Margaret Walwyn. Croft's father and his elder brother, John, died in 1439, and John's posthumous daughter, Joan, in 1445, bringing him the inheritance of a modest but ancient estate. His guardian was Walter Skull. He had two younger brothers (possibly half-brothers), another Richard, and Thomas Croft (c.1435-1488). A sister, Agnes, married Philip Domulton of Brockhampton, near Bromyard, Herefordshire. A complaint by Edward and Edmund, sons of Richard, duke of York, of 'the odieux rule and demenying of Richard Crofte and his brother' in 1454 has been cited as evidence that he was tutor to the future Edward IV, but the reference (possibly jocular) is more likely to the younger Richard (Davies, 243). Croft is likely to have held a post on York's estates and to have fought for him at Ludford Bridge (12 October 1459). He was pardoned in December 1459 and appointed to administer York's forfeited estates. He rejoined York's cause after the battle of Northampton (10 July 1460), and fought for Edward IV at Mortimer's Cross (2 or 3 February 1461). About this time he married Eleanor, 'nee' Cornewall (died 1519), widow of Sir Hugh Mortimer of Kyre, Worcestershire (died between April and June 1460). Croft was JP in Worcestershire from 1464, and became sheriff of Hereford in November 1469. That appointment was confirmed by the restored Lancastrian government in October 1470, but not renewed in November. Edward IV on his return from exile reappointed him sheriff on 11 April 1471, and he fought at Tewkesbury. Tudor sources credit him with the capture of the Lancastrian prince of Wales, though they exonerate him from responsibility for the prince's death. He was knighted after the battle and was granted lucrative and important receiverships, most notably that of the earldom of March. He was a member of the council of Edward, prince of Wales, at Ludlow, and, probably from 1473, treasurer of his household. A later tradition names his wife as 'governess' to the prince. He was MP for Herefordshire in 1478. Despite these connections with Edward V, Richard III appointed him treasurer of his household in May 1484. There is no record of his role in the Bosworth campaign, but his appointment as sheriff of Hereford, the grant of a seven-year farm of the royal manor of Woodstock, and reappointment as treasurer of the household, all in September-October 1485, suggest an understanding with Henry Tudor. His bastard, Thomas, and his stepson, John Mortimer, fought for Henry, and his brother Thomas may have helped finance Henry's campaign. 
Croft's rivalry with Sir William Stanley erupted into violence in Hereford and in the marches in 1487. He ceased to be treasurer of the household in 1494, but was steward of the household to Arthur, prince of Wales, by February 1495, until Arthur's death in 1502. He held the March receivership and other offices in Wales and the border counties until his death on 29 July 1509. He had accumulated sufficient land, from the profits of office and advantageous marriages, to establish his three surviving legitimate sons, Edward, John, and Robert, as landed gentlemen, to arrange good marriages for his five surviving daughters, and several granddaughters, and to make modest provision for his bastard's family. Croft's success was founded on a family solidarity which encompassed his brothers, bastard, and stepson, and indeed his former guardian, Sir Walter Skull, who, after the death of his own son, arranged a series of marriages to convey his property and a large part of that of his stepdaughters to the Crofts. Croft's wife, Eleanor, survived him until 1519. She was alleged to have headed an armed force of followers and outlaws during the feud with Stanley in 1487. She and her husband are buried in St Michael and All Angels Church, Croft, in a limestone tomb of fashionable Westminster workmanship, with effigies. Originally positioned in the north chapel, the tomb was relocated near the altar in the early eighteenth century. 
Sir Richard should be distinguished from his brother, also Richard, who appears in the records as 'the younger' before Sir Richard's knighthood, thereafter as 'esquire'. He was closely associated with his younger, probably full, brother, Thomas. The younger Richard was probably the Richard Crofte of the letter of 1454 cited above, and may have been a clerk in the Ludlow household. After Edward IV's accession he gained lands and offices in Oxfordshire, was MP for the county (1472-5), and esquire of the body from 1482. He lost his offices with the accession of Henry VII and died on 26 May 1502. 


@@@@@


doc= 47536


Galloway, Janet Anne (1841-1909), promoter of higher education for women in Scotland, was born at Birdston Cottage, Birdston, parish of Campsie, Stirlingshire, on 10 October 1841, the elder daughter of Alexander Galloway (1802-1883), estate factor, and his wife, Anne, 'nee' Bald, of Carsebridge, Alloa (died 1889). The family moved to Glasgow in 1844, where Alexander commenced business as land agent, valuator, and accountant, residing at 59 Bath Street, Glasgow, from 1857. Janet was the only one of their four children to survive to adulthood; two brothers died in infancy and a sister, Eliza Margaret, died in 1855 aged eight. 
Janet Galloway was educated in Scotland and then sent abroad to schools in France, Germany, and Holland, her father believing that 'as much pain should be taken about girls as boys' (Jardine, 56). On her return, she was trained by her father in bookkeeping, office work, and business methods. Finding by experience the limited range of employment open to women, which was due to their restricted education, she became an ardent supporter of the movement to provide higher education for women. In 1877 she became honorary secretary of the newly established Glasgow Association for the Higher Education of Women, founded by Jessie Campbell and others, to offer women opportunities of study at university level. She earnestly worked to provide teaching for women in university arts subjects, drawing up schemes of instruction, devising standards and methods of teaching, and securing lecturers and examiners. In 1883 the association was incorporated as Queen Margaret College, and she became its first secretary, continuing to refuse any payment for her duties. She had been her father's constant companion and housekeeper, and after his death in 1883 she moved into rooms in the college, the former North Park House in Hamilton Drive, Glasgow, donated by Isabella Elder. 
Queen Margaret College amalgamated with Glasgow University in 1892 after the Scottish universities commissioners issued an ordinance empowering Scottish universities to make provision for the instruction and graduation of women. Janet Galloway became a university official, and although new duties were placed on her she still refused to be paid. She helped to promote a corporate life among the students, organizing social gatherings and encouraging the formation of societies and a union. She would keep in touch with them after they left the college, taking a very keen interest in their careers, and promoted the formation of a women graduates association. She helped to found and run the Queen Margaret Guild (1885) which provided lectures for the university extension movement, was a founder of the students' residence, Queen Margaret Hall (1894), and was a prominent member of the executive committee of the Queen Margaret Settlement Association (1897), a social work programme carried out by students. She was also a member of the Teachers' Guild and from 1905 was one of the university's representatives on the Glasgow Provincial Committee for the Training of Teachers. Although baptized into the Church of Scotland she was a devoted member of St Mary's Episcopalian Cathedral in Glasgow. She was also an accomplished pianist and had a deep love of music. 
Janet Galloway, who was unmarried, was described as being blunt and having a 'ready fearless wit and kind eye'. Her personality was a mixture of conservative instinct and progressive act. She did not intend at first that Queen Margaret College should equip women to compete professionally with men but that it should better prepare them for their traditional roles. She personally preferred single-sex education for women but welcomed the changes that opened universities to women and eventually to co-education. She was a Conservative in politics and disapproved of women's suffrage, as well as being thoroughly opposed to the idea of female lecturers working in the college. Initially doubtful about the wisdom of establishing a medical school for women, she then spent years planning its proper layout and was very proud that she helped produce the first two female medical graduates from a Scottish university in 1894. 
Janet Galloway followed closely educational trends in Great Britain, Europe, and North America, and in 1893 represented Queen Margaret College at the Chicago Great Exhibition. In 1907 she received the honorary degree of doctor of laws from Glasgow University in recognition of her lifetime of gratuitous service to the higher education of women. She died in harness at Queen Margaret Drive, Glasgow, on 23 January 1909, having continued in her duties despite failing health. She would not hear of resting and attended an educational conference in Edinburgh the evening before her death. She was buried in Lennoxtown cemetery, Campsie, on 26 January. A fund was raised and a memorial window entitled 'The Pursuit of Ideal Education' was installed in the Bute Hall, Glasgow University, in honour of a woman who had unselfishly devoted her life to the advancement of education, the pursuit of learning, and the fulfilment of women's potential. 


@@@@@


doc= 47538


Gilchrist, Marion (1864-1952), physician, was born on 5 February 1864 at Bothwell Park, Lanarkshire, the daughter of William Gilchrist (died 1903), a well-to-do tenant farmer, and his wife, Margaret Williamson. Marion was a pupil at the nearby Hamilton Academy, but left school at the age of fourteen to work on the farm. Not content with supervising milking and butter and cheese making, she secretly enrolled in a correspondence course in English and attended evening classes at her old school. In 1887 she matriculated as an arts student from Queen Margaret College for the Higher Education of Women, Glasgow, probably aiming to become a teacher. At the end of her first year she began to take the exams leading to a LLA (lady literate in arts) awarded by the University of St Andrews, which she sat first at Paisley and then at Queen Margaret College itself. This qualification allowed many women throughout the United Kingdom to embark on professional careers. In 1888 Marion Gilchrist passed in physiology, French, and botany, in 1889 in logic and metaphysics and with honours in English and in education, and in 1890 in natural philosophy. She gained her LLA in that year and immediately enrolled along with thirteen other women in the newly opened medical school at Queen Margaret College. 
By this time Marion Gilchrist was taking an active part in student politics as a member of the Liberal Club. Since the college was not allowed to present candidates for professional exams, in 1891 she applied on behalf of herself and her fellow students for entry to the University of Glasgow under the terms of the 1889 'Universities (Scotland) Act' which sanctioned the admission of women. In the following year the first women students matriculated and Marion Gilchrist, with fifty-five other women, entered the medical faculty. So as to be able to graduate as quickly as possible, she took classes in the summer of 1893 at the Royal Hospital, the military hospital in Dublin. She graduated in July 1894 along with her fellow student Alice Lilian Louisa Cumming. Because Marion Gilchrist gained a high commendation she was technically the first woman graduate of the university. In the same year (Elizabeth) Dorothea Lyness (later Dr Chalmers Smith) also graduated. Along with her fellow women students, Marion Gilchrist had to overcome considerable hostility from some quarters of the male medical establishment and from male students. Despite her remarkable achievement in completing the course in four and a half years, she found time to be vice-president of the Queen Margaret College Student Union, vice-president of the Literary and Debating Society, and convener of the Queen Margaret College committee of the Glasgow University Liberal Club. 
After qualifying, Marion Gilchrist assisted in a general practice in the west end of Glasgow, developing an interest in diseases of the eye. The death of her father in 1903 gave her the means to set up in practice at 5 Buckingham Terrace, where she remained for the rest of her life. She never married, but shared her home and consulting rooms until 1928 with 
Financial and professional independence allowed Marion Gilchrist to become politically active more openly. During 1903 -- encouraged by her friends Janie Allan, the daughter of the owner of the Allan Line, and Margaret Irwin -- she joined the Glasgow and West of Scotland Association for Women's Suffrage, formed the previous year. Frustrated by the association's lack of progress, in 1907 all three supported a call for more militant action from Grace Paterson, who had been actively involved in establishing Queen Margaret College and was one of the first two women elected to the Glasgow school board. She had also been involved in setting up Redlands Hospital for Women in Glasgow in 1903. Dissatisfied with the committee's response, the four women resigned and joined the Glasgow branch of the Women's Social and Political Union. Unlike Janie Allan and her fellow student Dorothea Chalmers Smith, Marion Gilchrist did not take part directly in militant protest, although she became a member of the Glasgow branch of the Women's Freedom League. She preferred instead to devote her voluntary energies to the Invalid Children's School of the Queen Margaret College Settlement for which she acted as physician from 1903 to 1911. In 1914 she was appointed assistant surgeon for diseases of the eye at the Victoria Infirmary on the south side of the city. From 1916 until 1918, while Hugh Walker, the surgeon for diseases of the eye, was away on war work, Marion Gilchrist took over his duties. She resigned from the infirmary in 1930 as she found it difficult to share the position with that of ophthalmic surgeon at Redlands Hospital for Women to which she had been appointed three years before. She continued to serve Redlands Hospital until the end of her life, not just as a clinician but also assisting with fund-raising events. 
As Marion Gilchrist became less engaged with the suffrage movement, she became more involved in medical politics. She was among the first members of the Medical Women's Federation, which she supported actively throughout her life. She was a prominent member of the British Medical Association and the first woman chairman of the Glasgow division. She was a trustee of the Muirhead Trust, which had been established in 1889 with the initial purpose of establishing a medical school in the west of Scotland for women. She used these positions to advance the careers of medical women within the male-dominated medical institutions in the west of Scotland. She was an enthusiastic early motorist and traveller. Above all she was a medical practitioner with a fierce sense of duty -- a quality which she expected others to share. When a newly qualified woman doctor was visiting her for tea during the war and the air-raid warning sounded, she told her young colleague that she must return at once to her hospital on the other side of Glasgow even though bombs were falling outside. Marion Gilchrist died at her home in Buckingham Terrace, Glasgow, on 7 September 1952. 


@@@@@


doc= 47540


McIlroy, Dame (Anne) Louise (1878-1968), obstetrician and gynaecologist, was born at Lavin House, co. Antrim, Ireland, daughter of James McIlroy, general practitioner of Ballycastle, co. Antrim. Her sister, Janie Hamilton McIlroy, became a specialist in ophthalmology. Louise McIlroy graduated MB ChB at Glasgow University in 1898, going on to receive an MD with commendation in 1900. Her postgraduate work took her to Dublin (licentiate in midwifery, 1901), London, Vienna, and Berlin, and she obtained a DSc from Glasgow University in 1910. McIlroy was appointed resident house surgeon at the Samaritan Hospital For Women, Glasgow, in 1900 and in 1906 she succeeded Elizabeth Pace as gynaecologist at the city's Victoria Infirmary. Her first prestigious post came in 1911, when she was appointed first assistant to the Muirhead professor of obstetrics and gynaecology in Glasgow, Professor J. M. Munro Kerr, who was to have a strong influence on her later work. 
On the outbreak of the First World War McIlroy gave up her promising career in Glasgow to work for the war effort. She was one of the founders of the Scottish Women's Hospital for Foreign Service. Appointed surgeon-in-chief, she served in France, Serbia, and Salonika, and became surgeon at the Royal Army Medical Corps hospital at Constantinople. In recognition of her services she was awarded the Croix de Guerre in 1916, and became OBE in 1920. On her return to Britain she published a book describing her wartime experiences, 'From a Balcony on the Bosphorus' (1924). 
In 1921 McIlroy was appointed consulting obstetrician and gynaecological surgeon at the Royal Free Hospital and became the first woman professor of obstetrics and gynaecology at the Royal Free Hospital school of medicine, University of London. Her appointment was seen by some as an unwelcome experiment, not only because she was a woman, but also because she had trained and worked outside London. Yet McIlroy came to be renowned for her teaching as well as for her prolific research and writing. She is remembered particularly for her book 'The Toxaemias of Pregnancy' (1936), and for her work on the relief of pain in childbirth and the management of asphyxia of the new-born, but her numerous British and American journal articles dating from 1904 to 1951 also cover social issues such as 'the problem of the working mother' ('Index Medicus', 1922). In 1929 McIlroy was promoted to DBE and also elected as a founder fellow of the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists, if only because her male colleagues 'thought it necessary to have a representative of the women' (Shaw, 47). In 1932 she gained the MRCP. 
Dame Louise McIlroy took early retirement in 1934, but continued to practise at 115a Harley Street, London, and as consultant to the Bermondsey Medical Mission, the Thorpe Coombe Maternity Hospital, and to the boroughs of Finchley and Walthamstow. She obtained a second DSc, this time from the University of London, in 1934, and obtained the LLD at Glasgow University the following year. She also received a number of honorary degrees, and was elected FRCP in 1937. During the Second World War she again made a significant contribution by helping to organize the emergency maternity services in Buckinghamshire and by acting as consultant gynaecologist to the Women's Royal Naval Service in Plymouth. She was considered by her contemporaries to have 'great personal charm' and a 'puckish sense of humour', but also to be 'devastating in criticism if warranted' and to enjoy nothing better than 'a wordy battle with her male colleagues' ('BMJ', 451). Dame Louise McIlroy died on 8 February 1968 in Glasgow Hospital. She was commemorated at the Royal Free Hospital by having a gynaecological ward named after her. 


@@@@@


doc= 47541


Carswell, Catherine Roxburgh (1879-1946), novelist and book reviewer, was born on 27 March 1879 at 101 Hill Street, Garnethill, Glasgow, the second of the four children of George Gray Macfarlane (died 1899), and his wife, Mary Anne Elizabeth (died 1912), the daughter of George Lewis and his wife, Mary Anne. George Macfarlane was a commission agent who negotiated the shipping and sale of textiles. His erratic business career provided a middle-class lifestyle which was deeply religious. Both Catherine Macfarlane's grandfathers were ministers who left the Church of Scotland at the Disruption of 1843, and her parents were devout evangelicals, active in charitable works and mission: Mrs Macfarlane was especially linked with Jewish missions. This thoughtful life co-existed with Catherine's daring. Around her homes in 101 Hill Street and 172 Renfrew Street she played freely, and during family holidays at Mount Quharrie, near Abernethy, Perthshire, she swapped hanging onto the back rails of horse trams for climbing treetops. 
Catherine Macfarlane was educated at Park School, Glasgow, and recalled becoming 'at fourteen a life long socialist (through reading Robert Blatchford)' ('Lying Awake', 16). She rejected her father's Liberalism and his Christianity without dismissing the integrity of her parents' faith. Interests in music and painting were encouraged and she recorded her delight in seeing the first impressionist exhibition in Scotland. She was able to visit relatives in Italy before spending two years at the Schumann Conservatorium, Frankfurt am Main, Germany, studying the piano. She returned in 1901 to Glasgow, where she attended the Glasgow School of Art and met Maurice Greiffenhagen (1862-1931), a painter. She took classes in English literature at Glasgow University, where she met Walter Raleigh, professor of English literature, and Donald Carswell, a student contemporary, with whom she collaborated on the 'Glasgow University Magazine'. From 1907 to 1915 she reviewed fiction and drama for the 'Glasgow Herald'. 
Catherine Macfarlane was introduced to Herbert Parry Malpas Jackson ('b'. 1867/8), Raleigh's brother-in-law, and after a brief courtship the couple married, on 8 October 1904. It soon became apparent that Jackson was mentally unstable, groundlessly accusing his wife of infidelities. Later, when she became pregnant, Jackson became convinced the baby was not his, and after a struggle, during which he had to be deprived of a pistol, he was admitted to a mental hospital suffering from progressive paranoia. A daughter, Diana, was born in October 1905. She died of pneumonia in 1913, aged eight. 
Catherine Jackson and her daughter returned to Mrs Macfarlane. In Glasgow she embarked on an affair with Maurice Greiffenhagen. She loved him passionately but he would not leave his wife, and eventually the affair ended. At this time she raised a court action for an annulment of her marriage, on the grounds that Jackson could not have fully understood the marriage contract. In the face of opposition from Jackson's family, and in spite of the fact that the annulment would make Diana illegitimate, she won, and 'Jackson v. Jackson' (1908) was a leading case in matrimonial law until the reforms of the 1930s. 
In 1911 Catherine Jackson reviewed D. H. Lawrence's 'The White Peacock', recognizing early his significant talent. By 1912 she was in London. Her favourable review of Lawrence's 'The Rainbow' in 1915 cost her her position with the 'Glasgow Herald', but she quickly became assistant theatre critic to St John Ervine at 'The Observer'. On 9 January 1915 she married Donald Carswell (1882-1940), who had come to London to work on 'The Times'. Their marriage lasted until Donald's death in a car accident in the early days of the blackout in 1940. Donald held a variety of jobs and also wrote biography, but he never became the regular provider Catherine Carswell had hoped for -- their finances were always precarious. She valued their 'real and rich' marriage, particularly their interest in each other's writing. Their son, John Patrick Carswell ('b'. 1918) remembers his mother as 'tall and well-made with brown hair and strong features' (introduction to 'The Savage Pilgrimage', 6). 
Carswell first met D. H. Lawrence in 1914. The friendship, initiated by Ivy Low, soon became strong and lasting, and in 1916 they swapped manuscripts of 'Open the Door!' and 'Women in Love'. 'Open the Door!', a novel with autobiographical elements, follows the growth to maturity of its Glasgow heroine Joanna Bannerman; it is modernist in conception, values, and technique. An epistolary novel, 'The Camomile', followed in 1922. In order to write, it was Carswell's habit to hire a room of her own. She took rooms at 17 Keats Grove, Hampstead, eventually moving her family to this building; thereafter she took a room in Windmill Street. The Keats Grove house was given up for one at 35 Gloucester Crescent. She moved repeatedly within London, while also leasing a string of cottages in the home counties, maintaining the pattern of city and country homes that was a successful feature of her childhood. 
Carswell achieved literary recognition through 'The Life of Robert Burns' (1930). Offended by the sentimental mythologizing which surrounded Burns, she aimed to present him candidly and fairly. The work caused much offence to sentimental Burnsians: it was preached against in Glasgow Cathedral and Carswell once received a bullet by post. Owing to the biography's success she made contact with the Scots modernists and identified with their literary projects. She corresponded with Florence MacNeill, Helen Cruickshank, Edwin and Willa Muir, Hugh MacDiarmid, and Neil Gunn. After Lawrence's death in 1930 Carswell was sufficiently angered by Middleton Murry's biography of him, 'Son of Woman' (1931), to write 'The Savage Pilgrimage' (1932), an affectionate first-hand portrait. Murry issued a libel writ and the book was reissued in a modified form in 1933. As a result of this row Carswell began corresponding with Vita Sackville-West, though she was not otherwise close to the Bloomsbury group. 
In later years Carswell continued to produce anthologies, biography, and theatre history. She became friendly with John Buchan and after his death helped his widow to edit his papers, 'John Buchan by his Wife and Friends' (1947), which included her own striking memoir. Her last projects were an informal autobiography, 'Lying Awake' (1950) and preliminary studies for a biography of John Calvin. After bouts of pneumonia and pleurisy in the winter of 1945-6 Catherine Carswell died at the Radcliffe Infirmary, Oxford, on 18 February 1946. 'The Savage Pilgrimage' was reprinted in 1981, and 'Open the Door' in 1986, both with introductions by her son. 


@@@@@


doc= 47542


McInnes, Helen Clark (1907-1985), novelist, was born at 224 Armadale Street, Glasgow, on 7 October 1907, the only child of Donald McInnes, foreman joiner, and Jessica Cecilia Sutherland, 'nee' McDiarmid. When she was five years old her parents moved to Helensburgh, Dunbartonshire, where she attended the Hermitage School. She passed the entrance examination for the University of Glasgow at the age of sixteen, but postponed her entry and attended the Glasgow High School for Girls for one year, before matriculating in 1925. Her family moved back to Glasgow when she went up to university. She played tennis for the university, and was actively involved in the annual student charities' week events. In her final year she undertook part-time work in the university library, where she helped catalogue early printed books. Her interest in books continued after graduation (MA in French and German, 1928), when she was appointed special cataloguer to the Ferguson Collection at Glasgow University Library (1928-9). From 1929 to 1930 she was employed by Dunbartonshire education authority, selecting books for county libraries. In 1930 she enrolled at University College, London, where she was awarded a diploma in librarianship in 1931. 
On 22 September 1932 Helen married Gilbert Arthur Highet (died 1978), a classicist, whom she had met when they were both students at Glasgow. The marriage ceremony took place in the recently opened University of Glasgow memorial chapel. They moved to Oxford upon his appointment as a don at St John's College. Their son, Keith, was born in 1933 and Helen combined the roles of wife and mother with active participation in university life. She took a keen interest in amateur dramatics, and acted in several plays produced by St John's College, the Oxford University dramatic society, and the Experimental Theatre Club. She also travelled extensively in Europe, financing these trips by translating books from German. In 1937 Gilbert Highet was invited to lecture for one year at Columbia University, New York. The family moved to New York in 1938, when he was offered a permanent post as professor of Latin and Greek. New York became the family's home and in 1952 both Helen and Gilbert took American citizenship. Gilbert Highet was appointed Anthon professor of Latin at Columbia. In America, as in Europe, they loved to travel and spent their holidays exploring many parts of the United States, especially enjoying the rugged mountain areas. 
Helen began writing novels in 1939, her first book, 'Above Suspicion', being published in 1941 under the name Helen MacInnes. This book, the story of a young British couple looking for an anti-Nazi agent in Bavaria, was apparently based on her honeymoon in Bavaria. It later became a film, released in 1943 and starring Joan Crawford and Fred MacMurray. The success of this first novel launched her on a career which would lead to her being acclaimed by her publishers, Collins, as the Queen of Spy Writers. She wrote a total of twenty-one novels, which had sold 23 million copies and had been translated into twenty-two languages by the time of her death. Her work was noted for its high literary standard and descriptive accuracy, and for her obvious understanding of complex political situations and knowledge of current affairs. This may in part have been due to the fact that she kept a diary of important political events in the countries she visited. Her extensive personal experience of European travel must also have contributed to the vividness and accuracy of description of the geographical settings, culture, and customs of the regions in which her novels were set. However, her obituary in 'The Times' mentions that some people were concerned that the literary quality of her novels was in danger of being overshadowed by her political standpoint. 
In addition to 'Above Suspicion', film adaptations were made of the novels 'Assignment in Brittany' (1943), 'The Venetian Affair' (1967), and 'The Salzburg Connection' (1969). In 1966 Helen was awarded the Columbia prize in literature by Iona College, New Rochelle, New York. In 1969 she was the subject of a BBC radio programme entitled 'Home this Afternoon', in which she was interviewed about her life and work by Jack Singleton. In 1973 both she and Gilbert Highet received the Wallace award of the American-Scottish Foundation, awarded annually to Scottish-Americans distinguished in the fields of education, journalism, literature, and diplomacy. 
Following Gilbert Highet's death in 1978 Helen continued to write, and divided her time between her apartment in New York city and her country home on Long Island. Her last book, 'Ride a Pale Horse', was published in 1984, and appeared in the paperback best-seller list of the 'New York Times' on the day before her death. A number of her books were reprinted after her death. Having suffered a stroke a few weeks earlier, Helen McInnes died in hospital in Manhattan, New York, on 30 September 1985. 


@@@@@


doc= 47543


Elder, Isabella (1828-1905), benefactor, was born on 15 March 1828 in Hutchesontown, Gorbals, Glasgow, the fourth and last child, and only surviving daughter, of Alexander Ure (1788-1830), writer (or solicitor), and his wife, Mary, daughter of Hector and Margaret Ross, also of Gorbals. She had one older brother, John Francis (1820-1883). Her father died when she was two years old. There is no evidence as to where she might have been educated but most likely it was privately arranged. She married on 31 March 1857 John Elder (1824-1869) ['see under 'Randolph, Charles], a brilliant marine engineer and shipbuilder. 
On John Elder's death in 1869 Isabella Elder became the sole owner of his shipbuilding yard in Govan. Elder's firm had the greatest output on the Clyde, employing more than 4000 men. She ran the business successfully for nine months until partners could be found. Her brother, who was unmarried and had become a famous harbour engineer on the River Tyne, became the senior partner. 
A wealthy widow with no children, Mrs Elder tried to do what she thought her philanthropic and much-loved husband would have liked done, especially for the people of Govan, and for education and health generally. In 1873 she augmented the salary of the professor of civil engineering at Glasgow University, and in 1883 created the John Elder chair of naval architecture, the first of its kind. She became involved in the struggle for the higher education of women in Glasgow, and when Queen Margaret College for Women was constituted in 1883 she purchased North Park House and grounds and gave it to the college rent free, provided $20,000 was raised as an endowment. Earlier she had given bursaries for working lads from Govan to study marine engineering at Glasgow University and instituted scholarships for girls wishing to train as teachers or governesses. In 1890 Queen Margaret College very progressively opened a medical school and Mrs Elder, sympathetic to the desire of women to study medicine, agreed to fund all the running expenses. 
Mrs Elder maintained a close interest in the college, where the women students, though taught by university staff, could not graduate and obtain a degree. She realized that many women had to earn their living and that qualifications were necessary. When, in 1892, the university commissioners (Scotland) announced that women would be accepted in Scottish universities, Queen Margaret College became incorporated into the University of Glasgow. The medical course was considered satisfactory from its inception and 1894 saw the first female medical graduates, but it was 1895 before the first woman graduated in arts. Mrs Elder remained concerned lest women were given sub-standard teaching if they were taught separately from the male students and agreed to North Park House being handed over to the university for the exclusive teaching of women only on condition that the teaching provided was the equal of that for men. Despite promises she was disappointed in the lecturers, and when the principal approached her in 1899 for further largess she refused unless the original agreement was kept. She was never associated with the suffrage movement but always with equality of educational opportunity for women. In 1901 Glasgow University at its fifth jubilee awarded her an honorary LLD. 
In 1885 Mrs Elder gave Govan the 37 acre Elder Park and established and paid the expenses of a school for domestic economy, where teenage girls and young married women were taught to cook nutritious food cheaply and run a house. The US consul in Glasgow at that time commended the enterprise to the United States. She provided a district nurse to instruct women in health and hygiene and visit homes. The nurse could also assist the local general practitioners. In 1901 she provided a villa, helping to start the training home for cottage nurses in Govan, a project to help rural areas. In 1903 she built and paid the running expenses of the Elder Cottage Hospital where cottage nurses could gain experience. She built the Elder Free Library, liberally endowing it. 
Mrs Elder possessed great strength of purpose and strong principles. She also had a tender and most sympathetic heart, which led to many unrecorded acts of kindness and generosity quite apart from her public benefactions (which amounted to more than $200,000 in her lifetime). Of medium height and somewhat buxom as she grew older, she had thick dark hair plaited round her head; her hazel eyes contributed a look of compassion to firm features which, in turn, reflected her self-possession and intelligence. 
Isabella Elder died at her home, 6 Claremont Terrace, Glasgow, on 18 November 1905 of heart failure, gout, and bronchitis. Her death certificate was signed by Glasgow's first woman medical graduate, Dr Marion Gilchrist. She was buried on 22 November in the Elder family tomb in the Glasgow necropolis. By her will, which left more than $125,000 for charitable purposes, she established in memory of her father-in-law the David Elder lectures in astronomy at the Glasgow and West of Scotland Technical College (later Strathclyde University), and set up in memory of her husband and brother the Ure Elder Fund for Indigent Widows of Govan and Glasgow. She was described as 'a true woman, a wise benefactress of the public and of learning' ('The Bailie', 12 Dec 1883). A statue of Mrs Elder, unveiled in 1906, stands in the Elder Park near that of her husband. The statues of husband and wife erected by public subscription are unique in Glasgow. 


@@@@@


doc= 47544


Campbell, Janet (1827-1907), promoter of higher education for women in Scotland, was born in Cross-Arthurlie, Renfrewshire, on 26 March 1827, the eldest child of James Black (1799?-1831) of Cross-Arthurlie, the owner of a bleaching business, and his wife, Eliza Taylor (1803?-1859) of Balgray House, Newton Mearns, Renfrewshire. One brother, Charles, died in 1832 and the other, James (1831?-1853), died in Trinidad, West Indies. On 21 April 1846 she married James Campbell (1823-1902) of Tullichewan, Dunbartonshire, a merchant and a principal of the firm of J. and W. Campbell & Co., warehousemen (wholesale drapers), Ingram Street, Glasgow; they had five children, three daughters and two sons. Her husband was a cousin of Henry Campbell-Bannerman. Staunch members of the Free Church of Scotland, they attended Alexandria North United Free Church. 
Jessie Campbell was described as a lady with great intellectual gifts who identified herself with the various movements, social and intellectual, in which her husband was interested, such as the poor, education, and music. However, the movement for the higher education of women was her own cause. She recognized the need of women for education beyond school age, and desired to obtain for them educational advantages similar to those offered by universities to men. In 1868 she proposed that lectures for women be given by professors of Glasgow University. The first to respond were John Young, professor of natural history, Edward Caird (moral philosophy), John Nichol (English literature), and Robert Grant (astronomy). These lectures, given in the university and in the corporation galleries, were very successful and continued until 1877, when the Glasgow Association for the Higher Education of Women was formed to offer women opportunities of study at university level. Jessie Campbell became vice-president of the new association and Janet Galloway its honorary secretary. Lecture courses were offered with tutorial classes, set written work, and examinations. With Jessie Campbell at the helm the association thrived. It offered an ever-increasing range of courses while continuing to petition for the equal entry of women into Scottish universities. 
In 1883 the association was incorporated as Queen Margaret College, and Jessie Campbell became its vice-president and chaired its executive committee. The new college required a building and secure financial resources, tasks which she took on with relish. She persuaded an old friend, Isabella Elder, to purchase North Park House for the college, and was the main fund-raiser of the $20,000 endowment fund, appealing to the wealthy merchants and industrialists of Glasgow. Queen Margaret College, which was the only college for the higher education of women in Scotland, amalgamated with Glasgow University in 1892 after the Scottish universities commissioners issued an ordinance empowering Scottish universities to make provision for the instruction and graduation of women. Affiliation with Glasgow University had always been one of the aims of Queen Margaret College, but following its dissolution Jessie Campbell led an action to ensure that women retained some share in the management of the women's department of the university, which the college became. The issue was sidelined, and in 1893 Mrs Campbell retired from active involvement in the higher education of women in Scotland. Glasgow University awarded her an honorary LLD in 1901 in recognition of her pioneering work. She contributed an article, 'The rise of the higher education of women movement in Glasgow', to 'The book of the jubilee: in commemoration of the ninth jubilee of the University of Glasgow, 1451-1901' (1901). Jessie Campbell died at her home at Broomley, Alexandria, Dunbartonshire, on 10 February 1907, and was buried four days later in the family vault at Alexandria cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 47547


Brant, Joseph (1743-1807), leader of the Mohawk Indians, was born in 1743, probably in March, in or near Cuyahoga (near present-day Akron, Ohio). His parents, Peter Tehowaghwengaraghkwin and Margaret ('fl'. 1735-1780), were ordinary Mohawks with limited links to the tribe's leading families. 
Widowed, Margaret returned to her home at the Canajoharie Mohawk village in New York between 1746 and 1750. She had Joseph baptized there, his Mohawk name translating as 'two sticks of wood bound together'. She also remarried, but her new husband died fighting the Catawbas, and in 1753 she married a prominent Mohawk hereditary chief, Brant Canagaraduncka, from whom Joseph took his surname. Through his stepfather, Joseph and his elder sister, Molly Brant, came to the attention of the powerful superintendent-general of Indian affairs, Sir William Johnson. Molly became Johnson's common-law wife and an important figure in Mohawk politics. 
As a young warrior, Brant fought as one of the British-allied Mohawks in the Seven Years' War. Afterwards, Johnson sent him in 1761 to Moor's Indian Charity School in Lebanon, Connecticut, where he studied under the Revd Eleazar Wheelock. He learned to speak, read, and write English well, and studied such subjects as Hebrew, Greek, Latin, and agriculture, impressing Wheelock as a considerate and modest youth in the process. Both Brant and his patrons assumed that he would undertake further studies and become a missionary, but instead he returned to Canajoharie after only two years at school. As one of Johnson's extended network of Mohawk connections, Brant joined fellow tribesmen during the early stages of the Pontiac War (1763-7) to help the crown suppress the Native nations that had risen against the British. 
In 1765 Brant married Neggen Aoghyatonghsera, or Margaret (died 1771), a young Oneida woman from a prominent family. They had two children, Isaac and Christiana, and enjoyed a comfortable life at Canajoharie. As a product of the colonial middle ground, Joseph supported his family through hunting and fishing as well as by both traditional and European-style farming, and by trading, guiding, and translating for the British Indian department. After Margaret's death, in 1773 Brant, following Mohawk custom, married her half-sister, whose name may have been Susanna. The local Anglican priest thought such a marriage was inappropriate, so a German minister officiated at the wedding. Despite this incident and exposure to dissenting protestantism at school Brant remained a conscientious Anglican; he translated parts of the 'Book of Common Prayer' and other religious texts into Mohawk, although, like many aboriginal Christians, he did not abandon traditional beliefs entirely. 
Even though his origins were humble, Brant emerged as a leader among the Mohawks in the late 1760s and early 1770s (with some influence among the Oneidas as well). He advanced because of his own intelligence and energy, his prosperity which attracted a following, his marriages to prominent women, and his ability to serve both his people and the British as a cultural broker. 
During this period he struggled to prevent the loss of tribal independence and the unwanted alienation of Mohawk land to settlers who regularly used deceit to acquire coveted aboriginal farms and hunting territories. At one point, unable to gain redress through official channels, a frustrated Brant led twenty warriors to assault one of the most aggressive speculators, George Klock, who, like many of the worst exploiters of Native land rights, supported the revolutionary cause as the thirteen colonies slid towards rebellion. 
With the outbreak of hostilities, Brant joined a loyalist and Native force that marched north in May 1775 to guard the approaches to Montreal. During this time, the governor of Quebec, Guy Carleton, promised the Mohawks that they would keep their lands and offered them compensation for any losses they might sustain in fighting for the crown. Carleton's declarations promised to resolve many of Brant's concerns and helped to affirm his loyalty. Nevertheless, his earlier experiences had made him so wary of white ways that he decided to travel to London in late 1775 to seek confirmation and redress for earlier encroachments. Imperial officials offered to fulfil the commitments made in Montreal, providing that the Mohawks remained faithful during the rebellion. While in London Brant became something of a celebrity before leaving for America in June 1776. 'En route', he fought as a marksman when his ship came under attack from a privateer. He landed on crown-held Staten Island, participated in military operations in that region, and then journeyed back to the Mohawk valley through enemy lines. 
There Brant recruited Natives, as well as members of the white and black communities to fight for the crown. Headquartered primarily near Fort Niagara on Lake Ontario 'Captain' Brant spent the rest of the war leading his volunteers in operations against the rebels. His objectives were to rescue loyalists and Iroquois (Cayugas, Mohawks, Oneidas, Onondagas, Senecas, and Tuscaroras) from rebel-controlled regions, defend Six Nations territory, and deny the revolutionaries the abundant foodstuffs produced on the frontier. Brant's followers, particularly his Natives, also wanted to win the honours and rewards that Iroquois men could earn through combat in a society that valued the warrior spirit. 
Despite extensive propaganda to the contrary, Brant was a comparatively humane combatant in the bitter conflict that pitted former neighbours against each other. That propaganda contributed many myths about Brant: claims that he exercised far more control over Iroquois affairs than was possible in Six Nations politics and that he was descended from Mohawk nobility, and claims that portrayed him in pejorative terms, such as 'the Monster Brant' of Thomas Campbell's popular 1809 poem 'Gertrude of Wyoming'. 
Some of Brant's many actions included the siege of Fort Stanwix and the battle of Oriskany, as well as raids against numerous settlements, such as Cobbleskill and Cherry Valley. Because the loyalist and Iroquois attacks were so effective, George Washington dispatched a large army in 1779 to destroy Iroquois villages and farms. Brant participated in the failed defence of Iroquoia (modern upstate New York), most notably at the battle of Newtown. The success of the rebel assault forced the majority of Six Nations people to flee west to Fort Niagara, to spend the rest of the war in squalid refugee camps. However, the expedition did not force the pro-crown Iroquois out of the conflict, and war parties, often headed by Brant, continued to inflict death and destruction upon their enemies until 1781. 
Brant's second wife died in 1778 or 1779. His third marriage, in 1779, was to Catharine Adonwentishon (died 1837). The couple were to have seven children: Joseph, Jacob, Margaret, Catharine, Mary, John, and Elizabeth. Catharine's father was the important fur trader and Indian agent George Croghan. Her mother came from a prominent Mohawk family, which allowed Catharine to rise to the status of matron of the Turtle clan, while her half-brother, Henry, succeeded to the important civil and hereditary chieftainship of Tekarihoga at about the time of her marriage. (Joseph belonged to the Wolf clan.) Both Catharine and Henry used their influence to help advance Joseph's ambitions for leadership. 
During these years Brant had a farm (at present-day Lewiston, New York), near the Iroquois refugee camps at Niagara, where he kept black slaves and built an Anglican chapel. However, the war took its toll on him, as was shown in 1781 by the first of a growing series of accounts of drunken, brawling behaviour. 
The treaty of Paris that ended the American War of Independence left Brant feeling betrayed: Britain failed to address Native objectives, and the border with the new republic was located too far north to protect most aboriginal territory on the frontier -- territory that the tribes and loyalists largely controlled at the end of hostilities. Brant declared angrily, 'England had Sold the Indians to Congress' (Allan Maclean, quoting Brant to Frederick Haldimand, 13 May 1783, Haldimand MSS, BL, Add. MS 21763, 2.108). In light of the disaster of 1783, Brant and some other Iroquois leaders decided to resettle in British territory along the Grand River on the north shore of Lake Erie. They chose the Grand because of its proximity to both the predominantly Algonkian nations of the Ohio country and the Senecas of western New York (the most numerous of the Iroquois tribes). Thus, the site held out the promise of fulfilling Brant's new dream, that of forming a confederation of all of the tribes of the lower Great Lakes to defend their lands and interests in the face of anticipated white expansion. In 1784 the British agreed to the move and granted a tract to the Six Nations. By 1785, 1850 people, roughly one-third of the Iroquois in New York, had moved to the Grand. They comprised members of all the Iroquois tribes, along with Delawares and others who had lived among them before the revolution. This was a significant event in Iroquois history, heralding the birth of what would become the largest Six Nations community in the Great Lakes region. It also marked the rise of Brant from being primarily a Mohawk leader to being one with much broader influence among all the Iroquois. 
Brant used his personal resources and his influence with crown officials to construct a chapel on the Grand (still extant at the beginning of the twenty-first century), open a school, recruit a physician, and establish a masonic lodge. He also promoted European agricultural practices to improve his people's material well-being and to help them adapt to the erosion of older subsistence patterns. Like some other Six Nations leaders, Brant believed that agricultural prosperity would enable Native society to resist unwanted aspects of white culture and foreign administrative control. Change, however, came slowly because most Iroquois preferred their ancestral ways of living. 
Shortly after moving to the Grand, Brant began to worry about the exact nature of the British government's land grant. He had assumed that the large tract had been given in fee simple, thus allowing the tribes to lease or sell superfluous parts of it to generate capital to provide investment income to benefit the Iroquois. However, crown officials argued that the Six Nations only had the right to occupy the land, and therefore were limited to selling their right of occupancy to surplus territory. Furthermore, sales could be made solely to the government, which paid much less for occupancy rights than private speculators might offer for the land itself. Frustrated with the government's attitude and wanting to obtain the compensation promised in Montreal and London in 1775 and 1776, as well as hoping for promises of British military support should the Great Lakes tribes again go to war with the United States, Brant journeyed to England in 1785-6. He obtained the compensation he sought, but failed to resolve the land issue or secure any meaningful military commitment. 
Undaunted by his set-backs in London, Brant spent the rest of his life working to change government policies. Many within the Iroquois world mistrusted his motives or did not want to sell land because they hoped to maintain traditional ways of life. Others preferred to have chiefs other than Brant lead the alienation process. Internal Iroquois divisions were aggravated by the aggressive political and diplomatic actions of colonial officials who exploited government restrictions and their personal links to Iroquois leaders to advance the interests of the crown -- and sometimes themselves -- at the expense of the Six Nations. In desperation, Brant used whatever weapons he could find to achieve his goals. While participating in negotiations with the Americans to address Iroquois concerns within the United States, he made sure that the British knew about his efforts in order to raise doubts about his loyalty and thereby gain concessions. During the mid-1790s, when British officials in Canada were worrying about foreign invasion, he spread rumours that he might join the king's enemies or lead an uprising within British territory. At one point, he took a large war party with him to a meeting with colonial officials in order to intimidate them. While a violent breach was unlikely, Brant correctly thought that threats might prompt officials to make concessions in meeting his wishes to sell and lease land. Rumours and threats were consistent with traditional Iroquois diplomatic practices, and were intended to force other powers to respond to their demands. Nevertheless, they represented a departure for Brant, whose support for the crown had been comparatively forthright until the end of the American War of Independence. The change demonstrated his growing political maturity and his recognition of British willingness to sacrifice the interests of the Six Nations. 
South-west of the Grand, the Ohio nations fought the Americans between 1787 and 1794 to preserve their territory against American settlement. Brant and other Six Nations chiefs feared losing their land in New York (and perhaps Canada) if they joined the western tribes in what they assumed would be a doomed struggle without British support. Although deeply distrustful of the United States and willing to fight if necessary, the Iroquois leaders tried to persuade the western tribes to negotiate a boundary acceptable to the Americans. Instead, the western tribes rejected the advice of the Six Nations, were defeated, and lost most of their lands in the disputed region. In the process, Brant's efforts to establish a pan-tribal confederacy collapsed, as did his efforts to reunite the Six Nations, now split by the international border, with the result that Iroquois resident in Canada and America gradually went their separate ways. 
In 1795, during the frontier tensions and controversies over land rights, Brant and his son Isaac (who was something of a rogue) got into a fight. Joseph inflicted a knife wound that later became infected. Isaac died and Joseph was plunged into deep, self-recriminating grief. Although the circumstances surrounding the attack are unclear, Joseph's opponents within the Six Nations may have urged Isaac to murder his father. Political assassination by a family member was a traditional way of getting rid of someone, especially a person who had become 'too great' in Iroquois minds, and such threats had been made before in Brant's career. Another son, John (Ahyonwaeghs), rose to leadership after 1815, but he was only a little boy at the end of the eighteenth century. Casting about for an able assistant, Brant adopted a mixed Scottish-Cherokee individual, John Norton (Teyoninhokarawen), into the Mohawk tribe in 1798 or 1799 to become a chief and ultimately his successor. 
In 1802 or 1803 Brant left his Grand River home to take up residence at Burlington Bay, Upper Canada, on Lake Ontario, where he lived comfortably in the European style. (While he derived some of his wealth from farming and other enterprises, much of it came from government pensions and land grants as well as presents offered to help maintain the British-Iroquois alliance.) However, he continued to play an active role in Iroquois affairs. On his deathbed in his Burlington home on 24 November 1807, Brant's last words, directed at Norton, were supposedly, 'Have pity on the poor Indians: if you can get any influence with the great, endeavor to do them all the good you can' (Stone, 2.499). 
The cause of Brant's death is uncertain, although his health had become frail, partly because of heavy drinking and recurring malaria. He was buried near his Burlington home. His family inherited his two houses, hundreds of acres of land, a government pension, and other assets totalling a substantial legacy by the frontier standards of the time. In 1850, with much ceremony, his remains were reinterred in the graveyard beside the little chapel he had built at Brantford on the Grand River in 1787. 
The fundamental challenge faced by the Iroquois in Brant's time was how to resist the ever-constricting limitations on their independence and subsistence patterns as they dropped to a numerically insignificant status in a growing sea of European and American settlers. Earlier in his career Brant strove to address the challenge by earning favour through a vigorous loyalty to the crown in its struggles on the frontier. After the disaster of the American War of Independence, he tried to create new political and economic structures so that his people could exercise as much independence as possible and live comfortably within their changing environment. He also worked to force white officials to live up to the promises and obligations they had made to the Iroquois over the years. Ultimately, he enjoyed only modest successes in holding back unwanted control of Iroquois affairs. Internally, Native politics were too fragmented for one person to muster majority opinion behind any particular political and economic programme, and his modernizing tendencies put him in a minority position in relation to most Six Nations people. Externally, white officials had gained so much power over the Iroquois by the time Brant emerged as a leader that they were well placed to thwart most of the challenges he might pose to them. 


@@@@@


doc= 47556


Chaplin, William James (1787-1859), transport entrepreneur, was born at Rochester, Kent, the son of William Chaplin, a coach proprietor on the Dover road, and his wife, Eleanor. Chaplin was educated at Bromley, and on 11 July 1816 married Elizabeth Alston at St Nicholas, Rochester. They had at least fourteen children. 
About 1823 Chaplin succeeded William Waterhouse at the Swan with Two Necks inn, Lad Lane, London, and he was to become the largest ever coach proprietor. In 1827 his coach business employed 300 to 400 horses; by 1835 this had risen to 1200. As well as three London inns, he had extensive stables at Purley, Hounslow, and Whetstone, and was said to employ 2000 people. In 1836 he had ninety-two coaches leaving London every day, serving all the main roads from the city. He horsed fourteen of the twenty-seven mail coaches leaving London each night. His annual turnover was said to be $500,000. 
According to one of his former coachmen, 'Downright industry, and a systematic application to business, in which the female members of the family were called to assist, formed the foundation of his elevation'; he had excellent knowledge of both horses and men, and 'an intellect superior to most of his class in shrewdness and tact, and this with a soft, oily expression, that procured for him the soubriquet of 'Bite 'em sly'' (Cross, 113-14). Harris, writing in 1885, stated that he had never heard any of Chaplin's former coachmen or guards speak ill of him. He resided at a hotel he owned in the Adelphi. 
Chaplin correctly perceived the likely effect of railways on coaching, and adapted to the change with great skill. About 1838 he sold most of his coaches and horses, left the proceeds on deposit, and went to Switzerland for six weeks to contemplate his future, ensuring that no business communications could reach him. On his return he invested a large sum in the London and Southampton Railway (later the London and South Western Railway, or LSWR), eventually totalling $250,000. By 1840 he was vice-chairman and in 1843-52 and 1854-8 chairman, guiding the company through its formative years. Also, with another coach proprietor, Benjamin Horne, he established the railway carrying firm of Chaplin and Horne, which in 1840 became agent to the Grand Junction Railway, and from 1847 shared an exclusive goods and parcels agency with Pickfords on that railway's successor, the London and North Western Railway (LNWR). Chaplin retained a share in this until his death. 
In 1849 it was claimed that Chaplin's position in Chaplin and Horne was incompatible with his chairmanship of the LSWR, and he had to defend himself against charges of 'dishonest and corrupt conduct' (Fay, 71-2). The investigating committee found that 'wrong as many transactions decidedly were, Mr Chaplin made the interests and prosperity of the Company his first object, and from a long and constant connection, considered his own affairs identified with those of the South Western' (ibid.). Chaplin's support for a central route to Exeter via Salisbury, as opposed to a coastal route, caused him to resign as chairman in 1852, but he returned to that office in 1854 and it was the central line which was built. 
Chaplin was also a director of the Paris and Rouen, Rouen and Havre, and Rhenish railways, and was involved in a cross-channel steamship company, which were together intended to form part of a direct link between London and the continent. He was MP for Salisbury from 1847 until 1857, though he appears to have been largely silent in the house. He was described as 'an advanced Liberal and an active supporter of Reform measures' ('City Press', 30 April 1859, 2). He was also sheriff of London and Middlesex in 1845-6 and deputy lieutenant of Hampshire in 1856. In later years he had residences at 2 Hyde Park Gardens, London, and Ewhurst Park, Basingstoke. Ill-health forced him to resign his seat on the LSWR board in 1858, and he died on 24 April 1859 at 2 Hyde Park Gardens, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 47557


Spencer family (per. c.1647-1765), ironmasters, of Cannon Hall, in the parish of Cawthorne, near Barnsley, sat at the heart of the interlocking partnerships which controlled the greater part of iron production in Yorkshire between the mid-seventeenth and mid-eighteenth centuries. The Spencers ran a string of furnaces, forges, and slitting mills in the West Riding and their interests extended into neighbouring parts of Derbyshire and Lancashire. They also ventured into secondary manufacturing, being heavily involved in the nail trade in the first half of the eighteenth century. The forges in the area south and west of Leeds were first drawn together when Sir Francis Fane, the future earl of Westmorland and son of the Kentish ironmaster Sir Thomas Fane of Badsell, acquired the leases of the new forge at Kirkstall in 1618 and of the ancient bloomery forge at Wortley in 1621. However, it was not until these forges and the associated furnaces were in the hands of the Spencer family that they became of regional significance. 
The Spencer family came from Criggion in Montgomeryshire. A connection between this family and south Yorkshire was established in 1605, when Walter Spencer, son of John Spencer (died 1632), gentleman, married Frances, daughter of Thomas Barnby of Barnby (TNA: PRO, C2 Jas I B6/68). A younger brother of Walter was the London merchant 


@@@@@


doc= 47558


Gibbons family (per. c.1735-1863), ironmasters, colliery proprietors, and bankers came to prominence with 


@@@@@


doc= 47559


Guthrie, Sir Giles Connop McEachern, second baronet (1916-1979), airline administrator, was born in Westminster, London, on 21 March 1916, the son of Sir Connop Thirlwall Robert Guthrie, first baronet (1882-1945), a lieutenant in the Grenadier Guards, and his wife, Elia, 'nee' McEacharn. Educated at Eton College and at Cambridge, he began flying at university. In 1936, at the age of twenty, he partnered C. W. A. Scott in the Portsmouth to Johannesburg air race, theirs being the only team to complete the competition. After university Guthrie obtained his commercial pilot's licence and joined British Airways, a newly formed airline in competition with Imperial Airways. In 1939 he married Rhona, daughter of Frederic Stileman; they had three sons. He held the post of traffic officer with British Airways until the outbreak of war, when he joined the Fleet Air Arm as a fighter pilot. He was awarded the DSC in 1941 while serving on the aircraft-carrier HMS 'Ark Royal', and by 1943 had been promoted to the rank of lieutenant-commander. 
With his father's death at the end of the war, Guthrie succeeded to the baronetcy. He remained in the Fleet Air Arm as a test pilot until 1946 and was appointed OBE. Returning to civilian life, he entered banking and became managing director of the merchant bank Brown, Shipley & Co., as well as holding positions on the boards of the Prudential Assurance Company and Radio Rentals. In 1959 he returned to civil aviation when he was appointed to the board of the state-owned British European Airways (BEA). He retained his membership of BEA for the next ten years, but at the beginning of 1964 he took on a more demanding assignment when he became chairman and chief executive of the British Overseas Airways Corporation (BOAC). At the time, BOAC was losing money and had an accumulated deficit of $80 million. His predecessors, the chairman Sir Matthew Slattery and the managing director Sir Basil Smallpiece, had requested government permission to write off the debt which had been incurred as part of the cost of introducing British aircraft to BOAC's fleet. However, the minister of aviation, Julian Amery, had preferred to await the findings of the confidential Corbett Report on BOAC's performance. 
When Guthrie took up his position, he obtained not only the debt write-off which Slattery and Smallpiece had sought, but also a written undertaking from Amery that the airline would in future be run as a commercial enterprise, with any deviation from this policy -- on grounds of national interest -- requiring a specific directive from the minister. Under his chairmanship, BOAC was swiftly returned to profitability. It was an achievement aided by a general upturn in the airline industry after 1964, but performance was also raised by reducing the number of staff and closing unprofitable routes. At the heart of his plan to restore the corporation's finances was a deal negotiated with the government to reduce substantially the number of Super VC10 aircraft which had been ordered from Vickers some six years earlier. 
A man of great personal charm, Guthrie brought a shrewd business mind and steady leadership to BOAC. He is chiefly remembered for restoring the profit motive to the management of the national-flag carrier at a time when it seemed to have lost its sense of purpose. To a certain extent his achievement was overshadowed by the implementation of the Edwards committee recommendations after 1969, and the subsequent merger of BOAC and BEA as the modern British Airways. 
Guthrie retired as chairman of BOAC at the end of 1968. During the next two years he spent some time creating an airline self-insurance company, Air Transport Insurance, of which he was chairman. Otherwise he lived quietly in Jersey for the remainder of his life. He died of a malignant brain tumour on 31 December 1979. His eldest son, Malcolm Connop ('b'. 1942), succeeded to his title. 


@@@@@


doc= 47560


Hillman, Edward Henry (1889-1934), transport entrepreneur, was born on 19 March 1889 in Croydon, Surrey, the son of Edward Hillman and his wife, Annie. He left school at the age of nine, and worked as a brush maker. He joined the army as a drummer boy at the age of twelve. The First World War saw him rise to the rank of sergeant-major in a cavalry regiment, and also provided him with a gratuity on demobilization, which he used to buy a taxi. Success in this venture led to the sale of the cab and the purchase of a cycle shop in Romford with the proceeds. Suburban Essex remained his base, from which he built up a deserved reputation as a thorn in the side of the existing transport establishment. 
It is said that Hillman's entry into the motor coach business arose from his taking a booking agency for a local firm, the commission showing him the profits that could be made from running his own service. In December 1928 he started to run a service between Stratford Broadway and Brentwood, with a garage and office at 52B Romford Road, Stratford. This was an immediate success, being faster and cheaper than the existing bus services. By the summer of 1931 he had extended the route to serve Clacton, Ipswich, Norwich, Southwold, and Yarmouth, offering short-stage fares between all points, to the irritation of local bus operators. 
Hillman had entered the industry relatively late in its period of expansion, and when route licensing began in 1931 he faced considerable opposition in the new traffic courts. This, and the establishment of the London Passenger Transport Board in 1934 (which had been foreseen for some years), may have influenced his diversion into air transport. The compulsory acquisition of sixty-five of his ninety-three coaches on 10 January 1934 would have provided an input of capital, but it was on 1 April 1932 that he started an air service between Maylands airfield, near Romford, and Clacton-on-Sea, with a three-seater Puss Moth aircraft. In the following season he reinstated the Clacton service, and started to fly to Margate, and to Paris. In 1934, with all-year operation developing, he moved his base to what was later to become RAF Stapleford Tawney, at Abridge, near Chigwell, and obtained a Post Office mail contract for a service to Belfast, later extended to Glasgow. On the Paris service he undercut the fares charged by Imperial Airways and Air France, but his operating standards were high, and his airline had only one fatal accident. 
The de Havilland DH-84 Dragon airliner was Hillman's favoured machine, and he claimed that it had been designed to his specifications. He was also closely associated with the manufacturers of Gilford coaches, and his home in Romford was called Gilford Lodge. He was exceptional among airline operators in his practice of managing aircraft in the same way that he managed his coaches. There is a telling anecdote of Hillman on a bank holiday, standing in his shirtsleeves on the tarmac, pushing a mug of tea into the hand of one of his pilots, and telling him to 'get back to Paris and do another relief' (private information). Not only was he ready to drive his own coaches, he also learned to fly, so that he knew what he was expecting of his staff. 
Late in 1934 Hillman's Airways was floated, with an authorized capital of $150,000. Hillman intended to be managing director and deputy chairman for at least seven years. With this injection of new capital, further ventures were to be expected, but the promise was cut off by his untimely death. His interest in the company was acquired by the bankers, D'Erlanger, and subsequently Whitehall Securities merged the company with other independents to form British Airways, the government's second 'chosen instrument' (the first having been Imperial Airways). The coach services, which he had continued to operate, were sold to the Eastern National and Eastern Counties Omnibus companies, who removed the local fare stages, thus increasing fares for short-distance travellers. 
Hillman was always a rough diamond, who could at times be moody and intolerant. What sets him off against the general run of entrepreneurs in the transport business is the combination of hands-on management and strategic insight, which might have changed the nature of air transport by offering frequent, low-cost services over domestic routes. He died at his home, Gilford Lodge, Hare Street, Gidea Park, Romford, Essex, on 31 December 1934, of a heart attack and stroke. He was survived by his wife, Annie, 'nee' White, and their son Edward. 


@@@@@


doc= 47561


Horne, Benjamin Worthy (1804-1870), coach proprietor, was the eldest son of William Horne, and his wife, Mary. William Horne (1783-1828) was originally a painter, and entered the innkeeping and coaching trade following an advantageous marriage to Mary Worthy, daughter of a wealthy wheelwright. Subsequently, in 1812, he purchased the Golden Cross inn, Charing Cross. Other inn yards were later acquired too, as well as stables for 200 horses at Barnet. In 1819 he had about 400 horses at work, and in 1827 between 700 and 800 horses. 
Benjamin Horne took over the business when his father died in 1828. In 1836 he was the second largest coach proprietor (after William Chaplin), and had ninety-five coaches, including five mail coaches, leaving London every day. Horne was an exceptionally aggressive competitor, and he generally had sufficient resources to win any contest. Harper described him as: 'a tall, lathy, irritable man, of eager face, quick, nervous speech, and rapid walk, with something of a military air in his alert, upright figure... Horne must always expend his energies on the minor details of his extensive business, and himself do work that would have been better delegated to subordinates.... Up early, no day was long enough for him, and he economised time by taking no regular meal until evening. He was generally to be seen eating his lunch out of a paper bag as he swung furiously along the streets.... Although there was no keener or more ruthless man of business... he was privately a considerate and kindly man, helpful and charitable to those less successful than himself. (Harper, 2.221-2, 225)' On 4 November 1830 he married Catherine Larkin at St Nicholas's Church, Rochester; they had at least nine children. 
It was apparently his friend William Chaplin who persuaded him to adapt to the railways instead of opposing them. Certainly Horne was aware by 1835 of the probability of coach businesses being 'annihilated by steam some few years hence'. He joined with his brother Henry and William Chaplin in the firm of Chaplin and Horne, which in 1840 became carrying agent to the Grand Junction Railway (later the London and North Western Railway or LNWR), and was also active on other railways. In 1858 he described himself as the managing partner, and was constantly in and out of the LNWR yards at Euston and Camden Town. When the railway took in hand the goods department at Camden, citing inefficiency, he challenged the railway at law and, although he lost, was regarded as having vindicated the firm. He also continued his coaches where they could still pay their way, and, in 1843, considered himself the largest coach proprietor. He had an estate at Highlands near Mereworth, Kent, and a London residence at 33 Russell Square, and he died at the latter on 14 April 1870, aged sixty-six. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 47562


Instone, Sir Samuel (1878-1937), shipping and aviation entrepreneur, was born at Gravesend on 16 August 1878, the son of Adolphe Instone, and the eldest of three brothers. He was educated at Tunbridge Wells and at Boulogne. At the age of fifteen he went to work in the port, and soon acquired a very considerable knowledge of shipping between the United Kingdom and the continent. He married in 1910 Alice Maud Lieberman; they had five daughters. At a time unknown before the First World War he set up S. Instone & Co. Ltd of Cardiff to trade between Cardiff and Antwerp, and London and Antwerp, with coal as the principal cargo. Looking ahead at how he might expand his business, he bought the Bow Creek site of the Thames iron works, where he established the Instone wharf to allow direct trans-shipment to the Great Eastern Railway, later the London and North Eastern Railway (LNER), so as to avoid the congested lines through London itself. He worked closely with his brothers Theodore and Alfred, the latter of whom described their work in 'Early Birds' (1924). This book concentrated on the airline which the brothers founded in 1921 to speed their bills of lading from Cardiff and London to Antwerp and so avoid demurrage charges. The Instone Air Line, which ran from London to Paris from 1919, was a pioneering enterprise. It merged with Imperial Airways in 1924, with Samuel Instone remaining on the board until his death in 1937. 
In 1921 S. Instone & Co. Ltd went public with a nominal capital of $500,000 (of which $300,000 was issued). Instone himself was chairman of the Askern Coal and Iron Company Ltd, and of the Bedwas Navigation Colliery Company (1921). The combination of his modern ideas, introduction of machinery, and other cost-saving ideas, and the militancy of the declining mining industry with its rival unions, the South Wales Miners' Federation (SWMF) and the South Wales Miners' Industrial Union, resulted in a conflict that lasted a decade. In the shrill rhetoric of those depression years from the failed general strike of 1926 to the gradual recovery and amalgamation of the mines in the late 1930s, Instone was a leader in the fight for modern management and cost controls. This led him into a number of fights, and to his being labelled one of the 'bloodsucking rich'. The result is that his reputation now depends upon whether the literature is from the miners' or the owners' side, though recent scholarship has taken a more balanced view. 
The battle with the SWMF lasted until 1936, and ran that colliery into a $1 million debt, when a compromise left the Instones in charge in return for recognition of the SWMF. The adventure into Benzol (an industrial solvent derived from coal tar) ended in constant bickering over coal quality, and the plant's cleansing powers. In truth the venture was ill timed. At the Askern in Yorkshire he was known for the establishment of a model housing estate at Instoneville, and for his successful prosecution of an action for slander against Herbert Smith, then president of the Miners' Federation of Great Britain. A hard worker himself, he had much sympathy for the miners in spite of the demands of modernization. He and Theodore were strong characters, but respected each other's judgements, and worked with Alfred in complete harmony and respect, as 'The Times' noted (11 Nov 1937). Knighted in 1921, Sir Samuel was much liked for his many human qualities. He was a member of the lieutenancy of the City of London, and a liveryman of the Loriners' Company. Very interested in congestion in the streets, he started one of the waterbus services on the Thames. He lived at 11 Hanover Terrace, London, and died in the London Clinic on 9 November 1937 after an operation from which it was expected he would recover. 
Sir Samuel was buried on 10 November in the Jewish cemetery, Beaconsfield Road, Willesden, London, and the memorial service was held at the West London Synagogue, Upper Berkeley Street. His wife outlived him. At death he left $1034 gross, presumably having previously made farsighted legal arrangements. 


@@@@@


doc= 47563


Mountain, Sarah Ann (1769/70-1842), coach and inn proprietor, married Butler William Mountain (1759-1818) not later than 1790. His father, William Mountain, had been admitted to the Innholders' Company in 1772, his inn being the Swan with Two Necks, Lad Lane, one of London's major coaching inns. Butler William Mountain was admitted to the Innholders' Company in 1808 in respect of the Saracen's Head, Snow Hill, another large coaching inn. Sarah Ann and Butler William Mountain had at least seven children between 1790 and 1812. 
When her husband died in February 1818, aged fifty-nine, the business was carried on in Sarah's name. Harris, writing in 1883, described her as 'a very noted and spirited female coach and mail proprietor' (Harris, 156-7). In 1827 her son Peter (baptized in 1803) was managing the business for her, and claimed to have done so since 1818. In 1827 the business employed 200 horses, placing it in the middle rank of London coach enterprises, and in 1836 it had fifteen coaches leaving London every day, mostly from the Saracen's Head, serving most parts of the country. Its best-known coaches were the Rockingham to Leeds and Mountain's Tally-Ho to Birmingham. The business included a coach manufactory at the back of the Saracen's Head. 
Upon the arrival of the railways, Sarah Ann Mountain kept her coaches running as long as possible, and was a partner in the last London to Bristol coach. Her will of 1839 stated her residence as the Saracen's Head. She died, aged seventy-two, on 8 February 1842 at Park Lane, Croydon, and was buried on 14 February 1842 at St Sepulchre, Holborn. The business was left to her son Peter. 


@@@@@


doc= 47564


Praed, William Mackworth (1747-1833), banker and politician, was born on 24 June 1747 and baptized the following month at the London Foundling Hospital. He was the eldest of six children of Humphrey Mackworth Praed (1718?-1803), MP and banker, and Mary, daughter of William Forester of Dothil Park in Shropshire, and widow of Sir Brian Broughton Delves, baronet, of Broughton in Staffordshire. 
Educated at Eton College and at Magdalen College, Oxford, in 1774 Praed was elected MP for St Ives, the family seat. However, after allegations of bribery the result was declared void and he was unseated. On 19 June 1778 he married Elizabeth Tyringham (1749-1811), daughter of a banker, Barnaby Backwell of Tyringham in Buckinghamshire, at St George's, Hanover Square. Elizabeth had just inherited the family estate at Tyringham after the death of her brother, and this became the family home. William and Elizabeth were to have twenty children, only seven of whom reached their majority. In 1792 the old manor house was pulled down and a new one built by Sir John Soane. 
In July 1779 Praed became a junior partner of his father's bank, the Cornish Bank at Truro. In 1802 shortly before his father's death he became the senior partner, and soon afterwards opened a second branch at Falmouth, known as the Cornish Naval Bank. In 1780 he was again elected MP for St Ives, and remained so until 1806. He usually supported the Pitt ministry, but was best known for guiding enabling legislation for the Grand Junction Canal through the House of Commons. This important canal linked London and the midlands, and Praed was noted for his obsession with its success. For his work in parliament he was awarded a piece of plate by the canal shareholders, and, in 1813, in honour of his work as the company chairman, his portrait was commissioned for the boardroom. In 1801 he also became one of the company treasurers. In 1808 he was a leading proponent of the Grand Union Canal which linked the Grand Junction Canal and the Leicestershire and Northamptonshire Union Canal. After 1823 he no longer attended meetings of the Grand Junction Canal Company, but his sons and London banking partners retained a close interest on his behalf. Praed Street in Paddington, where the canal terminated, is another memorial of his enthusiasm. 
In 1801 William Praed formed a banking partnership with Philip Box, Kendon Digby, and Benjamin Babbage, and opened a bank at 189 Fleet Street, London, the building being designed by Sir John Soane. There were several changes of partner, but Praed was always the senior partner, and he brought other members of the family into the firm. Many of the bank's customers came from the west country or Buckinghamshire, and the bank provided treasurers, lent money, and invested in shares for the Grand Junction Canal. After 1850 the bank traded as Praed & Co., and it was taken over by Lloyds in 1891. 
In 1803 his father died and Praed inherited the family estate at Trevethow, but he disposed of it soon afterwards to Sir Christopher Hawkins, and gave up representing St Ives. Instead he stood for election in the closed borough of Banbury in Oxfordshire. In 1806 he won this seat, ousting Dudley North, but in 1807 there was a double return, and Praed was ousted by North in the fresh election ordered in 1808. He was never an MP thereafter. He concentrated on his other activities, but during the 1820s he may have withdrawn from active management, as his sons took on more responsibility. Near the end of his life he may have retired to Trevethow, which had been acquired once more, for he died there on 9 October 1833, and was buried at the local parish church in Lelant. His eldest son, James Backwell Praed, inherited the estate at Tyringham, and his father's banking interests, while another son, William Tyringham Praed, was also involved in the London banking firm, and became treasurer to the Grand Junction Canal Company. 


@@@@@


doc= 47565


Slade, William James (1892-1982), shipowner and master mariner, was born on 28 April 1892, at 18 Irsha Street, Appledore, Devon, the eldest son of William Kingdon Slade (1865-1943), master mariner, and his wife, Rosina Annie Abigail (1865-1964), daughter of Captain Richard Harding of Appledore. Slade attended the Wesleyan elementary school in Appledore from 1895 until 1904, when he was allowed to leave at the age of twelve after passing an examination. 
The male members of the Slade family had traditionally been employed as seamen but, partly as a result of the part-time work of the women of the family in the garments industry, they were just beginning to acquire small vessels of their own. These were employed in the home trade, that is, the coasting trade, and the trade with European ports between Brest and the Elbe. Slade had, since infancy, spent a month or more at sea with his father and his mother (who was an experienced sailor in her own right) in the family's vessels during the summer. Now he went to sea with his father in the ketch 'Ulelia' as boy at 1's'. (5p) a passage. His duties were to cook, clean, help to work cargo, and assist with the working of the vessel. 
Slade's father was barely literate, but he was a hard-driving man with an excellent business sense, and all the secretarial and business work in connection with the operation of the vessel was given to the boy, at his father's dictation, at the end of each working day, which lasted from 6 a.m. to 9 p.m. Increasingly as he grew into his teens Slade was also given responsibility for navigation and pilotage. As a result he was sometimes hardly ashore for months on end, even though the vessels were employed in the home trade. When the 'Ulelia' was partly rebuilt at Appledore he spent five weeks working with the shipbuilders. 
Although an unbelievably hard life, it was superb training, of which he took full advantage, and as a result at the age of nineteen was given command of, and managing responsibility for, the schooner 'Elizabeth Jane'. After a difficult start with a drunken crew Slade prospered with this vessel, and later with the schooners 'Millom Castle' and 'W. D. Potts', which was sunk by a German submarine in 1917 when Slade was in command, the ketch 'Trio', and the three-masted motor schooner 'Haldon'. In 1930 he lost an eye in an accident ashore but continued in command of the 'Haldon' until 1943. In 1944 he sold her. He had by then acquired sufficient capital to maintain himself to his own satisfaction for the rest of his life and settled, after civil defence work during the remainder of the war, at 29 Bridgeland Street, Bideford, where his wife ran a draper's shop. 
Although physically small Slade was immensely strong, a very able shipmaster, and an even more able businessman of great personal charm. To the end of his life he spoke with a strong north Devon accent. Slade also had the twin gifts of total recall and an ability to write in a pleasant, easy style. In 1959 his autobiography, 'Out of Appledore', was published. In it he was able to record not merely a form of seafaring life by then completely lost, but the social and economic background to it. The book went into four editions and became a minor classic of its kind. In 1971 he published a collaboration, 'Westcountry Coasting Ketches', of which he wrote much the greater part. Slade married in 1915 May Whitton (1892-1971), daughter of a Baptist minister. He had known her since childhood. They had five sons, all of whom became professional men. He died on 31 August 1982 in Barnstaple Hospital, from the long-term consequences of diabetes, and was buried on 3 September in Bowden Green cemetery, Bideford. 


@@@@@


doc= 47566


Thurgood, Walter Leonard (1903-1973), transport entrepreneur, was born in Church Lane, Cheshunt, Hertfordshire, on 24 January 1903, the son of Charles Thurgood, labourer in a gun factory, and his wife, Lily Amelia, 'nee' Durton. He was educated in Enfield and at the Regent Street Polytechnic, London, and apprenticed to a coach builder in 1918. 
Thurgood became a foreman at the Phoenix coach works in Ware, Hertfordshire, and this small home counties town, a centre of the malting industry, was to become the fixed base of most of his varied business activities, and to benefit from them in terms of employment opportunities. In 1925 he founded his own coachworks, W. L. Thurgood (Coachbuilders) Ltd, which built up a widening clientele of smaller stage carriage and private hire operators, spreading through the home counties into East Anglia and further afield. The coach building side of his entrepreneurial activities remained a constant factor (apart from wartime production) throughout the diversification of his business interests, and the works, in its final physical form, was sold to a rival as a going concern at the end of Thurgood's active business life. 
In 1928 Thurgood diversified into bus operation, running mainly vehicles bodied at his own works on a network of routes radiating from the nearby county town of Hertford. The People's Motor Services network prefigured part of the subsequent operating pattern of London Transport from its Hertford garage. Nineteen single-deck buses and a van were acquired from People's by the London Passenger Transport Board in November 1933, Thurgood having previously sold two thirds of his interest to Messrs Overington and Randall. 
Thurgood then turned to civil aviation, which was growing in both popularity and reliability. With Louis T. H. Greig as fellow director, Thurgood formed Jersey Airways Ltd and acquired its first 'airliner', a twin-engine De Havilland Dragon of 6/8 seats, which flew from St Helier beach to Portsmouth on 18 November 1933, three days after delivery. A fleet of eight such aircraft carried nearly 25,000 passengers in 1934 and six four-engined DH 86s were ordered. In November 1934 Thurgood, with Whitehall Securities, formed Guernsey Airways, but in December a holding company was established, Channel Island Airways, in which Railway Air Services and Whitehall Securities held part interests with Thurgood, who retained his shareholding until 1939. His links with Channel Islands transport lasted longer, with a large order being placed for Thurgood bodies by Guernsey Motors after the war. 
Thurgood's pattern of reinvestment repeated itself after his close involvement in aviation came to an end, when he established a factory for the production of decorative, laminated plastic sheet with the punning trade name of Wareite. This was sold to the Bakelite group in 1940, Thurgood obtaining shares in the controlling company. 
Wartime production in the coachworks appears to have concentrated on aircraft equipment, including jettison tanks, rather than vehicles. The works was destroyed by enemy action in October 1940, but rebuilt within a few months. At the end of the war coachwork production recommenced in late 1945 and the next few years, marked by a shortage of both private cars and new buses and coaches, were probably the heyday of the firm. New vehicle building was combined with a flourishing secondhand and refurbishing trade. The business moved to new, purpose-built premises on the edge of the town in 1953, which could handle double-deck buses. The BBC acquired the vacant works as a property store and also occupied additional buildings which Thurgood erected on his new coachworks site. In 1967 the coachworks was sold as a going concern to Plaxtons (Scarborough) Ltd, whose southern service centre it became. 
Thurgood was active in local civic life, serving on Ware urban district council for nine years and meeting the cost of a coat of arms for the town (with the punning motto 'Cave'). Thurgood can be epitomized, in John Hibbs's description of one of Thurgood's contemporaries, Edward Hillman, as a 'flying busman'. His coach building led to bus operation, which in turn financed civil flying. Further diversification took in plastics manufacture and eventually property development. Throughout this varied career, the town of Ware and coach building were constant factors. Thurgood died of heart failure at the Queen Elizabeth II Hospital, Welwyn Garden City, on 23 May 1973. He was survived by his wife, Maud, 'nee' Wilkinson, and six children. He was cremated at Enfield crematorium following a funeral service at St Mary's Church in Ware. 


@@@@@


doc= 47568


Tilling, Thomas (1825-1893), horse bus operator, was born at Gutter Edge Farm, Hendon, London, and was baptized on 22 February 1825 in St Marylebone, Middlesex. He was the son of James Tilling and his wife, Sarah Elizabeth. His father was a Gloucestershire farmer who had moved to London earlier in the century; and by the time of Thomas's birth, James Tilling had already acquired West End shops, from where the farm's milk was delivered to customers by women dressed in traditional Welsh costume, who carried the milk in pails suspended from yokes across their shoulders. 
Thomas Tilling's interest, however, was in horses and in 1847 he bought a carriage, which, driven by himself and drawn by his grey mare, Kitty, he hired out for weddings and other functions. He later added other greys to his stud and in 1850, with W. Stevens, bought a horse omnibus to take advantage, in the following year, of the great influx into London of visitors to the Great Exhibition. The business did not collapse, as did so many others, without these additional passengers. On 28 January 1847 Tilling married Cornelia Sevile, and they had a number of children, including Richard Stephen Tilling (1851-1929) and Edward ('b'. 1858). 
From his base in Peckham, Tilling ran his single bus, called The Times, to and from central London. A man of strict habits and with a great gift for organization, he ran his bus four times daily to a strict timetable, whether or not it was carrying many passengers. Those using it, knowing they could rely on its punctuality, increased in number and, by increasing the number of vehicles, he was eventually able to provide a quarter-hour service and to offer monthly fares to a regular clientele. 
When, in the mid-1850s, an attempt was made to buy up all the horse buses in London, as had already occurred in Paris, Tilling refused to sell but ran in collaboration with the new combine, and his business continued to grow. In due course, when the combine, the name of which had been Anglicized as the London General Omnibus Company, had become slack and inefficient, Tilling was among the independents who also ran in opposition to it. In 1892, on the eve of his death, Tilling was running eight vehicles in association with the London General and eighteen in opposition to it. 
Tilling also continued to act as a job master, hiring out horses and vehicles to a vast number of customers in various parts of London and then elsewhere in the country. From the outset his buses advertised 'T. Tilling, job masters, wedding carriages'. In 1864 he began to horse the Peckham fire engine and in due course other London brigades. That year he started to operate four cabs, and was soon hiring out others. He also supplied a special service for London's doctors, many of whom did not want the trouble of looking after the horse and vehicle they needed to make their rounds. Every week he provided forage and a visit from his veterinary surgeon, who attended to all aspects of the horse's welfare, including instructions for shoeing when required. John Tilling, in 'Kings of the Highway', has recalled that his great-grandfather claimed that he 'would replace a lame horse, a broken carriage or a drunken coachman within the hour' (Tilling, 45). 
With such facilities available, many other Londoners soon sought Tilling's services, especially after his sons Richard and Edward joined the business in 1867 and 1872 respectively. His many well-known clients, such as Blondin, the high-wire artist, were soon joined by others. On 12 February 1873 he married a widow, Emma Sophia Buck, 'nee' Rawlinson. In all, he had eleven children. In 1874 Tillings got the contract to supply 113 horses to the Metropolitan Board of Works. The firm built the snow ploughs which cleared its own bus routes and other streets after a particularly heavy snowfall in 1881 had brought London to a virtual standstill. It supplied many horses and carriages for the lord mayor's show and, in 1887, twenty-six landaus, each drawn by a pair of greys, for Queen Victoria's jubilee. Tillings was later able to display the royal warrant after supplying all the horses and carriages for the royal family. By this time Thomas Tilling had built up the leading private hire business in the capital. 
Tilling soon cast his eyes further afield. When a woman requested a coach and four to take a month's holiday touring round Wales, they were provided. He became involved in the finance and organizing of hiring from Durham to Cornwall. The great effort involved in this further expansion, when he was no longer young and vigorous, was said by the family to have hastened his death. He died at Swanley Cottage, Perry Hill Farm, Perry Hill, Catford, London, on 8 January 1893, aged sixty-seven. He was buried at Nunhead cemetery on 13 February. 'The Times' did not consider him worthy of an obituary, though another London paper, quoted by his great-grandson, referred to his 'marvellous energy, unfailing pluck and business aptitude... [He was] the prince of organizers' (Tilling, 58). 
Thomas Tilling would not, however, be so well remembered without the public company which his sons, Richard and Edward, and his son-in-law, Walter Wolsey, formed in 1897. Thomas Tilling Ltd, with an issued capital of $400,000, took over 4000 horses. The company negotiated the difficult transition from horse to motor vehicle and was, in 1907, involved in the creation of the Tilling-Stevens petrol-electric bus. It operated a number of regional bus concerns jointly with British Automobile Traction, in which Thomas Tilling Ltd acquired a considerable holding. 


@@@@@


doc= 47569


Wordie, William (1810-1874), carrier and contractor, was born on 23 March 1810 at Stirling, son of John Wordie (1783-1830), carrier, and Janet Stewart. William was locally educated and probably went from school into his father's modest cartage business in Stirling, running twice weekly between there and Glasgow. But by the late 1820s it had run into debt. John Wordie died suddenly on 30 June 1830, and left William to continue with half a dozen horses and carts, and many creditors. By 1837 he was paying these off by energetic pursuit of business, now offering a daily service to Glasgow. In that year he married, on 20 December, Janet (1814-1901), daughter of the farmer and landowner Peter Jeffrey of Throsk, on the Forth below Stirling. They had two sons and five daughters. In 1837 also he took John McArthur of Stirling into a partnership, which lasted until 1852. 
By the late 1830s road carriers in Scotland faced competition. The pioneer Garnkirk and Glasgow Railway opened in 1831, and the Edinburgh and Glasgow gained their act in 1838, and opened in 1842. Road transport between major centres would suffer although the railways did not as yet consider substantial goods traffic. To gain it they needed a collection and distribution organization, and this William Wordie and a few others in Scotland offered, as Pickfords did in England. In 1842 Wordie contracted with the new Edinburgh and Glasgow Railway to collect and forward goods by rail, using not only his carts but his own railway wagons. Cartage depots were opened at the stations, the first of many. 
Railway expansion in Scotland was rapid, especially by the Caledonian company, who in 1849 opened a line from Glasgow to near Falkirk, where a junction was made with the Scottish Central, who had built through to Stirling and Perth, opened in 1848. By 1850 the railway reached Aberdeen via Coupar Angus and Forfar. In 1849 William Wordie had opened an office in Glasgow, and, probably in 1852, moved his head office there from Stirling; he had a house in Glasgow by this time. Freed now from the McArthur partnership, Wordie & Co. rapidly expanded. The contract with the Caledonian had been won in 1851, and the Scottish Central and Aberdeen railways followed in 1854, so by the mid-1850s Wordie & Co. was carrying for the companies which made up the line between Glasgow and Aberdeen via Perth and Dundee. An agreement with Pickfords was made, for forwarding goods, which was to endure until nationalization in 1948, and in 1865-6 Wordies benefited by the Caledonian take-over of the companies forming the Aberdeen route. By this time William Wordie was moving further north. In 1860 he opened a depot in Inverness; he was already at Elgin, both now linked to Aberdeen by rail. In 1865 the Highland Railway was formed by amalgamation, and in 1868 Wordie & Co. gained their cartage work. A year later the company secured the cartage contract for the neighbouring Great North of Scotland Railway. 
By the time of his sudden death on 9 October 1874 at his Garngabber estate near Lenzie, following a heart attack, William Wordie controlled a large business, some 700 horses, with stables and depots from Glasgow to Thurso. He was an important figure in Scottish transport, and, as the obituary in the 'Glasgow Star' said, 'Mr Wordie had always a kindly word, and his little, quick, energetic figure will be missed from the platforms of our northern railways' (quoted in the 'Glasgow Herald', 10 Oct 1874). He was buried at Stirling new cemetery on 12 October. He was survived by his wife; and his sons, John and Peter, expanded further, over to Ireland and into England, until it was said, 'You'll find Wordie & Co. wherever you go'. 


@@@@@


doc= 47570


Dalzel, Archibald (1740-1818), historian and slave trader, was born in Kirkliston, Linlithgowshire, Scotland, on 23 October 1740, the eldest of the five children of William Dalziel (died 1751) and his wife, Alice Linn. After being educated as a medical doctor in Edinburgh he served in the Seven Years' War as surgeon's mate (1761-2). His life was dogged by a need for money, partly because he helped support his mother and scapegrace brother William. Having been discharged from the navy in January 1763, and not liking medical practice, he told another brother, Andrew Dalzel, 'Guinea is the only place that I have a probability of raising myself in' (Akinjogbin, 68). In March he accepted employment as a surgeon by the Company of Merchants Trading to Africa. 
Dalziel was stationed at Anoumabu on the Gold Coast, and on account of his meagre salary turned to slave trading. On 26 May 1764 he remarked, 'I have at last come a little into the spirit of the slave trade and must own (perhaps it ought to be my shame) that I can now traffick in that way without remorse' (Akinjogbin, 69). In 1767 he became director of the English fort at Ouidah in the kingdom of Dahomey. Trading with the nearby Dutch and Portuguese, he accumulated capital. However, he aspired to retire in affluence in England, and he departed Ouidah in 1770, made a slave voyage to the West Indies, and returned to England in 1771, possessed of about $2000. 
Less affluent than he had anticipated, Dalziel continued in the slave trade. He bought three slave ships, 'Little Archie', 'Hannah', and 'Nancy', and prospered until 1778, when he lost his capital to American privateers. That autumn he declared bankruptcy and altered his name from Dalziel to Dalzel. 
During the ensuing thirteen years Dalzel attempted piracy and served as captain of a slave ship, employed by London and Liverpool merchants. The African Committee of Liverpool called him to testify to the privy council in April 1788 when it heard evidence about the slave trade. His testimony minimized mortality on slave ships, asserted that slaves were well fed, and claimed that, while changes in slave ship construction were not necessary, some regulations on behalf of slaves and crew might be adopted. The abolitionist William Wilberforce quoted from Dalzel's testimony in the House of Commons in May 1789: 'the trade, says Mr Dalzel, at this time hangs upon a thread, and the smallest matter will overthrow it' (Rawley, 321). 
In 1791 the Company of Merchants Trading to Africa appointed Dalzel governor at Cape Coast Castle, its headquarters on the Gold Coast. In this capacity he resisted Danish efforts to expand territorial possessions and Dutch efforts to monopolize the Portuguese trade. He unsuccessfully urged that the British west African stations be made colonial territories. During the years 1797-1803 the London ship 'Governor Dalzel' made successive voyages from Cape Coast to American destinations. 
While Dalzel was in Africa his 'The History of Dahomy' was published in London in 1793. He drew in part on his experience, but also on William Snelgrave's 'A New Account of Guinea' (1754), Robert Norris's 'Memoirs of the Reign of Bossa Ahadee, King of Dahomy' (1789), and others. His 'History' was both a historical compilation and propaganda against abolition of the slave trade. He argued that the slave trade saved African victims from human sacrifice and slaughter. He also sought to exonerate Europeans from charges that they incited African wars to secure slaves, asserting that Africans had long engaged in wars among themselves. Although it is based on borrowed sources and is biased, the 'History' remains important for its contents, pleasant style, and influence. 
In 1802 Dalzel resigned as governor and returned to England. In his final years he became the owner of the 'Thames', which voyaged to Africa between 1805 and 1808, and 'Chalmers', which in 1805 went to Jamaica and in 1806, 1807, and 1808 made voyages from London to Africa. 
Although he never married, Dalzel had close associations with three women. In 1794 he referred to 'Mrs. D and child' being in 'a favourable' way (Akinjogbin, 76-7). The philanthropist Elizabeth Dickson (c.1793-1862) was his daughter. A son, Andre, died at Cape Coast Castle on 24 May 1797. In 1800 another son, Edward, went to Africa with Dalzel, employed by the company as a writer, and in 1811 he was living in Malta. Dalzel's life was marked by loyalty to his family. Active as a mariner, shipowner, officer, and historian, he was a significant figure in the last years of the slave trade, and his 'History of Dahomy' earned for him an enduring place in the trade's history. Information relating to his final years is scarce, though it appears he lived in Malta immediately before his death on the island of Gozo on 1 March 1818. 


@@@@@


doc= 47571


Harris, Richard (d. 1734), slave trader and lobbyist, is of obscure ancestry. He was in St Kitts in the West Indies in 1694, where he observed that French privateers, by intercepting provisions from British North America, caused Barbados planters 'to suffer much & their Negroes perish for want' (TNA: PRO, CO 137/8, 40). After establishing himself as a merchant in London he began sending cargoes to Africa, and from 1702 to 1712 he dispatched the second highest valuation among London merchants. From 1718 to 1734 eleven vessels owned by him transported slaves to Jamaica, Barbados, Virginia, and Buenos Aires, in the notorious 'triangular trade'. 
Harris early developed an interest in the Jamaica trade (importing slaves and exporting sugar). In 1709, concerned about wartime security, he advised the Board of Trade: 'What seems absolutely necessary, especially for Jamaica, is to remove the French from among our settlements in America' ('CSP col.', 24.319). As the Royal African Company undertook its long quest to recover its monopoly over trading in Africa, lost in 1698, Harris united with London merchants in opposition. They proposed that the trade be vested in a regulated company. Parliament refused to renew the African Company monopoly, but failed to establish a regulated company until 1750. 
By 1708 Harris stood to the fore among London slave merchants; the Board of Trade that year wrote to Harris enclosing queries to be communicated to the separate traders to Africa. Jamaica legislators and merchants employed Harris's services in petitioning for an open trade to Africa, asserting that 'Jamaica hath been better supplied with negroes by the seperate traders to Affrica than at any time by the Affrican Company' ('CSP col.', 25.336). In a quest for information the Board of Trade in 1731 wrote to 'Mr. Harris, one of the principal Separate Traders to Africa', requesting him to 'communicate to some others of the Principal Separate Traders, and let their Lord's have your and their answers' (TNA: PRO, CO 389/28, 447). Marketing slaves in American colonies encountered obstacles in the shape of colonial duty laws. Recognizing that the laws interfered with the slave trade, the crown in 1717 prohibited the passage of laws imposing a duty on importation of Africans. Jamaica and Virginia, where Harris held an economic interest in the trade, were major offenders. Harris persistently protested against the existing laws, only to find that the colonial legislatures no less persistently maintained them. 
Harris won greater success in other measures. London merchants faced impediments to the recovery of colonists' debts. Colonial laws exempted houses and lands from liability for debts. Although Harris and others reminded the Board of Trade that such exemption defied English law and royal instructions, the board, noting the laws were of long standing, recommended that the privy council not interfere. The merchants then turned to parliament and pushed through the 'Credit Act' of 1732, a triumph described as 'the Palladium of Colony credit, and the English Merchant's grand security' (Sheridan, 288-9). The act made lands, tenements, and slaves owned by colonial debtors liable to be seized for repayment of debts. The following year the passage of the 'Molasses Act' had Harris's support. He had earlier advised the Board of Trade that, 'if the French sugar colonies were not supplied with provisions and lumber from our northern colonies, it would not be possible for them to carry on their sugar trade in the manner they do' ('Journal of the Commissioners', 1728-34, 253). 
To the end of his life Harris pursued his long career as a slave trader. In 1733 the Board of Trade appealed to 'Mr. Harris, one of the most ancient traders to the West Indies', for information ('CSP col.', 40.52). Six weeks after his death his ship 'Antelope' imported 286 Africans from Angola into Virginia. On 14 September 1734 'Read's Weekly Journal' recorded: 'Last Tuesday Night [10 September] died at his House on Tower-Hill, Mr. Richard Harris, who for many Years was an eminent Trader to the Coast of Africa, and the West Indies'. 
For three decades Harris, without any official capacity, probably wielded more influence in shaping slave-trade policy than any other Briton. He enjoyed the esteem of London merchants and the Board of Trade, and testified frequently on the policy. He had the satisfaction of seeing free trade in slaves won, colonial exclusionary laws opposed, and two significant parliamentary measures -- the 'Credit Act' and the 'Molasses Act' -- made law. He also foretold the imperial policy of evicting France from North America. 


@@@@@


doc= 47572


Blennerhassett, Sir Rowland, fourth baronet (1839-1909), journalist and politician, born at Blennerville, co. Kerry, on 5 September 1839, was the only son of Sir Arthur Blennerhassett, third baronet (1794-1849), and his wife, Sarah, daughter of John Mahony. His only sister, Rosanna (died 1907), became a Red Cross nurse. Both parents were Roman Catholics. Rowland succeeded to the baronetcy on the death of his father in 1849. After being educated first at Downside School, under the Benedictines, and then at Stonyhurst College, under the Jesuits, he matriculated in 1859 at Christ Church, Oxford, but left, without taking a degree, for the University of Louvain. There he took a doctor's degree in political and administrative science, 'with special distinction'. He afterwards, in 1864, studied at Munich, where he formed a lifelong friendship with J. J. I. von Dollinger. Finally he proceeded to Berlin, where he became acquainted with many leading politicians, including Bismarck. A frequent visitor to France, he came to know the chief figures of all parties under the Second Empire. 
About 1862 Blennerhassett became intimate with Sir John Dalberg (afterwards Lord) Acton, with whose stand against later developments of ultramontanism he had a strong sympathy. The discontinuance by Acton in April 1864 of the 'Home and Foreign Review', a Roman Catholic organ of Liberal tendencies, suggested the possibility of establishing a journal the main objects of which should be political and literary; and Blennerhassett found the money for starting 'The Chronicle', a weekly newspaper, under the direction of T. F. Wetherell. Blennerhassett and Acton were of great service in searching for competent foreign correspondents. The first number appeared on 23 March 1867, and the last on 13 February 1868. As Gladstone predicted, it proved too Roman Catholic for Liberals, and too Liberal for Roman Catholics, and its early support of home rule for Ireland further prejudiced its chances of success. Save on ecclesiastical questions, the paper seldom expressed Blennerhassett's opinions. 'The Chronicle' lacked sympathy with the reasoned imperialism which developed out of Blennerhassett's early admiration of Bismarck and engendered a faith in the superiority of German to British methods of progress. His early desire that Britain should learn from Germany passed into a strong desire that the country should prepare itself for the rivalry which the new German ambitions were making inevitable. Thus with him foreign policy grew to be an absorbing interest. 
Meanwhile Blennerhassett took an active part in Irish politics. In 1865 he became Liberal MP for Galway City, a seat that he retained until 1874. But he lost the confidence of the priesthood, owing to his association with Dollinger and Acton (although he remained Roman Catholic) and his vote on the 'Irish University Bill' of 1873. From 1880 to 1885 he represented County Kerry, his native county. (He should not be confused with his fellow member and cousin Rowland Ponsonby Blennerhassett.) In that interval his attitude on the home-rule controversy changed completely. A lukewarm supporter of home rule as a parliamentary movement under Butt and Shaw, he actively opposed it as a national movement under Parnell. Defeated in the Harbour division of Dublin city at the general election of November 1885, he did not re-enter the House of Commons. 
During his parliamentary career Blennerhassett was mainly concerned with Irish university education and the Irish land question. His speeches on Fawcett's 'Irish University Bill' in 1871, and on Gladstone's 'Irish University Bill' of 1873, which he supported, showed an intimate knowledge of continental universities. He regretted Gladstone's exclusion of religiously divisive subjects, modern history and moral philosophy, from the curriculum, and pressed the system -- borrowed from Germany -- of two denominational faculties in the same university. In 1872 he moved the second reading of a bill for the purchase of Irish railways. In regard to the land question, he anticipated the legislation of 1903 in a confidential memorandum, dated April 1884 (afterwards printed), suggesting the appointment of a commission to convert large tracts of Irish land into peasant properties, by buying the estates of landlords willing to sell, at twenty-two years' purchase of the judicial rent. 
After his retirement from the House of Commons Blennerhassett continued to play a part in Irish public life. He was a commissioner of national education and a member of the senate of the Royal University. From 1890 to 1897 he was an inspector of reformatory and industrial schools; from 1897 to 1904 he was president of Queen's College, Cork; and in 1905 he was sworn of the Irish privy council. During these years he constantly wrote on political subjects in 'The Times', the 'Daily Telegraph', the 'Nineteenth Century', the 'Fortnightly Review', the 'Deutsche Rundschau', and, especially at the end of his life, in the 'National Review'. Blennerhassett published several of his speeches in parliament and his inaugural address on 'University Education' at Queen's College, Cork, in 1898. He edited Ringhoffer's 'Bernstorff Memoirs' in 1908. He deeply regretted the change to intransigence in papal policy on the election of Pius X, though he admitted the provocation given by the French legislation against the church, and the difference between the modernism of the 1900s and the liberal Catholicism of his youth. A ready talker as well as writer, Blennerhassett died on 22 March 1909 at 54 Rutland Gate, London, and was buried at Downside. 
On 9 June 1870 Blennerhassett married Countess Charlotte von Leyden, daughter of Count von Leyden, of an old Bavarian family, whom he had first met in Rome four months earlier. Charlotte Julia Blennerhassett, Lady Blennerhassett (1843-1917), was a well-known historian and the author of several books, notably a life of Madame de Stael (1889). Like her husband, she had studied with Dollinger and enjoyed a close intellectual relationship with Acton, who recruited her as a contributor to the 'Cambridge Modern History', for which she wrote two articles on nineteenth-century Catholicism. The Blennerhassetts had two sons, of whom Arthur Charles Francis Bernard succeeded to the baronetcy; an only daughter, Marie Carola Franciska Roselyne, married Baron Raphael d'Erlanger. 


@@@@@


doc= 47574


Gifford, (Thomas Johnstone) Carlyle (1881-1975), lawyer and investment trust manager, was born at Ingleston, Twynholm, Kirkcudbrightshire, on 14 January 1881, the son of Patrick Gifford, a farmer, and his wife, Barbara Sloan Grierson. He was educated at George Watson's College, Edinburgh, and Edinburgh University. On 11 June 1907 he married Maud Oriel Riata, the daughter of the Hon. Charles Henry Pearson, fellow of Oriel College, Oxford; they had one son. 
Gifford undertook his legal apprenticeship with W. J. Cook, writer to the signet, and spent a period as private clerk to Sir Henry Cook. He himself became a writer to the signet on 29 March 1905. He then accepted an offer from Augustus Baillie to go into partnership, and the firm of Baillie and Gifford, writers to the signet, was formed in 1906. Its legal practice was quite small, but the partners had some contacts in the rubber plantation business, from where their future growth was to come. In 1909 the Straits Mortgage and Trust Company was set up to lend money to planters, with Baillie and Gifford as managers and secretaries. Four years later its name was changed to the Scottish Mortgage and Trust Company. Baillie's role was to bring in new business, while Gifford ensured that it was conducted properly. 
Gifford specialized in two areas of law: land law, and the rules and regulations of the stock exchange. His talents in these areas led him to be invited to serve on the boards of several investment trusts, and by 1925 he was present on the boards of companies run by all of the Edinburgh fund management groups. On the outbreak of the Second World War he served on the boards of twenty-two companies. As well as investment companies and trusts, these included the Scottish Widows Fund and Life Assurance Society. By 1957 Baillie, Gifford & Co. had become the largest of the Scottish investment trust managers -- a position they retained at the time of Gifford's death in 1975. By then he had been semi-retired for several years. 
In building up the investment side of the business Gifford was aware of the need to employ non-lawyers. His solution was to split the business between investment and law. Two firms were created, one consisting of lawyers, the other of fund managers, and by 1970 there were no common partners. Gifford's business interests were not confined to Edinburgh, and he set up two investment trusts in London in 1929. His great involvement in the trust business led him to become closely involved in the setting up of the Association of Investment Trust Companies in 1929. Elected the first deputy chairman of this organization, he also served as chairman between 1934 and 1936. 
During the Second World War Gifford was called into government service. He served on the committee which advised on the requisition and disposal of overseas investments, and by 1940 he was described in 'The Times' as 'special British Treasury Agent in charge of the sale of British holdings of American securities' ('DSBB'). He spent almost two years in the USA, and was involved in the disposal of other British assets. The only controversy was over the sale of American Viscose, which was owned by Courtaulds: Winston Churchill later claimed that it had been sold at too low a price (ibid.). 
Gifford's sojourn in the USA reinforced an already strong belief in the free enterprise system, and in the immediate post-war years he remained opposed to nationalization and state regulation. It also reaffirmed his view that the USA was likely to be at the forefront of world economic growth. In the post-war years, despite the expense of acquiring overseas investment funds, he invested heavily in the USA, and was rewarded with the growing pre-eminence of his firm among British investment managers. 
Beyond the investment world Carlyle Gifford, as he was popularly known, had many other interests. As a lawyer he had a reputation for pleading successfully in tax cases. He also served on the court of Edinburgh University. The owner of a small farm at Humbie in East Lothian, he was a not very successful breeder of Hereford cattle. On 4 May 1960 he married Sophia Mary Wharton Millar; they had one son. Gifford loved sport and played tennis, including real tennis, and golf. He was a member of the Honourable Company of Edinburgh Golfers and an enthusiastic bridge player. He was an atheist, and was given to occasional acts of charity. 
Gifford died on 24 January 1975 from heart failure at his home, 24 Rothesay Terrace, Edinburgh, survived by his second wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 47575


Charles Henry Mills, first Baron Hillingdon (1830-1898), Sir Charles Mills's only son, was born on 26 April 1830 at Camelford House, Park Lane, London. He entered the bank in 1852 after Eton College and Christ Church, Oxford. He became senior partner in 1872 on his father's death, and succeeded to the baronetcy. However, the bank's guiding spirit from the mid-1860s to the mid-1890s was Bertram Woodehouse Currie (1827-1896). In 1853 Charles Henry Mills married Louisa Isabella Lascelles (died 1918), daughter of the third earl of Harewood; they had five sons and three daughters. This alliance with an old aristocratic family reflected the Mills's new social status and their increasing integration into the upper classes. But this marriage also took place within a network of relationships linking the old families of the banking aristocracy (Barings, Glyns, Grenfells, Mills, Smiths) with a few families of the landed aristocracy (Cassis, 221-43). Charles Henry Mills was the archetypal London private banker of the Victorian age, dividing his life between his bank, his outside City interests, politics, and society. His City directorships included the chairmanships of the London committee of the Imperial Ottoman Bank and of the Union Bank of Australia, two overseas banks in the promotion of which Glyn's had played a major role, and of the North British and Mercantile Insurance Company. In politics he was conservative MP for West Kent from 1868 to 1886 when he was raised to the peerage as Baron Hillingdon. He died suddenly in Wilton Church, Wiltshire on 3 April 1898. One of the wealthiest private bankers of his day, Lord Hillingdon left $1,479,000. 
Lord Hillingdon was succeeded to most of his offices by his eldest son, 


@@@@@


doc= 47576


Fleming, Robert (1845-1933), financier, was born on 17 March 1845 at Liff Road, Lochee, then a village about 3 miles to the north-west of Dundee. He was the fourth of seven children of John Fleming (1806-1873), an overseer in linen and jute mills in Lochee and Dundee, and his wife, Annie (1808-1860), the eldest of six children of James McIntosh, an itinerant tailor in Glen Shee, and his wife, Elspith. From such modest beginnings, Robert and John (1847-1925), the two surviving children of the marriage, went on to considerable success. John Fleming established a wood-importing firm in Dundee and Aberdeen, was elected to Aberdeen town council in 1893 and served as lord provost from 1899 to 1902, was knighted in 1908, and sat as Liberal member of parliament for South Aberdeen from 1917 to December 1918. Robert Fleming received a basic education at the Free Church of St David's School, Brown Street, Dundee. At eleven he was awarded a bursary that enabled him to study for a further two years at Dundee high school. There he gained a thorough grounding in mathematics and bookkeeping, which proved of immense value to him in his career. He started work at thirteen as an office boy to James Ramsay jun., a merchant in Dundee's Cowgate, at an annual salary of $5. Within two years he had moved as a clerk to the mercantile office of Cox Brothers, the largest firm of jute spinners and weavers in the world; he then took up an appointment as bookkeeper to Edward Baxter, a prominent Dundee merchant, in 1866. 
In his teens Fleming became fascinated by the stock market. The first half of the 1860s was a period of intense financial activity, following legislation permitting the formation of joint-stock companies, many of which were quoted on the London stock exchange. As the number of new companies mushroomed and share prices rose sharply, investors were increasingly driven by blind optimism. The inevitable crash came in 1866, when the major discount house Overend, Gurney & Co. stopped payment, bringing down a number of other companies and precipitating a major financial crisis. One of those companies was the Oriental Commercial Bank, in which a youthful Fleming had invested around $40 of the money he had saved from his salary of $100 per annum. However, the shares were only partly paid, and he was called on to pay a much larger sum. It was money he did not have and he was forced to compromise with the liquidator. Although not legally obliged to do so, Fleming vowed as a matter of honour to pay the calls in full as and when he could, and achieved this within five years. Despite having his fingers badly burnt, he was not put off investing. It was an episode that he never forgot and which shaped his lifelong investment philosophy of courage and caution. 
It was during his time with Edward Baxter, who had large holdings of overseas securities, that Fleming developed his investment ideas and in particular his interest in overseas stock markets. He realized that America, recovering from civil war, was a land of boundless opportunity, and that the mortgage bonds of railroads were the key to safe and profitable investment in that country. He also appreciated that British investors were anxious to obtain a greater return than could be earned from domestic securities, but that the vast majority of them were unwilling to risk investing overseas on their own. Fleming decided that the answer lay in promoting an investment trust -- then a relatively new concept -- which would be invested in American railroad bonds to yield 7 per cent, almost double the return on British government stocks. It says much about his personality and strength of character, his enthusiasm for investment, and his grasp of the complexities and pitfalls of the market in railroad securities that in 1873, aged twenty-seven, he was able to convince four of the most respected and influential businessmen in Dundee that his idea had merit and persuade them to act as trustees of the first investment trust to be formed in Scotland. The Scottish American Investment Trust encountered such an enthusiastic response from investors that the initial prospectus, seeking subscriptions of $150,000, had to be withdrawn and replaced by a prospectus for $300,000. Fleming was appointed secretary of the trust. Later that year he visited America for the first time -- he was to cross the Atlantic a total of 128 times -- supervising the investment of the trust's funds in railroad bonds. Almost immediately a financial panic hit America, following the collapse of the leading New York banking house of Jay, Cooke & Co., which triggered a severe economic depression that lasted until 1879. It was a testing time for Fleming and the trustees -- the first of many -- but the trust weathered the storm well. Its success led to the flotation of two further trusts over the next two years, both oversubscribed, increasing the total sum invested to $1.1 million, the bulk of the money raised in Dundee itself. 
On 14 February 1881 Fleming married Sarah Kate (1857-1937), the second child of a son and three daughters born to Marshall Kirkland Hindmarsh, a senior official of the Inland Revenue in Scotland, and his wife, Mary Kirby Baylis. They had two sons and two daughters. Two of their grandchildren were Peter Fleming (1907-1971), the writer and explorer, and his brother, Ian Fleming (1908-1964), creator of James Bond. 
Fleming was never a director of the three trusts, but in 1882 he was invited to join the board of the Dundee Land Investment Company Ltd and its sister company, the Dundee Mortgage and Trust Investment Company Ltd, later part of the Alliance Trust. For four years until his resignation (owing to pressure of other business) Fleming served as the companies' expert on American securities. Few transactions were undertaken without referral to him, and on his visits to the United States he was given wide discretion to acquire investments for the companies. He was closely involved also in negotiations for the transfer of the Matador Cattle Company to Scottish ownership, inspecting the ranch and signing the agreement in Texas on behalf of a syndicate of Dundee businessmen in 1882. The Matador, tightly controlled from Dundee, was one of the very few cattle companies floated during the ranching mania of the early 1880s to survive and prosper. Fleming went on to set up the Investment Trust Corporation in London in 1888 and the British Investment Trust in Edinburgh the following year. He helped establish the Northern American Trust Company in Dundee in 1896 and reorganized the Metropolitan Trust Company in London in 1899. For almost fifty years he exercised enormous influence in the field of investment, being a director of a number of investment trusts and acting as adviser or broker to many more. 
It was as an investor and expert on American railroads that Fleming established an early international reputation. Railroads were America's first 'big business', but they were not for the unwary or faint-hearted. In addition to fraud and corruption, investors frequently had to contend with mismanagement and stock-manipulation on a grand scale. Superimposed on this was the business cycle of boom and bust. The often reckless over-expansion of the rail network during the good years brought disaster when economic depression set in, many railroads being forced into receivership more than once. In 1876, at the age of thirty, Fleming and a colleague were asked by Sir Edward Watkin MP to go to New York on behalf of the London bondholders' committee of the Erie Railway, then in receivership, to confer with representatives of the company. Their plan for the financial reorganization of Erie was largely adopted. Subsequently Fleming was involved in the restructuring of other railroads, including the Denver and Rio Grande (1884-6), the Mexican National (1886), the East Tennessee, Virginia, and Georgia (1885-6), the Atchison, Topeka, and Santa Fe (1894-6), and the Norfolk and Western (1895-6), of which he was also a director between 1886 and 1893. He was regarded in railroad and banking circles as a shrewd operator. He needed all his astuteness, perspicacity, and experience in 1886, when he assumed a central role in the battle with Jay Gould, the notorious railroad promoter and speculator, for control of the Texas and Pacific Railway. For a time it looked as if Gould, one of the most intelligent and artful operators of them all, would wrest control of the company from its bondholders and shareholders for next to nothing, but when Fleming arrived in New York and united the majority of the opposing parties behind his plan, Gould's attempt at 'daylight robbery' was foiled, though not without a fight. 
In 1884 Fleming turned down the offer of a lucrative partnership in the New York banking house of Jesup, Paton & Co. because he was unwilling to commit his family and himself to living in that city for the rest of his life. However, towards the end of the 1880s he became restless: he had been playing on an international stage and Dundee seemed to him rather restricting. In 1890 he decided to move his business to London, though retaining his Dundee office. He resigned as secretary of the three Scottish-American investment trusts, but, anxious to retain his expertise, the Dundee trustees appointed him their London correspondent. His family lived in Chislehurst for twelve years before Fleming purchased the Nettlebed estate in Oxfordshire, where he built a large mansion, Joyce Grove. He was high sheriff of Oxfordshire in 1909. He went on to acquire a town house in London, in Grosvenor Square. As a City financier for more than thirty years there were few ventures of any significance that he did not help to finance. He underwrote or placed issues of securities by companies in every corner of the world worth tens of millions of pounds using his network of British investment trusts, insurance companies, and other clients. Major commitments included supporting E. H. Harriman's restructuring of the Union Pacific Railroad in the early years of the twentieth century, financing Sir William van Horne in the construction of railways in Cuba, and underwriting issues amounting to more than $15 million by Anglo-Persian Oil Company, the forerunner of British Petroleum. 
In 1904 Fleming engaged Walter Whigham, a young Scottish accountant, as his assistant. Although Fleming had admitted to working better 'in single harness', he needed help. Approaching sixty, his business was increasing and he was frequently away in Scotland or America. He also had a number of other commitments. For example, in 1906 he was appointed a member of the finance committee of King Edward's Hospital Fund for London, and the following year he was made an extraordinary director of the Royal Bank of Scotland. In 1909 he took his elder son, Valentine, and Whigham into partnership. His younger son, Philip, joined the firm in 1911. Tragically Valentine was killed in action in France in 1917. After the war the partnership went from strength to strength. It is said that Robert Fleming & Co. was one of only two City institutions that issuing houses would invariably consult before deciding on the terms of a new issue, the other being the Prudential. 
Fleming had an indefatigable energy for work. Above average in height, well-built, and erect, he presented a distinguished appearance. He was a serious, rather reserved man, who did not engage in idle conversation. Even to those who knew him he was a man of few words, these being delivered in a deep voice with a Scots accent. He could appear severe and intimidating, but by nature he was a kindly person and an adoring husband and father. He was very keen on outdoor pursuits -- particularly, when he was young, rowing and walking; latterly his passion was stalking. With two exceptions, each year from 1892 until his death he rented a Scottish sporting estate where the family gathered in late summer. He was a fine shot, bagging two stags the same day at Black Mount in Argyll, in 1929, at the age of eighty-four. 
Robert Fleming became a financier of international repute, establishing in London the investment bank that bore his name for more than a century until it was sold to Chase Manhattan Corporation in 2000. Throughout his life he was closely associated with investment trusts in Scotland and England. He is often referred to as the father of the investment trust, being largely responsible for establishing the principles of sound investment-trust management. A contemporary of J. Pierpont Morgan and a close business associate and friend of Jacob Schiff of the New York investment bank of Kuhn, Loeb & Co., Fleming was widely known and respected in financial circles on both sides of the Atlantic, a man of unquestioned integrity. He was among the shrewdest investors of his generation and an acknowledged expert on financing railways, particularly in the United States, Mexico, and Cuba. Despite his success and accumulated wealth, Fleming remained modest, unassuming, and very generous, his unostentatious benevolence supporting both national and local causes. He never forgot his birthplace, donating sums to University College, Dundee, and in 1929 donating $155,000 to the city to finance the building of houses for Dundee's workers. He received the honorary degree of doctor of laws from St Andrews University in 1928 in recognition of his gifts and of his advice to University College over many years. In 1929 he was made a freeman of the city of Dundee. Fleming died suddenly of heart failure at Black Mount, Bridge of Orchy, Argyll, on 31 July 1933, aged eighty-eight. He was buried at Nettlebed three days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 47577


Blair, Alexander (1789-1859), banker, was born on 18 June 1789, the son of William Blair, a captain in the 13th regiment of foot, and his wife, Margaret Freeland. Nothing seems to be known of his early life, but his commercial education began in a merchant's house in Liverpool. In 1811 he entered the service of the British Linen Bank in Edinburgh. He began as a confidential clerk and, from there, proceeded to the position of assistant secretary. In 1826 he was appointed joint secretary. Two years later the manager and secretary of the bank both resigned, and Blair was appointed joint manager with Thomas Corrie, a director of the bank, who resigned from the board upon his appointment as joint manager. Blair was to be paid $800 plus $100 for a house, while Corrie was paid $1400. On 7 May 1828 Blair married Mary Smith (1800-1872), the daughter of George Smith, a banker. They had one daughter, Mary Elizabeth (1830-1857). 
If Blair resented his situation at the British Linen Bank he did not have to endure it for long, for in July 1832 the treasurer of Scotland's oldest bank, the Bank of Scotland, resigned after pressure from his board, and Blair was appointed to the position at a salary of $1200. What the Bank of Scotland needed was a reforming manager who had strong views on financial management and business organization. They found both of these attributes in Blair. He began by reforming the reporting practices in the bank to ensure that he and the board were continuously aware of the position of the bank, and 'he quickly made his mark as an effective banker, at once energetic and disciplined, with an ability for work on accounts, the auditing and control of branches and the huge volume of administrative work required of a Bank Treasurer' (Saville, 301). 
This was a difficult time for banks as many new joint-stock banks were being set up, thereby increasing the competitive pressures. The Bank of Scotland's profits continued to be under pressure, and Blair wrote a very incisive treasurer's report for his board. This was a comprehensive review, which considered the bank's internal affairs as well as such topics as joint-stock banking, the role of the Bank of England, and 'the probable intention of the Government upon the subject of the currency' (Checkland, 354). Blair realized that, despite the boom in business, the Bank of Scotland's profits were actually falling. The only real solutions to this problem were a lowering of the deposit rate and the introduction of charges on services (as English banks did), but the Bank of Scotland was unable to act unilaterally. Blair therefore worked for the introduction of a code of conduct for all Scottish banks. 
Blair had very sound ideas about how a bank should view its balance sheet, especially its reserve ratios and its dividend policy. It is easy, in reading his letters, to see Blair as the arch conservative banker, and there was much about his demeanour which would confirm this view. But the bank emerged from his period as treasurer as a healthier and larger institution with a reputation for sound judgement and good faith. Under Blair's firm hand a more limited role was allowed to directors and Scottish politicians on the board, and his managerial reforms led to a greater degree of professionalism. 
By the later 1840s Blair had become convinced that the Scottish banking system was dangerously weak. His preferred solution was a merger of the three public banks in Edinburgh. Once consolidated, an institution comprising the Bank of Scotland, the Royal Bank of Scotland, and the British Linen Bank would perform in Scotland a role analogous to that of the Bank of England. However, although Blair obtained promises of government support, he was unable to secure approval from his colleagues in the other two banks. 
Blair certainly did not believe in untrammelled competition, viewing it as potentially damaging to both the profitability and the stability of the financial system. In the early 1840s he made several efforts to get the Scottish banks to agree to uniform rates of interest for deposits and discounts. However, it usually proved difficult to hold the parties together for very long. Blair conceded that agreements would end when it suited the needs of any individual bank. 'Experience shows', he wrote, 'that the banks have never acted together unless compelled to do so by the state of the money market, and that all proceedings of committees have been disavowed by one or other of the Boards' (Checkland, 391). Nevertheless, the regular meetings which he established between senior bankers became the committee of Scottish bank general managers, the basis for the cartel which operated for more than a century. 
Blair skilfully defended Scottish banking principles and methods before a number of parliamentary committees, and he became embroiled in the currency and banking debate. He was a friend of Thomas Tooke, who wrote part of his 'History of Prices' (6 vols., 1838-57) in Blair's house at Drylaw. Volume 3 is dedicated to Blair. The passage of the 'Bank Charter Acts' of 1844 and 1845 led to widespread condemnation in Scotland. Blair and other Scottish bankers objected to the degree of banking centralization and control that the acts introduced. Not only did the legislation impose a costly requirement to hold reserve gold, but, by inhibiting the formation of new banks, it supported the cartel over prices operated via the general managers' committee. Although Blair believed that the legislation of 1844 and 1845 was intellectually flawed, he nevertheless conceded that in practice it contained some useful operating principles. 
Blair saw himself, or rather his bank, as the policeman of the system, and in the 1830s he led the other public banks in an attempt to discipline what he believed to be the financially irresponsible Western Bank of Scotland. Blair's view of the Western as a potential problem was well founded, for it was the Western's failure in 1857 which did so much damage to the reputation of the Scottish banking system. It was again Blair who led the effort to minimize the damage of the crisis. However, it and the report, and evidence from the select committee on the 'Bank Acts', 'thoroughly depressed' (Saville, 406) Blair, who was disappointed that the support given by the Bank of Scotland to bolstering the Scottish banking system had not been appreciated. Unfortunately, Blair experienced a personal blow when, in the middle of the crisis, his only child, Mary, died in childbirth. Blair enjoyed indifferent health throughout 1858, and died on 1 February 1859 at his home, Beechwood, Edinburgh, as a result of influenza. He was buried in St John's churchyard, Princes Street, Edinburgh. 
Throughout his life Blair took a professional interest in economic debate, but he was also a classical scholar who read the psalms in Hebrew. For recreation he played sacred music on an organ, and otherwise conducted himself in a modest manner. He had a wide circle of correspondents, who included the leading banking theoreticians such as J. R. McCulloch, Lord Overstone, and the MP John Abel Smith. 
One of the most highly regarded Scottish bankers of his time, Blair strove to defend the interests of the Bank of Scotland, while also working to transform the nature of the Scottish financial system. Yet while he undoubtedly succeeded in the former role, Blair did not generate enough support for his schemes of bank merger. In the period before the 'Bank Charter Acts' of 1844 and 1845 his arguments did not prove powerful enough to undermine the influence of the Bank of England. 'This failure to maintain the pre-eminence of Scottish banking ideas', Richard Saville has recently concluded, 'rather clouded his judgement in later years and induced a reluctance to take part in national debate, although in purely banking terms he was able to deal with the periodic crises of the banking system' (Saville, 301). 


@@@@@


doc= 47578


Nicholson, Nancy (1788-1854), miser and eccentric, was born on 3 May 1788 at Drax, Yorkshire, the only child of John Jackson (died 1810), vicar of Drax, and his second wife (died 1842). Her father was the master of Drax grammar school, and it was probably the prospect of succeeding to this position and other financial rewards which induced the Revd John Nicholson (died 1850) to marry her in October 1811. Although Nicholson became not only master of the school but also vicar of Drax, the couple had a miserable marriage. While Nancy Nicholson's miserliness was of a legendary order, her husband was not faultless: periodically he got very drunk, and was known to beat her. As mistress of the school she exercised her economizing talents to the full, serving the boys tiny meals and making them perform many household chores, which apparently included pilfering fruit from neighbours' gardens. After the Nicholsons were relieved of the charge of the school, she turned to the keeping and marketing of livestock, especially pigs, at which she proved herself very successful. Her business sense was further evidenced by the care she took to ensure that her own name as well as her husband's appeared on the deeds for the considerable amount of land which they purchased. After they separated in 1845 Nicholson consoled himself with an accordion, while his wife passed through a period of unusual extravagance, subscribing to a weekly newspaper and having her portrait painted. This was perhaps unwise in a woman of some 17 stone, who always refused to purchase new clothes. After her husband's death on 8 February 1850, Nancy Nicholson energetically sought for a post as a housekeeper, finding her leisured existence as a woman of property a dull one. In 1850 she joined the Roman Catholic church, but left it when a priest asked for a small donation towards the building of a church at Howden. She died on 6 August 1854 at her house in Asselby, leaving several expectant relatives out of her will. A distant cousin received $1500 but the bulk of her property was bequeathed to a half-nephew. Much of her apparent oddity could be more fairly viewed as the result of frustrated intelligence and energy, coupled with a total disregard for the conventions of her sex and class. 


@@@@@


doc= 47579


Miller, Sir Francis Norie-, first baronet (1859-1947), insurance company manager, was born on 11 March 1859 at Cheshunt, Hertfordshire, the son of Henry Miller, chief of the statistical department, HM customs, and his wife, Ann Alexander Norie, who was of Scottish birth. He was educated privately and trained for the law, but instead began his insurance career in the London office of London and Lancashire Fire Insurance Company. In 1880 he joined Ocean Accident and Guarantee, and in 1882 he became chief clerk in the accident and guarantee department of Employers' Liability Assurance. On 16 January 1884 Norie-Miller married Grace Harvey Day, daughter of the Revd H. J. Day, vicar of Cheshunt. They had two sons and a daughter. In 1885 he became assistant secretary of Mercantile Accident and Guarantee of Glasgow. In February 1887, aged only twenty-seven, he was appointed secretary of General Accident and Employers' Liability Assurance Association of Perth, recently founded by a group of local businessmen and landowners. He remained with the company for the rest of his career, as manager from 1891, as a board member from 1918, as managing director (1933-9), as chairman (1933-44), and as honorary governor from 1938 until his death. 
When Norie-Miller joined General Accident, accident insurance was still in its infancy. His achievement was to develop his company into one of Britain's greatest composite insurers. Beginning from a two-room office in Perth, he swept out all but one of the old officials, cancelled doubtful risks, and, travelling throughout the country, appointed 800 new agents in his first year. With great energy and determination, he was alert to new market opportunities, demonstrating competitive panache in underwriting new forms of insurance, diversifying across all markets, discounting premium rates, and cross-subsidizing one branch of business by profits made in another. 
In 1887 Norie-Miller introduced coupon insurance by providing free cover against injury from railway accidents for anyone carrying a particular publisher's diary. Burglary, fire, and motor insurance were commenced in the 1890s. No-claims bonuses were pioneered as a competitive device, and in the 1920s a hugely successful scheme was introduced whereby a year's free motor insurance was offered with every new Morris sold. By the 1930s General Accident had become Britain's largest corporate motor insurer. In 1899 business was commenced in the United States. By 1914 a worldwide network of offices had been established. Norie-Miller was also the driving force behind this organization. He crossed the Atlantic eight times during the First World War, and by 1935 he had made thirty-nine business trips to the United States alone. 
A prominent figure in the civic life of Perth, Norie-Miller served as a magistrate for forty-seven years. He was a director of Perth Royal Infirmary for thirty-two years, and chairman for over twenty-one years of Perth school board and the county education authority. In 1907 he was made an honorary fellow of the Educational Institute of Scotland. He was a regular worshipper at St Ninian's Cathedral, Perth. He was awarded the Medaille du Roi Albert by the king of the Belgians for his work for Belgian refugees during the 1914-18 war. In 1933 he became a freeman of the city of Perth. At a by-election in 1935 he was elected member for Perth, after a joint invitation to stand from the local Liberal and Conservative parties, but he did not contest the subsequent general election that year. In 1936 he was created a baronet in recognition of his services to Perth. 
Norie-Miller's elder son, Claud, was killed on active service in the Mediterranean in 1917. The younger son, Stanley, succeeded his father as general manager of General Accident in 1933. Grace died in 1931, and in 1934 Norie-Miller married his secretary, Florence Jean Belfrage McKim. He enjoyed the countryside, shooting, fishing, golf, and poetry. He died at his home at Cleeve, Cherrybank, near Perth, on 4 July 1947, aged eighty-eight, and was buried at St Ninian's. He was survived by his second wife. His son Stanley succeeded to the baronetcy. 


@@@@@


doc= 47581


Drummond, Andrew (1688-1769), goldsmith and banker, was born at Machany, Perthshire, the great-great-grandson of James Drummond, first Lord Maderty, and the son of Sir John Drummond (died 1707) and his wife, Margaret, the daughter of Sir William Stewart of Innernytie. Little is known of his early life, though he had four elder brothers, of whom only William Drummond, who succeeded as fourth viscount of Strathallan in 1711, survived to adulthood. A decree of forfeiture was passed against Drummond's father in 1690 for his attachment to the Stuarts, and he was imprisoned for a while in Stirling Castle; on proof that his mind was deranged, he was released on 28 July 1692. 
Drummond was apprenticed to Colin McKenzie, a goldsmith of Parliament Close, Edinburgh, on 4 May 1705, but in 1712 he is recorded as practising his trade in London, at the sign of the Golden Eagle, Charing Cross. On 7 November 1716 he married Isabella (died 1731), the daughter of Alexander Strahan or Strachan, a London-Scottish merchant; they had three sons and two daughters. Two of their children survived to adulthood: John (1723-1774), who married Charlotte Beauclerk; and Isabella ('c'.1720-1740). 
In 1717 Drummond began to offer banking services in addition to his goldsmithing work, by which time he was the tenant of one of six newly constructed brick houses alongside Northumberland House. His business came to an abrupt halt on 3 October 1745, when the entries in his customer account ledger for that year were ruled off and balances calculated. A notice was placed in the press arranging to pay off his debts in two 'dividends' by March 1746. Tradition has it that the ledger was seized or inspected because Drummond was suspected of Jacobite sympathies, as his brother, Lord Strathallan, was a leading participant in the Jacobite rising of 1745. However, on 15 October 1745 a new ledger was started for those customers who wished to continue with him, although fewer than half of those named in the earlier ledger elected to do so. Drummond took his son John into partnership at that time, and his nephews Robert and Henry also began to work in the bank in 1749. 
The banking business gradually recovered, and in 1760 Drummond moved into specially commissioned premises on the west side of Charing Cross (now Whitehall). He lived on the bank premises until 1729, when he purchased Stanmore House, Middlesex. In 1763 work began on the virtual reconstruction of the house to designs of John Vardy, and following Vardy's death in 1765 Sir William Chambers completed and added to the existing works. In 1755 Drummond also bought the family's former estate at Machany, which had been attaindered after the Jacobite rising. 
Drummond died on 2 February 1769 at Stanmore House; a memorial to him was placed in Great Stanmore church. At the time of his death the bank was owned jointly with his son John and nephew Robert; it had more than 1500 accounts on its books and annual profits of over $10,000. The clientele included various titled and landed families, but the business was also noteworthy for the number of artists and craftsmen it served, including the painter Thomas Gainsborough, the sculptor Henry Cheere, the plasterer Joseph Rose, the architects Sir William Chambers and Henry Holland, and the landscape gardener Capability Brown. Another distinctive feature was the number of army agents who banked at Drummonds, including from the 1750s Drummond's nephew Henry Drummond, who acted as agent to a number of regiments and obtained lucrative contracts as joint paymaster to the Royal Artillery and the British forces in North America. 
A contemporary, John Ramsay of Ochtertyre, remembered Drummond's boast: 'I have done great things, and have almost everything I could desire. My son is married into a noble family, and I have planted a colony of Drummonds round Charing Cross which appears to thrive' (Allardyce, 304). 


@@@@@


doc= 47582


Brabazon, Reginald, twelfth earl of Meath (1841-1929), politician and philanthropist, was born on 31 July 1841 in a house near Belgrave Square, London, the second son of William Brabazon (1803-1887), styled Lord Brabazon and from 1851 eleventh earl of Meath, and his wife, Harriot (1811-1898), the second daughter of Sir Richard Brooke, sixth baronet, and his wife, Harriot Cunliffe. His elder brother, Jacques le Normand, died of diphtheria in 1844, near Naples, but Reginald survived and, as Lord Brabazon, was educated from 1851 to 1854 at a private school at Whitnash, near Leamington Spa, before attending Eton College (1854-9). The Spartan regime at Eton is recalled in his autobiography, 'Memories of the Nineteenth Century' (1923), which tells of a master who accused boys of 'spinelessness' for brushing snow off their knees, pointing out that, if their forefathers had 'minded a little snow', then Canada would not have been added to the empire. On leaving school he went to learn German from 1860 to 1861 in Buckeburg, near Hanover, and in 1863 passed into the Foreign Office as a clerk by competitive examination. 
On 7 January 1868 Brabazon married Lady Mary Jane Maitland [Mary Jane Brabazon, countess of Meath (1847-1918)]. The daughter of Thomas Maitland, eleventh earl of Lauderdale (1803-1878), and his wife, Amelia (died 1890), the daughter of William Young, she was born on 15 March 1847. The marriage produced four sons and two daughters. Brabazon moved into the diplomatic service, and his first appointment to the embassy in Berlin (1868-70), during the period of the Franco-Prussian War, led to his alienation from Germany. He also served at The Hague (1870) and in Paris (1871-3), before abandoning diplomacy, at the insistence of his in-laws, on being posted as second secretary to the 'remote' outpost of Athens. Brabazon remained unemployed without pay, at the disposal of the diplomatic service, until he finally resigned in 1877. He and his wife went to live at Rivermead, Sunbury, Middlesex, in 1873 and decided to devote their prodigious energies and enthusiasms to 'the consideration of social problems and the relief of human suffering' (Brabazon, 'Memories of the Nineteenth Century', 201). Brabazon embarked on a career of public philanthropy that was to span several decades, from the time of the handsome, black-bearded aristocrat of the 1870s to the bald, white-bearded, benevolent Santa Claus of the 1920s. 
In 1874 Brabazon became honorary secretary of the Hospital Saturday Fund Committee and started the Dublin Hospital Sunday movement, and in 1879 became the first chairman of the Young Men's Friendly Society, later the Church of England's Men's Society. In 1882 he founded the Metropolitan Gardens Association, of which he was chairman until his death, but it was as an alderman of the London county council (1889-92, 1898-1901) and first chairman of its parks committee that London is indebted to him for the preservation of so many of its open spaces, and for parks, gardens, and playgrounds covering thousands of acres, the lungs of the metropolis. Lady Brabazon not only supported her husband's schemes but also devoted her own time and money to philanthropic endeavours, such as the Workhouse Concert Society. In 1885 she set up the Ministering Children's League, whose members pledged to help those in suffering by doing at least one kind deed every day. 
On 7 January 1887 Brabazon was invited to speak on the National Association for Promoting State-Directed Colonization, begun in 1884, of which he was both chairman and president, to a meeting held in Clerkenwell, London, under the hostile auspices of the Social Democratic Federation. The working-class audience was ready for 'a warm time with a real live Lord' and his speech was frequently interrupted, one man shouting, 'I should like to cut off your head', to which he replied, 'If they could prove to him that cutting off his head would save the starving poor, he was quite willing that it should be cut off' (Brabazon, 'Memories of the Nineteenth Century', 232-4). In May 1887, on his father's death, he succeeded to the title as the twelfth earl and inherited 14,717 acres, along with Killruddery, near Bray, co. Wicklow, Ireland, and Eaton Court in Herefordshire with 695 acres. 
Lord Meath, an ardent Conservative, Unionist, and imperialist, began to promote the movement for the recognition of an empire commemoration day, with which his name is chiefly associated, after reading in 1896 of a ceremony in Hamilton, Ontario, at which the British flag was hoisted and children sang the national anthem. The first public meeting to promote the idea of celebrating Queen Victoria's birthday, 24 May, as 'Empire day' did not take place until 24 May 1904, but four years later official British recognition of such a day was turned down in the Commons by a 68-vote majority, the figures being received with loud Irish nationalist and Labour cheers. Meath succeeded in obtaining British government support for Empire day only in 1916, a decade after it had become a statutory holiday in most of the dominions; the war against Germany, as much as his incessant propaganda efforts, brought final recognition. In 1922, a year after his retirement from active involvement, Empire day became affiliated to the Royal Colonial Institute, and 80,000 schools throughout the empire were said to participate. 
While campaigning for Empire day, Meath was also a zealous supporter of Lord Roberts's campaign for national military service, had founded the Lads' Drill Association (1899-1906), afterwards incorporated in the National Service League, and become chairman and president of the Duty and Discipline movement (1912-19), as well as scout commissioner for Ireland (1911-28). Many of these causes are now seen as an establishment-led reaction to the weakening of parental discipline and the questioning of authority in an age of gradual emancipation from Victorian values and domestic tyranny. Meath wrote and edited several books, mostly collections of his articles or essays, promoting the campaigns to which he devoted his time. He died on 11 October 1929 at 40 Eaton Square, the residence in London of his sister Lady Kathleen Brabazon, and was buried at Delgany, co. Wicklow, on 16 October 1929. Lady Meath, who had predeceased him on 4 November 1918, was buried on 7 November at Bray, also in co. Wicklow. 


@@@@@


doc= 47583


Kingsley, Frances Eliza (1814-1891), biographer, was born at Taplow House, near Maidenhead, the eleventh child, and seventh and youngest daughter, of Pascoe Grenfell (bap. 1761, d. 1838) ['see under 'Grenfell family], MP for Great Marlow, and his second wife, Georgiana St Leger, youngest daughter of Viscount Doneraile. The Grenfell family was originally Cornish and claimed a connection with Sir Richard Grenville. Pascoe Grenfell had amassed a substantial fortune through Welsh and Cornish mining interests, and his own second marriage into the aristocracy set the pattern for future alliances in the family which enhanced its growing prominence in finance, politics, and the army and navy. Fanny's nephews included a governor of the Bank of England (H. R. Grenfell) and a field marshal (F. W. Grenfell); Julian Grenfell, the poet, was a great-great-nephew. 
As was common in well-to-do families, the Grenfell sons were sent to public schools but the daughters were educated privately. Fanny had opportunities to read widely in modern literatures and in history and theology. By the mid-1830s she was living at home with three devout, unmarried sisters. All were attracted to the Catholic spirituality revived within the Church of England under Tractarian influences, and considered forming or joining some kind of Anglican sisterhood similar to the Puseyite Park Village community established some years later, in 1845. 
However, on 6 July 1839, when the family was staying at Braziers Park near Ipsden, Oxfordshire, Fanny met Charles Kingsley (1819-1875), five years her junior, then a rather wild Cambridge undergraduate. This encounter was fictionalized as the meeting of the lovely and learned Argemone with Lancelot Smith in Kingsley's first novel 'Yeast' (1848), which was always Fanny's favourite. From this moment, later acclaimed as their true wedding day, the sisterhood project was doomed. Fanny's mother had died in 1818 and her father in 1838, so her ambitious half-brother Charles Pascoe had just become head of the family. In the course of a protracted courtship, carried on mainly by letter in the face of the stern disapproval of her brother and most of the Grenfell family, Fanny turned Kingsley's thoughts to ordination, introducing him to the writings of Coleridge, Carlyle, and F. D. Maurice, which became central to his religious outlook. It is clear from the startling mixture of religion and frank sexuality in Kingsley's sometimes vividly illustrated letters to Fanny from this period that almost from the outset the relationship involved powerful physical attraction and a corresponding defiance of celibate religious idealism. Despite all difficulties they were finally married by special licence in Bath on 10 January 1844. 
Even then they could not live together until Kingsley was able to move from his Dorset curacy, held through the good offices of Fanny's brother-in-law, to become rector of Eversley in Hampshire. They moved into the damp and inconvenient rectory in May 1844. Here Fanny stayed for most of her married life. She played little part in Kingsley's public life in London and elsewhere, though they both attended the first women's suffrage meeting in 1869. Four children were born, Rose (1846), Maurice (1847), Mary (1852), and Grenville (1858), amid miscarriages and repeated periods of ill health. Holidays for convalescence added to constant financial worries. But Fanny was usually a cheerful and supportive wife and mother, energetically involved with parish work and amanuensis for many of her husband's books. Dark-haired, heavy-featured but with beautiful eyes, almost Spanish in appearance, she was a good manager, kind and hospitable if sometimes daunting, regarded as the original of the redoubtable Eleanor in Kingsley's 'Alton Locke' (1850). 
In later life Fanny suffered from angina and was unable to accompany Kingsley on his travels to the West Indies and the United States. She was seriously ill after a heart attack in 1875, when her husband was also ill; though she recovered, he did not. Semi-invalid, she spent her widowhood at Tachbrook Mallory, near Leamington Spa. Almost immediately she began work on 'Charles Kingsley: his Letters and Memoirs of his Life' (1877), which was frequently reprinted. A popular abridged edition appeared in 1879. She also edited four volumes of pious selections from Kingsley's writings. Subsequent biographers have complained of her uncritical attitude and her reticences and suppressions, including the omission of all reference to Kingsley's spendthrift brother Henry, whom she disliked, but she made available a great deal of interesting unpublished material and wrote with intelligent sympathy, insisting that her argumentative husband was a prophetic teacher. She continued to take an informed interest in theological controversy, and her compilation 'From Death to Life' (1887) convincingly demonstrated that Kingsley had anticipated contemporary liberal discussion of life after death. Fanny died on 12 December 1891 at Tachbrook Mallory. 


@@@@@


doc= 47584


Pickwick, Eleazer (bap. 1749, d. 1837), stagecoach proprietor, the son of Moses Pickwick ('bap'. 1725, died 1799) and his wife, Sarah Smith, was baptized at Freshford parish church, Somerset, on 2 February 1749. His parents were from the village of Limpley Stoke. The family fortunes began and ended in a bizarre manner, for Eleazer was the grandson of a foundling, baptized Moses Pickwick in 1695 in commemoration of his discovery at Pickwick in Corsham, Wiltshire, and his death coincided with the publication of Charles Dickens's 'Pickwick Papers', which made his name a household word. By then, however, the business was being run by his cousin Moses Pickwick, whose name Dickens's Sam Weller found emblazoned on the London to Bath coach. 
At Eleazer's birth the family was living in obscurity on the Wiltshire/Somerset border, but he moved to Bath, where in 1775 he married Susanna Coombs at St Michael's Church, where she had been baptized twenty years earlier. By the end of the decade, building on his experience as a postboy at the Bear inn, he was able to provide the services of a post-coach to London from the Angel inn in Bath whose licence he held. He soon enlarged his scope by increasing the number of services scheduled, especially to London, from Bristol as well as Bath, and by transferring his base to the White Hart, which was a major inn in the centre of Bath. The exemplary manner in which Pickwick undertook the Oxford cross-post to Bath and Bristol was praised by the superintendent of the mails in 1797. The facilities at the White Hart remained vital to Pickwick's business, although by the turn of the century he no longer found it necessary to retain the licence, held since 1782. Pickwick was to be at the profitable heart of the coaching trade in Bath for over half a century. 
Municipal recognition came late to Eleazer Pickwick. He was made a freeman of Bath in 1799, and a member of the common council in 1801, becoming mayor in 1826; and although named a turnpike trustee in 1800 he did not qualify for service until 1810. During these years he was also actively engaged in acquiring a landed interest in the area with which his family had earlier been associated. In 1797 he purchased the manor house and lands in the parish of Bathford in Somerset. To this he added Hartley Farm in Batheaston, Somerset, as well as a manor house and lands in the parish of Wingfield in Wiltshire. He owned a freehold property in Bath, in Bath Street, but resided in Westgate Buildings from 1800. About 1830 Pickwick acquired a fine town house in the city, 10 Queen Square, Bath, where he died on 8 December 1837. His wife had predeceased him, dying in 1835; they were both buried at Bathford parish church. Their two sons had died at an early age, and so on Pickwick's death his estate was inherited by his nephew, Captain William Eleazer Pickwick, except for the coaching business. Moses Pickwick had long been associated with this, and had already become the sole proprietor in the mid-1830s. However, the railways dealt coaching a great blow, and in the 1850s Moses retired to a family farm rented since 1800 from Oriel College, Oxford. 
A portrait of Eleazer Pickwick, painted about 1803 by John Sanders, shows a bluff ruddy-cheeked man in simple riding habit, at ease in a country setting. His successors, perhaps to erase memories of the foundling, and of Dickens's eccentric characters, and having obtained a grant of arms in 1838, abandoned the name of Pickwick about 1872 in favour of Sainsbury, which was acquired through marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 47586


Wyatt, Sir Myles Dermot Norris (1903-1968), air transport entrepreneur, was born on 2 July 1903, at West House, Hartford, near Northwich, Cheshire, the younger son of Arthur Norris Wyatt, master brewer, and his wife, May, 'nee' Reynolds. 
Wyatt was educated at Radley College and New College, Oxford. In 1926 he joined the Port of Calcutta commissioners, working for the next eight years as assistant and deputy secretary. In 1934 he returned to Britain, and became general manager for Airwork Ltd. This company had been formed in 1928 by Nigel Norman and Alan Muntz to develop the airfield at Heston, in west London, as a centre for private flying. However, the number of private owners using the site grew only slowly, and Airwork diversified into aviation support services as well as opening a flying school. By the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939, Wyatt was a director of the firm. 
During the war Airwork concentrated on training pilots for the Royal Air Force, and repairing combat aircraft. In 1945 Wyatt was the key figure in the company's management, and with the sale of Heston airport to the government, he and Muntz established Airwork as an independent airline. Initially this meant supplying charter services, since the Labour government had reserved scheduled flying to the new air corporations created by the 1946 'Civil Aviation Act'. In the following years, however, Airwork extended its range of operations, providing air trooping capacity for the government, flying colonial coach services to Commonwealth countries in Africa, and establishing a share of the new 'inclusive tour' market. 
In the course of its expansion Airwork acquired other smaller airlines, including Morton Air and Freddie Laker's Air Charter Ltd in 1958. It also received substantial investment from shipping interests like Furness Withy and the Blue Star Line. In 1960, encouraged by new legislation which relaxed the air corporations' monopoly of scheduled services, Wyatt's company merged with another shipping-backed independent airline, Hunting Clan Air Transport Ltd, to form British United Airways (BUA). In 1961 BUA became a wholly owned subsidiary of Air Holdings Ltd, with Wyatt as executive chairman, and Freddie Laker as his managing director. Laker later left BUA to follow his own career as an entrepreneur. 
With further acquisitions, including Silver City Airways, which had pioneered car-ferry services between England and the continent, BUA became Britain's largest independent airline. In 1966 it took over scheduled services to Brazil, Argentina, and Chile from the state-owned British Overseas Airways Corporation (BOAC), flying the new Vickers VC10 jet aircraft on the route. By the end of the decade BUA's network of services from Gatwick airport covered east and west Africa, the Canary Islands, and western Europe, as well as South America. Wyatt himself, who had been created CBE in 1954, was knighted in 1963. 
Mindful of BUA's profitability, and of the large capital expenditure needed to fund the airline's investment in new aircraft, Wyatt entered into secret negotiations in 1966 to sell the company to BOAC. The proposal was vetoed by the government pending the report of the Edwards committee inquiry into British air transport. When this was released in 1969 it recommended the creation of a 'second force' in competition with the air corporations, and BUA was eventually merged with Caledonian Airways to form British Caledonian Airways. 
Besides being chairman of the Air Holdings Group, Wyatt was a director of several other companies, and a long-time officer of the British Independent Air Transport Association until BUA left the organization in 1964. He was outspoken in defending the interests of Britain's independent airlines, arguing that the government should allow them a greater share of the market for scheduled passenger traffic. He was also a keen yachtsman, becoming admiral of the Royal Ocean Yacht Club, and the owner of several famous cruising yachts. 
Myles Wyatt married Dorothy O'Malley in 1929, with whom he had a son and a daughter. Sir Myles died at his home, Alresford Hall, Alresford, near Colchester, on 15 April 1968. 


@@@@@


doc= 47587


Dudley, Elizabeth (1779-1849), Quaker minister, was born on 1 September 1779 at Suirville Mills, Clonmel, co. Tipperary, Ireland, the eldest of the eight children of Robert Dudley (1732?-1807) and his third wife, Mary (1750-1823), daughter of Joseph and Mary Stokes of Bristol. She was educated at Suir Island School, Clonmel. In 1798 her mother reluctantly accepted medical advice stipulating 'a sea voyage and short residence at Bristol Hot-wells' ('Life of Mary Dudley', 228) and was accompanied by Elizabeth, her three sisters, and her brother Charles: they remained there until early 1800. Her mother's gift in the vocal ministry had been acknowledged by her Quaker meeting shortly before Elizabeth's birth and in 1802 she accompanied her mother on a religious visit to England. 
After her husband's death in 1807, Mary Dudley moved to London in 1810 with her three surviving daughters. In the following year Southwark monthly meeting acknowledged Elizabeth's gift in the ministry, which 'though full of gospel love and human sympathies... was less tender and winning' than that of her mother, for she 'was endowed with a more masculine understanding' and 'possessed in a large degree the power of close reasoning, with a clearness of judgment which was seldom at fault' ('Memoirs', 328). 
Elizabeth Dudley's travels in the ministry were, except for one visit to Ireland in 1845, confined to Britain. She held meetings in many places where there were no Quakers and was broad in her religious sympathies; the evangelical Joseph John Gurney (1788-1847) and Josiah Forster (1782-1870) were frequent correspondents. Nevertheless, when faced with more extreme evangelical views, she could write (probably in 1836): 'Mary J. Graham is too strong in her views of election and assurance for my Quakerly expansiveness, and seems to overlook numerous Scripture assertions bearing on universal grace and love' ('Memoirs of Elizabeth Dudley', 237). Perhaps her firmest friendship, lasting from 1802 until her death, was with Lucy Alexander (1774-1856), the wife of Thomas Maw of Needham Market from 1804. 
Elizabeth Dudley was a not infrequent visitor to Newgate and by 1818 had recorded her conviction that the death penalty was inconsistent with Christian principles and must be abolished. She was clerk to the women's yearly meeting of British Quakers in 1817 and from 1826 to 1834. She was an active member of the morning meeting (the body which acted as a publications committee for British Friends) and she herself prepared the 'Life' (1825) of her mother. Her sister Charlotte (1786-1825) was also acknowledged a minister in 1825, shortly before she died. 
Elizabeth Dudley was deeply affected by her sister Mary's death in 1847. In August 1849, on returning from a visit to Lucy and Thomas Maw, she found cholera raging with great violence in Southwark. On 6 September she became unwell, signs of cholera appeared, and she died shortly after midnight at The Priory, Peckham. Her body was interred in the Quaker burial-ground, Peckham, on 10 September. 


@@@@@


doc= 47589


Gawthern, Abigail Anna (1757-1822), diarist and lead manufacturer, was born on 10 July 1757, probably in Nottingham, the second surviving child of Thomas Frost (1719-1798), a grocer and tallow chandler of Nottingham, and his first wife, Ann (1721-1761), daughter of the Revd John Abson, rector of St Nicholas's Church, Nottingham. She was named after her paternal grandmother, Abigail Anna Frost 'nee' Secker, sister of the Revd Thomas Secker, archbishop of Canterbury from 1758 to 1768. This relationship was a major influence on the younger Abigail's family, both in a social and a material sense, as most of the archbishop's fortune passed to Thomas Frost and his daughter; indeed following Secker's death in 1768 Frost, not content with a substantial bequest, contested the will and managed to lay claim to an additional $11,000 intended to be 'devised to charitable uses' (Dickinson, 170-71). 
Abigail was educated in private academies in Nottingham and Surrey until she was thirteen. At the age of twenty-five she married her first cousin, Francis Gawthern (1750-1791), at St Peter's Church, Nottingham, on 6 March 1783. Her contribution to the marriage settlement was $6700. Her husband ran his family's white lead manufactory in Nottingham, which specialized in the production of high quality white paint. In 1763 the firm was supplying the Worcester Porcelain Company. Abigail moved into the Gawtherns' handsome town house, built in 1733 (subsequently 26 Low Pavement, Nottingham). However at the age of thirty-four she found herself a widow left with two children (two others had died young) and a considerable fortune. 
Abigail Gawthern continued to conduct the family business, aided (and sometimes frustrated) by managing clerks, for a further sixteen years; she also engaged in considerable property transactions in and around her rapidly expanding home town, including the enclosure and redistribution of land in Basford parish. Her son Francis came of age in 1807 and, presumably receiving the legacy of $2000 mentioned in his father's will, he also assumed control of the leadworks. The following year, however, the works 'were discontinued, notwithstanding the Nottingham lead very deservedly continued to retain its reputation to the last', the process having been superseded by more economic forms of production using molasses and tanners' bark ('Diary', 15). 
From an early age Abigail had kept a record of notable local and personal events in a series of annual pocket books, but in the early 1800s she copied the entries into a folio volume. The diary, which covers the years 1751-1810, is thus a retrospective compilation, with some entries made with the benefit of hindsight. Although it has no literary merit it is a valuable record of life in upper middle-class society in an English provincial town during the late Georgian period. The author was herself engaged in trade but she possessed considerable landed property in the region and had numerous relatives in the Anglican church. Her circle of relatives and friends were typical of the urban (or 'pseudo') gentry, ranging from junior members of titled families, the county gentry, the clergy, and visiting army officers, to attorneys, physicians, and affluent tradesmen, all of whom constituted Nottingham county society at the time. However in one respect her family were atypical, for they supported the tory and Anglican causes during a period when the greater part of the influential Nottingham tradesmen, who controlled the closed corporation, were whigs and dissenters. 
Abigail's main interests lay in the social round -- in the local assemblies, plays, concerts, balls, race meetings, and private card parties -- and in visits to fashionable resorts. She describes at length visits to London in 1802 and to Bath and Weymouth (where she saw the royal family) in 1805. Although many of her entries are taken up with social gossip, especially notices of births, marriages, and deaths, they give an insight into the social mores of the time, as well as into aspects such as the operation of the provincial marriage market and the short life expectancy even of the better off. She also records details of local events such as the hotly contested parliamentary elections, and the many riots prompted by a variety of economic and political causes for which Nottingham, with its economy based on a volatile domestic hosiery industry, became notorious in and around the 1790s. 
Abigail Gawthern died at her home, Low Pavement, Nottingham, on 7 January 1822, aged sixty-four, 'after a long and painful illness, which she bore with Christian fortitude' ('Diary', 16). She was buried in St Mary's Church, Nottingham, on 15 January. 


@@@@@


doc= 47591


Griffin, John Joseph (1802-1877), chemist, author, and business manager, the fourth and youngest son of Joseph Griffin (1752-1838), was born at Webb Square in Shoreditch, London, on 22 January 1802. The family later moved to Glasgow where the father sold books and chemicals. The eldest son, Richard Thomas Griffin (1790-1832), trained in the book trade under Thomas Tegg at Cheapside, London, for a five-year term, on 30 March 1820 joining him in equal partnership. From this time the business in Glasgow was styled Richard Griffin & Co., while the London business traded under Tegg & Co. By contrast, John Griffin received a chemical education under Andrew Ure at Anderson's Institution. His connection with the Glasgow Mechanics' Institution brought him under the influence of Thomas Clark who taught chemistry there. For some time in the 1820s he was employed on the staff of the 'Scots Times'. 
Griffin's enthusiasm for chemistry and his desire to help those students seeking an education in the subject was displayed in his various texts. Initially 'Chemical Recreations' was written to assist those attending the newly formed Glasgow Mechanics' Institution in their home-based practical studies. It ran into six editions between 1823 and 1826. Towards the same cause he added 'A Practical Treatise on the Use of the Blowpipe in Chemical and Mineral Analysis' in 1827. In 1829-30 he visited Paris and Heidelberg where he noted various works of potential value for consideration at home. Of these, he translated F. P. Danger's 'L'art du souffleur a la lampe' and H. Rose's 'Handbuch der analytischen Chemie' to launch, in 1831, a 'Polytechnic Library' series through a joint arrangement between Richard Griffin & Co. and the London-based publishing house of John Bumpus. 
In 1832 Griffin married Mary Ann, 'nee' Holder ('b'. 1802); they had twelve children. Also in that year, just before Richard's death, John became a co-partner to the family business. He then, effectively, ran the business alone until Charles Griffin (1819-1862), his deceased brother's son, completed his education at the Anderson's University. When Charles joined the business about 1842 the earlier arrangement with Tegg was terminated. In time, Charles became a freeman of the City of Glasgow and, by 1850, was president of the Stationers' Company of Glasgow. Meanwhile, John Griffin developed the business of trade in chemical apparatus and, by 1848, had transferred these interests to London. By 1852 he had relinquished his part in Richard Griffin & Co. in favour of his nephew. From the early 1860s the publishing side traded separately, first under the style Griffin, Bohn & Co. to 1862, and then as Charles Griffin & Co. 
Under John Griffin's direction the publishing side of the family business developed a scientific leaning, as shown by the 'Scientific Miscellany' series which appeared in the early 1840s and included 'A System of Crystallography' (1841) which Griffin wrote principally to demystify and promote an otherwise inaccessible mathematical subject. Another venture included a prestige contract to republish, in a much extended form, the original (1816-45) Smedley, Rose, and Rose 'Encyclopaedia metropolitana'. This appeared during 1848-9 in thirty volumes. Later involvement with other publishing houses came through the Cavendish Society, a group set up to perpetuate the name of the German chemist Leopold Gmelin (under whom Griffin had studied during his brief stay at Heidelberg) through the translation of the multivolume 'Handbuch der Chemie'. 
In parallel with these activities, John Griffin embarked on a project to supply apparatus to accompany the various texts. A trade catalogue dated November 1837 formally marks the start of this business, although a cartoon of the 'Billsticker' in the company's 'Book of Trades' (4th edn, 1837) suggests that he had already opened a chemical bazaar at the new premises in Buchanan Street to sell the portable chemical laboratories, prepared by Robert Best Ede of Dorking, to accompany the seventh edition of 'Chemical Recreations' (1834). The eighth edition (1838), however, explains that he had set up a 'chemico-commercial' project to see just how low prices for apparatus could be brought to develop a market need for cheap, robust, and reliable apparatus. With this new line established and developing he set out, in 1841, to Germany, Austria, and Bohemia, expressly to make contacts and to trade with suppliers in glass instruments and porcelain ware. By 1844 his catalogues showed apparatus sets for J. F. W. Johnston's 'Catechism of Agricultural Chemistry and Geology' (1844), a pioneering text in elementary school science, as well as for the 'Scientific Miscellany' series. 
Griffin's social and intellectual life in Glasgow is recorded through his attendance at the Glasgow Philosophical Society, which he joined in April 1834. There he mixed with other influential persons from Anderson's and Glasgow universities, including, respectively, the chemists Thomas Graham and Thomas Thomson. Later, through the 1840s, he held the position of librarian to the society, and it was through the medium of the society that he announced his views on the 'proximate constitution of chemical compounds'. These views were elaborated in a special 'Romance' contained in the seventh edition of 'Chemical Recreations' (1834) wherein, after describing the chaos of chemical nomenclature which then pervaded the literature, he denounced the views of the celebrated Jacob Berzelius before offering his own notions in substitution. 
The inconvenience of Glasgow as a centre for the distribution of apparatus and the development of professional chemistry in London through the Chemical Society, of which Griffin was a founder member, were among factors which eventually led to the business being transferred to London. (Likewise, his nephew moved the publishing side to London, although not until the late 1850s.) In 1848 he opened a chemical museum in Marylebone under his own name, where he traded in chemicals and chemical apparatus as well as books for Richard Griffin & Co. An expansion took place in 1850 when he added philosophical apparatus to his range following the take-over of a long-established London wholesaler, John Ward. Two further editions of 'Chemical Recreations' (1849 and 1854/1860) ensured a dominant market share in the rising educational trade. 
Although plagued by health problems, Griffin published 'The Radical Theory in Chemistry' (1858), an interesting work on nomenclature applied to organic chemistry, yet unanalysed, in which there are echoes of his earlier views on chemical notation. The final works to appear under his name, 'Chemical Testing of Wines and Spirits' (1866) and 'Centigrade Testing Applied to the Arts' (1872), may have been written with the assistance of his sons, Charles Griffin FSA (1838-1900) and William Griffin (1839-1883) who, from the early 1870s, had conducted the business under the style J. J. Griffin & Sons. John Griffin died on 9 June 1877 at his home, 31 Park Road, Haverstock Hill, London. 
By 1889, under the direction of William's son John Ross Griffin (1863-1921), the business was incorporated as a limited liability company. Family connections remained with the business until John Ross's death, although some shareholding had passed into the family of Thomas McKinnon Wood MP, a close relative of the Griffin family, who, from about 1908, was director and later chairman; from about 1919 to 1957 the business was in the hands of his three sons. Under the direction of this family various mergers took place: first with the Scottish firm of Baird and Tatlock Ltd in 1925 to become (in 1928) Griffin and Tatlock Ltd, and then with W. and J. George and Becker Ltd in 1954 to become Griffin and George Ltd. From 1957 Griffin and George Ltd, together with T. Gerrard & Co., formed the Education Group of Fisons Scientific Equipment Division. 
Throughout his life John Griffin was passionately concerned with the promotion of chemistry. With equal vigour, he felt it his duty to clarify the language of chemistry which then suffered from a clutter of systems in mineralogy, chemical nomenclature, and crystallography. His texts demonstrate a high quality of thought, prescriptive action, and fearless criticism of established ideas. Even if his own ideas remained mostly untouched by the academic establishment, he was, nevertheless, largely responsible for creating the means of study to a growing mass audience through ingenious and cheap forms of chemical apparatus. He received many accolades in later life, including two prize medals from the Great Exhibition of 1851 and the International Exhibition of 1862, respectively for his graduated glass instruments and research apparatus. Equally, he should be remembered for his contributions to the subject itself, including, for example, the concept of normality as well as many laboratory techniques. In addition to his texts and trade catalogues, he published papers in the 'Proceedings' of the Glasgow Philosophical Society and 'Chemical News'; he can also be traced in the 'Reports' of the British Association, of which he was a member. 


@@@@@


doc= 47596


Hambro, Sir Everard Alexander (1842-1925), merchant banker and philanthropist, was born at Bransbury House, Willesden, in London, on 11 April 1842, the youngest of the three sons and one daughter of Baron Carl Joachim Hambro (1807-1877), merchant banker, and his wife, Caroline Gostenhofer (1810-1852). By 1839 Carl Joachim had returned from Denmark and founded in London the family firm of C. J. Hambro & Son, which quickly emerged as a leading merchant bank. 
Everard (nicknamed Evy) was the brother of Charles Joseph Theophilus Hambro (1834-1891), MP for Weymouth (1868-74) and Dorset South (1886-91), and of Percival Lewis Hambro (1836-1885). He was educated at J. P. Clover's school, Roehampton, and Trinity College, Cambridge. On 23 October 1863 he married (Gertrude) Mary Stuart (1848-1905), the daughter of Martin Ridley Smith of Warren House, Hayes, Kent, and Celia, daughter of Henry Stuart (1808-1880), of Montfort, Isle of Bute, who was a descendant of George III's prime minister, John Stuart, third earl of Bute. The couple settled at 70 Prince's Gate, London; they also rented Mount Clare, Richmond Park, and in 1874 joined his father, Carl Joachim Hambro, at Gifford House, Putney Heath, where J. P. Morgan was his neighbour. They became close friends and collaborators in business. 
In 1864 Hambro joined C. J. Hambro & Son. In 1869 he became one of the bank's four partners, and on the death of his father in 1877 he became senior partner of the bank. He held 75 per cent of the bank's capital of $650,000. In 1878 his earnings from the bank were $52,000, and they rose to $150,000 in 1886. By 1890 the bank's capital had grown to $1.3 million; it was one of London's largest and most prestigious houses. 
During the 1870s and for the next thirty years, Hambro gave time and money to good causes. In 1873 he bought a house at Roehampton and started an orphanage which he supported until 1879; it became known as the Hambro Orphanage for Girls, and was finally given to the Church of England's Children's Society (Waifs and Strays) in 1909. He played a major part in the foundation of the Royal National Pension Fund for Nurses in 1886. He became KCVO in 1908. 
In 1879 Hambro was elected to the court of the Bank of England. Here he was instrumental in proposed reforms to the important Bank of England committee of treasury -- which he joined in 1910 -- and the committee of daily waiting; the passage of his reforms set junior and senior members of the court at odds. His unpopularity with former governors of the bank assured that he would not be elected governor or deputy governor. Henry Gibbs, a former governor, described Hambro's resolutions of 1 February 1894 as 'being antagonistic unlike anything he had known in his forty-one years at the Bank' (Bramsen and Wain, 334). 
Hambro was an assertive and imposing man. He greatly increased his private reserves and those of the bank by expanding its finance of international trade, especially between North and South America, by the syndication of railroad loans, and through bullion dealing. In financing international trade he worked closely with the New York banks Phelps, Stokes & Co., Drexel, Morgan & Co., and Heidelbach and Ickelheimer & Co. Although he handled issues for corporate entities in the 1870s and 1880s, the bank's business in foreign loans was of vital importance. Hambro issued loans for the governments of Sweden, Norway, Denmark, Greece, Russia, and Italy. Prominent among his supporters in this work were the houses of Hoskier in France, Tietgen in Denmark, and Morgan in America. His chief ally in London was E. C. Baring (later Lord Revelstoke) of Baring Brothers & Co. 
In 1881-2, with Barings, Hambro issued an enormous loan of $29 million for the Italian government, in competition with Baron Alphonse de Rothschild (1827-1905) in Paris. Throughout difficult and fluctuating international markets, Hambro remained steady and reported a profit of 1.14 per cent for his syndicate of banks -- or $350,000. This issue broke the Rothschild monopoly of Italian government loans, and confirmed Hambro as one of the greatest international bankers of his generation. However the issue had come within a whisker of failure, which would have ruined both banks. 
In 1890 Hambro repaid the support of Revelstoke by playing a leading role in the rescue of Barings at the time of the Baring crisis. Early on he was important in bringing together Barings and the Bank of England while his firm subscribed handsomely to the Bank Guarantee Fund, which underwrote Baring's rescue. Yet Hambros had also been underwriter of the flotation of the Buenos Aires Water Supply and Drainage Company Ltd, the failed transaction which had laid Barings low. 
The profits of C. J. Hambro & Son fell sharply, in line with a City slump, in 1890. Hambro sought peace at the Villa Espoir, Biarritz, where he played golf. In 1892 he suffered a bout of ill health which kept him from business. He convalesced at the Scottish estate, Gannochy, near Brechin, in Forfarshire, which he had rented from the earl of Dalhousie, and at Hayes Place, Kent, where he kept a herd of pedigree Guernsey cows. In the mid-1890s, Hambro returned to the City and raised foreign loans for the Scandinavian countries and arranged project finance in South Africa and the Americas. 
Hambro and his wife Mary had eight children. One died at birth; two, Hermione and Maurice, died in childhood. Five survived: Charles Eric Hambro KBE (1872-1947), Harold Everard Hambro CBE (1876-1952), Angus Valdemar Hambro (1883-1957), Violet Mary Hambro MBE (1884-1965), and (Ronald) Olaf Hambro (1885-1961). In June 1900 Hambro bought the Milton Abbey estate from his nephew, Henry Charles (Harry) Hambro (1869-1933). In June 1905 Mary died at the age of fifty-seven. Hambro retreated to Milton Abbey and developed his interest in shooting: a royal shooting party in December 1909 consisted of forty-six beaters, thirty-one gamekeepers and loaders, and ten guns, who in three days shot 1300 pheasants. 
At seventy Hambro married Ebba, younger daughter of C. Beresford Whyte of Leitrim, a woman in her early twenties whom he had met at Biarritz. Hambro was a handsome and charismatic man. A contemporary records, 'Cast like a heroic mould on a colossal scale, one of the handsomest men even at 68... a giant not only in stature, but in character, in ability, in talents' (Bramsen and Wain, 348). During the First World War Hambro returned to work in the City and closely associated himself and the bank with Scandinavian trade relations, acting as the British government agent for the purchase of Norwegian kroner in 1916. In 1920 he became first chairman of the bank created by the unification of C. J. Hambro & Son and the British Bank of Northern Commerce Ltd, backed by leading Scandinavian capitalists anxious to diversify to London. It was known as Hambros Bank of Northern Commerce Ltd, in 1921 abbreviated to Hambros Bank Ltd, and he was chairman until his death. 
Sir Everard Hambro died at Hayes Place, Kent, on 26 February 1925. He had led the bank for forty-eight years, and had presided over changes in the City and as a director of the Bank of England. The meeting of the court in March 1925 reads: 'The Court desire to place on record their high appreciation of his conspicuous abilities and wide knowledge of affairs which, throughout this long period, have always been at the service of the Bank. They also wish to express their feelings of personal regard for one who, by his unvarying kindliness and courtesy and by his personal charm has won the esteem and affection of every member of the Court. (Bramsen and Wain, 376)' 



@@@@@


doc= 47598


Handyside, Andrew (1805-1887), iron founder and engineer, was born on 25 July 1805 in Edinburgh, the son of Hugh Handyside, ironmonger, and Margaret Baird. As a young man he followed the example of his brother William Handyside (1793-1850) by going to work with his uncle Charles Baird at his iron foundry and engineering works in St Petersburg. The Baird manufactory was known for an immensely wide range of products, from steam engines to constructional ironwork, and through his experience there Handyside became ideally qualified to manage a similar enterprise back in England. In 1839 while still in St Petersburg, he married his Polish-born wife, Anastasia Henley: they had no children. 
Handyside returned from Russia about 1846 and took over the Britannia ironworks in Duke Street, Derby. This works had been established over thirty years earlier by Weatherhead and Glover and had a wide reputation for its ornamental cast ironwork known as 'Derby castings'. Under Handyside, the scope of its output was considerably extended, and the firm became a leader in the manufacture of iron products for export. During the continued development of the English railway system in the mid-nineteenth century, Handysides supplied bridges, railway equipment, and the ironwork of station buildings, including the roofs of Broad Street, London (1864-5), Liverpool Central (1872-3), and Manchester Central (1876-80) stations. The same range of products was exported for railways throughout the world, notably bridges for India and Australia and the 120 foot span roof of the main station in Amsterdam. Prefabricated buildings were also part of its export trade, supplied ready for erection complete with doors, windows, and fittings. Despite such diversification, the firm still maintained its reputation for traditional castings such as for lamp-posts, pillar boxes, and other ornamental objects, plus the manufacture of steam engines, pumps, and mining machinery. 
The more important commissions that Handysides received were based on designs by consultant architects or engineers, for instance the Albert suspension bridge, London (1871-3) by R. M. Ordish, and a winter garden at Leeds Infirmary (1868) by G. G. Scott. However, under Handyside the firm developed the expertise to design as well as manufacture new structures of every kind. This accomplishment was publicized through a promotional book 'Works in Iron' (1868 and subsequent editions), which helped demonstrate that less complex structures could be completed without the need for an independent designer. Handyside ran the works on a tight rein and did his best to eliminate traditional customs such as the observance of Mondays as an unofficial holiday. By 1873 he had a workforce of about 360 and decided to open a second site for the firm in Fox Street, Derby. Probably to help finance that extension, the company was incorporated with a capital of $120,000. 
Handyside played a modest role in Derby public life. He was a town councillor (1855-8), and was a director of both the Derby water works and the Derby and Derbyshire Banking Company. However dour he may have seemed to his workers, he and his wife maintained Russian customs of hospitality at home, complete with a samovar on the sideboard. He died on 9 June 1887 at 16 Ashbourne Road, Derby, and was buried in the Uttoxeter Road cemetery. Handyside was survived by his wife. The firm which carried his name continued to flourish and was employing about 1000 people in the 1890s, but from that height of success it plunged to failure and was wound up in 1910. 


@@@@@


doc= 47599


Harding, Sir Robert Palmer (1821-1893), accountant, was born on 18 February 1821, the son of Robert Harding (died 1862), an auctioneer and house agent. It is thought that he had originally operated a fashionable West End hatters, a business which ran into difficulties, and according to legend a court official advised him to embark on a career in accountancy. He established a practice in July 1847, entered a partnership with Edward Pullein in August 1848, and by 1850 the firm operated from 16 Gresham Street in the City of London. In November 1857 Frederick Whinney, who joined Harding and Pullein as a clerk in December 1849, was admitted as a partner. In December 1858 James Boatwright Gibbons joined the partnership, which continued as Harding, Pullein, Whinney, and Gibbons from January 1859. Harding remained the senior partner until October 1883, when he retired from the firm, which by then was named Harding, Whinney & Co. 
As a specialist in liquidations and bankruptcy work, Harding was in 1864 appointed a commissioner to inquire into the working of the 'Bankruptcy Acts'. In 1866 he was appointed (in conjunction with William Turquand) liquidator of Overend, Gurney & Co., a long-term bank liquidation which was finalized only weeks before Harding's death. He also liquidated other large concerns, including Marylebone Bank (from 1853), Royal British Bank (1856), Mexican and South American Co. (1857), Professional Life, Life Assurance Treasury, National Assurance (Bank of Deposit) (all in 1861), Unity General Assurance (1864), and East India and London Shipping (1866). In 1866 the select committee on the limited liability acts revealed that Harding, Whinney, and Gibbons was handling the winding up of sixty-one of the 259 companies then in liquidation. Such commitments appear to have presented Harding with limited scope for audit engagements. Nevertheless, he was the auditor of the Central Argentine Railway, and he secured Morgan Bros., the Battersea iron founders, as a client of the firm. 
Harding was a founding father of professional accountancy in Britain. He was among the thirty-seven accountants to sign the draft rules of the Institute of Accountants in London, founded in 1870. Later, he became a founder of the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales (ICAEW), and was its vice-president when the charter of incorporation was granted to the body on 11 May 1880. Both Harding and the institute's first president, Turquand, actually received the charter. Together with Turquand, Whinney, Arthur Cooper, and Charles Kemp, Harding was delegated to negotiate with the Board of Trade on matters which might affect the accounting profession. Harding succeeded Turquand as the institute's president and served in this role during 1882-3. 
In 1883, on retiring from Harding, Whinney & Co. and the ICAEW, where he simultaneously resigned his seat on the council and also his membership, Harding accepted appointment as chief official receiver in the bankruptcy department of the Board of Trade. Appointed because of his 'large experience in the administration of estates' ('The Accountant', 9, 1883, 4), he served in the role of chief official receiver until his retirement in 1890, when he received a knighthood -- the first awarded to a professional accountant -- in recognition of his contribution to the department. 
An obituary in a professional journal described Harding as 'a conspicuously able man, although, unlike his talented partner [Frederick Whinney], not showing to great advantage in public. But his powers of organisation and control were superb; but this will be apparent from the long list of large concerns he was engaged in' ('The Accountant', 19, 1893, 1093). The firm which Harding co-founded became Whinney, Smith and Whinney in 1894. 
In 1845 Harding married Marion Martha, the daughter of Joseph Ryle; they had six daughters and two sons. He died of a cranial tumour at 20 Wetherby Gardens, his residence in South Kensington, on 22 December 1893, and was buried on 27 December in Stanstead Old Church, St Margaret's, Hertfordshire, the burial place of his ancestors. 


@@@@@


doc= 47601


Banner, Sir John Sutherland Harmood-, first baronet (1847-1927), accountant and steel maker, was born at Dingle Mount, Toxteth Park, Liverpool, on 8 September 1847, the second son of Harmood Walcot Banner (1814-1878), an accountant, and his wife, Margaret, 'nee' Sutherland. The family were prosperous members of the Lancashire business community: his paternal grandfather was involved in the founding of the Liverpool stock exchange; and his father left $160,000 when he died, the rewards from his accountancy business. 
From 1856 to 1864 Harmood-Banner (as he was known during his adult life) was educated at Radley College and then joined his father's firm in 1865, becoming a partner in 1870. In 1875 he married Elizabeth (1850-1903), the daughter and coheir of the leading Wigan industrialist and MP, Thomas Knowles. They had four sons and two daughters. This marriage was an important influence on his later career, as his father-in-law chaired Pearson and Knowles, a coal and iron conglomerate based in Warrington. He joined the board of this company and became deputy chairman after Knowles's death in 1883. 
Harmood-Banner's main career in the 1880s and 1890s was in accountancy. The work was varied and he advised several firms that were in financial difficulties. In 1912-13 he helped in the reconstruction of Samuel Allsopp & Son, brewers in Burton upon Trent. In 1916 Spiers and Ponds, the hotel owners, went into liquidation, and under Harmood-Banner's chairmanship new managers and directors had to be appointed. For many years he was also the auditor of the Bank of Liverpool and the Lancashire and Yorkshire Railway. In 1904-5 he was president of the Institute of Chartered Accountants. This career as an accountant evidently presented him with opportunities as an adviser and investor in a number of other, mainly Liverpool-based, businesses. These included insurance companies (such as the Liverpool Reversionary Company), speculative gold-mining ventures (notably the Spes Bona Mining Company in the Transvaal), similar operations in South America (for example, the Anglo-Chilian Nitrate and Railway Company), and property companies (Canadian City and Town Properties, formed in 1910, of which he was chairman). On 11 March 1908 he married, in Marylebone, London, his second wife, Ella Wilstone (1881/2-1954), a widow, daughter of John Ernest Herbert Linford. 
Harmood-Banner combined his accountancy and advisory work with a political career, having followed his father into Liverpool city council in 1895. His civic career flourished: he was a justice of the peace and deputy lieutenant for Cheshire, mayor of Liverpool in 1912, and alderman two years later. In 1905 he was elected Unionist MP for Everton, launching a parliamentary career that was to last until 1924. A 'tory democrat', he denounced ritualism in the church, supported Ulster protestants, and based his support in Liverpool on sectarianism. In the House of Commons he became a spokesman for Lancashire businesses, particularly the liquor trade with which he had the closest links: in 1915 he served on a cabinet committee which reported on liquor trade restrictions; and between 1922 and 1926 he was chairman of Robert Cain & Sons, brewers in Liverpool. 
With Harmood-Banner as its deputy chairman, Pearson and Knowles continued to expand. By 1907 it had acquired the wire making firm of Rylands, which gave the parent company the opportunity to supply its new subsidiary with semi-manufactured steel. This was to be done by the Partington Steel Company, formed in 1910 with a capital of $700,000 and built on a 90 acre site on the banks of the River Irlam near Warrington. With its 3000 ton capacity for the production of billets, rails, and joists, the Partington Company was fully operational by 1913. It has been described as the largest single investment in the steel industry during Edwardian times. Three new blast furnaces were added during the massive expansion of the First World War, a period which also saw Pearson and Knowles set record output levels. Like most steel firms, however, the group had overexpanded, and the post-war legacy was obsolescent plant, debt, and falling orders. By 1920 Pearson and Knowles had been sold to Armstrong Whitworth, at which time Harmood-Banner lost his seat on the board. 
In his latter years Harmood-Banner still had several major interests. He was deputy chairman of British Insulated and Helsby Cables, and held directorships on the boards of several electric supply, telegraph, and oil companies, both in Britain and overseas. He was, for example, chairman of Black Sea Amalgamated Oilfields, which was part of the Anglo-Maikop group. In 1921 he became chairman of the Imperial and Finance Corporation, and in the same year joined the board of a London foreign-banking firm. He also served on several government committees, such as that on the luxuries tax in 1918, the royal commission on income tax in 1919, and the railway rates tribunal in 1921-2. He was knighted in 1913 and created a baronet in 1924. 
Harmood-Banner retired due to ill health about 1925. He died on 24 February 1927 at his home, Ingmire Hall, Sedbergh, Yorkshire, after a highly successful and varied business career. His eldest son, Harmood Harmood-Banner, succeeded to the baronetcy. 


@@@@@


doc= 47602


Harriman, Sir George William (1908-1973), motor vehicle manufacturer, was born in Coventry on 3 March 1908, the son of George Harriman, a motor machinist, and his wife, May Victoria, formerly Cooper. At the age of fifteen and a half he became an apprentice at the Hotchkiss works, Gosford Street, where his father was a general foreman. This factory was taken over in May 1923 by William Morris for the manufacture of engines; it was, at this time, an important centre of innovation in production engineering. Frank Woollard, who became Morris's manager there, enhanced the existing capabilities of the workshops by reorganizing the flow of work. Within a few months he raised weekly engine production from fewer than 300 units to 1200. By 1924 the factory was making 2000 engines per week, with only limited extensions of the work space and labour force (Lewchuk, 167-70). During his apprenticeship Harriman made the acquaintance of Leonard Lord, who was then working in the drawing office. By 1938 Harriman was assistant works manager at the new Courthouse Green engine works in Coventry. 
Two years later Harriman followed Lord to the Longbridge, Birmingham, works of Austin, where he became machine shop superintendent responsible for engine production. During the early part of the war he worked closely with Lord, who had been appointed as government controller of Boulton and Paul Aircraft Ltd, to expedite production of Defiant night fighters. For this work Harriman was appointed OBE in 1943. In the following year he became production manager at Austins. 
In 1948 Harriman accompanied Lord on a visit to the United States, where he developed a broader appreciation of American production methods. Under his direction Austins pioneered in Britain the introduction of automated transfer machines for engine manufacture. An innovative assembly building, designed by an American architect, was opened at Longbridge in 1951. Harriman's role in the company was recognized by his appointment as general works manager in 1945 (with a seat on the board), and his elevation to deputy managing director in 1950 and deputy chairman in 1952. 
When Austin and Morris merged to form the British Motor Corporation (BMC) in February 1952, Harriman's responsibilities expanded. He was very successful in rationalizing engine production and to a lesser extent the range of models built. The total volume of output was raised from 279,000 in 1952-3 to 656,000 in 1959-60 with only a modest increase in factory space, labour force, and capital investment. Harriman was appointed deputy chairman and joint managing director of BMC in 1956. 
When Sir Leonard Lord retired as chairman and managing director in 1961, Harriman was the obvious successor. Over the next five years BMC's production base was extended by new factory development such as the new truck and tractor plant in Bathgate, Scotland, opened in 1961, and by acquisitions such as the Pressed Steel Company in 1965 and Jaguar in the following year. Harriman became chairman of British Motor Holdings Ltd (BMH), formed in 1966 and the fourteenth largest industrial corporation outside the USA. With assets of $210 million, 114,000 employees, 32 factories worldwide, and some 6000 dealers, the new organization had a production capacity of 1.1 million vehicles. In addition to making cars, trucks, and tractors, BMH also made buses, fork-lift trucks, and domestic appliances. 
The enlarged corporation had, however, many inherent points of weakness. The 1966-7 financial results showed a loss of $3.2 million, partly a result of the costs of the merger but, more seriously, a reflection of declining productivity and profitability. Future product development was limited. As later critics have noted, there were no real successors to the innovative Mini and 1100/1300 range designed by Alec Issigonis in the late 1950s. A strategy for the European market was only in the early stages with the development of small assembly operations in Belgium, Italy, and Spain. 
BMH, in common with other British motor manufacturers, was being undermined by more volatile conditions in the industry especially in labour relations, annual sales, and worldwide export competition. Informal talks between Leyland and BMC about a possible merger had started as early as 1964 but, except for some limited joint ventures overseas, nothing happened. A dinner for Donald Stokes of Leyland and Harriman, hosted by the prime minister, Harold Wilson, at Chequers in October 1967, moved the merger discussions closer to a climax. Final terms were agreed in January 1968 and the formation of the British Leyland Motor Corporation was announced the following month. Harriman became the first chairman but his influence was limited, as Leyland men and outside appointments dominated. In 1969 Stokes took over the chairmanship and Harriman became honorary president. Until his retirement aged sixty-five, in March 1973, Harriman had a very minor role in the direction of the company. 
As a key figure in the post-war British motor industry, Harriman was essentially a production engineer, at his best grappling with the problems of engineering, factory layout, and vehicle production. He was adept at expanding output with fairly minimal capital investment, a policy which worked well in the 1950s but one which compromised the future possibilities of higher productivity and profits. In the company Harriman was well liked by fellow executives and workers on the shop floor. 
Harriman was important in modernizing the firms created by the first generation of motor magnates, Austin and Morris, but he was less comfortable in the new era of corporate administration where larger strategies in finance, marketing, and organized research were critical. While BMC managed to retain a home market share of about 38 per cent from the early 1950s to the mid-1960s, the merger of the original Austin and Morris interests was never completed. Both companies retained separate boards of directors and books until 1966 and separate lines of dealers were retained until even later. The informal methods of BMC in administration, precise costing of vehicles, and market research contrasted with the rigorous organization of Ford. 
Most of Harriman's working life was spent as a company executive. His wider contribution to the British motor industry was recognized by the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders, which he served as president in 1967-9. He was made CBE in 1951 and was knighted in 1965 for services to exports. In his earlier years he was an active sportsman and later found relaxation in golf and trout fishing. He never lived far from the factories he managed, first in Coventry, then for many years in Solihull and latterly in the nearby village of Knowle. Harriman was very reticent about his private life; all that is recorded is that he was survived by a widow and one daughter (Josephine Marie). He died at his home, Dial House, Chadwick End, Knowle, of cardiac failure, on 29 May 1973. 


@@@@@


doc= 47603


Harris, George James (1896-1958), chocolate and confectionery manufacturer, was born at 383 Paisley Road West, Govan, Glasgow, on 8 August 1896, the son of Charles Harris, an engineer's draughtsman, and his wife, Agnes, 'nee' Brownlie. He was educated at Ayr Academy, from 1914 served in the Royal Flying Corps as a pilot and, after being shot down, transferred to the King's Liverpool regiment. He fought at most of the western front's bloody battles, was mentioned in dispatches, won an MC and bar, and left the military at the age of twenty-three as a major and acting colonel. After the war he studied mathematics at the London School of Economics, but left before completing his degree in order to qualify as a chartered accountant with Deloitte & Co. In 1923 he married Friede Rowntree, a member of the famous cocoa and chocolate family, and was by custom offered a position at Rowntree & Co., where, as secretary of the quality research groups, he co-ordinated the analysis of products and production issues. 
Harris moved to the sales department in 1925, and spent an unsuccessful year in the United States attempting to launch a line of sweet gums; he returned as the company's London sales manager. His appointment to the post of marketing manager for bar chocolate products in January 1931 was one of many concurrent managerial changes throughout Rowntree. The recent recession had exposed the company's weak product range and highlighted rival Cadbury's growing dominance of the British confectionery industry, and Rowntree had to tackle a very real threat to its viability. It was Harris's drive and insight which inspired his firm's renaissance in the 1930s: his marketing concepts and techniques underwrote the introduction of Black Magic in 1933; he directly oversaw the launch of KitKat and Aero in 1935, Dairy Box in 1937, and Smarties in 1938; and, although another nine years passed before it was placed on sale, Polo had been conceived by 1939. Harris's career reflected these successes: he became marketing director in 1936, chairman of Rowntree's executive board in 1938, and company chairman in 1941. 
The Second World War, with its consequent shortages and rationing, forestalled the commercial potential of Rowntree's new products. Reluctantly, Harris turned his attentions to the industry as a whole. From 1941 to 1946 he was chairman of the Cocoa, Chocolate and Confectionery Alliance and chairman of the Cocoa and Chocolate War-Time Association, which undertook the wartime organization of the industry on behalf of the Ministry of Food. Harris was seriously ill in 1946 and 1947, and medical advice was offered as the explanation for his retirement in January 1952. In fact there was dissension within Rowntree, and the prospect of publicity over Harris's legal defence of a minor traffic offence appeared to some indicative of declining judgement. It was a sad end to a brilliant business career -- all the sadder because Rowntree did not fully benefit from its most recent product innovations until confectionery rationing was lifted in 1953. 
It was Harris's role as a pioneer of British marketing which makes his career so notable. As a person he was reserved, laconic, and determined, setting the highest standards of effort and achievement for himself and for others. After his unsuccessful year in the United States in 1925-6 he had returned with knowledge of the latest developments in marketing thought, and over the following decade he proved himself an innovator in creative marketing. He was distinguished by his clear perception of how to develop unique products that could command consumer confidence, and during the 1930s he introduced to Rowntree marketing principles which were to become commonplace in British industry. A mixture of branding, intensive advertising, and statistically testable consumer research enabled the company to discover and respond and appeal to consumer wishes; in creating a marketing-orientated business, Harris transformed Rowntree's prevailing corporate culture. 
Fascinated by commercial enterprise, suspicious of employees with outside interests, and dismissive of a Rowntree family engrossed by various public works, Harris was determined to professionalize his company. Unlike the previous chairmen, Joseph and Benjamin Seebohm Rowntree, he was uninterested in personnel issues, and it was his overriding concern with marketing and product innovation that created a company of high quality and high-profile brands, a fact denied by none of his successors. This single-mindedness, when combined with illness towards the end of his career, may have made Harris more reclusive and subject to mood changes, but he had always been impatient of corporate politics and procedures, preferring to work entrepreneurially with a selected staff. He died at his home, Bossall Hall, near York, on 11 September 1958, survived by his wife and three daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 47604


Harrison, Sir Cyril Ernest (1901-1980), cotton industrialist, was born on 14 December 1901 at Sileby gas works, near Leicester, the son of Alfred John Harrison, a gas works manager, and his wife, Edith, 'nee' Perry. He was educated at Padiham Wesleyan school and Burnley grammar school, the family having moved to east Lancashire. 
Harrison's early career was far from smooth. In 1917, through the influence of his father, he was appointed office boy at Herbert Noble's Perseverance Mill, Padiham, under the impression that he was serving an apprenticeship for a managerial position, but he was soon pushed out to make room for Noble's sons. For a time, Harrison trained as a weaver -- a lowly occupation -- and then as a fabric dealer on the Manchester Cotton Exchange. On 4 June 1927 he married Ethel (1901/2-1971), daughter of Edward Wood FCA JP, a leading Burnley accountant. The couple had two sons. Having learned the trade, Harrison and a friend, Ralph Harling, set up their own fabric merchanting business, C. E. Harrison & Co., in 1928. After further vocational studies, Harrison qualified as a fellow of the Chartered Institute of Secretaries, and in the 1930s he took an interest in the deliberations of the Burnley chamber of commerce. 
Harrison's potential was spotted in 1939, and he was appointed manager of the yarn sales division of English Sewing Cotton (ESC), Britain's second largest producer of cotton thread. It was not considered unusual at that time for someone without a technical or managerial degree to fill an important post in a major company. Harrison's skill at selling thread was not, however, to be put to the test. When war broke out in 1939, market forces in the textile industry were gradually replaced by a system of planning. In 1940 ESC sent Harrison to work for the official Cotton Control, which supervised the rationing of raw cotton supplies, and ensured that each mill gave priority to essential orders. ESC granted Harrison a directorship in 1942, and he became managing director in 1948, and vice-chairman in 1952. The late 1940s were halcyon days for Lancashire; with Japanese and continental European mills temporarily out of contention, British firms could make large profits with ease. Harrison rose to the top at a time when ESC was not exposed to the discipline of market forces, and in 1950 he remained an untried man. 
Under Harrison's vigorous leadership, ESC adopted a policy of modernization, investing $4 million in new machinery and other facilities between 1945 and 1955, reforming its manning practices, and revitalizing its marketing procedures. Significant gains were made in productivity. Harrison introduced a pension scheme for operatives, and enjoyed an excellent relationship with the unions. But Lancashire faced a daunting struggle in the 1950s against competition from countries with lower labour costs, and men such as Harrison could do no more than mount a spirited rearguard action. In 1963, Harrison became chairman of ESC. This was a year of crisis in the cotton industry. Courtaulds and ICI, Britain's main producers of man-made fibres, were about to embark on a series of acquisitions of large textile companies and had set their sights on ESC and another firm, Tootal. Harrison was in favour of the creation of larger, multi-process textile groups, but did not relish the prospect of ESC's being absorbed by a bigger firm. As a compromise, he arranged for ESC to purchase Tootal, and for Courtaulds and ICI to accept minority stakes in the enlarged company. Then, in 1968, in order to frustrate a takeover bid by Viyella, and shortly before Harrison's retirement from the chair, ESC merged with the Calico Printers Association, the dominant firm in the textile finishing sector, and adopted the name English Calico. Harrison had saved ESC from extinction, but English Calico was financially weak and unable to compete internationally, a situation not unrepresentative of the Lancashire textile industry as a whole. It would be unfair to blame Harrison for the problems of ESC in the 1960s; it is, of course, much harder to succeed in a declining industry than in one which is expanding. 
Harrison was a busy man with many interests. He was active in the Cotton Board, the umbrella organization representing the Lancashire interest, and led a Cotton Board trade mission to Australia and New Zealand in 1959; he was president of the Shirley Institute, the cotton industry's research association; between 1958 and 1960 he was president of the Manchester chamber of commerce. He then served as president of the Federation of British Industries, 1961-3, proving that his performance at ESC in the 1950s was held in high regard in other industries, and he thereafter remained on the grand council of the Confederation of British Industry (CBI). He was a member of the National Economic Development Council and the British National Export Council. He was knighted for his services to industry in 1963. Between 1965 and 1972, he was a deputy chairman of William and Glyns Bank, and joined the board of the Royal Bank of Scotland in 1966. He was a member of the North West Electricity Board, sat on the governing council of Manchester University (receiving an honorary MA in 1961), and served on the council of the Manchester Business School. In 1959, he was appointed chairman of the Christie Hospital in Manchester, which specialized in cancer research, and between 1966 and 1974 was chairman of governors of the United Manchester Hospitals. He declined an invitation to become high sheriff of Lancashire in 1970, due to the illness of his wife, who died in 1971. Harrison was a deacon and secretary of Wilmslow Congregational Church for many years. Sir Cyril Harrison died at his home, 8 Harefield Drive, Wilmslow, Cheshire, on 14 March 1980, aged seventy-eight. 


@@@@@


doc= 47609


Billington, Mary Frances (1862-1925), journalist, was born at Chalbury rectory, Wimborne, Dorset, on 6 September 1862, the only daughter (she had three brothers) of the Revd George Henry Billington (died 12 Dec 1904), rector of Chalbury, and his wife, Frances Anne (daughter of the Revd T. Barber). Billington was educated at home and, once she could read at the age of eight, was encouraged to read 'The Times' and other leading newspapers. In this way she absorbed some of the elements of her future profession, so much so that she was earning enough to support herself from her late teens. She began her career in journalism by writing about something she knew well -- Dorset ghosts -- and earned her first guinea by contributing to the 'turn-over' column in Sir George Armstrong's 'Globe' which, in its time, was the launch pad for many an aspiring journalist. 
In August 1888 Billington went to Southampton to assist in the establishment of the 'Southern Echo'. While there she attracted the attention of John Passmore Edwards, the proprietor/editor of the London 'Echo'. A country girl born and bred, she was just the person to write a series on the recent enfranchisement of the agricultural labourer. For just over two years, she worked full-time on the 'Echo', then regarded as the most successful London evening newspaper. This gave her a thorough training in journalism in which, as she later recalled, she recorded little of public importance but widened her expertise by reporting anything from East End parties to ragged school prize days. Edwards also encouraged her to write 'descriptive' articles, ranging from articles on penny waxwork shows to those which she described as 'mostly related to the seamy side of female life'. Billington made good use of the advice, and introductions to other newspapers, offered by her fellow male journalists, and obtained a staff position on the 'Daily Graphic', prior to its establishment in 1890. She was the first woman to be appointed as a special correspondent on feminine interests. So, in 1890, she reported the funeral of Mrs Catherine Booth, the founding 'Mother of the Salvation Army', and, in 1891, became one of the first women to don heavy diving equipment and dive underwater at the Royal Naval Exhibition. During 1892 she branched out into reporting on the preparations in Westminster Abbey for Tennyson's funeral and, two years later, on the opening of Tower Bridge. She also played an important role in the formation of the Society for Women Journalists (SWJ) and, in May 1894, was appointed its first vice-president. 
Then, becoming even more adventurous, Billington persuaded the editor of the 'Daily Graphic' that too little attention had been devoted to the role of women in India and secured the commission to visit there. This yielded a series of twenty-eight articles and she published these, in 1895, as 'Women in India'. When sending Gladstone a copy of the book to thank him for his help with the expedition, she thought it politic in her letter to belittle 'that silliest of crazes, woman's suffrage'. In 1897 she was recruited to run the women's department of the 'Daily Telegraph', and worked on the paper until her death in 1925. 
Throughout the First World War Billington served as president of the SWJ and also arranged some of her articles into books on how women contributed to the war effort, highlighting the bad management of some army camps. She also furthered the cause of women journalists by lecturing on journalism to SWJ members and to the London School of Journalism. She once wrote that for women to succeed in the male-dominated world of British journalism they needed 'true grit' -- something she exhibited in her own pioneering career. 
Throughout most of her working life in London, Billington lived at 23 Warwick Square, Belgrave Road, London, and she died there on 27 August 1925. She was buried in the Chalbury church where her father had served as rector from 1861 to 1904. 


@@@@@


doc= 47610


Cotter, Sir James (d. 1705), army officer and colonial governor, was the second son of Edmond Cotter (died 1660), landowner, and Elizabeth Connell, the daughter of John Connell of Barryscourt. Little is known of Cotter's early life, though he may have served with the royalists during the English civil war. His first confirmed action seems to have been involvement in an abortive attempt to assassinate a number of those involved in the execution of Charles I, who were then living as exiles in Vevey, Switzerland. However, on 11 August 1664 Cotter and two fellow Irishmen succeeded in shooting dead the regicide John Lisle on his way to church in Lausanne. Although Cotter himself neither led the mission nor actually carried out the killing, his involvement in the murder seems to have provided the foundation upon which his future advancement was based. Popular tradition says he received a knighthood and a commission in the army for this service, though the former claim is unsubstantiated. 
In July 1666 Cotter did indeed receive a commission, but in 1667 he was captured by the French during an attempted invasion of the island of St Kitts in the West Indies. Despite accusations concerning his poor conduct in battle and of fraternization with his captors, Cotter returned to England in May 1668 and successfully petitioned for relief and back payment. Having resigned his commission in November 1673, Cotter was granted a number of administrative posts in the West Indies. Though these were held in trust by his elder brother, and exercised by deputies, they proved very profitable. Following a further mission to Switzerland in 1676, during which he provided a report on the activities of Edmund Ludlow and his remaining fellow regicides, Cotter returned to the West Indies. In 1679 he married Margaret Stapleton, the daughter of Sir William Stapleton, a fellow Catholic Irishman, with whom Cotter had fought at St Kitts and who was now the governor of the Leeward Islands. By April 1681 Cotter had assumed the rank of colonel, and was governor of the island of Montserrat, whose administration was dominated by Irishmen. 
In September 1682 Cotter travelled to England on leave, apparently never returning to the West Indies. Earlier that year, following his petitioning, he had been awarded a pension of $200 annually from the Irish revenue. Cotter then seems to have returned to Ireland, purchasing land in co. Cork to enlarge the small estate he had already established. In September 1683 he was admitted a freeman of the city of Cork, and in 1684 was acting as a magistrate in the county. Further acquisitions of land followed, and in 1686 he acted as sheriff of co. Cork. Cotter's possible participation at the battle of Sedgemoor in 1685 may have resulted in his being knighted, but again there is no proof to this effect. In 1688 he married for a second time; his wife was Ellen Plunkett (died 1698), the daughter of Lord Louth, with whom he subsequently had seven children. 
From March that year Cotter's proven loyalty to the crown and his position in the Irish Catholic elite led to his taking on new responsibilities. These included his appointment as a lieutenant-colonel in a Jacobite regiment. He was also elected as a member for Cork city in the 'patriot parliament' of 1689, and appointed the governor of Cork by James II on 11 February 1690. Following the flight of James II, Cotter's wife and eldest son, also James Cotter, were removed to France as Cotter himself assumed command of the Jacobite forces in the south-west. His military exploits throughout the war met with mixed results, but under the subsequent treaty of Limerick he retained his lands. 
Opposition to this was countered by declarations of support from the protestant inhabitants of Cork city and Sir Richard Cox. Cotter then turned to the life of a country gentleman, allegedly becoming a patron of Gaelic bards and musicians. He was also accused of sheltering a Catholic bishop despite the enactment of legislation excluding the hierarchy from Ireland. He died in comfortable circumstances in 1705 at Rockforest, co. Cork, where he was buried. The details of Cotter's life suggest he was a man of energy and opportunism, with a durable loyalty to both the crown and his religion. Ultimately, it may be that his career and reputation contributed to the fate of his son James, hanged for rape in 1720. 


@@@@@


doc= 47611


Cotter, James (c.1689-1720), Jacobite agitator and rapist, was born in co. Cork, Ireland, the eldest of seven children of Sir James Cotter (d. 1705), army officer and colonial administrator, and his second wife, Ellen Plunkett (died 1698), daughter of Lord Louth. The elder Cotter's career had received something of a fillip during Charles II's reign owing to his involvement in the murder of the regicide Lord Lisle in Lausanne in August 1664. The profits accrued from the offices and pension that were subsequently bestowed on him resulted in Cotter's acquiring some property in north Cork to add to the small estate he had been bequeathed by his father, Edmond. Despite his involvement on the Jacobite side during the revolution of 1688, his estates remained intact and were inherited by his son. 
On the death of his father the younger Cotter eventually became the ward of Lord Netterville, a local protestant proprietor. However, despite the censure of the Irish House of Commons, his actual care was delegated to a Catholic tutor. By 1710 Cotter had married Margaret Mathew, the daughter of Major George Mathew, a local Catholic landlord, and was already acquiring a reputation as a Jacobite troublemaker. In 1707 he had been involved in an election riot in Tralee, co. Kerry, and in 1713 he was noted as one of the ringleaders in the severe disturbances that accompanied elections in Dublin. Following the accession of George I to the throne, rumours circulated regarding both a potential rebellion in Ireland and an invasion, some of which implicated Cotter as a potential conspirator. In August 1718 he became involved in an incident near Fermoy, co. Cork, which led to his being accused of raping one Elizabeth Squibb. A prosecution was instigated by Edward Fenn, a Quaker and a relation of Squibb's. Although Cotter finally surrendered for trial in July 1719, legal proceedings were delayed. Then at his trial on 17 March 1720 he was convicted and sentenced to death. Despite calls for a pardon by both the grand and petty juries, letters of support from leading protestant gentlemen of the county, an appeal for clemency from the family of the victim, an attempted escape, and the nocturnal demolition of the gallows on the eve of the date set for his execution, Cotter was finally hanged at Cork on 7 May 1720; he was buried the following day in Carrigtwohill. His death caused considerable popular hostility, much of it focused on the Irish Quaker community, who were seen as responsible for his downfall. 
Cotter entered local folklore immediately, and in later years was celebrated in Gaelic poetry and popular song as a constant opponent of the protestant ascendancy and a religious and political martyr. Even into the late nineteenth century his execution was cited in popular literature as a symbol of the ruthless suppression of Irish nationalism and Catholicism by the Anglicized protestant state. In recent years most historians have continued to see Cotter's case as at least an example of local religious and political intolerance which resulted in a judicial assassination. However, such conclusions ignore the fact that Cotter was in fact almost certainly guilty of rape, a crime frequently punished by death. In addition, Cotter's father was widely known to have been responsible for the murder of Lord Lisle, the grandfather of Henrietta, duchess of Bolton, wife of the then lord lieutenant of Ireland. This latter fact was seen by at least one contemporary as crucial in circumventing local calls for mercy and guaranteeing Cotter's execution. The lack of precise and unquestionable evidence concerning Cotter's alleged crimes, and the myths and speculation that have grown up around the man, probably mean the exact details of the situation must remain uncertain; but the assertion that he was the victim of a local protestant cabal does seem untenable. 


@@@@@


doc= 47612


Evans, Dame Joan (1893-1977), scholar and author, was born at Nash House, Abbots Langley, Hertfordshire, on 22 June 1893, the only child of Sir John Evans (1823-1908), archaeologist and numismatist, and his third wife, Maria Millington Lathbury (1856-1944), daughter of Charles Crawford Lathbury of Wimbledon. There were three sons and two daughters by Sir John's first marriage. Joan's half-brother Sir Arthur Evans, of Knossos fame, was forty-two years her senior. As the child of an elderly, distinguished father and a mature, academic mother, she had a somewhat solitary childhood, depending for close affection on her nanny, Caroline Hancock, to whose memory she dedicated her memoir 'Prelude and Fugue' (1964), and who stayed with her for nearly sixty-seven years. The only man she might have married was killed in the First World War. Her father died when she was fifteen but the bond between them was already forged, and she knew by instinct that some form of scholarship would be the guiding motif of her life. 
Joan Evans was educated at Coram School, Watford, Berkhamsted Girls' Grammar School, and then from 1914 at St Hugh's College, Oxford, where she took a diploma in archaeology (with distinction) in 1916, a certificate of letters in 1919, and a BLitt in 1920. From 1917 to 1922 she was the college's librarian (initially temporarily). In 1931 she became honorary librarian of the Courtauld Institute, London. Her interests were always far-ranging, but in view of her later concentration on medieval France, it may seem surprising that her first book was 'English Jewellery from the 5th Century BC to 1800' (1921). Much later she published 'A History of Jewellery, 1100-1870' (1953). She had a true collector's flair and, just as her father avidly collected British flints, she early began to collect gems and jewels. The Ashmolean Museum, Oxford, the Birmingham City Art Gallery, and, above all, the Victoria and Albert Museum, were to be the beneficiaries. From this time she published numerous articles on jewellery and medieval artefacts and occasionally edited French medieval texts. 
In 1931 came Evans's ground-breaking book, 'Pattern: a Study of Ornament in Western Europe from 1180 to 1900', and in 1939 'Taste and Temperament'; but these were subsidiary interests. She truly discovered her abiding interest with 'Life in Mediaeval France' (1925), which was followed by 'Monastic Life at Cluny, 930-1157' (1936), 'Art in Mediaeval France' (1948), 'English Art, 1307-1461' (1949), 'Cluniac Art of the Romanesque Period' (1950), 'Dress in Mediaeval France' (1952), and her edition of 'The Flowering of the Middle Ages' (1966). These works remain vital general works of reference, despite the further researches of others. France was the passion of her life. In the preface of 'Art in Mediaeval France', a work which was dedicated to archaeologists and antiquaries who had fought for France during the Second World War, Evans vividly recalled her childhood visits to France, when a 'mediaeval cycle of times and seasons, traditions and beliefs' still governed much of everyday life, now much altered. Despite the ravages of the revolution and the recent war, she firmly believed that 'by force of memory and imagination and love we may mend the shining chain; not France, nor her history, nor the memorials of that history can die' ('Art in Mediaeval France', x-xi). To this end, she devoted some of her considerable private means, in the same year that she published this seminal work, purchasing and presenting to the municipality of Macon the Cluniac Chappelle des Moines de Berze. A plaque commemorates the gift. In the 1930s and 1940s she had also worked on a later period of French history and had written biographical studies of Chateaubriand (1939), Madame de Serilly (1946), and Joseph Joubert (1947). In 'Prelude and Fugue' she chillingly describes the bombers going overhead at dawn on D-day: 'That dawn indeed it seemed as if all the world was changing. My mother who had dominated my life for so long, lay dead; the France that I loved was being attacked by her allies; and everything seemed in flux.' 
Joan Evans was a woman of strong family loyalties. In 1943 she published 'Time and Chance: the Story of Arthur Evans and his Forebears' and in 1956 'A History of the Society of Antiquaries'. Sir John and Sir Arthur had both been presidents of the antiquaries. She became the first woman president (1959-64), and in 1973 received the gold medal of the society. She was proud of the fact that she had been elected president in her own right with no suspicion of nepotism. From 1948 to 1951 she had been president of the Royal Archaeological Institute. She was a chevalier of the Legion d'honneur. Many other honours fell to her: she was DLitt, London (1930), DLitt, Oxford (1932), honorary LLD, Edinburgh (1952), honorary LittD, Cambridge (1956), honorary FRIBA, and a fellow of the Royal Historical Society and the Royal Society of Literature. In 1976 she was appointed DBE. She was at various times a trustee of the London Museum and of the British Museum and a member of the advisory council of the Victoria and Albert Museum. She was also a sympathetic and generous person. Her gifts to individual friends and scholars were anonymous and numerous. She was a major benefactor of St Hugh's College, and bought for it part of its present site; she was elected to an honorary fellowship in 1936, and returned to the college as a supernumerary fellow in 1951. She helped to secure for the National Trust the ridge above Wotton under Edge, where she lived for the second half of her life. 
One unusual episode should be mentioned. In 1911 Miss Moberley and Miss Jourdain, successive principals of St Hugh's, published 'An Adventure', an account of a psychic experience which they believed had occurred to them on a visit to Versailles. They left the copyright to Joan Evans and she edited its fifth edition (1955). Despite her admiration for these ladies she was eventually convinced that the experience was hallucinatory and in 1971 she forbade further reprinting. In October 1976 she published her own view of the affair in '''An end to' An adventure'', in' Encounter' (vol. 47). 
Joan Evans considered herself a Victorian, and her air of authority and her bearing were splendidly of that period. In appearance she was very like her father, a fact noted by her mother's French friends who remarked that this was 'tactful' as her father was seventy when she was born. Her rapport with the nineteenth century was shown in 1956, when she co-edited Ruskin's diaries with J. H. Whitehead, and in 1966 when she edited 'The Victorians', a selection of extracts and illustrations that tell us almost as much about herself as about them. It was in character that she retained some of the heavy Evans family furniture in her home, Thousand Acres, Wotton under Edge, where she died on 14 July 1977. Her body was cremated. Of her writings it has been rightly said that she published too much too quickly; she can be faulted on detail. This, however, does not diminish her achievement overall, which was of an inspirational nature. She was a scholar with an overriding sense of beauty and visual awareness, inspired by the vision implied in Ruskin's phrase 'the lamp of beauty'. 


@@@@@


doc= 47613


Millar, Eric George (1887-1966), librarian, was born in Fulham, London, on 24 October 1887, the elder child and only son of George Thomas John Millar (1855-1889), barrister, and his wife, Edith Mary (1862-1942), daughter of Thomas Anstey Guthrie of Kensington. His father died only weeks before the birth of a daughter and his subsequent development was very strongly influenced by his mother's eldest brother, Thomas Anstey Guthrie the younger (F. Anstey, the humorous writer). He was educated at Charterhouse and at Corpus Christi College, Oxford (1906-10), before joining the staff of the manuscripts department of the British Museum in the autumn of 1912. 
Millar had already begun to study illuminated manuscripts, with the encouragement of two established scholars, M. R. James, a friend of his uncle, and Sydney Cockerell. Both were to become close personal friends. He became involved in the work of the New Palaeographical Society and the Societe Francaise de Reproductions de Manuscrits a Peintures. His career was interrupted in 1915, when he enlisted in the Buffs; he served with the 4th battalion in northern India for almost three years before discharge late in 1919. This experience encouraged a lasting taste for Buddhist art. On return he embarked upon a series of publications including a study of the Lindisfarne gospels (1923), a pioneering two-volume survey of English medieval illuminated books (1926-8), and a catalogue of the manuscript collection of A. Chester Beatty (1927-30). It was a source of lifelong regret that the sale of the collection prevented the completion of this ambitious project. His work, meticulous in detail and economic in words, broke new ground and laid solid foundations for later scholars, particularly those who followed him in the investigation of English illumination, an area not well served by previous generations. Millar was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries in 1921, received a DLitt from Oxford University in 1931, and was promoted deputy keeper of his department in 1932. Also in 1932 he published a study of the Luttrell psalter, newly acquired for the nation. His routine departmental work was wide-ranging and included the compilation of a handlist of the Ashley collection of literary manuscripts which, though never published, has remained an essential working tool for well over fifty years. He delivered the Rhind lectures at Edinburgh in 1933 and was Sandars reader in bibliography at Cambridge in 1935. In 1936 he became secretary of the Roxburghe Club; he collaborated with James in a volume on the Bohun manuscripts in that year and published the Rutland psalter in 1937. In 1940 he was seconded to the Ministry of Home Security, before returning to the museum to take up the keepership in 1944. During his three years as head of department he oversaw the return of the collections from their wartime places of safe keeping. Retirement produced a further sequence of Roxburghe Club volumes, the 'St Trond Lectionary' (1949), the York psalter (1952), 'La Somme le Roy' (1953), and the 'Alnwick Bestiary' (1958). He also wrote a monograph on the Parisian miniaturist Honore for Faber in 1959. 
The York psalter and Honore's 'Somme le Roy' were the two gems of Millar's private collection, both ultimately bequeathed outright to the British Museum, together with his collection of John Downman's portrait drawings, in memory of his mother. The acquisition of manuscripts, portrait miniatures, watercolours, and drawings was a lifelong passion. He bought the first of the sixty-seven medieval manuscripts known to have passed through his hands as early as 1911 and the last in 1957. His collection also embraced the work of modern scribes and illuminators and included a range of literary autographs, many acquired from his uncle's friends. His drawings and watercolours were mainly works by nineteenth- and twentieth-century illustrators, including 'Punch' artists who had been associated with F. Anstey. Many of these were crowded onto the walls of his living-rooms. Virtually the whole of this material, including the twenty medieval books in his possession at the end of his life, was willed to the British Museum. 
Eric Millar was a heavily built and not notably agile man. His warm personality and his consistent generosity with his time and expertise made him many friends of all ages, both personal and professional. He was noted for his fund of lively reminiscences and his taste for boyish, unsophisticated jokes. He was particularly popular with children, for whose enjoyment his garden in Wiltshire was laid out. He never married, and shared a home at 28 Pembroke Gardens in Kensington with his mother until her death in 1942. Thereafter he divided his time between his leisure retreat, the Summer House at Dinton, near Salisbury, and a Victorian studio at 28 Holland Park Road, London. In 1943 he became a member of the Athenaeum, where he enjoyed meeting and entertaining his friends, who were also on occasion treated to lavish 'nursery' teas at his home. For most of his life he was an enthusiastic trout fisherman. He was also a keen photographer, adept with both still and movie cameras. He greatly enjoyed listening to the music of Wagner. He died at West Suffolk Hospital at Bury St Edmunds on 13 January 1966, having collapsed during a stay with friends, and was cremated. His ashes were buried at Dinton with the remains of his mother and his sister. 


@@@@@


doc= 47614


Pollard, (Henry) Graham (1903-1976), bookseller and bibliographer, was born at 85 Erpingham Road, Putney, London, on 7 March 1903. His father was Albert Frederick Pollard (1869-1948), historian and first director of the Institute of Historical Research; his mother, Catherine Susanna 
(Katie; died 1934)
, was the daughter of William Lucy, of the Eagle ironworks, Oxford. Pollard had one sister, who became the wife of Harold Edgeworth Butler, professor of Latin at University College, London. His formal education began in 1909 at Willington preparatory school in Putney. In 1916 he gained an exhibition to Shrewsbury School. His housemaster at Shrewsbury was J. B. Oldham, subsequently a respected historian of bookbindings, who clearly stimulated and encouraged Pollard's bibliographic interests. While at Shrewsbury Pollard wrote verse and was active in the debating society, but his father was not happy with these pursuits and in 1920 he spent a year studying history at University College, London. In 1921 he was elected to an open scholarship at Jesus College, Oxford, to read history, and gained a third-class degree in 1924. None the less he made his mark at Oxford: debating; contributing to and editing the 'New Oxford', for the Oxford University Labour Club; and as a precocious book collector. When Thomas James Wise was admitted to an honorary fellowship at Worcester College, he was taken to see the undergraduate's collection. A. L. Rowse remembered his rooms looking 'more like a bookseller's shop' and spoke of 'a glorious collection of books' (Rowse, 81). Before taking his finals Pollard had bought David Garnett's share in Birrell and Garnett, booksellers at 30 Gerrard Street, London. 
On 30 July 1924 Pollard married Kathleen May (Kay) Beauchamp (1899-1992), daughter of George Henry Beauchamp, who came from a long line of Somerset farmers and colliery owners. A pupil of Pollard's father, having read history at University College, she became a lifelong member of the Communist Party. Pollard also joined the party, running the St Pancras branch of the Amalgamated Union of Shop Assistants, Warehousemen, and Clerks and editing the 'Distributive Worker'. Throughout the general strike he played a role in the St Pancras area of London but as the twenties progressed, and his wife's enthusiasm for communism and the Soviet Union grew, Pollard's active political interests declined. In 1930 Kay Beauchamp made an extended visit to the Soviet Union and the marriage was, in effect, over by August 1931, though there was no official divorce until 1972. 
Birrell and Garnett was to provide Pollard with his true bibliographical education. In 1927 the business became a limited company with Jane E. Norton as chairman and Pollard as managing director. Throughout the twenties and thirties an impressive series of catalogues was produced; that on type specimens became a standard work of reference. Another on early writing books would probably have enjoyed the same status, but was never printed, the collection having been sold to the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York. Early newspapers and colonial printing reflected Pollard's bibliographic interests alongside English literature and Jane Norton's leanings towards economic theory and social conditions of the early nineteenth century. The immense range of knowledge acquired by Pollard in these fields was demonstrated in his contributions to 'The Cambridge Bibliography of English Literature'. 
Pollard was meeting and collaborating with the more important members of the bibliographical world. He quickly became a friend of Stanley Morison. In the early thirties he became involved with John Johnson, Strickland Gibson, and others at Oxford, and joined them on the editorial board of 'Oxford Books on Bibliography'. Lectures given to bibliographical societies led to important and influential articles, particularly on the early history of the Stationers' Company and the book trade in medieval Oxford. His collaboration with John Carter and their publication of 'An Enquiry into the Nature of Certain Nineteenth Century Pamphlets' (1934) sent shock waves through the bibliographical establishment and unveiled T. J. Wise as a scoundrel and cheat. It provided not only a classic example of bibliographical scholarship but a gripping detective story. 
It is unlikely that the bookshop ever made much money, and Pollard was not a businessman. In March 1939 the partnership ended, the new book department being sold to Quaritch. At this point, most probably through the mediation of Stanley Morison, Pollard was appointed a special lecturer in the history of the newspaper at University College, London. The commencement of the war, however, limited his activities to a few lectures and seminars until he joined the Board of Trade as a temporary principal in April 1942. One of his classic articles, 'Notes on the size of the sheet', appeared in 'The Library' in 1942. 
Although Pollard's was originally a temporary appointment, at the end of the war he stayed on at the Board of Trade until retiring in 1959. His career mainly involved running the organization and methods branch of the Board of Trade, but it included working under Harold Wilson on the removal of many controls after the war; a spell on loan to the machinery of government branch at the Treasury; and, towards the end of his career, involvement in negotiations for the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade in Geneva. The knowledge he gained of trade and commerce during this stage of his career vastly increased his understanding of how the book trade had operated through the centuries. Bibliographical work did not cease during this period: his edition of 'The Earliest Directory of the Book Trade, by John Pendred, 1785', with its invaluable introduction and appendices, was published in 1955; and in the final months before retirement he gave the Sandars lectures at Cambridge, 'The English Market for Printed Books'. 
In October 1940 Pollard had moved to Barton Manor, a house on the edge of Oxford, which he made his base for the remainder of his life, proximity to the Bodleian Library being an important reason for his choice. At the Board of Trade he had met Esther Potter, who became his lifelong companion, and together they had a flat in London at Blackheath, full of wonderful books and the scene of memorable bibliographical entertainment. 
The years of his retirement began with his serving as president of the [London] Bibliographical Society (1960-62), and during his tenure he presented the society's gold medal to his old housemaster, J. B. Oldham. In 1961, as reader in bibliography at Oxford, he gave the Lyell lectures; in these he returned to a favourite topic -- the medieval Oxford book trade. Work continued on the revision of the 'Enquiry'; 'working papers' were published, but the revision was never finished by Carter or Pollard. With Albert Ehrman he produced 'The distribution of books by catalogue from the invention of printing to A.D. 1800, based on material in the Broxbourne Library' (1965) for presentation by Ehrman to members of the Roxburghe Club. Another major project, from which he derived much pleasure but which remained unfinished at his death, was a catalogue of the books at Waddesdon Manor. In 1969 he was himself presented with the Bibliographical Society's gold medal during the presidency of his old friend John Carter. He made his one and only lecture tour to the United States in 1973. The year 1975 saw the Oxford Bibliographical Society publish a volume of essays in his honour entitled 'Studies in the Book Trade', which contained an appreciation by John Carter and a photographic portrait of him at that time. Pollard died at the Radcliffe Infirmary in Oxford on 15 November 1976, having read a paper on another of his favourite topics, the pecia system, in Durham only a few weeks earlier. 


@@@@@


doc= 47615


Wormald, Francis (1904-1972), palaeographer and art historian, was born at Dewsbury Mill in the West Riding of Yorkshire on 1 June 1904, shortly after his twin brother, John; their twin sisters, Ellen and Ann, were born in 1909. Their parents were Thomas Marmaduke Wormald JP (died 1939), chairman of Wormalds and Walker, blanket manufacturers, of Dewsbury Mill, and Frances Mary Walker-Brook (died 1920), whose family owned a woollen mill in Huddersfield. The boys were born in the mill house attached to their father's factory, but the family later moved to Field Head, a Georgian house at Mirfield. Thomas Wormald did not like his children to make friends outside the family, and they had to devise their own amusements, most of which were contrived by Francis. The only outdoor game for which he cared was croquet, which he played with pitiless proficiency all his life. Taken on a shooting expedition with his father for the first time, he was said to have bagged a snipe with his first cartridge and a brace of pheasants with the next two, but he refused to go shooting again because it hurt his hands, in which he had a slight abnormality. He liked collecting things, a lifelong passion pursued with taste and discrimination, and would scour local cottages for pieces of porcelain and trawl the Huddersfield bookshops for bargains. When he was about seven years old he was taken to the British Museum, and upon seeing the illuminated manuscripts on exhibition he decided on the spot that he would join the museum's manuscripts department. 
The move to Mirfield brought Wormald into contact with a formative influence in his intellectual and religious life. Opposite the gates of Field Head was Hall Croft, home to the society which became the Community of the Resurrection, presided over by Walter Howard Frere, the liturgiologist. Mrs Wormald entertained the community regularly, though Mr Wormald disliked their socialistic leanings -- they had even dined Keir Hardie -- and their Anglo-Catholicism, about which Wormald and his father had many arguments. Frere ignited his interest in liturgical matters, already well developed by the time he went to Eton College, and his profound and lifelong Anglo-Catholic faith owed much to Frere's example. 
Wormald's education began with a governess from Huddersfield and continued at Stanmore Park preparatory school. In 1918 he was sent with his brother to Eton, where he was nicknamed Tea-tray because of his fondness for what was on it. His Eton career was not distinguished scholastically, but he went up to Magdalene College, Cambridge, in 1922 and took a second class in the history tripos in 1925 (he proceeded LittD in 1950). At Cambridge he acquired the nickname Auntie and a reputation as a theatrical performer, especially as a talented comedian. After graduation he worked for a time in the Pepys Library at Magdalene. 
In 1927 Wormald fulfilled his boyhood ambition by obtaining appointment as an assistant keeper in the department of manuscripts at the British Museum. However, his main interests -- illuminations and liturgies -- were respectively the provinces of his senior colleagues Eric Millar and A. J. Collins, and he was put to cataloguing miscellaneous papers for the 'Catalogue of Additions to the Manuscripts'. He learned Portuguese to cope with some sixteenth- and seventeenth-century papers on India. He continued, however, to pursue his interests through private study and contacts with academic friends outside the museum. 
After Mirfield and Howard Frere, the second transforming influence in Wormald's life was the migration from Hamburg to London in January 1934 of the Warburg Institute, with its galaxy of great names in the study of European art and culture, notably Fritz Saxl, Rudolf Wittkover, Hugo Buchthal, Ernst Gombrich, and Otto Pacht. Wormald was soon on terms of scholarly intimacy with all of them; he taught classes at the Warburg, and with Roger Hinks did much to establish the institute's distinguished place in the London academic scene. It was Wormald's genius to marry the European academic tradition of these learned and inspiring teachers with his distinctively English and down-to-earth approach to art-historical and iconographic studies. His observation was acute and his prose style spare, direct, and quite free from art-historical jargon. He wrote more than sixty books and articles on illuminations, iconography, liturgy, and calendars, and contributed about 100 book reviews to the 'Burlington Magazine' and the 'Times Literary Supplement', many of which were weighty contributions to knowledge in their own right. His major publications were 'English Benedictine Kalendars before AD 1100' and 'English Benedictine Kalendars after AD 1100' ('Henry Bradshaw Society', vols. 72, 1934; 77, 1939; and 81, 1946), 'English Drawings of the Tenth and Eleventh Centuries' (1952), 'The Benedictional of St Ethelwold' (1959), and 'The Winchester Psalter' (1973). He also published important works in collaboration with other scholars, notably (with Hugo Buchthal) 'Miniature Painting in the Latin Kingdom of Jerusalem' (1957) and (with C. E. Wright) 'The English Library before 1700' (1958). 
On 19 July 1935 Wormald married his cousin Honoria Mary Rosamund Yeo (1898-1991), daughter of Gerald Yeo, a barrister, of Emsworth, Hampshire, and Margaret Leighton; she was then reading medicine at University College, London, and had just taken her first MB. A medical examination for life insurance revealed that Wormald had Bright's disease; he was given a few months to live, but the disease subsided, though it eventually returned to kill him. Very few of his friends knew of this, and the Wormalds simply decided to ignore it. They lived in Wormald's flat in Mecklenburgh Square until 1941, when they moved to Dolphin Square. Wormald spent the war years in the Ministry of Home Security, where his duties included making civil defence training films. He also did firewatching duty at St Paul's Cathedral. 
With the resumption of his duties in the manuscripts department after the war, Wormald rapidly consolidated his academic reputation and was regarded as the heir apparent to the then keeper, A. J. Collins. In 1950, however, at the urging of Sir Harold Idris Bell, the former keeper of manuscripts, he accepted the newly established chair of palaeography at King's College, London; a post he took up rather reluctantly, feeling, as he put it, like a cloistered monk obliged to become a bishop. He led a busy life of research, teaching, travel to foreign libraries, and service on numerous university committees, including the board of studies in palaeography, of which he was chairman 1951-62, and the committee of management of the Warburg Institute. With the University of London librarian, Jack Pafford, he established the library's palaeography room, the finest in the world devoted to its subject. His palaeography classes at the Institute of Historical Research could be an alarming experience. He would distribute photographs of apparently indecipherable scripts to the class, and require each victim in turn to read his text aloud. Any prompting by others would infuriate him; he had a sharp tongue when provoked, but his essential kindness ensured no lasting hurt to those who felt it. He would patiently get a student to tease out the words of the vilest Late Roman Cursive by himself, letter by letter; 'What do you see?', 'What does it look like?', he would say again and again, until the right answer was forthcoming. He had the gift of showing students that they knew more than they thought. 
In 1960 Wormald was appointed director of the Institute of Historical Research in succession to Sir Goronwy Edwards. His regime was like a blast of fresh air. New decorations, curtains, furnishings, and pictures swept away the institute's post-war institutional drabness, and its social life was developed with receptions and other diversions for students and staff. The Wormalds had a genius for hospitality, which they did not confine to the institute. They delighted in the company of young people, and they often entertained students in their Warwick Square flat, which was surmounted by Honoria's cherished roof-garden. They were both superb cooks, and dinner 'chez' Wormald was always a memorable occasion. Francis was fond of life's pleasures, but Yorkshire canniness governed what he spent on them. At conferences abroad he would always sniff out a restaurant offering the best food at the cheapest price. His enjoyment of life was reflected in his benignly Pickwickian appearance: medium height, comfortably rotund in later years, and with round steel spectacles on a broad, friendly face. 
Wormald's conscientiousness and common sense made him much in demand for committees. His portfolio included the Royal Commission on Historical Monuments, the National Monuments Record Committee, the Advisory Council on Public Records, the Advisory Council on the Export of Works of Art, the advisory committee of the Victoria and Albert Museum, the council of the British School at Rome, the executive committee of the Friends of the National Libraries, the councils of the British Academy (of which he was elected fellow in 1948), the Royal Historical Society, the Henry Bradshaw Society, the Canterbury and York Society, the Walpole Society, the British Records Association, and the Royal Archaeological Institute. He was vice-president of the Society of Antiquaries (1956-60), director (1964-6), and president (1965-70), and he was an ornament of the Cocked Hats, its dining club. In 1967 he was the society's statutory nominee as a trustee of the British Museum. He was elected to the Roxburghe Club in 1953 and the Society of Dilettanti in 1966. He was made honorary keeper of manuscripts at the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge, in 1950. 
Among Wormald's other honours were fellowships of Magdalene College, Cambridge (1961), and King's College, London (1964), and he was also honorary fellow for life of the Pierpont Morgan Library. He was made 'membre adherent' of the Societe des Bollandistes in 1960. The University of York bestowed an honorary doctorate on him in 1969 and the University of Cambridge offered him a doctorate of laws in 1972, but he died before he could receive it. Official recognition of his services to palaeography came with his appointment as CBE in 1969. He retired as director of the Institute of Historical Research in 1968 and gave his last anniversary address to the Society of Antiquaries on 23 April 1970. Soon afterwards symptoms of his old illness returned and in September 1970 he was treated for kidney failure at St Thomas's Hospital. He was discharged and was able to complete his last book, 'The Winchester Psalter', posthumously published in 1973. He returned to St Thomas's in December 1971, but was discharged for Christmas. He returned again on 10 January 1972 and died early the next day. His funeral and cremation were private. At a service of thanksgiving for his life at his parish church, St Stephen's, Rochester Row, on 20 January 1972, the archbishop of Canterbury, a friend from Cambridge days, gave the blessing. Honoria died at Aldsworth, Sussex, on 26 November 1991. 
Wormald's small but choice collection of manuscripts (some of which were kept in a drawer with his shirts) was divided after his death between the Fitzwilliam Museum, the British Library, the Bodleian and University of London libraries, and private beneficiaries. His fine library of about 1800 books, and the extensive remains of his incoming correspondence, formed the nucleus of the Wormald Library in the Centre for Medieval Studies, King's Manor, University of York. His collection of about 1000 offprints went to the Warburg Institute. The Society of Antiquaries owns a portrait of him as president by Hermione Hammond. 


@@@@@


doc= 47622


Bevan, (Emma) Frances (1827-1909), translator and poet, was born in Oxford on 25 September 1827, the eldest of three children of Philip Nicholas Shuttleworth (1782-1842), warden of New College, Oxford (1822-40), and bishop of Chichester (1840-42), and Emma Martha Welch. Her father was anti-Tractarian and her mother pious: according to Henry Fox (later fourth Lord Holland), 'prim, precise and very dull' (Webster, 23). Intellectual from childhood, when her father enquired if she wished to take a story-book with her on a journey, she replied, 'No thank you Papa, I have my book on pneumatics to take with me' (ibid., 25). A gifted artist -- apparently as a child her drawing won the praise of John Ruskin -- she painted the reredos at Fosbury church, Wiltshire. 
Frances developed high-church views. But when living with her widowed mother at Wykenham Rise, Totteridge, Middlesex, she met the evangelical Anglican Robert Cooper Lee Bevan (1809-1890), a banker and eventually chairman of Barclay, Bevan, Tritton & Co. She became his second wife on 30 April 1856, and they resided at Trent Park, East Barnet, Hertfordshire, and later at 25 Prince's Gate, London. Bevan had four sons and two daughters from his first marriage, and he and Frances had eight children who survived into adulthood: Anthony Ashley Bevan (1859-1933), who became professor of Semitic languages at Trinity College, Cambridge; Edwyn Robert Bevan (1870-1943), later a religious scholar; and Hubert, Millicent, Gladys, Gwendolen, Enid, and Nesta. Shortly after her marriage Frances joined the Plymouth Brethren in Barnet. Her husband, however, remained Church of England. 
Frances withdrew from society. She was distant from family life, not giving her children toys but only 'useful' presents and not permitting them fiction -- although she did take pleasure in the writings of Lewis Carroll. She dressed in black with no ornamentation (but paradoxically allowing cosmetics), and her 'tall, majestic figure' (ibid., 38) had an 'air of command' (ibid., 71). She spoke French and German well, and published her first book of verse translations from German in 1858. Two similar works followed in 1859 and 1884. 'Hymns of Ter Steegen, Suso and Others' (2 vols., 1894-7) became her most widely known collection and works from it passed into various church hymnaries. 'Sinners Jesus will Receive', a translation of a hymn by the Lutheran Erdmann Neumeister, enjoyed considerable popularity. As a translator she was not exact, and compared with, for example, John Wesley, passion is restrained. Among her own compositions, 'Midst the darkness, storm and sorrow', a Brethren standard, gave quintessential expression to her individualistic, other-worldly mysticism, and 'Christ, the Son of God, hath sent me' was a missionary favourite. In addition she produced religious tracts and seven books, mainly sketches of individuals such as the medieval mystic Mechtild von Magdeburg, the pietist Gerhardt Tersteegen, and John Wesley. Writing with a strong animus against Roman Catholicism, she attempted to trace an evangelical succession -- often represented by capable women -- which stressed divine grace and assurance of salvation. Tersteegen's piety she found particularly congenial. 
Due to Robert Bevan's gout, in later years the family spent the winter in Cannes, where Frances engaged in philanthropic activities. Even at the age of seventy she rose to read Hebrew at 8.30 a.m. She died on 15 March 1909 at Chalet Passiflora, Cannes. 


@@@@@


doc= 47623


Bramwell, William (1759-1818), Methodist preacher, was born in Elswick, Lancashire, in February 1759, the tenth of eleven children of George Bramwell, a farmer, and his wife, Elizabeth, devout Anglicans. After a village education William was apprenticed to a Liverpool merchant in 1775, then to a Preston currier. After being converted while receiving communion he joined the Methodists, met John Wesley, and began to preach, one of his early converts being Ann Cutler (1759-1794). In 1786-7 he became an itinerant preacher in Kent, but then served mainly in northern towns. In July 1787 Bramwell married Ellen Byrom (died 1828); they had four children. 
Bramwell was the most successful Wesleyan revivalist of his generation, particularly in the Yorkshire revival of 1792-6. He used groups to pray for those undergoing conversion. Having received the gift of 'entire sanctification' he forcefully preached the possibility of receiving this instantaneously by faith, which, with the emotional scenes in his meetings, recalled early Methodism, though he kept tight control of proceedings. His work was admired in America and in revivalist circles inside and outside Wesleyanism. He supported female preaching, opposing restrictions on it by the Wesleyan conference in 1803, though advising the leading preacher, Mary Barritt (later Taft), to submit. 
Bramwell was criticized by Wesleyan leaders hostile to revivalism and emphasizing pastoral discipline. On several occasions he appeared to offer leadership to seceders but then retreated. This was so in his dealings with Alexander Kilham in Sheffield (1797) and James Sigston and the 'Kirkgate Screamers' at Leeds in 1803. That year he resigned from the Wesleyan Methodists and appeared to be about to lead a secession of the Manchester Band Room Methodists and Christian Revivalists in Macclesfield, but under great pressure returned to Wesleyanism. This behaviour hindered him from achieving high office, though he was nominated chairman of the Manchester district on the eve of his death. 
Bramwell acquired some knowledge of the biblical languages. He was the author of 'A Short Account of the Life and Death of Ann Cutler' (1796) and an abridgement of Samuel D'Oyley's translation 'The Salvation Preacher' (1800), which seems to have disappointed its readers. 
Bramwell stood about 5 feet 9 inches or 5 feet 10 inches tall, with legs which seemed too slender for a figure inclined to stoutness but curbed by diet. He had a dark complexion, black hair, and piercing eyes. Vigorous and ascetic in his habits, he was an inveterate early riser for prayer, in which he had great power. He had a clear, flexible voice, preaching graphically on the horrors of hell and mercilessly condemning sin. He was credited with 'discerning spirits' (perceiving strangers' sins). 
Bramwell was an outstanding example of the persistence of the revivalist tradition within Wesleyanism, though also of the strains this was now creating, while his methods anticipated the more self-conscious organized revivalism of the American Charles Finney (1792-1875). He died at Leeds on 13 August 1818 of a stroke and was buried three days later at Westgate Hill near Birstall, Yorkshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 47624


Baynes, Alfred Henry (1838-1914), missionary society administrator, was born on 11 April 1838 at Wellington, Somerset, ninth son of Joseph Baynes, Baptist minister at Wellington, and Anna Day Ash, of Broadmead Baptist Chapel, Bristol. He was the younger brother of Thomas Spencer Baynes (1823-1887), philosopher and man of letters. Educated at Devonshire College, Bath, he originally intended to enter the medical profession. However, he was prevented by ill health from pursuing the necessary training, and at the age of twenty he joined instead the London firm of Messrs Peto, Brassey, and Betts, where he became private secretary to Sir Samuel Morton Peto (1809-1889), the civil-engineering contractor. In 1860 Peto, who was honorary treasurer of the Baptist Missionary Society (BMS), seconded Baynes to the society to attend to its accounts. Baynes never returned to his original employers, and from this relatively humble beginning as the society's accountant he rose to become finance and minute secretary (1870), co-secretary (1876), and from December 1878 to 1906 general secretary. On his retirement in 1906 he was made honorary secretary of the society. 
Baynes presided over a considerable increase in the size and range of operations of the BMS, and thus holds an important place in the story of late-Victorian protestant missionary expansion. Between 1876 and 1906 the missionary force of the society grew from 109 to 170. Baynes encouraged the growth of the society's China mission from a minor enterprise into one of the most significant protestant missionary bodies in China. He was the moving spirit behind the BMS Congo mission, which first became firmly established in 1879 and remained his chief enthusiasm. In association with his two leading missionaries, William Holman Bentley (1855-1905) and George Grenfell (1849-1906), Baynes directed Baptist expansion on the Congo River. He was frequently required to represent the society's interests through contacts with the Foreign Office, Bismarck's German government (in relation to the Cameroons in 1885-7), and King Leopold II of the Belgians. Until 1905, following Grenfell's advice, Baynes was a firm supporter of Leopold's Congo Free State as a guarantee against Portuguese (and hence Roman Catholic) ambitions in central Africa, and he sought to defend Leopold against the mounting volume of criticism directed at the 'rubber atrocities'. 
Although Baynes disliked 'platform work', he was an effective communicator of missionary enthusiasm to the religious public, especially in relation to central Africa. As a missionary secretary he combined a certain tendency to autocracy with an aversion to rigid regulations, and exuded an infectious optimism. 
During his years at the BMS Baynes resided at Putney, London, then at Wandsworth Common, and finally at Eastbourne, Sussex. On 2 September 1874 he married Emma Katherine (died 1935), daughter of John Bigwood, minister of Onslow Baptist Church, Brompton, London, where Baynes served as a deacon and Sunday school superintendent. They had one son, Norman Hepburn Baynes (1877-1961), Byzantine historian, and one daughter. After his retirement Baynes moved to Fitzwalters, Eastbury Road, Ruislip, Northwood, Middlesex, where he was appointed justice of the peace. He died at his home on 16 October 1914, and was buried at Northwood. 


@@@@@


doc= 47626


Cubitt, James (1836-1912), architect, was born in Ilford, Essex, on 20 March 1836, the only son and elder surviving child of James Cubitt (1808-1863), Baptist minister, and his wife, Mary (1796/7-1872). These Cubitts were Norfolk Baptists. James's grandfather William (1754-1814) founded Neatishead Baptist church; a great-aunt, Sophia (1778-1855), dominated Ingham Baptist church; an uncle, William (1801-1888), became a Baptist manufacturer in Shoreditch and in Banbury. The Baptist ministry followed naturally for James's father, a conscientious man with a didactic streak and uncertain health: he attended Stepney College, then served pastorates at Ilford, Stratford upon Avon, Bourton on the Water, and Thrapston. At Ilford he married a widow and took pupils, among them a nephew, Mordecai Cubitt Cooke (1825-1914), the mycologist. No record survives of the younger James's schooling but the wide reading, keen historical sense, and fluent, sharp English of his prime reflect this background of literate, articulate, and often quarrelsome provincial congregations on the cusp of prosperity. 
It is not clear what turned Cubitt to architecture. The surname helped, but though the contracting -- like the engineering -- Cubitts came from Norfolk, and there was a marriage connection with the engineer Sir William Cubitt (1785-1861), there was no real link with them. None the less it did no harm to be thought their kinsman, and 'Building News' promoted the myth by calling Cubitt 'a member of the family of that name, which furnished a former President and a vice-president to the Institution of Civil Engineers' (16 May 1890). 
From 1851 to 1856 Cubitt was articled to Isaac Gilbert of Nottingham and attended classes at the Nottingham School of Art. Assistantships followed, in Malvern with E. W. Elmslie (1856-7) and in London with R. J. Withers and W. W. Pocock (1857-60). Each had a sound line in public, commercial, and ecclesiastical buildings. Gilbert was a Congregationalist, Pocock a Wesleyan, Withers a churchman -- an ecclesiologist noted for plain, correct Gothic. They explain Cubitt's subsequent bias, confirmed by visits to Cotswold, midland, and north-eastern churches. 
In 1862 Cubitt was in Camberwell. In the previous year his father had been appointed tutor at the Pastors' College, founded by the Baptist preaching phenomenon C. H. Spurgeon, in the Metropolitan Tabernacle, recently designed by Pocock. Cubitt's early practice was dominated by commissions associated with Spurgeon: chapels at East Hill, Wandsworth (1862), and Rye Hill, Newcastle upon Tyne (1864), and institutional buildings for the Tabernacle itself (1866-9). The chapels were bold Italianate Romanesque; the rest was Ruskinian-Venetian Gothic. 
Other influences now worked on Cubitt. He relished the broad severity of J. L. Pearson, James Brooks, and G. F. Bodley, writing about such work and more technical matters in 'Building News'. By 1868 he had moved to 26 Finsbury Place, in partnership with Henry Fuller, another of Isaac Gilbert's pupils. Fuller, who had worked for Alfred Waterhouse, had a growing chapel practice and a reputation for technical innovation. Cubitt completed Fuller's finest building, Clapton Park Congregational Church, Hackney (1869-73). 
In 1870 Cubitt published 'Church Design for Congregations', a persuasive manual for prospective chapel builders, advocating a truly protestant architecture for 'a real nineteenth-century church, in a masculine and monumental style'. Convinced that the contemporary spirit was best found in the thirteenth century, he celebrated the 'magnificent capabilities' of column-free naves, central crossings, and galleries 'where the architecture meant them to be'. His sources ranged from Pugin to Viollet-le-Duc, his illustrations from Spain to Byzantium. 
Fuller died in December 1872. By 1875 Cubitt had moved his practice to 2 Finsbury Pavement, his home to 5 Eaton Villas, Loughton, Essex, and had married Fanny Emma Comely (1851-1875), a farmer's daughter whose family were mainstays of the elder Cubitt's ministry at Bourton. She died in childbirth four days before the stone-laying of the chapel that her husband designed for his father's old congregation. He never remarried. 
The 1870s saw two landmarks in Cubitt's church design. Emmanuel Congregational Church, Cambridge (1874; Early English with Early French detail), celebrated nonconformity's new place in that university. Its nave arches of 'unusual span' gave hearers full view of its pulpit. Union Chapel, Islington (1876-89), won by Cubitt using the Ruskinian pseudonym Torcello in an ill-tempered competition adjudicated by Alfred Waterhouse, was a brick chorale of a church, fine for sung and spoken word, seating 1800, costing $50,000, and hailed as among the most notable buildings erected in Britain between 1842 and 1892 ('The Builder', 1 Jan 1943). 
Union Chapel was Cubitt's masterpiece, but the Baptist Church of the Redeemer, Edgbaston (1882), and the Welsh Church, Charing Cross Road, London (1887), were equally massive vindications of 'Church Design'. Thereafter Cubitt mellowed. From 1881 he practised from 2 Broad Street Buildings, Liverpool Street, associated in the 1880s with J. M. Brydon, with G. F. Collinson in the 1890s, and with H. J. Manchip from 1905. In 1890 Cubitt was elected FRIBA, with Waterhouse and Brydon as proposers. The crisply helpful 'Popular Handbook of Nonconformist Church Building' followed in 1892. 
France now gave way to the Low Countries, and central crossings to broad naves. Osborne Road Baptist Church, Jesmond, Newcastle (1887), was emphatically Norman, but Avenue Congregational Church, Southampton (1898), and Streatham Congregational Church (1901) were parish churches in fifteenth-century Perpendicular Gothic. Most suggestive of all was Cubitt's fascination with Wren, who 'designed from the inside outwards' ('Contemporary Review', 46, July 1884). 
This announced a proto-member of the arts and crafts movement, as suggested in Cubitt's ancillary buildings for Westgate Road Baptist Church, Newcastle (1886), flagged in his secular commissions -- board schools, for example, in Loughton, Leytonstone, Lewisham, and Dulwich -- and fulfilled in the schoolroom ('seventeenth-century domestic work') for Union Chapel, Loughton (1898), and in some private houses in Loughton. His last major building was a church, Tabernacl, Bangor (1905), at once Norman and Perpendicular -- proof of a Victorian mind pressing forward. 
Cubitt was an architect's architect -- admired by Waterhouse and Brydon, singled out by Hermann Muthesius -- linking the ecclesiologists to the nonconformist conscience. He lived modestly in Loughton, Essex, where his brother-in-law William Vivian ministered until financial disgrace and death terminated his ministry. He died, intestate, on 8 August 1912 at his home, Monghyr Cottage, Loughton (which had been named after an Indian Baptist missionary station), and was buried two days later at Loughton cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 47627


Cunningham, Sir Henry Stewart (1832-1920), lawyer and novelist, was born at the vicarage, Harrow, Middlesex, on 30 June 1832, the fifth son and penultimate child of the fourteen children of the Revd John William Cunningham (1780-1861); Henry was the third of the four children from his father's second marriage, to Mary Calvert (1800-1849), a general's daughter and the sister of Sir Harry Verney, model Christian landowner. The vicarage was a stronghold of educated evangelicalism. Henry's mother intended him for the church, and he was sent to Mr Renaud's evangelical school at Bayford, Hertfordshire, before attending Harrow School (1845-51), where his father had been a governor since 1818. At Harrow he won the Peel medal. He then spent four months as a private tutor in Norwich before matriculating at Trinity College, Oxford, in 1851, where he took a second class in Greats (1856) and won the chancellor's prize for the English essay. 
On 10 June 1859 Cunningham was called to the bar of the Inner Temple, London. He supplemented his earnings by writing: in the summer of 1860 he was in Italy reporting on Garibaldi's successes, and in 1861 his first novel, 'Wheat and Tares', was published. His paternal uncle Francis Cunningham, vicar of Lowestoft, Suffolk, and his wife, the former Richenda Gurney, were recognized as the model for the clerical household in this -- not unkind -- satirical account of the evangelical milieu of a fashionable watering-place. Five other novels followed, all of which demonstrate a fondness for Latin tags and a tendency for the comedy of manners to sit uneasily with a romantic plot in which a serious illness, or tragic death, effects a morally educative lesson. 
On his father's death in 1861, Cunningham and his younger sister, Emily, moved to 6 Craven Hill, Hyde Park, London, but the household had to be dismantled in 1866 when his partner in a tea firm, in which he had invested his own and other relatives' money, absconded, leaving him bankrupt. Later that year he became government advocate and legal adviser to the Punjab. He was joined first by Emily and then by his brother-in-law, Sir James Fitzjames Stephen, in whose task of codifying Indian law he became involved in 1871. After a break in Simla, he served as advocate-general in Madras from 1872 (possibly 1873) to 1877: appointed a member of the famine commission, he drew upon the expertise of another family connection, Florence Nightingale. On furlough, he married, on 28 July 1877, the Hon. Harriett Emily Lawrence (died 1918), daughter of John Laird Lawrence, first Baron Lawrence, who had been viceroy of India when Cunningham first arrived. The couple returned to Calcutta, where he became a high court judge (1877-87). In 1881 the famine commission made its report, and he published 'British India and its Rulers' (1881), a conservative appraisal of Britain's imperial rule. Two of his novels, 'The Chronicles of Dustypore' (1875) and 'The Coeruleans: a Vacation Idyll' (1887), offer shrewd portraits of Anglo-Indian society. In 1887 he and his wife returned to England, accompanied by their son Lawrence ('b'. 1878) and daughter ('b'. 1887). 
Cunningham was created KCIE in January 1889, assumed several financial directorships, and campaigned on public health issues both in India and in London. His penultimate novel, 'The Heriots' (1890), a tale of the upper-class English society in which he and his family now lived, and who divided their time between London and Brighton, was much feted by his contemporaries. He died on 3 September 1920 at his home, 83 Eaton Place, London, and was buried on the 7th in the churchyard at Banstead, Surrey. 


@@@@@


doc= 47628


Ellis, John Edward (1841-1910), colliery owner and politician, was born on 15 October 1841 at Castle View, The Newarke, Leicester, the eldest of the five children of Edward Shipley Ellis (1817-1879), railway chairman and social reformer, and his wife, Emma Burgess (1809-1899), both of whom came from Quaker families. 
Educated at Friends' schools at Hertford and Kendal, in 1857 Ellis accompanied his father (by that time chairman of the Midland Railway Company) on a trip to the USA to study the American railway system. From 1858 to 1861 he served an apprenticeship with Kitson and Hewitson, railway and general engineers, of Leeds. In 1861 he was appointed to a management position at the Hucknall colliery then being sunk by a partnership in which his father and uncle were initially joined by two others, and Ellis soon assumed overall managerial control. This was the first mine to be sunk in Nottinghamshire's Leen valley, which was to become Britain's most prosperous coalfield. A paternalistic employer, Ellis was concerned to provide fair wages and good working conditions, as well as decent housing and social infrastructure. He was largely responsible for the establishment of a local board in the Leen valley in 1866, a school board in 1871 (he served as chairman of both bodies for some years), a town water supply, and adult schools (in which he himself lectured for a time). 
In 1867 Ellis married Maria (1845-1941), the fifth child of John and Jane Rowntree of Scarborough, whom he met at the Quaker meeting there. They lived at The Park, Nottingham, and had three sons (two of whom died in early adulthood), and twin daughters, one of whom, Marian Ellis, became a philanthropist and political activist. In Nottingham, Ellis again became involved in educational work and was a member of the city's school board. Between 1882 and 1886 he was also chairman of the Nottingham Joint Stock Bank. 
Ellis promoted the formation of a Liberal association in north Nottinghamshire in 1880, and in 1885 he became MP for the newly created seat of Rushcliffe, which then included Hucknall. He held this seat until shortly before his death in 1910. A highly principled man, as befits a Quaker, Ellis campaigned against Irish injustices and for home rule; supported the temperance movement; opposed the arms trade and the South African War; and supported free trade. In 1902 he welcomed the emergence of labour representation in parliament. He chaired many standing and select committees of the house; in 1895 he became temporary chairman of ways and means, but subsequently declined nomination as speaker. From December 1905 to December 1906 he was under-secretary for India under John Morley, and he was sworn of the privy council in 1905. 
Because of his early belief in classical economic doctrine Ellis was unsympathetic to trade unions in the 1860s and 1870s, but he gradually came to recognize their value; soon after the formation of the Nottinghamshire Miners' Association in 1881, he gave it encouragement and support. He formed a particularly close relationship with the association's second agent, William Bailey (appointed 1886), and the good relationship then established with the association continued after Bailey's untimely death in 1896. Ellis, assisted by two other Nottinghamshire colliery owners who were Liberal politicians, induced the Leen valley colliery proprietors to break the owners' lock-out by their men in 1893 by re-opening their pits on the pre-stoppage conditions and by forming a breakaway owners' association. This split in the coal owners' ranks was subsequently exploited by the union. 
Ellis was asthmatic and it was partly for this reason that he bought a country estate near Scarborough (Wrea Head, Scalby) in 1883. On his election to parliament in 1885, he also bought a London residence, 40 Pont Street; in 1906 he moved from there to 37 Prince's Gate, Knightsbridge. He died from acute bronchitis at his London home on 1 December 1910, and was buried in the churchyard at Scalby on 6 December. 


@@@@@


doc= 47629


Freeman, Thomas Birch (1809-1890), missionary and colonial official, was born on 6 December 1809 at Twyford, near Winchester, of an African father, Thomas Freeman, a farmer, and an English mother, Amy Birch. He adopted the name Freeman in youth, perhaps from his father who may have been a freed slave. Little is known of his upbringing except that it was in poverty, or of his education, save that he could write with elegance. 
As a young man Freeman rose to become head gardener and botanist to Sir Robert Harland at Orwell Park, near Ipswich. Freeman joined the Wesleyan Methodists, became a lay preacher, and lost his employment for refusing to return to the Church of England. He thereupon volunteered as a Methodist missionary to west Africa, where the first white missionaries had all died within weeks of arrival. Freeman's offer was thus welcomed, in the false belief that as an African he was racially protected against tropical diseases. On 17 October 1837 he married Elizabeth Boote, housekeeper to his former employer; she died of fever in February 1838, within weeks of their arrival on the Gold Coast. On 25 November 1840, while on his first leave in England, Freeman married Lucinda Cowan, daughter of a Methodist minister; she died on 25 August 1841, within seven months of landing in Africa. Some years later he married an educated African, who bore him a son, also named Thomas Birch Freeman. 
Freeman was one of the most successful Christian missionaries of his age, founding the Methodist churches of the Gold Coast and Nigeria. His faith was transparently sincere and he was a skilled diplomat, who impressed both the British colonial representatives and rulers of African kingdoms; these included the powerful interior kingdom of Asante which he visited in 1840. His converts were looking for greater self-expression than their own societies permitted; Methodism allowed Freeman to place literate Africans as lay preachers and ministers, thus spreading the organization of the church rapidly. In 1842 he visited Badagri in south-west Nigeria, and then Abeokuta, where large numbers of slaves liberated by the Royal Navy were returning home, who proved fertile soil for conversion. From 1842 he supervised an expanding number of Methodist congregations in the Gold Coast and Nigeria, visited the kingdom of Dahomey in 1843 when it threatened Abeokuta and Badagri, and made further visits to Asante in 1848 with the British governor of the Gold Coast. 
Freeman's very success as an evangelist led to his resignation in 1857, for he was naive in his financial administration, expecting that God would provide funds for each expansion. An accounting in 1857 revealed that while Freeman had been scrupulously honest he had presided over chaotic finances. He was at once given employment by the colonial government as civil commandant of Accra district, and he remained in the colonial service for the next sixteen years. In 1873 he returned to the Methodist ministry in a purely pastoral role, retiring in 1885 to live in Accra. He died in the Methodist mission circuit house there, in his eighty-first year, on 12 August 1890. 


@@@@@


doc= 47632


Haslam, Anna Maria (1829-1922), campaigner for women's rights, was born in Youghal, co. Cork, in April 1829, sixteenth of the seventeen children of Abraham Fisher (1783-1871), a corn miller, and his wife, Jane Moor (1789-1877), of Neath, Wales. She had eight sisters and eight brothers. She was educated at the Quaker school at Newtown, co. Waterford, from 1840 to 1842, and then, until 1845, at the Quaker school at Castlegate in York. Her parents were active in the anti-slavery, temperance, and international peace movements, and the family helped in a soup kitchen in Youghal during the great famine. Anna later linked her activism in women's rights to her upbringing, noting in an interview that she 'could not remember any time when she was not a believer in women's equality. It came to her naturally and was always taken for granted in her household' ('Irish Citizen', 21 March 1914). 
From 1847 Anna taught at Ackworth School, Yorkshire, where she met her future husband, a fellow teacher, 
Anna Haslam's interests spanned a range of organizations and campaigns. In 1861 she helped establish the Irish Society for the Training and Employment of Educated Women in Dublin. She campaigned to have girls included in the 'Intermediate Education (Ireland) Act' of 1878, and in 1882 was involved in setting up the Association of Schoolmistresses and Other Ladies Interested in Irish Education, which sought to protect rights won for girls' education and to fight for further changes. In 1870 she established a branch of the Ladies' National Association for the Repeal of the Contagious Diseases Acts in Dublin. She also served as an executive committee member of the National Association for the Repeal of the Contagious Diseases Acts. In 1886 she became secretary to the Women's Vigilance Committee, part of the social purity movement which developed from the 'Contagious Diseases Acts' campaign. When the First World War broke out in 1914 she was instrumental in setting up 'women patrols' which aimed to keep young girls off the streets of Dublin for fear they would fall into prostitution. 
Anna Haslam established the first suffrage society in Dublin in 1876. After many name changes, this organization was to become the Irish Women's Suffrage and Local Government Association (IWSLGA) in 1901. She was secretary to this association from 1876 until 1913, and was then elected life president. A pacifist throughout her life, she did not support the militant tactics of the Irish Women's Franchise League. In addition to campaigning for the national franchise, the IWSLGA also sought to win the right for women to become poor-law guardians and to vote in municipal elections, rights which were eventually won in 1896 and 1898 respectively. Anna Haslam, a leading figure in these campaigns, wrote a number of articles on these issues in the 'Englishwoman's Review'. 
Anna Haslam was a staunch unionist and opposed the introduction of home rule for Ireland, fearing that its passage would result in the loyalists of Ireland being 'politically extinguished'. She nevertheless welcomed women and men of all political persuasions and all religious denominations into her organizations. To the end of her life she was held in very real affection by feminists of widely differing political opinions. 
In the 1918 election, the first in which women over thirty were allowed to vote, Anna Haslam was paraded to the polling booth by members of different suffrage groups, as a symbol of the long years of struggle to attain the franchise. Thomas Haslam, a significant feminist in his own right, did not live to see his wife cast her vote. Like his wife, he had devoted his energies to securing rights for women, and had been active in the IWSLGA. Interested in birth control, he published 'The Marriage Problem' on the subject in 1868 under the pseudonym Oedipus. In 1870 he wrote a pamphlet, 'A Few Words on Prostitution and the Contagious Diseases Acts', as a contribution to the Irish campaign for the repeal of the acts. He published the first newspaper in Ireland to support women's suffrage, the 'Women's Advocate'; but it ran to only three issues, in April, May, and July 1874. He wrote a number of pamphlets on women's suffrage, the last being published in 1916, a year before his death. He was buried in the Quaker burial-ground at Temple Hill, Blackrock, in co. Dublin. Anna Haslam died in Dublin on 28 November 1922 at the age of ninety-three, and was buried beside her husband in the Quaker burial-ground. 


@@@@@


doc= 47633


Paish, Frank Walter (1898-1988), economist, was born in Croydon on 15 January 1898, the eldest of five sons (there were no daughters) of Sir George Paish (1867-1957), joint editor of 'The Statist' (1900-16) and author of many publications on economic and social problems, and his wife, Emily Mary, daughter of Thomas Whitehead, of Liverpool. He was educated at Winchester College before being commissioned into the Royal Field Artillery in 1916. He served in France in 1917-18 with the rank of lieutenant and was awarded the MC (1918) during the German offensive of March 1918, when he was wounded by shrapnel. From 1919 to 1921 he was a student at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he obtained a second class (division one) in both part one of the history tripos (1920) and part two of the economics tripos (1921). 
On leaving university Paish joined the Standard Bank of South Africa, first in London in 1921 and then, from 1922 to 1932, in South Africa, at Aliwal North, where he was manager of a country branch, and finally in Cape Town, where his responsibility became that of economic intelligence and analysis. In 1927 he married Beatrice Mary (died 1992), sister of Rachel, who married Sir Bryan Matthews, and daughter of Gustav Conrad Eckhard, shipping agent, of Manchester. They had two sons and a daughter. 
In 1932 Paish left the bank and was appointed a lecturer at the London School of Economics (LSE). His work for the Standard Bank led him to throw new light on the working of the gold standard and he was one of the first economists to emphasize the role of changes in national income and expenditure, in addition to the quantity of money, in bringing about balance of payments adjustments. Paish was made a reader at the University of London in 1938 and Sir Ernest Cassel professor of economics (with special reference to business finance) in 1949. During this period his publications included 'Insurance Funds and their Investment' (1934, with George Schwartz) and a study of the cheap money policy of 1932. From 1941 to 1945 he was deputy director of programmes in the Ministry of Aircraft Production. During the war he was also commissioned into the Home Guard, reaching the rank of captain. 
Paish was elected president of section F of the British Association in 1953. He held his professorship until retirement in 1965, when he was appointed professor emeritus; and in 1970 he was made an honorary fellow of LSE. Between 1965 and 1970 he acted as consultant to Lloyds Bank on economic affairs. He had neither the training nor the taste for the mathematical theorizing and complex econometric testing which became prevalent in his profession. Instead, he had an unusually shrewd eye for applied economic problems and for the basic statistics needed to throw light on them. He always saw the formulation of economic theory as an art, and he was content to make contributions to the solution of difficult questions by means of a first approximation; econometric refinements he was content to leave to others. He had a rare understanding of the cyclical behaviour of the British economy and had a better forecasting record than most. He was one of the first economists to emphasize the need for a margin of spare capacity ('unused productive potential') to prevent inflation and the dangers of an ambitious policy of stimulating demand in the hope of stimulating long-term economic growth. In the conditions of the 1960s he argued that the spare capacity needed to prevent inflation would involve a level of unemployment of 21/2 per cent, a view which was the subject of hostility on the part of those who believed that economic policy should be less restrained, including trade unionists; although he held policy makers rather than trade unions responsible for inflation and did not believe in the efficacy of 'incomes policy'. 
Changes in the characteristics of the British economy in the 1970s and 1980s, like those in most other countries, rendered Paish's original estimate of the level of unemployment implied by anti-inflationary policy much too low; and later all economists accepted the need for some margin of spare capacity, even though they might disagree on its precise level and on the role of different instruments of economic policy. In the 1960s Paish's views were unpopular in Whitehall, where his prescriptions were neither sought nor taken. The tension between the supporters of his approach, who included colleagues at LSE, and advocates of more ambitious demand policies, broadly identified with the Keynesian school in general and with economists in Cambridge in particular, made difficult his task as editor of the London and Cambridge Economic Service, which produced regular assessments of economic conditions by economists from LSE and Cambridge. He was its secretary from 1932 to 1941 and again between 1945 and 1949, and editor from 1947 to 1949. 
Paish's publications included 'The Post-War Financial Problem, and other Essays' (1950), 'Business Finance' (1953), 'Studies in an Inflationary Economy' (1962), 'Long-Term and Short-Term Interest Rates in the United Kingdom' (1966), (ed.) 'Benham's Economics', fifth to eighth editions (1962-7), and, with A. J. Culyer, the ninth edition (1973), 'Rise and Fall of Incomes Policy' (1969), and 'How the Economy Works, and other Essays' (1970). 
Paish was of medium height and fair-haired, with strikingly blue eyes. His war wound left him with a limited degree of movement in his right shoulder, which necessitated some unusual but spectacular shots at the table tennis which was an off-duty diversion of the senior common room at LSE. His writing and his teaching had a directness, clarity, and lack of pretentiousness which were characteristic of the man. He had a boyish sense of humour and would reach the heart of a subject by means of brief and pithy comment. He was always ready to help his students and was an amiable colleague; but behind his friendliness and humour there was a robustness and even a hint of steel, which owed something, perhaps, to his experience in the First World War. Paish died at his home, the Old Rectory Cottage, Kentchurch, Hereford, on 23 May 1988. 
Harold Rose', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 47634


Holttum, (Richard) Eric (1895-1990), botanist, was born on 20 July 1895 in Linton, Cambridgeshire, the eldest in the family of two sons and one daughter of Richard Holttum, grocer and owner of a village general store, and his wife, Florence Bradley. His parents being Quakers, he was educated at the Friends' school, Saffron Walden, Essex, and then at Bootham School, York. He wrote in 1980 that his Quaker schooling 'conveyed a sense of responsibility and of respect for other people based on some appreciation of the spiritual basis of all living'. His long life of public service and research had that foundation. In 1914 he entered St John's College, Cambridge, with a scholarship to study botany, physics, and chemistry. He obtained a first class in part one of the natural sciences tripos in 1916. The horror of the First World War led him to join in 1916 the Friends' Ambulance Unit, in which he served with the French army on the western front. In 1919 he received the Croix de Guerre. He returned to Cambridge, gaining first-class honours in part two of the tripos (botany) in 1920 and was awarded the university's Frank Smart prize. 
In 1920 Professor Albert C. Seward appointed Holttum as his assistant and as a junior demonstrator in botany at Cambridge, and together they went to Greenland in 1921 to investigate in fossil deposits its former tropical flora. Holttum was appointed assistant director of the botanic gardens, Singapore, in 1922. The Singapore herbarium was in a chaotic state and the general state of fern taxonomy was likewise unsatisfactory, with current classifications inconsistent, genera ill-defined, and specific descriptions inadequate. Holttum's research to remedy this led to his extensive fundamental pteridological publications. In 1925 he became director of the Singapore Botanic Gardens. An indefatigable field botanist, he was also a far-sighted, energetic administrator, intent on both botanical investigation and the encouragement of gardening in Malaya. Holttum used the method of raising orchid seedlings on nutrient media in glass test-tubes and flasks to raise new orchid hybrids. Out of his enterprise grew the important orchid-growing industry of Malaya. In 1927 he married an artist, Ursula (died 1987), daughter of John William Massey, gentleman farmer at Finchingfield, Essex. They had two daughters. 
After the Japanese conquest of Singapore in July 1942, Holttum's fate and that of the Singapore Botanic Gardens were determined by Emperor Hirohito's instruction that such scientific institutions be maintained. Professor Hidezo Tanakadate ordered Holttum and the assistant director to continue their work. Later in 1942 Professor Kwan Koriba took over the administration. He treated Holttum 'with much kindness', as Holttum gratefully acknowledged, and for the next three years encouraged his scientific research on orchids, gingers, ferns, and bamboos, for which he previously had had too little time. Conscious, however, of the hardships of internees while he himself was exceptionally privileged, Holttum requested to be interned also, but Koriba ordered him to continue with research. Nevertheless his isolation caused him acute mental distress, near to utter despair. After the Japanese surrender in September 1945 Holttum returned to England to recuperate. He then resumed direction of the neglected Singapore Botanic Gardens, resigning in 1949 to become the first professor of botany in the newly founded University of Singapore, where he proved to be an enthusiastic and inspiring teacher. Never wasting time, he published 'Plant Life in Malaya' (1954), 'Gardening in the Lowlands of Malaya' (1953), and 'Orchids of Malaya' (1953). With his department established and thriving, Holttum retired in 1954, returned to England, settled at Kew, and worked in the herbarium of the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, principally on tropical ferns, until his death. His 'Ferns of Malaya' (1955) was the prelude to major work on the ferns of Malaya, Indonesia, New Guinea, and the Philippines for the 'Flora Malesiana' (section Pteridophyta). About 110 of his 500 or more publications on botany and horticulture relate to ferns, and all manifest his meticulous attention to detail, originality, and breadth of outlook. 
Holttum was made an honorary Cambridge ScD (1951) and an honorary DSc at Singapore (1954); he was awarded the Victoria medal of honour of the Royal Horticultural Society (1972), the gold medal of the American Orchid Society (1963), and the gold medal of the Linnean Society of London (1964). The University of Malaya, which created him an honorary DSc in 1949, awards an Eric Holttum medal to an outstanding student of botany. At least twenty-three botanical specific names with the epithet 'holttumi' or 'holttumianus' commemorate him. 
A lifelong member of the Society of Friends, Holttum joined the society's Brentford and Isleworth meeting in 1955. His spoken ministry there had its background in an extensive acquaintance with religious and philosophical literature, deep spiritual insight, and much thought. He published in 1975 'A Personal Christology' (reprinted 1995). His religious views also found expression in Quaker magazines and journals. From 1962 onwards he became increasingly deaf, and was ultimately completely deaf, although his eyesight, patience, and intellect remained unimpaired to the end. He had a modest, unassuming manner, and was helpful to all. Physically he was short and sparse in build, with sharp and alert features, a high forehead, and ginger hair. Holttum died from pneumonia on 18 September 1990 in Queen Mary's Hospital, Roehampton, London. 
William T. Stearn', rev. ' 


