@@@@@


doc= 5879


Coleridge, Derwent (1800-1883), writer and educationist, was born on 14 September 1800 at Greta Hall, Keswick, Cumberland, the second of the three surviving children of the poet Samuel Taylor Coleridge (1772-1834) and his wife, Sara (1770-1845), daughter of Stephen Fricker of Bristol. From early childhood he showed the sturdy independence and dogged determination which characterized his life. After attending Keswick day school he was educated at the Revd John Dawes's school at Ambleside and spent his weekends with the Wordsworth family. For three years he was a private tutor in Lancashire and then in 1820 went to St John's College, Cambridge. Through the friendship of his cousin Henry Nelson Coleridge (1798-1843) he was drawn into a brilliant circle which included Thomas Babington Macaulay, the poets Chauncey Hare Townsend and Sidney Walker, Winthrop Praed, and John Moultrie, the future vicar of Rugby who became his lifelong friend. (Much later, in 1864 and 1876, Derwent Coleridge edited the poems of Praed and Moultrie and wrote memoirs of them.) He joined his contemporaries in writing for 'Knight's Quarterly', contributing under the pseudonym Davenant Cecil mostly rather second-rate love poems. He was never happy as a creative writer, but his incisive intellect and organizational skills made him a natural critic and editor, as the lucid approachability of his later work testifies. He was also an accomplished linguist: in addition to the usual European languages he also knew Zulu, Arabic, Hawaiian, Hungarian, and Welsh. 
Derwent Coleridge's eventual pass degree at Cambridge does not deny his brilliance but reflects the misery of his final year, which began with a bout of typhus fever and continued with debt and confusion. Both he and Moultrie had lost their orthodox faith, but that autumn Moultrie regained his, leaving Coleridge feeling spiritually betrayed. Debt, caused by moving in wealthy circles on a frugal allowance, seemed about to be alleviated by two exhibitions, but he did not receive the money for months. He resented his father's failure to provide for him financially, while at the same time criticizing his debts. Throughout his life he was publicly loyal to his father. In private, however, he was angered by his hypocrisy and weakness, and the inherent dependence of his children on others. Sensitive and independent, he found intolerable the constant need to be overtly grateful. In 1823 he deliberately cast himself off from his family, until he could return from a new position of strength and identity. He moved to the west country, becoming third master at the proprietary school at Plymouth. 
Derwent Coleridge became involved in the intellectual life of the city, including lecturing at the Athenaeum. His talk on Wordsworth was published by the 'Metropolitan Quarterly' in 1826. In Plymouth he met Mary Simpson Pridham (1807-1887), whom he married on 6 December 1827. His love for her gave purpose to his life again and made him receptive to a profound reaffirmation of faith. In January 1826 he returned to Cambridge to read for an MA in divinity. He was fully ordained on 15 July 1827, and accepted the living of Helston in Cornwall, which had a school attached. He transformed the school into a thriving concern which produced excellent examination results. He designed a new school building and had it erected. Architecture was a lifelong fascination. He believed that a suitable environment was essential for successful work. In each of his subsequent positions he was to instigate a major rebuilding programme. 
In 1839 Derwent Coleridge's book 'The Scriptural Character of the English Church' was published. It was a way of trying to clarify his beliefs in the light of his own reconversion and also in the climate of religious debate fuelled by the Oxford Movement and the dissident low churches. He writes of the threat of these divisions and appeals for a broad approach, stressing the impossibility of applying earthly theories and systems to the universal, timeless nature of God. 
On 3 February 1841 Derwent Coleridge was appointed principal of St Mark's College, newly established in Chelsea, London, as the very first teacher training college. Over the next twenty years he did much to shape the course of education. His annual reports reveal the all-encompassing nature of the community he headed. The students were given a thorough education ranging from academic subjects to music, carpentry, and bookkeeping. They also worked on the college farm and in the house, which encouraged a sense of duty and humility and made them practically acquainted with the work and conditions of the poor among whom many of them would be placed. The theory of teaching was constantly reinforced by work in a real school within the college, which also benefited the poor children of the local community. Coleridge was convinced that the church should be on the front line of social change and the way was through education. He saw the daily choral service in the college chapel as the moral foundation of the college, but this too, like the education of the very poor, was attacked as excessive. In 1861 there was a public outcry against the government's revised education code. Among the many pamphlets published were Derwent Coleridge's 'The Education of the People' and 'The Teachers of the People'. The revised code overturned everything he had worked for in its plans for private rather than public funding, 'payment by results', and the reduction of grants for teacher training. 
On the death of his brother (David) Hartley Coleridge (1796-1849) Derwent Coleridge collected, edited, and published his work, adding a moving and perceptive memoir (1851). After the death of his sister Sara Coleridge (1802-1852) he carried on her editorship of their father's works. In 1864 he became rector of Hanwell, Middlesex, where his last great project was the building of a new church. At the age of eighty he retired to Torquay, where he died on 28 March 1883; he was survived by his wife. During his last years he enjoyed the companionship of his children. The eldest, Derwent Moultrie, had been sent to Australia and had died there in 1881, but Ernest and Christabel Rose Coleridge remained close to him. 




@@@@@


doc= 5880


Coleridge, (David) Hartley (1796-1849), writer, was born on 19 September 1796 in Oxford Street, Kingsdown, Bristol, the eldest of the three surviving children of the poet Samuel Taylor Coleridge (1772-1834) and his wife, Sara (1770-1845), daughter of Stephen Fricker of Bristol. He was a remarkably precocious child, but Coleridge actively encouraged his inherent strangeness and powerful imagination. He watched and questioned him, trying to find in the behaviour of his child confirmation of his own theories of language and the imagination. Such overwhelming attention alternating with the bleakness of his father's frequent departures began to damage Hartley's ability to function in the real world and caused him increasingly to retreat into the security of his imaginary world, Ejuxria, a world which he could control. He knew the boundary between the two worlds was there but he constantly strove to dissolve it. 
After four unsettled years in Somerset and London the family moved to Greta Hall, Keswick, Cumberland, in July 1800. The house was shared with the landlord William Jackson and his housekeeper, Mrs Wilson, who became figures of stability in Hartley's young life, as did Robert Southey who came to visit and stayed for forty years. After attending Keswick day school, in 1808 Hartley went with his brother Derwent Coleridge (1800-1883) to school at Ambleside, and weekends were spent with the Wordsworth family. The school was run by the Revd John Dawes, under whose enlightened guidance Hartley progressed well; in May 1815 he matriculated at Merton College, Oxford. In 1818 he was awarded a second-class degree and the following year became a junior fellow at Oriel College. In the early nineteenth century Oriel was characterized by austerity, sobriety, and adherence to regulations, and it quickly became apparent that Hartley Coleridge could not fit into it. He was expelled on charges of 'sottishness, a love of low company and general inattention to college rules' (Griggs, 306). It was eventually conceded that the reports of drunkenness were exaggerated. He did suffer from a degree of alcoholism for much of his life, but it was only just beginning at this point. It seems probable that lack of respect for college traditions and attitude was the real cause for the expulsion. He had quietly ignored those regulations he found petty or hypocritical, knowing that this would not be overlooked by the college authorities but unable to compromise. 
Hartley Coleridge moved to London in 1820 and tried to establish himself as a writer. His first essays were published in the 'London Magazine' at this time. But, having no money and no home, he had to rely on the charity of his parents' friends and in the autumn of 1822 had to submit to his father's insistence that he should return to Ambleside to work for the Revd Dawes. Initially all went well, but after Dawes's retirement Hartley Coleridge and a Mr Suard tried to expand the school and in 1826 it folded. This left him without a regular income but gave him time to return to writing. Over the next few years he was to publish mainly in 'Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine' and the 'Winter's Wreath', but also in 'The Gem', the 'Literary Souvenir', the 'Christian Mother's Magazine', and the 'Academic Correspondent', and then later in his life in the 'Penny Magazine' and the 'Englishwomen's Magazine'. His essays and letters reveal a persona, the Old Bachelor, behind which he could hide his feelings of guilt and failure and his sense of having been abandoned by his family. He came to view himself as a man of adverse destiny, out of step with nature and with time. His despair was hidden under the mask of whimsical drollery and chivalrous, gentle eccentricity. From 1822 until his death his essays changed very little in style, tone, or concerns. They mirror the quaint, digressive, learned Old Bachelor but they also throw out glimpses of the man behind the mask, illuminating his erudition about literature, art, and theology and revealing his social concern, especially his hatred of injustice and oppression. One volume of his poetry was published in 1833 and was well received. It was reissued as part of the two-volume collection published posthumously in 1851 with an introductory memoir by Derwent Coleridge. The poems are a curious mixture, sometimes narrated by the persona of the Old Bachelor, sometimes in specific genres, and sometimes very personal sonnets of extreme pathos which reveal the anguish he tried to suppress. Of the latter the most poignant are 'Long Time a Child' and 'Let me not Deem'. 
In 1832 Hartley Coleridge moved to Leeds to the home of the publisher Bingley, to whom he was contracted to write short biographies for a series, 'Lives of Distinguished Northerns'. The thirteen 'Lives' he completed before Bingley went bankrupt in 1833 transcend the confines of word length and lack of source material, giving not only a sense of the subject but the added delight of Hartley Coleridge's intimate style. He returned to the Lake District, remaining in Grasmere until February 1837 when his friend Isaac Green, assistant master at Sedbergh School in Yorkshire, became ill and he offered to take his place. He stayed for two terms and was happy and successful. The following year he repeated his success, this time standing in for the headmaster. During his first stay at Sedbergh his landlady in Grasmere, Mrs Fleming, died, and on his return he lived with William and Eleanor Richardson. He returned to them after his second spell at Sedbergh, and when they moved to a larger house, Nab Cottage, on the road between Grasmere and Rydal, he moved with them and remained there until his death. 
Hartley Coleridge did not marry or have children. His morbidly low sense of self-worth conspired with his need for the safety of self-containment to make sexual relationships almost impossible. But as the Old Bachelor he was loved and cared for by many people in the area. His papers are full of invitations to attend family gatherings. In his turn he tried to give help and consolation to all who needed it, regardless of their social status. And many friends understood the underlying desolation which led to occasional bouts of self-abandon and wandering. In 1839 the publisher Moxon asked him to write an introduction for a new edition of the plays of Massinger and Ford. Again he suffered from limitations of length and materials but eventually produced a useful and approachable piece of work, published in 1840, and with further editions appearing in 1848 and 1851. The work was well paid and he was also earning a small amount of money at this time from lecturing on poetry at the museum of the Natural History Society at Kendal. In early December 1848 he dined out, and walked home in the pouring rain. Afterwards he became ill, developed bronchitis, and became worse throughout December. By Boxing day the Richardsons were sufficiently concerned to send for his brother Derwent. Hartley Coleridge died on 6 January 1849 at Nab Cottage and was buried on 11 January in Grasmere churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 5881


Coleridge, Henry James (1822-1893), Jesuit, born in London on 20 September 1822, was the second son of Sir John Taylor Coleridge (1790-1876), and his wife, Mary (1788-1874), the second daughter of the Revd Gilbert Buchanan. Henry was a great-nephew of the poet Samuel Taylor Coleridge and the younger brother of John Duke Coleridge, Baron Coleridge. His sister, Alethea, married J. Mackarness, later bishop of Oxford. Henry Coleridge was educated at Eton College and then Trinity College, Oxford, where he matriculated in 1840, graduating BA in 1845 and MA in 1847. From 1845 until 1852 he was a fellow of Oriel College. He came under the influence of the Tractarian movement and, after receiving Anglican orders, accepted the cure of Ottery St Mary and then that of Alphington in Devon, a part of the country with which his family had long been associated. In 1852 he became a Roman Catholic and went to Rome to make a further study of theology at the Pontifical Jesuit University. Ordained priest in 1855, he received his doctor's degree in 1857, and in September of that year entered the Jesuit noviciate at Beaumont Lodge near Windsor. Two years later he joined the staff of St Beuno's, the Jesuit Theological College in north Wales, to lecture in holy scripture; he held this post for six years. 
Throughout his life, Coleridge was a prolific writer; his many publications included 'Vita vitae nostrae meditantibus proposita' (1869), 'The Life and Letters of St Francis Xavier' (2 vols., 1872), 'The Life of our Life' (18 vols., 1876-92), 'The Prisoners of the King: Thoughts on the Catholic Doctrine of Purgatory' (1878), and 'The Works and Words of our Saviour Gathered from the Four Gospels' (1882, 1897). 
In April 1865 Coleridge was appointed the first Jesuit editor of 'The Month', a periodical begun by Fanny Margaret Taylor in 1864, which she sold to the Jesuits. Living in Hill Street, at the residence of the Jesuit fathers of Farm Street Church in west London, he remained editor until 1881 and was responsible for the successful launching of 'The Month' as a Jesuit publication. John Henry Newman, whom he had known at Oxford and who had asked for his help with the Catholic University in Dublin, was one with whom he corresponded on the journal's affairs; Coleridge may be considered to have been Newman's closest friend among the Jesuits. A number of articles by Newman were published in 'The Month' in the 1860s, both before and after the Jesuits acquired ownership; Newman's 'The Dream of Gerontius' appeared in the May and June numbers of 1865. The last article Coleridge wrote for 'The Month' (October 1890), entitled 'A father of souls', was about Newman. After the issue of the 'Syllabus of errors' (condemning certain liberal ideas) by Pius IX in 1864 and the promulgation of the definition of papal infallibility as a dogma by the First Vatican Council of 1870, W. E. Gladstone published his pamphlets 'The Vatican Decrees in their Bearing on Civil Allegiance: a Political Expostulation' and 'Vaticanism'. In reply Coleridge preached a sermon, 'The abomination of desolation', in Farm Street Church in November 1874 and sent Gladstone a copy; there followed a correspondence. 
From 1881, when Coleridge retired from the editorship of 'The Month', he spent the rest of his active life writing and editing the 'Quarterly Series'. Throughout his years in London he gave himself to the pastoral work of Farm Street Church. In June 1891 he suffered a paralytic stroke and, after two years as an invalid, died at Manresa House, Roehampton, on 13 April 1893. His remains were, at Lord Coleridge's special request, interred in the family vault at Ottery St Mary. Photographs show a handsome man of distinguished appearance. 


@@@@@


doc= 5882


Coleridge, Henry Nelson (1798-1843), barrister and writer, was born on 25 October 1798 at Ottery St Mary, Devon, the fifth of the six surviving sons of Colonel James Coleridge (1759-1836) and his wife, Frances Duke Taylor, daughter of John Taylor. James Duke Coleridge (1789-1857) and Sir John Taylor Coleridge (1790-1876) were his brothers. He was educated at Eton College, where he became part of the brilliant academic circle, led by W. M. Praed, which produced 'The Etonian' magazine. This evolved into 'Knight's Quarterly' when the contributors went up to Cambridge, and Henry Coleridge contributed to it under the pseudonym Gerard Montgomery. He achieved great success at King's College, Cambridge, standing second for the university scholarship in 1819, winning both the Latin and Greek Ode prizes in 1820 and the Greek Ode prize in 1821, and eventually becoming a fellow. 
At Christmas 1822 Henry Coleridge met his cousin Sara Coleridge (1802-1852), the daughter of Samuel Taylor Coleridge (1772-1834), and by March 1823 they were engaged. His only sister Fanny, the only person to know of this, anticipated family disapproval and cautioned that it should be kept secret, but a year later Henry Coleridge told his father and shortly afterwards was sent to the West Indies to accompany his cousin, William Hart Coleridge, who was to become bishop of Barbados. The reason for his trip was ostensibly to improve his health, which was indeed poor throughout his life, but it is likely that the real reason was his family's attempt to break off the engagement. However, in 1826, Henry Coleridge's account of his excursion, 'Six Months in the West Indies', was published anonymously and not only upset some members of his family by its flippant tone and lively anecdotes but also included a thinly disguised reference to his love for Sara. 
In 1826 Henry Coleridge was called to the bar, but both his salary and health remained precarious. In 1828 he became secretary to the committee of the newly opened King's College, London University, but after nine months had to leave because the college faced financial restraints. Throughout his life apparent success disguised financial insecurity, often caused by generous loans which were never repaid to him. He eventually married Sara, on 3 September 1829, with the family blessing. Their first home was in Hampstead, and Samuel Taylor Coleridge lived near by in Highgate. From 1830 until his father-in-law's death in 1834 he made regular visits and began to record Coleridge's conversation, a labour of love which became 'Table Talk', published in 1835. Coleridge's conversation was famously expansive, and Sara praised her husband's ability in this publication to 'narrow' him. Some critics disagreed, however, feeling that Henry had not so much 'narrowed' Coleridge as distorted him, twisting him into a reflection of his own conservative vision. Opinion on 'Table Talk' remains divided. As Coleridge's literary executor, Henry Coleridge then began the huge task of collecting and editing his work. He was helped by Sara and she continued the work after his death. He published four volumes of 'Literary Remains'; new editions of other work including 'The Friend', and 'Aids to Reflection'; and began assembling material for another edition of 'Biographia literaria'. 
In addition to this and his work as a chancery barrister, Coleridge also lectured on equity to the Incorporated Law Society and contributed reviews to the 'Quarterly Review' and the 'British Critic'. In 1830 he had written the first volume of 'An Introduction to the Study of Greek Classic Poets'. It was well received and went into several editions, but his legal career began to flourish at that time and he never found the time to write the proposed second volume. 
Contemporary accounts suggest that Henry Coleridge was a man of great wit, irresistible charm, and sociability, adored by children and fond of flying kites. For much of his life he had suffered from rheumatic and spinal complaints and in May 1842 he lost the use of his legs from spinal paralysis. He died on 26 January 1843 at 10 Chester Place, Regent's Park, London, where the family had moved in 1837. He was survived by his wife and two children, Herbert Coleridge, philologist, and Edith. On 3 February he was buried in Highgate cemetery, Middlesex, in the same grave as Samuel Taylor Coleridge, a grave which would later be shared with his wife, his mother-in-law, and his son. 


@@@@@


doc= 5883


Coleridge, Herbert (1830-1861), philologist, was born at Hampstead, Middlesex, on 7 October 1830, the only son of Henry Nelson Coleridge (1798-1843) and his wife, Sara Coleridge (1802-1852). Having been educated at Eton College by his uncle, the Revd Edward Coleridge, he obtained the Newcastle medal and the Balliol scholarship in 1847, and in 1848 was declared Newcastle scholar. While at school he acquired an interest in Icelandic. His university career at Oxford, which began in 1848, led in 1852 to a double first-class in classics and mathematics, which gave 'high hopes of future eminence' ('GM', 706). 
On 31 March 1853 Coleridge married Ellen Persehouse, daughter of T. M. Phillips, and on 17 November 1854 he was called to the bar, and began practising as a chancery barrister at his chambers in Lincoln's Inn, specializing in conveyancing. As his private means were adequate to his needs he was free to devote his leisure hours to philology -- Sanskrit, the northern tongues, and particularly the language and literature of Iceland. In February 1857 he was elected a member of the Philological Society (founded in 1842), and contributed two papers on diminutives in 'let' and the Latin words 'ploro' and 'exploro', which were read at their March and May meetings. The society was then engaged, following a paper by Chenevix Trench, 'On the deficiencies in our English dictionaries', on a proposal for supplementing the two standard dictionaries of Johnson and Richardson, but in late 1857 Trench made proposals for a complete new English dictionary. Coleridge threw himself into this project with his characteristic enthusiasm, became its chief workman, and was appointed honorary secretary of a special committee 'formed for the purpose of collecting words and idioms hitherto unregistered', a post for which he was well fitted by his learning, literary facility, and methodical habits. His new duties, amounting to a general editorship of the work, involved a large correspondence with the numerous volunteer helpers. The results of his researches are embodied in his 'Glossarial Index to the Printed English Literature of the Thirteenth Century' (1859), which he describes as 'the foundation-stone' of the proposed English dictionary. The scheme developed into the momentous 'New English Dictionary' (later the 'Oxford English Dictionary'). 
Coleridge's efforts were necessarily relaxed, though never entirely relinquished, in consequence of a decline in health, which ended in consumption. He had a bad haemorrhage in 1858 yet, in spite of increasing weakness, he continued to write papers on various philological topics, as well as reports of the progress of work; and during the last fortnight of his life, while confined to bed, he still sometimes dictated notes for the dictionary. An essay on King Arthur was printed by the Philological Society after his death, which took place on 23 April 1861 at his home, 10 Chester Place, Regent's Park, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 5884


Coleridge, James Duke (1789-1857), Church of England clergyman, was born on 13 June 1789, the eldest son of James Coleridge of Heath's Court, Ottery St Mary, Devon, and Frances Duke Taylor, daughter of Bernard Frederick Taylor and one of the coheirs of Robert Duke of Otterton; he was the elder brother of Sir John Taylor Coleridge and of Henry Nelson Coleridge. He went to Balliol College, Oxford, where he matriculated on 21 May 1808. Initially he took no degree, and was improvident. On 9 June 1814 he married Sophia, daughter of Colonel Stanhope Badcock. It was intended that he should have a military career, but desiring to take orders, he gained a degree by taking a BCL on 27 January 1821 (he proceeded DCL on 5 March 1835). 
Coleridge then began the life of a clergyman, his whole time as such being served in the diocese of Exeter. In 1817 he was curate of the small parish of Whimple, near Exeter, and a year or two later he was working energetically as curate in the city benefice of St Sidwell's, Exeter. William Carey, his diocesan bishop, promoted him in 1823 to the vicarage of the then united parishes of Kenwyn and Kea, Cornwall, where he worked until 1828. During this period the church of Chacewater, with seating for 1500 persons, and the smaller church of St John, Kenwyn, were built in the parish, and became the centres of separate work. One of Coleridge's published sermons was 'On the Funeral of the Late Mr William Gill of Chacewater' (1827), Gill being his most active assistant in the building of that church. From 1826 to 1839 he held the rectory of Lawhitton, and from 1831 to 1841 he was vicar of Lewannick, both livings situated in Cornwall. In 1839 he was appointed vicar of Thorverton, Devon. He held the post of official to the archdeacon of Cornwall, and in August 1825 became a prebend of Exeter Cathedral. 
Coleridge was an old-fashioned high-churchman, his views being quite similar to those of Henry Phillpotts, his diocesan bishop from 1830. He was an energetic propagandist, writing numerous sermons and pamphlets. He emphasized the importance of family religion in 'Joshua's Choice' (1819), which was several times reprinted, wrote interestingly on sickness in several pamphlets (1825 and 1832), and warned his parishioners about errors of doctrine (1834) and regeneration (1836). His 'Practical Advice to the Young Parish Priest' (1834) was a work of some substance. His 'Companion to First Lessons' (1838) has a touching dedication to his brother, John Taylor Coleridge. Coleridge died at the vicarage, Thorverton, on 26 December 1857, survived by two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 5885


Coleridge, John (bap. 1719, d. 1781), Church of England clergyman and schoolmaster, was baptized on 21 January 1719 at Crediton, Devon, the son of John Coleridge (1697-1739), a weaver, and his wife, Mary Wills (1698-1776). Having become a respectable draper in Crediton, John Coleridge senior went bankrupt when his son John was fifteen. According to family legend the boy, a promising scholar at the grammar school at Crediton, left school and walked off to seek his fortune; he was found weeping by the roadside by a gentleman who got him a job as an usher at a nearby school. 
On 24 May 1743 Coleridge married Mary Lendon (died 1751?), of Crediton; they had four daughters, three of whom survived infancy. From 1745 to 1748 he was a schoolmaster at Clysthydon, Devon. In 1747, at the age of twenty-eight, he took the unusual step for a married man of matriculating at Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge. He became a distinguished classical and Hebrew scholar, and might have had a fellowship if he had been single. He returned to Devon in 1749, before becoming a teacher at Squire's Grammar School in South Molton and a curate at Mariansleigh. 
Mary Coleridge having died, probably in 1751, John Coleridge married, on 18 December 1753, Ann Bowden (1727-1809), daughter of Roger Bowden and Mary Zeatherd, in St Mary Arches Church in Exeter. Ann's background was as humble as her husband's. 'The Bowdens inherited a house-stye & a pig-stye in the Exmore County, in the reign of Elizabeth', according to their son Samuel, and 'they have inherited nothing better since that time' ('Collected Letters', 1.302). This second marriage produced ten children, nine of whom survived infancy. The eight sons took up a variety of professions, mostly with great success; one joined the army, one the navy, three the church, and another became a doctor. The last, the child of his father's old age, was Samuel Taylor Coleridge (1772-1834), poet, who was born on 21 October 1772. 
In 1760 Coleridge was appointed headmaster of the King's School at Ottery St Mary and vicar of Ottery St Mary church, the largest and most important parish church in Devon. He published articles on biblical scholarship in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' and helped Dr Benjamin Kennicott with his edition of the Hebrew 'Bible'. He also printed some idiosyncratic scholarly works, mainly by subscription raised among local worthies and admirers: 'Miscellaneous dissertations, arising from the XVIIth and XVIIIth chapters of the book of Judges' (1768), 'A critical Latin grammar: containing clear and distinct rules for boys just initiated, and notes explanatory of almost every antiquity and obscurity in the language, for youth somewhat advanced in Latin learning' (1772), and a sermon declaring that America's success in the American War of Independence was God's punishment of British sinfulness, 'Government not originally proceeding from human agency, but divine institution, shewn in a sermon preached at Ottery St Mary, Devon, December 13th 1776, on the fast-day, appointed by reason of our much to be lamented American War' (1777). Samuel Taylor Coleridge declared that his father's works went largely unnoticed and unread. His reputation seems not to have spread much beyond Devon, where he was admired for his scholarship -- his 'Miscellaneous Dissertations' lists over 300 subscribers -- and his Sunday sermons. 
Coleridge died suddenly, probably of apoplexy, at the age of sixty-two, in the early morning of 6 October 1781, only hours after returning home to the School House at Ottery from Plymouth, where he had enlisted his second youngest son, Francis, as a midshipman. He was buried on 10 October in the chancel of Ottery St Mary church. His death had severe consequences for his precocious youngest son, who on losing his father also lost his home and was sent the following year, aged nine, to London as a boarder at Christ's Hospital school. 
Coleridge was, by all accounts, including that of Samuel, who relished comparisons between himself and his beloved father, an original -- an absent-minded scholar, bookish, enthusiastic, careless of his appearance, 'an Israelite without guile', 'a perfect Parson Adams' ('Collected Letters', 1.310, 355), of whom it was told that he once mistook the apron of his female neighbour at dinner for his own shirt, stuffing it into his trousers, and on another occasion appeared before his bishop with a shaven head, having forgotten to put on his wig (Gillman, 3-4, 5). 


@@@@@


doc= 5886


Coleridge, John Duke, first Baron Coleridge (1820-1894), judge, was born at 7 Hadlow Street, London, on 3 December 1820, the eldest son of Sir John Taylor Coleridge (1790-1876), barrister and judge, and his wife, Mary (1788-1874), the daughter of the Revd Gilbert Buchanan DD, vicar of Northfleet and rector of Woodmansterne. Reporting his birth in a letter to John May (Bodl. Oxf., MS Eng. lett. c. 289 ), his father observed 'The Lord Chancellor for 1865 made his appearance this morning about 6'. Henry James Coleridge was his younger brother. Coleridge was educated at Eton College (from which he was very nearly expelled for an unspeakable offence in May 1833) and at Balliol College, Oxford, where he was elected a scholar in 1838. He was a frequent speaker at the Oxford Union, of which he was president in Michaelmas term 1843. On 27 February 1840 he moved a motion highly critical of the way in which the House of Commons was handling the issue of parliamentary privilege. His speech impressed the 'Morning Post', and the motion was carried by fifty votes to nine. He was also a member of the Decade, a select debating society in Balliol, whose other members included Jowett, Clough, and Matthew Arnold. He took a keen interest in the Tractarian movement and was profoundly influenced by John Henry Newman. Severe and prolonged illness in 1842 interrupted his studies and he graduated with an ordinary pass degree. Ill health was a recurrent feature of his life, assailing him in 1855, when he became recorder of Portsmouth; in the form of typhus in October 1859; most dramatically in March 1863, when he was taken suddenly ill in the middle of a case at Exeter assizes; and in the long vacation in 1871 in the middle of the Tichborne trial. He took his MA in 1846, however, and was elected to a fellowship at Exeter College, which he held from 1843 until his marriage on 11 August 1846 to Jane Fortescue Seymour, third daughter of the Revd George Turner Seymour of Farringford Hill on the Isle of Wight, and sister of his Balliol contemporary, J. B. Seymour. 
Coleridge was called to the bar by the Middle Temple on 6 November 1846, and practised from chambers in 3 King's Bench Walk until 1864. It was a difficult time for a young barrister with a family and with uncertain health. In 1847 there were nearly twice as many barristers on the western circuit as there had been thirty years earlier; the 'County Courts Act' 1846 had removed the small cases, and there was a general lack of civil business. The turning point in Coleridge's career came at Exeter assizes in March 1853 with his defence of George Sparkes, the Clayhidon murderer. He made a brilliant speech, ending with a quotation from 'Othello' and the words of the communion collect, which 'produced an immense sensation' ('The Times'). As his seniors, Montague Smith, Robert Collier, and Thomas Phinn, took silk, he built up a large junior practice. In 1855 he resisted the temptation to become clerk of the assize on the midland circuit, and was appointed recorder of Portsmouth, a position he held until 1866. By the summer of 1860 he had the largest junior practice on the western circuit. In that year his fees reached $4000. 
Coleridge was reluctant to apply for silk because of the risks involved, but in February 1861 Lord Chancellor Campbell offered a silk gown both to him and to his fellow Devonian, personal friend, and professional rival, John Karslake. They took silk together on 25 February 1861 and were elected together as benchers of the Middle Temple. The western circuit had never been stronger than it was in those years. The leader was Montague Smith, a future judge of the common pleas and the privy council, and there were three future attorneys-general, Collier, Karslake, and Coleridge. Those four completely dominated the circuit, and when Karslake became solicitor-general in 1866 Coleridge became leader of the circuit until 1868. He relied heavily on his juniors, Montague Bere and, especially, Charles Bowen, who first appeared before him at Portsmouth sessions in October 1861. In 1867, the last full year before he became solicitor-general, his fees amounted to $12,200. 
Coleridge was always politically ambitious. In August 1847, when Gladstone was elected for Oxford University, Coleridge was joint secretary of his London committee. For many years he was tempted to enter parliament himself. By education and family background he was a high-church tory, and he was approached several times as a candidate in the Conservative interest. But over the years his churchmanship became broader and his politics more liberal. 'Democratic feeling and convictions only strengthen with me every year I live... 'Delenda est aristocratia'' (letter to Sir William Heathcote, 19 August 1860, Coleridge, 'Life and Correspondence', 1.259-60). He was finally adopted as Liberal candidate to contest Exeter at a by-election in 1864 and though defeated after a short and rough campaign, which convinced him of the necessity for the ballot, he won the seat at the general election in the following year. He made his maiden speech on 21 March 1866 to propose the second reading of the 'Tests Abolition (Oxford) Bill', and he was actively involved in the campaign to abolish religious tests in the universities until it finally succeeded in 1871. Oxford University made him a DCL in 1877, and Exeter College elected him to an honorary fellowship in 1882. In the same parliament he made major speeches against marriage with a deceased wife's sister, which he opposed firmly throughout his life, and, at Gladstone's request, moved the instruction at the committee stage of the 1867 'Reform Bill' to impose a $5 annual rating limit on the franchise. 
Re-elected for Exeter after a tight contest at the general election in November 1868, Coleridge was asked by Gladstone to be solicitor-general. He refused, apparently because of friction between himself and Collier, the attorney-general, on circuit many years before. When his refusal became public and Gladstone insisted, he agreed to accept the office, and was knighted (12 December 1868). 
In the new parliament Coleridge spoke again on university tests and in favour of Irish church disestablishment and also on law reform; but much of his time was occupied with private practice. He was leading counsel for the plaintiff in 'Saurin v. Starr', the convent case, which lasted most of February 1869. He obtained a verdict of $500 damages, and finally established his professional reputation in London. He successfully defended Overend and Gurney against a charge of fraudulent conspiracy in a nine-day trial in December in the same year. His income in 1869 was over $19,000. From May 1871 to March 1872 he spent an enormous amount of his time on the Tichborne case, with the able and devoted assistance of Charles Bowen, to the detriment of both men's health. His cross-examination of the plaintiff lasted three weeks, and his opening speech for the defendants lasted twenty-three days. By painstaking attention to detail he was able to overcome the widespread public bias in favour of the claimant, and the jury stopped the case on 6 March 1872. His attention to the case was hardly distracted in November 1871 when Collier was appointed to the court of common pleas and then immediately to the privy council, and Coleridge became attorney-general. On 3 May 1872 the practice of allowing the law officers to devote so much time to their private practice was attacked in the House of Commons, and Coleridge made a characteristically eloquent and successful defence. 
In November 1873 Chief Justice Bovill died suddenly, worn out, it is said, by the Tichborne case, and Gladstone appointed Coleridge as chief justice of the common pleas and gave him a peerage (the only chief justice of the common pleas since 1688 to receive a peerage, apart from Lord Gifford in 1824). When Sir Alexander Cockburn died on 20 November 1880, Gladstone, who had returned to power that year, appointed Coleridge as lord chief justice of England in his place, and the offices of chief justice of the common pleas and chief baron of the exchequer (vacant by the death of Sir Fitzroy Kelly) were abolished. 'He [Gladstone] did nothing for me till I entered Parliament, but he did everything for me afterwards', Coleridge commented in a letter to Grant Duff, on 16 November 1886 (Coleridge, 'Life and Correspondence' 2.354). 
Soon after Coleridge's appointment to the bench his mother, father, and wife (a distinguished portrait painter whose sitters included J. H. Newman) died in quick succession (1874, 1876, and 6 February 1878 respectively). He was devastated and for a while withdrew from society, and rifts began to appear in his family. Particular difficulties arose over his daughter, Mildred, who met Charles Warren Adams, secretary of the Anti-Vivisection Society, of which Coleridge was a keen supporter. The rest of her family thought that he was thoroughly undesirable, and when she left home to live with him, Bernard John Seymour Coleridge (later second Baron Coleridge) wrote her a long letter to say so. This led to two libel actions in the Queen's Bench Division, for two days in November 1884 and for eight days in November 1886, when the chief justice was sued in his own court and all the family linen was washed in public. Mildred married Charles Adams on 24 June 1885. Stephen William Buchanan Coleridge, the third of Coleridge's four children, also became a prominent anti-vivisectionist. 
In August 1883 Coleridge went to America as a guest of the New York Bar Association and visited New York, Boston, Chicago, and Washington. He had always been interested in America and had a number of American friends, like Ellis Yarnall, with whom he corresponded for forty years. On his way home he met Amy Augusta Jackson, daughter of Henry Baring Lawford, of the Bengal civil service. They were married on 13 August 1885. With her he found happiness again. He died at his London home, 1 Sussex Square, on 14 June 1894 and was buried at Ottery St Mary on 22 June. His second wife died on 24 May 1933. 
Coleridge presided over the trial of many 'causes celebres': 'Lonsdale v. Yates', the 'World' libel case in 1884; 'R. v. Dudley & Stephens', who had killed and eaten the cabin-boy, the only case in which a sentence of death has been passed in the Royal Courts of Justice (1884); 'Wood v. Cox', the racing libel case (1888); 'O'Donnell v. Walter' (1888); and the great Baccarat case, 'Gordon-Cumming v. Wilson' in which the prince of Wales gave evidence in court (1891). But he did not leave his mark on English law. He rarely sat on appeal, and, since cases tried on circuit were no longer reported, his decisions in civil and criminal cases on circuit have not been preserved. He was not a great lawyer: indeed his close friend Jowett went so far as to say: 'I don't think him a first rate intellect' (Quinn and Prest, 93). And his administration of the Queen's Bench Division left much to be desired. But he will be remembered for his silver-tongued eloquence and as a trial lawyer, both at the bar and on the bench. 
Coleridge was tall and handsome, and had an extremely beautiful voice. His language was refined and forcible, and no one could, on occasion, produce a greater sense of solemnity with less effort. He had an abrasive manner, which not infrequently caused friction with his colleagues, but no one could have been more loyal to his friends. He had a great love and wide knowledge of English literature, especially of the poetry and drama of the Elizabethan period. During his early years at the bar he wrote for 'The Guardian', the 'Quarterly Review', and the 'Edinburgh Review'; and there were frequent literary quotations in his speeches at the bar and in parliament, and in his judgments and summings-up on the bench. William Butterfield designed an enormous and splendid library for him at his Devonshire seat, Heath's Court, Ottery St Mary, to contain 12,000 volumes, including a substantial collection of Elizabethan literature. 


@@@@@


doc= 5887


Coleridge, Sir John Taylor (1790-1876), judge, was the second son of Colonel James Coleridge and his wife, Frances Duke, daughter of Bernard Frederick Taylor and descended from the wealthy Duke family of Otterton. A nephew of the poet Samuel Taylor Coleridge, he was born on 9 July 1790 in St Peter's Street, Tiverton, where his parents lived after their marriage until 1796, when the colonel bought Heath's Court, Ottery St Mary, from the Heath family. 
Coleridge was educated from 1796 until 1803 under his uncle, George Coleridge, at the King's School, Ottery St Mary, and then at Eton (1803-9) and Corpus Christi College, Oxford, where he was elected a scholar in 1809. At Corpus he was a friend of Keble and Arnold. His university career was one unbroken triumph. He won the chancellor's prize for Latin verse, the prizes for English and Latin essays, and the Vinerian scholarship. He was placed alone in the first class in classics in 1812 and was elected to a fellowship at Exeter College. 
In 1814 a loan from John May, a wealthy Richmond wine merchant and a friend of the family, enabled Coleridge to make a tour of the continent. Between July and December he visited Paris, Lyons, Geneva, and the north of Italy as far as Venice, Bologna, and Florence. On 7 August 1818 he married Mary (1788-1874), second daughter of the Revd Gilbert Buchanan, rector of Woodmansterne, Surrey. 
After a period as a special pleader, Coleridge was called to the bar by the Middle Temple on 26 June 1819, helped by a further loan of $1000 from John May. He practised from chambers in 2 Pump Court, Temple, and joined the western circuit and the Exeter sessions. 
The early years were financially difficult; on one occasion Coleridge was unable to pay his ironmonger and upholsterer. For the first three years he frequently walked long distances on the western circuit. He supplemented his income from other sources: by taking pupils, including Francis Baring, the future Lord Northbrook, and John Boileau; by writing articles for the 'Quarterly Review' and the 'British Critic'; by editing Blackstone's 'Commentaries'; and by being the editor of the 'Quarterly Review' in 1825. In that year he made $962 at the bar, $1000 from the 'Quarterly Review', and $500 for his edition of Blackstone. 
From 1826 Coleridge concentrated on his profession. He was leader of the Exeter sessions from 1826, and county counsel from 1827 to 1829. At his best sessions in 1827 he made more than $103. On the western circuit his progress was uneven: Serjeant Wilde was undisputed leader of the circuit from 1826 to 1834; Follett quickly overtook everyone else, but Coleridge established his position immediately after them. On 27 January 1832 he was elected recorder of Exeter by ten votes to seven against Follett. In London he had little business. He was appointed a commissioner in bankruptcy on 12 December 1827. He was counsel in the great case of 'Rowe v. Brenton' in November 1828 which brought him into contact with the leading barristers of the time and with the king's advisers. He was appointed serjeant on 14 February 1832, but his practice suffered when the court of common pleas was opened in 1834. In 1834 his income was just under $4000. By 1839 he was in a position to purchase Heath's Court from his elder brother, James Duke Coleridge. 
On 27 January 1835 Coleridge was appointed a justice of the court of king's bench by Lord Lyndhurst in the place of Mr Justice Taunton. In civil cases his judgments were learned and elegant: for example, 'Stockdale v. Hansard' (1839) in constitutional law; the 'Bishop of Hereford's case' (1848) in ecclesiastical law; and 'Lumley v. Gye' (1853) in the law of contract, a dissenting judgment which was praised by Holdsworth. He was involved in unfortunate controversy arising out of 'Pooley's case' at Bodmin assizes in 1857. Pooley was convicted of a very offensive blasphemy and sentenced by Coleridge to twenty-one months in prison, but subsequently received a free pardon on grounds of insanity. The case was used in J. S. Mill's 'On Liberty' to show that penalties for opinion still existed, and the controversy dragged on in 'Fraser's Magazine' and elsewhere. Coleridge retired from the court of queen's bench on 12 June 1858. He had been made a privy councillor on 5 June and served on the judicial committee in ecclesiastical cases for several years. He was offered a peerage by Gladstone in 1869 but refused because of the potential effect on his son's career: if he had become a peer and then died, his son, John Duke Coleridge, would have lost his position as MP and solicitor-general and, under the accepted rule at that time, the right to practise at the bar. 
Coleridge served on a number of commissions, including those on the assize circuits in 1845, on the inns of court in 1854, and on the law courts and popular education in 1858. In 1852 he received the degree of DCL at Oxford, and in 1854 he was appointed a commissioner under the 'Oxford University Act', in spite of a motion in the House of Commons to exclude him on the grounds that he was an extreme high-churchman. His published lecture entitled 'On Public School Education' (1860) contributed to the appointment of a royal commission on the public schools in 1861. 
A prolific writer, Coleridge left a manuscript journal covering the period from 1820 to 1876, of which a few extracts have been published in books about the Coleridge family. He corresponded with Arnold, Southey, Newman, Pusey, and Keble, and his 'Life of Keble' (1869) is heavily based on that correspondence. He was a close friend and admirer of the Tractarians, though never in entire agreement with them, as he made clear in his 'Life of Keble'. 
Coleridge had six children: Mary Dorothy Frances Coleridge (1819-1820); John Duke (1820-1894), the future lord chief justice; Henry James Coleridge (1822-1893), an Anglican priest who entered the Roman Catholic church in 1852; Mary Frances Keble Coleridge (1824-1898), who rejected a proposal of marriage in 1845 from Roundell Palmer, the future Lord Chancellor Selborne, to her father's deep regret; Alethea Buchanan Coleridge (1826-1909), who married J. F. Mackarness, the future bishop of Oxford; and Frederick William Coleridge (1828-1843). Coleridge's wife died on 8 March 1874; he died at Heath's Court, Ottery St Mary, on 11 February 1876 and was buried in the family vault there on 17 February. 


@@@@@


doc= 5888


Coleridge, Samuel Taylor (1772-1834), poet, critic, and philosopher, was born on 21 October 1772 at Ottery St Mary, Devon, and baptized there on 30 December, the youngest of ten children born to John Coleridge (bap. 1719, d. 1781), vicar of the town and master of the grammar school, and his second wife, Ann, 'nee' Bowden (1727-1809). There were also three surviving half-sisters by John Coleridge's first wife, who died in 1751. 
From earliest years Coleridge was singularly precocious and imaginative. 'I never thought as a Child', he said, 'never had the language of a Child' ('Notebooks', 5.6675). He early showed a devotion to books, claiming to have been able to read a book of the 'Bible' by the time he was three, and the 'Arabian Nights' when he was five. His nurse's preference for his brother Frank caused him, he said, to read at his mother's side and to play only by himself. His precociousness led to flattery from old women and to a growing unpopularity among fellow children: soon he was far more accustomed to the conversation of adults. A quarrel on one occasion in which Frank baited him as their mother's favourite led to his running away from home and staying out all night by the River Otter; he was rescued eventually by a neighbour, Sir Stafford Northcote, though not before he had suffered exposure to which he partly attributed his later rheumatic ill health. He continued to be absorbed in books, notably romances and tales of magic -- so much so that his father became alarmed and burnt some of them. 
The most traumatic experience of Coleridge's early years, in 1781 when he was nearly nine, was the sudden death of his father in the middle of an October night. Immediately before, John Coleridge had travelled to Plymouth with his son Frank, who was enlisting as a midshipman, a typical move for the Coleridge family, their mother being strongly ambitious for them -- even though her husband would have been content for them to become blacksmiths so long as they were happy. The sudden bereavement left Ann Coleridge with the difficult task of planning at short notice for the future of her precocious youngest, and she must have felt that his promise called for a course of action commensurate with his potential. According to Henry Crabb Robinson, Judge Buller, a former pupil of John Coleridge's, said he would take him to London and send him to Charterhouse, an offer which was gratefully accepted; but in the event he arranged a presentation to Christ's Hospital, a school for orphans. Despite its strong academic reputation, Coleridge claimed, the ambitious members of the family felt degraded by this eventuality and his brothers later refused to receive him in his bluecoat uniform. His mother signed the application, nevertheless, and he was accepted. Coleridge departed for London and for a time was looked after by his mother's brother, who treated him kindly and took him round coffee houses to be admired as a young prodigy; in July he was given his uniform and taken to the junior school at Hertford, where again he was treated well before being transferred in the autumn to the great school itself. 
Plucked from Devon surroundings where he was looked up to locally while enjoying the intense emotions of family life, and set down in the impersonal surroundings of a late eighteenth-century London school, Coleridge evidently found it hard to forgive his mother for countenancing the dramatic change; it probably accounts for a coldness in their subsequent relationship. Life at Christ's Hospital, as described both by his friend Charles Lamb in 'Christ's Hospital five-and-thirty years ago', and by himself in poems such as 'Frost at Midnight' and his verse 'Letter to Sara Hutchinson', was harsh. Food was poor and meagre, the dormitories spartan; the reaction of the young Coleridge was apparently one of depression and recalcitrance. Despite his omnivorous reading, he acquired in the lower school a reputation for dullness and ineptitude marked by a general unwillingness to learn simple rules of syntax; his older friend Thomas Middleton found him reading Virgil for pleasure, however, and reported the fact admiringly to the headmaster. Boyer, a man of brusque Johnsonian common sense, took notice and ensured that he was put in the way of becoming a Grecian; being addicted also to the infliction of corporal punishment after the pedagogic practices of the time, however, he in no way relaxed his discipline, and Coleridge, while respecting his teaching abilities, maintained that his severities haunted the nightmares of his later life. 
The rigours of the school were by no means unremitting. Coleridge was initially received at Buller's house, but imagining himself slighted by being put at the lower table he soon stayed proudly away. Although feeling lonely and neglected as a result, he continued to be entertained occasionally at his uncle's house. His bookishness was meanwhile assisted by a strange incident. A passer-by in the street against whom he struck a glancing blow mistook him for a pickpocket, and relented only on being told that his sweeping gesture had been that of Leander swimming the Hellespont; he was then sufficiently impressed to make Coleridge free of Thomas Boosey's lending library in Cheapside, where he proceeded to devour his way through the whole catalogue. Coleridge describes the effects of this mixture of physical deprivation and imaginative richness on him at fourteen vividly: how he would find himself in Robinson Crusoe's island, 'finding a Mountain of Plum Cake, and eating out a room for myself, and then eating it into the shapes of Chairs & Tables -- Hunger and Fancy -- ' ('Notebooks', 5.6675). His brothers George and Luke both went to London, and Coleridge, walking the wards of the London Hospital with Luke and delighted if he could hold a plaster or attend the dressings, became for a time eager to pursue medicine as his career. At another time, not relishing the prospect of proceeding to university, he decided to become apprenticed to a neighbouring friendly shoemaker (possibly hoping to follow in the footsteps of his hero the shoemaker mystic Jacob Boehme). The man accordingly approached Boyer for permission, to be met with such a storm of anger that he retreated forthwith. 
Coleridge went on to 'bewilder' himself -- a term suggesting Milton's argumentative devils -- in metaphysics and theological controversy (Coleridge, 'Biographia literaria', 'Collected Works', 7/1.15). A declaration of allegiance to the principles of Voltaire occasioned a flogging of particular severity -- the only just flogging, he later claimed, that he ever received at Boyer's hands. A different fruit of his reading was an enthusiasm for the Neoplatonists, whose writings were being translated by Thomas Taylor; Middleton meanwhile introduced him to the poetry of William Lisle Bowles. Nor can he have been unaware of religious developments in London such as the advent of Swedenborgianism, or of the events abroad that were changing human thought -- the making of a new sovereign state in America, the stirrings that were shortly to produce the French Revolution. 
Other diversions of Coleridge's schooldays included swimming: a dip in the New River with all his clothes on was followed by an attack of jaundice and rheumatic fever that exacted a long period in the school sick ward. He also formed another attachment. Mrs Evans, mother of one of his schoolfellows, he came to regard as a mother more adequate than his own, while Mary, one of her daughters, was the object of his first intense love: they soon agreed that they 'thought in all things alike' ('Collected Letters', 1.113). In summer 1789 he revisited Ottery for the first time in many years. 
Coleridge left Christ's Hospital on 7 September 1790 and was appointed by his school to an exhibition of $40 a year in the following January, being admitted in his absence as a sizar at Jesus College, Cambridge, on 5 February 1791. He entered into residence the following October, was made a pensioner on 5 November 1791, and matriculated on 31 March 1792. At Jesus he also held a Rustat scholarship, restricted to the sons of clergymen and worth about $25 a year, and was subsequently made chapel clerk; on 5 June 1793 he was elected a foundation scholar. In his first year he seems to have worked hard, encouraged by Middleton (then in his last year at Pembroke College) and won the Browne medal for classical poetry with a Greek Sapphic ode on the slave trade which he read at Commencement. The summer was spent in Ottery, where among other things he helped a friend prepare a paper on recent poetry, probably for the Society of Gentlemen at Exeter. 
The following academic year was more eventful. With events in France building up towards the terror, politics were under intense discussion. Charles Le Grice later recalled how the group he belonged to would meet in the evening to discuss the latest pamphlet: 'There was no need of having the book before us. Coleridge had read it in the morning, and in the evening he would repeat whole pages verbatim' (Chambers, 20). In the university, meanwhile, attention became focused on the trial of William Frend, fellow of Jesus College, for publishing a tract, 'Peace and Union Recommended', in which he attacked the liturgy of the church, expressing views which the authorities, apprehensive, like many in the country at that time, of possibly seditious activities, regarded as dangerous to church and king. At Frend's trial in the Senate House in May 1793 Coleridge was prominent among the undergraduates who thronged the gallery, and narrowly escaped punishment for vociferous applause. After Frend was banished from the university (though without losing the benefit of his college fellowship) Coleridge continued to see him through shared acquaintances in London such as Lamb and George Dyer. 
After another visit to his Devon relatives in the long vacation Coleridge returned to college where he participated in a literary group convened by Christopher Wordsworth, expressing his enthusiasm for Neoplatonic philosophy and the poetry of Bowles and reporting to them that his west country associates had rated highly the recently published poems of Christopher's older brother William. By now, problems were accruing. Debts had mounted for Coleridge, beginning with his rashness in ordering furniture thoughtlessly for his college room. He had hoped to meet them first by winning the Craven studentship (for which he was in the final four, the award being made, however, to the youngest) and then by winning the Browne medal again with his Greek 'Ode to Astronomy', but was this time unsuccessful. Earlier in the year, in February, he was addressing Mary Evans 'with the ardour of fraternal friendship' ('Collected Letters', 1.52) while being, by his later account, desperately in love with her and knowing that she reciprocated his feelings, yet not daring to declare his love, given his lack of means to support her. Instead, he plunged into a course of life which included associations which he was privately to term his 'Unchastities' (ibid., 2.734). His description in 1803 of a dream in which Sal Hall, a Cambridge prostitute, was importuning him and his account in 1799 to Godwin of waking up in a house of ill fame in London in December that year offer clues to this part of his life. 
In December, at his wits' end, Coleridge fled to London. There, after spending his last money on a lottery ticket which failed to win, writing a poem on the event, and contemplating suicide, he presented himself as a volunteer for the 15th light dragoons under the assumed name Silas Tomkyn Comberbache. Despite the family tradition of military service, it is a measure of his desperation that he was willing to put himself at the service of an army already engaged in a war so unpopular with him and his friends; it is an indication of the army's current need for men that it was willing to enlist so unpromising a recruit. Coleridge described himself as 'a very indocile Equestrian' ('Collected Letters', 1.66) and means were soon found by which he could serve without training directly for battle. Meanwhile he took no great steps to guard his anonymity, if accounts are to be believed of how he startled officers by casual interventions betraying his conversancy with the classical languages; eventually his identity was unmasked through a chance meeting in the street with some college friends. Penitent letters to his brothers at the beginning of February were followed by the purchase of his discharge, and he returned to Cambridge, where, it is recorded, he was 'admonished by the Master in the presence of the Fellows' on 12 April 1794. 
In spite of this reprieve and his acceptance of the penalties that accompanied it, Coleridge had been unsettled by his military experience and found it hard to resume a normal academic life. By mid-June he was setting off with a companion, Joseph Hucks, for a walking tour to north Wales. On the way they stopped in Oxford, hoping to find subscribers for Coleridge's projected 'Imitations from the Modern Latin Poets', and called on his fellow Grecian Bob Allen, who introduced him to a Balliol undergraduate, Robert Southey (1774-1843). The two young men got on so well that the Welsh tour was delayed for three weeks while they discussed the parlous state of current civilization and brooded on a democratic alternative. Then Coleridge set off on the tour to the Snowdon region, which was marked by an unexpected event: attending church at Wrexham, he saw Mary Evans's sister Anne, and afterwards Mary herself passing his inn. The effect of seeing her again was so overwhelming that social and political questions were momentarily driven from his mind. 
On returning to Bristol these questions again assumed full prominence, as the scheme which Southey and Coleridge came to call Pantisocracy (from the Greek, 'government by all equally') took shape -- strongly influenced no doubt by the departure earlier that year of Joseph Priestley for America with a plan (never fully carried out) to found a settlement in Pennsylvania on the banks of the Susquehannah. The young men's version was for a community in the same area of North America, consisting of twelve young men and twelve young women who would marry and bring up their children in innocence of the corrupt traditions and conventions of the Europe they had left behind, educating them in principles of wisdom and benevolence that would ensure a better new generation. Opportunely, they came to know the family of Mrs Fricker, a widow whose daughters seemed likely and willing to provide the desired female companionship; Southey was attached to Edith, while Coleridge interested himself in her sister Sara. An important addition to their circle of acquaintance came with a visit to Thomas Poole, an independent-minded tanner at Nether Stowey, who combined social concern with strong common sense, and who listened sympathetically to their ideas. There would be no private property; according to Poole the men expected to labour for two or three hours each morning to support the colony (basing their figure on Adam Smith's calculation that only one-twentieth of working time in Britain was spent on productive labour), while their leisure hours would be devoted to study, discussion, and the education of the children. 
As time passed, the planning was dogged by difficulties: the problem of raising sufficient money for the passage, questions such as whether further relatives should accompany them, or servants should have equal status. Coleridge returned for the Michaelmas term to Cambridge, where Pantisocracy became a central topic of interest and controversy. He defended the scheme against all comers but met strong criticisms, including a friend's sharp comment that 'the women' would spoil it ('Collected Letters', 1.122). Women were indeed proving to be a problem in another manner. Coleridge had promised to write to Sara but was failing to do so, and his allegiance to the scheme received a sharp set-back when he unexpectedly received a thoughtful and finely phrased letter from Mary Evans, recalling the closeness of their intellectual companionship and exercising all her rational powers in an attempt to dissuade him from the Pantisocratic venture. His feelings for her swept back. Hearing that she was engaged to be married, he wrote shortly after to ask if the story was true, at last declaring his love. Her reply, which has not survived, was evidently a death blow to his hopes. Having left Cambridge during the term to pay a visit to London he lingered, drinking egg-hot, smoking Oronooko, and exchanging condolences with the recently jilted Lamb, while delighting all by his conversation. Southey, increasingly disquieted, wrote pointing out that he must make his intentions clear to Sara, who was being pursued by other men. Eventually he went to London and Coleridge, still mourning the loss of Mary Evans ('my ideal standard of female excellence rises not above that woman'; ibid., 1.145), was reclaimed for Pantisocracy and Sara Fricker. 
The two young men now set up as lecturers in Bristol, with Coleridge speaking on political issues of the day such as the slave trade and then undertaking a series entitled 'On revealed religion, its corruptions and its political views'. Politically, he was sailing near the wind, given the recent actions of the government against persons supposed guilty of seditious statements, but the collapse of the London treason trials at the end of 1794 had acted as a safeguard for free speech. His views, attacking the government and the war against France but also condemning the violence of the French Revolution, with a call for wider education and strong criticisms concerning current political abuses of language, were tolerated or ignored. 
In October, still acting on the sense of duty instilled by Southey, Coleridge married Sara Fricker (1770-1845). The apprehension he felt was increased by the fact that the church, St Mary Redcliffe in Bristol, was closely associated with the poet Thomas Chatterton. The couple spent their honeymoon in nearby Clevedon, where Coleridge showed his growing poetic and speculative capabilities in 'The Eolian Harp', written there probably just before their marriage. He was surprised at his contentment, writing to Southey in November, 'I love and I am beloved, and I am happy!' ('Collected Letters', 1.164). Another poem soon followed, 'Reflections on Having Left a Place of Retirement', when he left Sara for a time while he returned to Bristol, intent on finding a way of meeting his growing responsibilities. In the poem's last line, voicing his future commitment to 'Science, Freedom and the Truth in Christ', Coleridge summarized succinctly the guiding principles of his reformist views, based on those of the admired Priestley and his enthusiasm for scientific investigation, libertarian politics, and Unitarian religion. The Pantisocratic scheme, meanwhile, quietly collapsed, a chief factor being Southey's unwillingness to proceed. 
As an important gateway to America and a central outlet of the sugar trade, Bristol was at this time an important centre for new movements and ideas, creating new wealth in the district and not only stimulating a spirit of enterprise, enquiry, and libertarianism but raising political issues such as the employment of slaves in the West Indian plantations. After considering various alternatives, Coleridge decided to start a journal of his own devoted primarily to such matters, to be called 'The Watchman'. A tour to the midlands and north canvassing potential support produced enough subscriptions to make the project a practical one while enabling him to meet leading figures of the day such as Erasmus Darwin and Joseph Wright at Derby. The first number appeared on 1 March 1796, bearing the 'seditious' -- yet biblical -- motto, 'That all may know the Truth; and that the Truth may make us free!' Publishing every eighth day to avoid the weekly stamp tax, Coleridge relied heavily on extraneous sources, but could also use much writing, including verse, of his own. The magazine lasted for ten issues. In April he also published his first verse collection, 'Poems on Various Subjects', beginning with his 'Monody on the Death of Chatterton' and ending with the long 'Religious Musings', where he eulogized both Priestley and a new hero, David Hartley, related to his growing psychological interests. 'Metaphysics, & Poetry, & 'Facts of Mind'', he wrote to Thelwall in November, 'are my darling studies' ('Collected Letters', 1.260). The evidence of his reading is that he was constantly trying to bring together esoteric psychological insights -- especially from the Neoplatonists and from modern investigators -- to throw more light on the human mind. 
Subventions from his friends and a grant of $10 from the Royal Society of Literature helped cover Coleridge's losses but the need to find a means of support was now urgent. An offer of a tutorship fell through, that of a London co-editorship was turned down. An important new association was with William Wordsworth (1770-1850), met the previous year in Bristol and currently living with his sister Dorothy (1771-1855) at Racedown in Dorset: in May Coleridge referred to him as 'a very dear friend... in my opinion the best poet of the age' ('Collected Letters', 1.215). Awareness of the Wordsworths' frugal way of life may have prompted a new plan, following the birth of his first child -- named (David) Hartley Coleridge (1796-1849) in honour of his new hero -- to find a cottage at Stowey near Tom Poole where he might bring up his children 'in the simplicity of peasants, their food, dress and habits completely rustic' (ibid., 1.240). Early in December he wrote to Poole asking him to buy a cottage available there in Lime Street, which Poole (reluctant on grounds of its smallness and dampness) was eventually persuaded by his entreaties to do. The little family moved there at the end of the year. 
At the invitation of Sheridan, Coleridge began writing a play, 'Osorio', for production at Drury Lane, hoping for recognition and some financial reward; he also prepared a new edition of his poems for publication by Cottle. A visit from Wordsworth in March prompted a visit to both William and Dorothy at Racedown, where Dorothy responded enthusiastically to his intelligence. Both poets had now finished tragedies, which they read to one another. After a fortnight William returned with Coleridge to Stowey, where he was joined by his sister at the beginning of July; a neighbouring mansion, Alfoxden, being temporarily vacant, Poole negotiated a lease and they moved in shortly afterwards. This initiated an intensively productive period for the three, in which writing was coupled with frequent walks in the Quantocks and beyond, Dorothy's acute sensibility acting as a powerful stimulus to both men. Coleridge entered on the most brilliant period of his career: although oppressed by severe doubts about his ultimate religious beliefs, he was excited by the world of speculation opened out by scientific discoveries concerning oxygen and the vital powers of the human body. 
In July Coleridge was visited by Lamb, who joined the walk described in the poem 'This Lime-Tree Bower my Prison', and John Thelwall, whose theories of vitality had recently intrigued him. Having recently been tried and narrowly escaped being found guilty of treason as a result of his progressive political views, Thelwall wished for a quiet place of retirement and hoped to find a house in the neighbourhood. By this time however alarm had been aroused locally by the abortive invasion at Fishguard and the Wordsworths were suspected of being French spies: a government agent was sent down to investigate. His report from Stowey, which has survived in the Home Office papers (domestic, vol. 137, Geo. III, 1797), stated that 'a sett of violent Democrats' had taken possession of Alfoxden; they were not French but a mischievous group of disaffected Englishmen, known to be in contact with Thelwall and with the Tom Poole who had established a 'Poor Man's Club' in the town. Coleridge advised Thelwall that it would not be easy to find a house for him nor politic for him to settle so close. 
A few weeks later a new and important figure made his presence felt. Thomas Wedgwood, who knew Wordsworth through the Pinney family and who was, with his brother Josiah, devoted to advanced thinking, had come to Bristol to be under the care of Thomas Beddoes at Clifton, being in poor health. He had recently conceived a plan for educating a genius according to the latest theories by rigidly controlling the sense impressions it received from birth onwards, with hard objects hung around it in the nursery to irritate and no time spent outdoors: 'How astonishingly the powers and produce of the mind would be increased by a fixed habit of earnest thought' (Cornwell, 177-8). The scheme was to be governed by a committee of philosophers, the only likely superintendents he knew being Wordsworth and Coleridge. In September he came over to Alfoxden and spent several days there. The details of the proposed scheme no doubt prompted both poets to reflect on what they considered the proper way of educating genius in children -- not by exerting an iron control over all their sense impressions, but by encouraging cultivation of their imagination, even -- in Wordsworth's view at least -- a freedom to run wild. 
Collaboration between them flourished. Early in November the three set out on an excursion to Linton and the Valley of Stones in the course of which a poem was planned, to be called 'The Wanderings of Cain'. In the event Coleridge produced only a draft -- and then mostly in prose -- while Wordsworth found himself powerless, but different possibilities arose. It may well have been during this same walking tour (in one account, Coleridge, 'Poems', 232, Coleridge refers to 'the fall of the year') that the 'retirement between Lynton & Porlock' ('Notebooks', 3.4006) took place, during which Coleridge, having taken 'two grains of Opium... to check a dysentery', composed in 'a sort of Reverie' (Coleridge, 'Poems', 232) his poem 'Kubla Khan', to be recited in company on several subsequent occasions and published nearly twenty years later as a 'psychological curiosity' (ibid., 228). (The 'Cain' scheme may help to explain some of the imagery of the poem, as well as the significance of the name 'Can', spelt thus in the manuscript version.) Coleridge's account in the 1816 preface of being interrupted by 'a person on business from Porlock' whose visit blocked completion of the poem, though in all probability a fiction, has found a permanent place in subsequent literary tradition. In mid-November Dorothy Wordsworth reported that the three had undertaken another, shorter expedition, during which the two poets had laid the plan for a ballad, to be published with some pieces by her brother. This was the first conception of 'The Rime of the Ancient Mariner' and of 'Lyrical Ballads', the volume in which it was published. Although the work was planned jointly, Wordsworth recorded that Coleridge's invention soon took over the ballad as a whole. Just as the content of 'Kubla Khan' had been determined by Coleridge's previous readings in poetry and mythology, he was able to draw for this new poem on his reading in travel literature, supplemented by these same sources. Recognizing it also as a contribution to the growing literature of the supernatural, he planned a further poem, 'Christabel', where he hoped to be even more successful in casting a spell of imagination over a story realistically narrated. 
These were not the only poetic fruits of 1797. In the autumn an enlarged version of Coleridge's 'Poems' appeared, freshly entitled 'Poems, to which are now Added, Poems by Charles Lamb and Charles Lloyd'. Any gratification his two friends might have felt at being included in the same collection seeped away, however, when he sent to the 'Monthly Magazine' under the pseudonym of Nehemiah Higginbottom three 'Sonnets attempted in the manner of contemporary poets', in which, according to his own account, he satirized the defects of all three authors, including himself -- notably an 'affectation of unaffectedness' and a cult of 'simplicity'. Lamb and Lloyd were not amused by what they took to be directed primarily against themselves. Lloyd, meanwhile, was producing his novel 'Edmund Oliver'. Coleridge, thinking the hero's 'love-fit, debaucheries, leaving college & going into the army' were clearly based on his own ('Collected Letters', 1.404), was resentful in his turn at the breach of confidence. 
In December Coleridge was invited to stay at Cote House, near Bristol, where the Wedgwoods' brother-in-law James Mackintosh, a gifted philosopher, was impressed by his capabilities and recommended him to his late wife's brother Daniel Stuart, now editor of the 'Morning Post'. The introduction produced helpful offers of work but Coleridge still faced the need to find a settled income to support his growing family. Tom Wedgwood wrote with his brother Josiah shortly after to express concern at his having to look for an inevitably time-consuming profession when he might be developing his talents through further study, and enclosing a draft for $100. Coleridge first wrote, with Poole's encouragement, to accept then decided to return it, on the grounds that he needed a more permanent source of income. 
Coleridge had recently been preaching by invitation in Unitarian chapels in his neighbourhood and, according to his own later account, was coming to be thought of by some as the 'rising star' of the movement. His friend J. P. Estlin, the minister in Bristol, had heard that John Rowe, the current minister at Shrewsbury, was planning to join him in Bristol and arranged for him to be considered for the vacant post. Accordingly, Coleridge travelled to the Shropshire town, though he thought it unlikely he would be appointed, to meet and preach to the congregation there. Among those present was the young William Hazlitt (1778-1830), who had walked 10 miles from Wem and who described the occasion in his essay 'My first acquaintance with poets': 'Coleridge rose and gave out his text 'And he went up into the mountain to pray, HIMSELF ALONE'... and when he came to the two last words, which he pronounced loud, deep and distinct, it seemed to me who was then young, as if the words had echoed from the bottom of the human heart, and as if that prayer might have floated in solemn silence through the universe. ('Complete Works', 17.108-9)' Coleridge, he recalled, discoursed on the necessary separation between the spirit of the world and that of Christianity, describing vividly the evils of militarism: aware that Shrewsbury was home to many aristocrats he was no doubt anxious to put all his cards on the table straight away. He told Hazlitt, similarly, that before accepting the post at Shrewsbury he would have preached two sermons, one on infant baptism, the other on the Lord's supper, showing that he could not administer either. He was attracted by the Shrewsbury post, particularly since its doctrinal requirements would have been minimal: 'it will be necessary for me, in order to my continuance, to believe that Jesus Christ was the Messiah -- in all other points I may play off my intellect 'ad libitum'' ('Collected Letters', 1.366). While he was considering the position, however, he received a further letter from the Wedgwoods containing the unconditional offer of an annuity of $150 per annum, which after no more than a little thought he accepted, withdrawing his candidacy, looking after Mr Rowe's duty for two weeks, and then returning to Stowey. Hazlitt, who had been enchanted by the visit, was invited to visit Nether Stowey in the spring and did so. 
Coleridge was now faced with the need to organize his life in accordance with his newly found independence. The judgement of a later biographer that 'perhaps the worst thing possible had happened to him' since 'it was time for him... to take up his share of the economic burden which is... the common lot of humanity' (Chambers, 90) is hard to support, given the flowering of his genius during the period that immediately followed. In these months he wrote 'Frost at Midnight', completed the 'Ancient Mariner', and produced one or two more contributions for the 'Lyrical Ballads' volume. Considering how he might best spend his time in accordance with the hopes of the Wedgwoods, he concluded that he should fulfil a plan he had been nursing for some time by spending a period in Germany and following the current intellectual developments there, in fields ranging from nervous physiology to biblical criticism. William and Dorothy Wordsworth, whose lease of Alfoxden had not been renewed, agreed to join him. All three no doubt looked forward to seeing life under a political system differing significantly from that in their own country and in the disappointing France, where suppression of the Swiss cantons had led Coleridge to write a poem, called first 'Recantation' and then 'France: an Ode', to mourn the eclipse of liberty signalled by that event, and publish it with 'Frost at Midnight' and 'Fears in Solitude'. (The two men may also have been apprehensive at the possibility of being called on for military service, but there is no direct evidence to support this.) 
On 16 September the three friends set sail from Yarmouth, accompanied by John Chester, a neighbour and admirer in Stowey. Having arrived in Hamburg, then a centre of political intrigue owing to the international tensions of the war, they called on the poet Klopstock and made their way south, the Wordsworths to Goslar, where they hoped to live cheaply, and Coleridge first to learn the German language at Ratzeburg, then to the university town of Gottingen, at this time one of the most stimulating centres of learning in Europe. Coleridge benefited from his stay in various ways. He was instructed in the language by Tychsen and Benecke and studied the origins of German poetry, particularly the Minnesinger; acquainted himself with Eichhorn's biblical criticism (considerably in advance of similar studies in England); talked with the Kantian philosophers, acquiring a knowledge of the rich Spinozist tradition; and heard the physiological lectures of Blumenbach, to whom he had an introduction. Only in the last case did he suffer a set-back; if he was hoping to hear about the latest work on hypnotism (which had made brief appearances in the original 'Ancient Mariner') it must have been dispiriting to discover that Blumenbach did not even believe in the existence of the phenomenon. 
In February Coleridge's second son Berkeley, born the previous May, died of convulsions, but he did not hear the news until April. He was discouraged by Poole from returning home immediately and in the event did not arrive until late July, having in the meantime undertaken walking tours to the Brocken and elsewhere. It is likely that his failure to be with his wife during this time contributed to the subsequent rift between them. 
The situation had changed in other ways. Whether or not Coleridge recognized the fact at the time, the German stay had proved to be a turning point in his career. He could not simply return to the provincial English society he had left and take up the threads as he had left them. Although he did not formally acknowledge the fact at the time, his enthusiasm for Unitarianism, also, was dying. Instead he was working out the implications of Spinozism as encountered in Germany. A new and exciting acquaintance was with Humphry Davy, Spinozist poet and experimenter with nitrous oxide, Beddoes's young assistant in Bristol, who was shortly to move to London, where Coleridge would attend his lectures 'to increase his stock of metaphors' (Paris, 1.138). Much as he might strive for a continuity with his earlier west country life, talking to Poole and planning a joint poem on Muhammad with Southey, his true magnetism was to the Wordsworths, now in the north. At Sockburn in co. Durham in October he found them visiting their childhood friends Mary Hutchinson (later William's wife) and her sister Sara, and set off with William and his brother John on a walking tour of the Lake District. At the end he returned to Sockburn, where he fell in love with Sara Hutchinson as they stood together by the fire one evening. 
Next Coleridge travelled south to London, where Daniel Stuart had recently offered him a post as staff writer on the 'Morning Post', enabling him to comment directly on current political events. Exactly how much influence he wielded is hard to determine, and after his death Stuart claimed that his subsequent estimates had been exaggerated. Yet it was a time when the public was especially in need of informed commentary, and the contemporary format of newspapers, consisting mainly of news and advertisements, made contributions such as Coleridge's more prominent. He and Stuart discussed politics constantly, following his changing views during the previous decade: while his dislike of Pitt remained constant, his attitude towards France wavered between a warmth engendered by his earlier radicalism and a forceful patriotism prompted by current French aggression and the fears of invasion. The rise of Napoleon presented the greatest challenge. Coleridge perceived at once that he was a man of 'commanding genius' ('His Times', 'Collected Works', 3/1.208-10) but at first cast him as a French version of General Washington, saving the republic by adherence to strong principles; when it became clear that Napoleon was embarking on a career of conquest, he warned his fellow countrymen not to underestimate his powers. Since some of his articles made a considerable impact, Coleridge's belief that he became a marked man later in Italy need not be lightly discounted. 
In London Coleridge worked intensively for a few months, not only reporting on the parliamentary debates and writing political commentaries but translating Schiller's 'Wallenstein'. He also enjoyed the company of William Godwin, seen for a time as a potential ally in developing the radical potentialities of the new age: 'Let me tell you, Godwin!' he wrote in May, 'four such men as you, I, Davy, & Wordsworth, do not meet together in one house every day of the year -- I mean four men so distinct with so many sympathies' ('Collected Letters', 1.588). He was also moving a good deal in literary society more generally: he cultivated some fashionable women writers, among them Mary 'Perdita' Robinson, who addressed poems to him and to his new baby son, Derwent Coleridge (1800-1883), and to whom he wrote a poem of his own, 'A Stranger Minstrel'. 
Political feelings were currently running high, particularly with the publication of 'The Anti-Jacobin', in which, along with his poetic associates, Coleridge found himself lampooned. He turned against James Mackintosh, who had recently abjured the principles of support for the French Revolution set forth in his 'Vindiciae Gallicae' (1791) and had attacked Godwin in the 'Introductory discourse' to a series of planned lectures. Taking Godwin's part, Coleridge wrote a scurrilous poem, 'Two Round Spaces on the Tombstone', published anonymously in the 'Morning Post', and satirized Mackintosh in some lines which Stuart found too personal to include. In April he visited the Wordsworths in Grasmere, collaborating on a second edition of 'Lyrical Ballads'; resolving to settle his family locally, he negotiated successfully to acquire Greta Hall in Keswick. On the way to take up residence, in July 1800, they stayed in Liverpool, where he met several of the local literati, including James Currie, William Roscoe, and William Rathbone. He was impressed by the wealth displayed in such institutions as their Athenaeum, but not unmindful of its source. 'The slave-merchants of Liverpool', he wrote to Poole, 'fly over the head of the slave-merchants of Bristol, as Vultures over carrion crows' ('Collected Letters', 1.608). 
The move to Keswick signalled a further shift in Coleridge's plans for himself. Instead of a London based group which might have rallied the talents of Davy, Godwin, and Wordsworth to a radical new thinking, he had now committed himself more specifically to the Wordsworth circle (including of course Sara Hutchinson) and to William's dream of writing great poetry from the vantage point of retirement in his native countryside. Coleridge's activities in the subsequent period varied between writing articles and poems for London, mostly for the 'Morning Post', and work toward a more important achievement, largely to be carried out away from the metropolis. (De Quincey, in June 1803, heard to his surprise that Coleridge intended to 'astonish the world with a 'Metaphysical' work... on which he intends to found his fame' ('Diary of Thomas de Quincy', 191).) He set to work on studies of thinkers ranging from the ancients, through scholastic writers such as Aquinas to the volumes of Kant he had acquired from Germany -- all with the aim of undermining the suppositions of eighteenth-century philosophy. His attitude to Kant was ambiguous. On the one hand he was deeply impressed, naming several works, the 'clearness and evidence' of which 'took possession of me as with a giant's hand' (Coleridge, 'Biographia literaria', 'Collected Works', 7/1.153); but when he found Kant identifying the Will with the practical Reason, he questioned his authority: 'Again & again he is a wretched Psychologist' ('Notebooks', 1.1717). Nevertheless he was to absorb and use Kant's terms so thoroughly as to be accused of plagiarism; it has even been suggested that he did not properly understand Kant's thinking -- though it would be truer to say that he could not always believe Kant had meant exactly what he said and so sometimes imposed his own construction. In the course of these studies Coleridge's health suffered, partly from overwork, partly from rheumatic disorders associated with the dampness of his new surroundings. Increasingly he took laudanum, at this time the common remedy for such disorders, gradually realizing that he had become addicted. His own account threw some of the blame on the 'Kendal black drop', a notorious local concoction, which he probably took during the first winter at Greta Hall, and on his discovering in an old medical journal a case similar to his own in which a patient had been cured by rubbing laudanum into the swollen joints while taking it internally, trying it with results that seemed at first miraculous but afterwards proved enslaving. 
These accounts should be examined with care, given the known tendency of opium addicts to distort facts concerning their condition. Coleridge clearly found the effects of laudanum pleasant from an early stage, writing to his brother George in 1798, 'you, I believe, know how divine that repose is, what a spot of enchantment, a green spot of fountain and flowers and trees in the very heart of a waste of sands!' The 'Kubla Khan'-like imagery causes one to wonder whether he may have sometimes turned to opium in the hope of repeating the miracle that had produced that poem. Some of his accounts of experiences of heightened sensibility -- especially in states of convalescence -- may also owe something to opium. He distinguished between sensibility and sensuality, however, denying that he had ever taken opium purely for pleasure: 'My sole sensuality was 'not' to be in pain' ('Notebooks', 2.2368). It is possible to accept his claim without supposing that either his intellectual curiosity or his liking of comfortable sensations was ever suppressed. Before the penalties of his addiction became apparent, he could regard such fruits simply as a pleasant bonus. 
Meanwhile Coleridge's domestic life deteriorated. Despite her devotion to their children, Sara's lack of warm sensibility and hastiness of temper rendered his existence with her, as he put it a few years later, 'incompatible with even an endurable Life' ('Collected Letters', 3.7). For sympathy he turned increasingly to Sara Hutchinson, who spent periods both in Grasmere and Keswick. She in turn felt the strain of the relationship, particularly since he insisted that his marriage was indissoluble. After a visit to London at Christmas 1801 he wrote more newspaper articles and in late February went to Gallow Hill in Yorkshire, where he found Sara ill and helped nurse her in her new home; after his return to Keswick he wrote a verse letter expressing his despair which was later pared to less than half its length, readdressed to Wordsworth, given the title 'Dejection: an Ode', and published on the Wordsworths' wedding day, 4 October 1802. A final child, Sara Coleridge (1802-1852), was born in December. 
In the following summer, while Mary Wordsworth recovered from the premature birth of her first child, Coleridge, Dorothy, and William decided to renew their threefold companionship on a trip with a jaunting car into Scotland. After a time Coleridge separated from them, setting off to Fort Augustus (where he was briefly arrested as a suspected spy) and then to Fort William and Perth. During this period Southey and his wife, Sara Coleridge's sister, took up residence at Greta Hall. There they stayed for the rest of their lives as Southey assumed control of the house and became increasingly responsible for bringing up Coleridge's family as well as his own. Coleridge, meanwhile, nursed plans to create an ''Instrument' of practical Reasoning in the business of real Life' ('Collected Letters', 2.947). He had spent time in close discussion of such matters with Thomas Wedgwood (whose health was declining and who was to die, probably of cancer, in 1805). 
At first sight, Coleridge's output during this period looks disappointing: the translation of 'Wallenstein' (1800), a handful of poems -- few of unimpeachable quality -- and some pieces of political journalism. Yet when his letters, full of seminal thoughts, and his notebooks, with their enquiring and intelligent observations -- some made in the quiet night watches when he was ill -- are also included, the picture is transformed. 
With his intermittent illnesses (not to mention the continuing effects of opium) Coleridge came to feel that his best hope was to spend time in a warmer, drier climate. After considering Madeira and other destinations he opted for Malta (a patriotic gesture, given the island's precarious status in the current war with France) and set sail from Portsmouth on 9 April 1804, arriving some six weeks later. Once there, he was taken up by the high commissioner, Sir Alexander Ball, whom he was to eulogize later in 'The Friend'. Asked to perform secretarial duties for a small salary he gained insights into administration, enhanced when he was made acting public secretary the following January; he was not, however, liked by his clerk, who, like Poole and De Quincey, noticed a practice of reproducing the same impressive information for the benefit of successive people. During the autumn he travelled in Sicily and ascended Etna. 
Early in February John Wordsworth was drowned when the 'Earl of Abergavenny', of which he was captain, sank off Portland Bill. Coleridge, receiving the news at the end of March, was deeply distressed, all the more since he had believed that Sara Hutchinson, still the subject of yearning notebook entries, might have found married happiness with John on his return. From now on he made plans to travel back to England (overland, since he dreaded another sea voyage). The stay in Malta had not improved his health and he was increasingly dependent on opium and spirits; he was also oppressed by the noise there. 
During this period Coleridge was continuing the long reappraisal of his religious position that had begun during his period of doubt at Stowey. Having been drawn first to Spinozism and then to a combination of the thinking of Plato and St John, he had for a time put his previous allegiances on hold, expressing in 1802 to Estlin, his chief Unitarian friend, a wish that religious deism could flourish in France, being closer to true religion than the ''gross' Idolatry of Popery', together with his belief that Quakers and Unitarians were the only Christians pure from idolatry ('Collected Letters', 2.893). By 1805 he had come to believe in the centrality of the Trinity: not 'the inanity of Jehovah, Christ and the Dove' but 'the adorable Tri-unity of Being, Intellect, and Spiritual Action' ('Notebooks', 2.2444). On 12 February he summed up his new position in the phrase 'no Trinity, no God' (ibid., 2.2446). 
For some months Coleridge could not leave Malta owing to the absence of the new public secretary, E. T. Chapman, who was away buying grain for the beleaguered island. When on 23 September 1805 he finally found himself free to leave, he visited Sicily again and then proceeded to Naples, probably with a British troopship. Despite Napoleon's victory at Austerlitz, which left him free to attack Italy, Coleridge set off for Rome in December and decided to stay, disregarding rumours of imminent invasion. He met Ludwig Tieck, and translated one of his love lyrics, and made contact with a number of artists under the patronage of Wilhelm von Humboldt, the Prussian minister. The beginning of a long, admiring friendship with the painter Washington Allston may have been a chief inducement to his prolonged stay. When Napoleon ordered all British travellers out of Rome he moved through the 'heavenly country' ('Notebooks', 2.2856) of the Arno valley to Pisa, making notes there in the Campo Santo, and Leghorn, from which (an overland journey being now debarred by Napoleon's ascendancy) he finally sailed on 23 June 1806. 
On 11 August, after a journey dogged by opium-related medical troubles and a period of quarantine, Coleridge landed at Stangate Creek in Kent and offered a prayer of thanksgiving at a 'curious little chapel' ('Collected Letters', 2.1176). Finding it difficult to meet his wife he moved between various addresses in the south, taking up residence in September at the offices of Daniel Stuart's 'Courier' in the Strand. A month later he was writing on religious questions, including his renewed Trinitarianism, and negotiating to give lectures at the Royal and London institutions. Resolved on separation from his wife, he renewed contact with the Wordsworths, who were dismayed at his changed appearance, and spent a period with them and Sara Hutchinson at a farmhouse at Coleorton in Leicestershire which had been offered them by Sir George Beaumont. 
This stay was marked by extremes of emotion: on the one hand a growing jealousy of the relationship between Sara Hutchinson and Wordsworth culminated in an incident on 27 December when Coleridge imagined that he saw them in bed together; on the other a reading by Wordsworth on 7 January of the 'Poem to Coleridge' (later 'The Prelude'), which had been enlarged to full length during his absence, prompted the composition of a long poem of his own entitled 'To W. Wordsworth' (published ten years later as 'To a Gentleman', 'Poems', 436-43) in which, regaining his best poetic style, he expressed his admiration for Wordsworth's achievement and mourned his own predicament. 
Part of the separation agreed with his wife was an understanding that Coleridge should take charge of his sons. Feeling the need to reconcile his family at Ottery to the changed circumstances of his domestic life, he arranged a trip with his wife and children to the west country in the summer. Although the family visit was not achieved, illness at Ottery intervening, there was a profitable reunion with Poole; the trip also resulted in his first meeting with De Quincey, who subsequently escorted Sara Coleridge twice to Keswick and made Coleridge an anonymous gift of $300, which he agreed to accept as a loan. 
After illness during the autumn of 1807 and renewed contact with an old Bristol friend, John Morgan, whose wife and sister nursed him, Coleridge moved to London to prepare for lectures on 'Poetry and the principles of taste' at the Royal Institution. These were delayed first by Humphry Davy's indisposition and then by illnesses of his own which also prevented him from arriving at all on some occasions, to the irritation of his fashionable audiences. Later, as the lectures became regular, they gained in popularity. A double lecture on education, given at the end on 4 May to compensate for those missed, proved controversial in its advocacy of the principles of his friend Andrew Bell as against those of Joseph Lancaster and offended the proprietors of the institution. He concluded the lectures after giving eighteen. 
During the summer Coleridge spent some time with the Clarkson family at Bury St Edmunds, and reviewed Thomas Clarkson's 'History of the Slave Trade' for the 'Edinburgh Review'. A letter to his brother George reproaching him for not having received them the previous summer was answered by one in which his brother said that he considered the separation from his wife 'an irreligious act' ('Collected Letters', 3.705). By now Coleridge was making plans for a new journal, 'The Friend', again to be produced mainly by himself, which would deal not with the events of the day but with the questions of principle raised by them. In September he settled with the Wordsworth family at their recently acquired house in Grasmere, Allan Bank, where he planned to look after his children and work on his new venture, with Sara Hutchinson as amanuensis: it was to be printed at Penrith, calling for a journey on foot over the fells from Grasmere every time a fresh number was ready. Despite the apprehension of some of his friends that it would never appear, and Wordsworth's feeling that this might be as well since Coleridge was unfitted by temperament for any course of action demanding application, a week with Wordsworth's friend Thomas Wilkinson during which he was kept without stimulants helped him to produce the first number on 1 June. From then on, although dogged by problems concerning the supply of stamped paper for its printing, 'The Friend' appeared steadily if irregularly until the twenty-eight issue in March 1810, assisted by contributions from Wordsworth (the first of his 'Essays upon epitaphs' and a fragment of the 'Poem to Coleridge') and Christopher North (John Wilson). Coleridge drew on a variety of sources and subjects, including letters he had sent home from Germany and recollections of Sir Alexander Ball in Malta, but his prime object was to attack the French revolutionary thinkers and their forerunners, comparing Voltaire unfavourably with Erasmus and Rousseau with Luther, and work towards the establishment of better principles in public life. His arguments, which he shared with Wordsworth, helped to establish a principled conservatism in the England of the time. 
Eventually 'The Friend' lapsed, its demise hastened by the departure of Sara Hutchinson; she left Grasmere, tired, to join her brothers in their recently acquired Welsh farm; Coleridge moved to Keswick for a time, teaching his wife and daughter Italian. He thought that Sara's withdrawal had been secretly encouraged by the Wordsworths, and his suspicions were supported when Montagu, accompanying him on a visit to London, where he hoped to gain help in overcoming his continuing opium problem, told him that Wordsworth had warned him against entertaining Coleridge in his house, and had 'commissioned' him to say that he had been an absolute nuisance in his own and that he had no hope of him. The Wordsworths had privately used the expression 'no hope' about him, and Dorothy had described the difficulties of having him as an inmate ('Letters of William and Dorothy Wordsworth', 2.397-9), but it is unlikely that Wordsworth had intended to convey their sentiments so directly, however great the provocation. Coleridge was shattered not only by the information but by the means which, as he thought, had been chosen to convey it; he moved to Hudson's Hotel in Covent Garden and nursed his wounds, recalling his constant support for his friend. Meanwhile he kept up outward appearances, powdering his hair, and presenting himself sleek and conversational in company; Lamb described with relish the fate and supposed sentiments of 'goblet after goblet' as he downed them ('Letters of Charles and Mary Lamb', 3.62). The Wordsworths, hearing such reports, failed to grasp the extent of his grievance and did nothing; only private notebook entries fully expressed his despair: 'Whirled about without a center -- as in a nightmair -- no gravity -- a vortex without a center', and 'No hope of me! absolute nuisance! God's mercy is it a Dream!' ('Notebooks', 3.3999, 3997). He turned to the Morgans again and lived with them for a time in Hammersmith. At the same time he wrote long notes about the foundations of his Christian faith, mingling them with remonstrances concerning the Wordsworths' behaviour. 
Coleridge was helped at this time by the restored presence of Washington Allston, who had taken up residence in London. Coleridge seems to have found in him an acceptable substitute for Wordsworth and was delighted by the 'spiritual' element in his painting, expressed often through images of illumination; he promoted his interests in both London and Bristol, and showed notable perseverance in looking after him when he fell ill a little later. In the autumn he planned a new series of lectures, on the English poets, which began at Scot's Corporation Room, Fleet Street, in November 1811. Byron and Samuel Rogers were among those who attended one or more; 'incomparably the best' of them, according to Henry Crabb Robinson, was in December, on love in 'Romeo and Juliet' ('Henry Crabb Robinson', 1.54). In the later lectures, at least, Coleridge drew on Schlegel, whose lectures had been published in 1809-10, after his previous series; his own view of the organic was much more subtly developed than Schlegel's, however, and, like his view of Hamlet's introspectiveness, seminal for future criticism. His sense that he had 'a smack of Hamlet' himself (Coleridge, 'Table Talk', 'Collected Works', 14/2.61) struck a chord with his listeners: when he dwelt on the harmful effects of Hamlet's procrastination, one of them remarked 'this is a satire on himself', to which Crabb Robinson replied, 'No, it is an Elegy' (Coleridge, 'Lectures', 'Collected Works', 5/1.391). 
New work for 'The Courier' during 1811 was not so successful as previous contributions had been; the regularity of his contributions gradually lapsed into more occasional writing, which however continued until 1818. Interest in 'The Friend' was growing, on the other hand, and Coleridge went to the Lakes early in 1812 to organize materials for a reprint. This was his last visit to the area; passing through Grasmere he did not call on the Wordsworths, to the distress of his children. Wordsworth himself left for London in April, hoping to effect a reconciliation; this, after some correspondence on both sides and largely through the good offices of Crabb Robinson, was achieved in May. On 11 May national attention was arrested by the assassination of the prime minister, Spencer Perceval, in the House of Commons; Coleridge hurried to 'The Courier' office to offer his services. His new course of lectures at Willis's Rooms, due to begin next day and postponed for a week as a result of the news, was largely devoted to the drama; by now he seems to have evolved a method of lecturing extempore, while still having a copy of Schlegel to which he could refer. Wordsworth attended some of these lectures and walked with Coleridge, but the relationship was no longer the same. 
In the autumn Coleridge's drama 'Osorio', now renamed 'Remorse', was accepted for early production at Drury Lane and he published with Southey a joint collection of their notes and observations under the title 'Omniana'. At this point Josiah Wedgwood wrote to say that in his present financial state he could no longer afford to continue paying his half of the annuity unless it should appear that he was 'bound in honour to do so' ('Collected Letters', 3.420). Coleridge accepted the position gracefully, while stating in his reply that he had been much calumniated by others -- a claim which Wedgwood resisted (ibid., 421 and n.). The remaining half of the Wedgwood annuity, left in trust by Tom, had been made over to Mrs Coleridge; Coleridge had also taken out an insurance policy on his own life, the payments being kept up until his death. During the winter he gave lectures at the Surrey Institute and in January 1813 'Remorse' was produced with considerable success, to be published later in the year. 
A new crisis arose when John Morgan, in whose household Coleridge had been living, first fell ill and then was made bankrupt; while he took refuge in Ireland, Coleridge showed considerable business acumen in devising rescue plans. He also devoted himself to the welfare of Morgan's wife and sister-in-law; there are signs that he found in them substitutes for the lost Hutchinson sisters, with Charlotte at least vestigially a surrogate Sara. During the autumn he met Madame de Stael, who described his conversation as ''tout a fait un monologue'' (Southey, 2.332n.), and delivered a further series of lectures on Shakespeare and on education. In December he settled Mrs Morgan and Charlotte Brent for the time being at Ashley, near Box in Wiltshire, and stayed there from time to time. Subsequently he was taken ill at the Greyhound Hotel in Bath and remained in the area for several months in a state of crisis, including guilt about opium. When he felt well enough to deliver a set of lectures on Milton at Bristol in April he alienated his old friend Estlin by his description of Milton's Satan as a scoffing Socinian, while Cottle, grasping for the first time the extent of his addiction, urged him to efforts of will power -- eliciting the reproach, 'You bid me rouse myself -- go, bid a man paralytic in both arms rub them briskly together, & that will cure him' ('Collected Letters', 3.477). Simultaneously, discovering the saintly Archbishop Leighton and his commentary on '1 Peter' (later a nucleus for his 'Aids to Reflection') he wrote repentant notes in its margins. He also called on Hannah More, who told Wilberforce how delighted she was to hear strong evangelical doctrines from this erstwhile Unitarian. 
This was the nadir of Coleridge's career. From the summer of 1814, with the help of his Bristol friend Josiah Wade, he began to plan new work. He outlined his scheme for a work on 'the communicative intelligence in nature and in man' ('Collected Works', 11/1.369-70) in which he adumbrated his later writing on the Logos and gave further substance to his long-standing plan for a great work offering a new Christian philosophy for the age. In December he moved with the Morgans to the house of a Mr Page, a surgeon at Calne in Wiltshire, where in the course of the next year he moved a good deal in local society and delivered a speech against the 'Corn Bill' in the market place. A plan to bring together his poems in a new collection led him to ask Wordsworth for a copy of the poem addressed to him and to offer a few criticisms of the recently published 'Excursion' -- prompting in turn an attempt to elaborate his critical ideas further in the context of his own life and thought. What was first thought of as a preface to the new collection became his 'Biographia literaria': not a straightforward or full autobiography, but a more digressive account of his life in the course of which he both explained his objections to the associationist theories of Hartley and offered searching criticisms of Wordsworth's poems -- while still asserting him to be the greatest poet of the age. Much more was embraced, however. His ideas of literary growth produced the theory of 'desynonymization', by which words, like twigs and leaves on a tree, gradually diverged and differentiated their meanings. His prime example was the distinction between 'fancy' and 'imagination', expressing the difference between a mechanical making and a creative artistic power linked to the divine. Towards the end of what was to be the first volume (uneasy, perhaps, at the pantheistic implications of such ideas) he drew increasingly on the ideas, and even the phrasing, of Schelling, in a manner condemned by later writers. In the second he mounted a detailed criticism of the social theory of the preface to 'Lyrical Ballads' (to which he himself had contributed) arguing against the idea of a 'natural' language existing among the lower classes and in favour of the one cultivated by living in a Christian civilization. Much of the discourse was written down by John Morgan at his dictation, a mode of composition he increasingly favoured. He thought of writing a tragedy, but in the end settled on a 'Dramatic Entertainment', which he entitled 'Zapolya: a Christmas Tale' (published 1817). This was in due course offered to both Covent Garden and Drury Lane but was rejected by both; it was eventually performed for ten nights at the Surrey Theatre in February 1818. 
1816 was a notable year. In April Coleridge met Byron, who had been urging John Murray to publish 'Christabel', and read 'Kubla Khan' to him a few days before he left England for good. One result was the publication of both poems, together with 'The Pains of Sleep', a poem which Coleridge no doubt felt ought to appear alongside 'Kubla Khan' as a corrective to any temptation to laudanum taking that might be encouraged by its preface. The little volume appeared in May, and despite unfavourable reviews was reprinted twice during the year. In April Coleridge also took the momentous step of appearing (with the proof sheets of 'Christabel' in his hand) at the door of the house of James Gillman, a Highgate surgeon, and asking to be taken in as an inmate to help cure his addiction; in the event he was to stay for the rest of his life. Continuing to dictate to Morgan there he also wrote for 'The Courier' and began preparing two 'Lay Sermons', the first of which, 'The Statesman's Manual, or, the Bible the Best Guide to Political Skill and Foresight' (particularly notable for its distinction between 'symbol' and 'allegory', pp. 30-31), appeared in December. This and the 'Christabel' volume were both bitterly attacked in the 'Edinburgh Review' by Hazlitt, who resented the accounts of an earlier lakeland escapade of his that he believed Coleridge to have circulated in London and denounced him as a renegade from his earlier political principles. Coleridge poured out his own bitterness to a new acquaintance and admirer of 'The Friend', Hugh J. Rose. 
After the second 'Lay Sermon', 'Addressed to the Higher and Middle Classes, on the Existing Distresses and Discontents', a response to contemporary post-war unrest, appeared in April 1817, 'Biographia literaria' finally saw the light of day, along with the new collection of Coleridge's poems now entitled 'Sibylline Leaves', in July. During the spring Coleridge had negotiated with their publisher, Rest Fenner, towards publishing an encyclopaedia, the 'Encyclopaedia metropolitana', which would attempt to present the sum of contemporary knowledge in an ordered form. The negotiations fell through, since the publisher required him to live in Camberwell where his work could be more closely monitored, but Coleridge did produce a 'Preliminary treatise on method' which appeared as a 'General introduction' to the finished work and was a basis for the essays on method in the revised 'Friend'. (The 'Encyclopaedia metropolitana' became an important forerunner of other modern encyclopaedic enterprises.) During the summer he renewed acquaintance with Ludwig Tieck, first encountered in Rome, a welcome harbinger of contacts with Germany which were now being renewed following the conclusion of the Napoleonic wars. Coleridge learned among other things that Blumenbach had abandoned his doubts concerning hypnotic phenomena, prompting him both to revive his own interest and to follow the current wave of interest in 'Naturphilosophie'. For some years he explored such possibilities with his new friend and disciple the surgeon Joseph Henry Green. After a holiday at Littlehampton, in the course of which he met H. F. Cary, the translator of Dante, he lectured in December to the London Philosophical Society on the principles of experimental philosophy and met Wordsworth again. Just as Byron had taken exception to Coleridge's attack on Maturin in 'Biographia literaria', however, Wordsworth had evidently been offended by some criticisms of his own poetry there and appeared cold and scornful. 
1818 began with the delivery of fourteen lectures on the history of philosophy -- a familiar method for Coleridge to adopt when wishing to prime the pump of his intellect for work on a difficult subject -- to the London Philosophical Society, where he met a new friend and disciple, Thomas Allsop. He also became disillusioned by the behaviour of Rest Fenner (shortly to become bankrupt) and negotiated with the more respectable publishers Taylor and Hessey, who took over until the mid-1820s. In the spring he championed the cause of the child labourers in the cotton mills and wrote several pamphlets in support of Sir Robert Peel's bill to regulate their employment. He also undertook a major revision of 'The Friend', adding the essays on method, where his ideas of growth were set out more fully, and reordering the whole more coherently. At the turn of the year he began delivering his lectures on philosophy again, along with six on Shakespeare, at the Crown and Anchor in the Strand, continuing until March. On 11 April 1819, while walking with Green in Highgate, he encountered a 'loose, not well-dressed youth' (Coleridge, 'Table Talk', 'Collected Works', 14/1.325), a former student at Guy's Hospital who had known Green as his demonstrator, and who after seeking permission walked with the pair for about 2 miles. This was John Keats, who set down a list of the things covered as Coleridge 'broached a thousand things' ('Letters of John Keats', 2.88) including nightingales and dreams: to the untutored eye a rich gallimaufry of unrelated topics, but to someone more familiar with his thought an interlinked disquisition concerning the imaginative consciousness. Coleridge later recalled an impression of feverishness in Keats's farewell handshake which had, he claimed, made him think he had not long to live. 
A few days later Hartley Coleridge, whose university education at Oxford had been supported largely by Coleridge's relations and friends, was elected, to his father's delight, to a probationary fellowship at Oriel College. Coleridge exerted himself further on the question of child labour as Peel's bill passed the Lords, and began writing from time to time for 'Blackwood's Magazine'. His summer holiday was spent with the Gillmans at Ramsgate, which became their favourite resort in the years following. At this time, also, it was felt by Coleridge's admirers that some records of his extraordinary conversation ought to be kept; Allsop was an early recorder, to be followed from 1822 onwards by Coleridge's nephew, Henry Nelson Coleridge (1798-1843), whose notes from then until Coleridge's death formed the basis of the posthumous volumes of 'Table Talk' (1835, 1836). 
The conclusion of Coleridge's lectures in March 1820 left him with the desire to concentrate on his great work, for which he continued to make plans. In May, however, there was a severe set-back in his private life when the fellows of Oriel College refused to renew Hartley's probationary fellowship on the ground of irregular behaviour, including drunkenness. Coleridge, anxiously aware of the implications of his own addiction, wrote a heartfelt and eloquent plea to the provost of the college, Edward Copleston, without success. His own work was becoming more religious in character, with Green acting as the amanuensis for his work on the 'Old' and 'New Testaments'. Early in 1821 he reported good progress on a treatise on logic; he also gave some writing on Prometheus to Hartley, hoping that he might be stimulated to work of his own on the subject. Sundays in that year were devoted to work with Green on his larger work, the 'Assertion of Religion'. Feeling once again meanwhile the need to produce some work of more immediate benefit he turned back to the works of Archbishop Leighton, which had so impressed him at the time of his spiritual crisis in 1814 and proposed to John Murray a selection of his 'Beauties', with comments of his own. At the same time he continued to prepare for his larger work by dictating his 'Logic' to two young men, C. B. Stutfield and John Watson. 
Although no further poems on the scale of the unfinished 'Christabel' had been forthcoming, Coleridge never stopped writing verse. He contented himself often with light contributions that could be entered in private albums or included in letters but he also contributed to the increasingly fashionable annuals, keepsakes, and general drawing-room literature, sometimes using such occasions for heartfelt meditations on lost love. By constantly experimenting with new forms and metres he demonstrated yet again his extraordinary versatility. From the 1820s, moreover, the critical climate changed. The adverse criticism that had greeted his poetry in the previous decade, when a stance of incomprehension often masked political hostility, gave way to more sympathetic accounts, pioneered by J. G. Lockhart's article in 'Blackwood's Magazine' in 1820. Such eulogies often dwelt on the new kind of music to be heard in his lines. 
The voice of criticism was still raised occasionally, directed now toward Coleridge's prose, with thinly veiled insinuations of plagiarism, as with the ''Noctes ambrosianae'' dialogue, attributed to John Wilson, in the October 1823 issue of 'Blackwood's', in which the 'Opium-eater' is made to characterize him as 'a thief', albeit 'a man of surpassing talents'. 'Strip him of his stolen goods, and you will find good clothes of his own below' (p. 500). The best comment on this and related aspects of his personality was Wordsworth's: 'The activity of his imagination, which I must call morbid, disturbs his sense & recollection of facts' (Coleridge, 'Table Talk', 'Collected Works', 14/1.546): his occasional cavalier way with the truth ought, in other words, to be regarded as the defect of his distinctive excellences. It also enabled an expansiveness in conversation. From November 1823, when the Gillmans moved to The Grove in Highgate, with an extended bookroom upstairs where Coleridge could entertain guests for his 'Attic nights' ('Collected Letters', 5.368), it became common to call on Thursdays and hear the greatest talker of his time holding forth by the hour in what he admitted were all too often his ''oneversazioni'' (ibid., 6.790). Earlier that autumn at Ramsgate he enjoyed the renewal of another old intimacy when he re-encountered Sara Hutchinson, who reported his comment that kissing a baby was 'the next best thing to Bathing in the Sea' ('Letters of Sara Hutchinson', 263). Their paths had already crossed in London through common acquaintance with the Monkhouse family and they met socially on subsequent occasions, her kindly behaviour to him possibly prompting the bitter poem 'The Pang more Sharp than All'. 
The 'Beauties of Leighton' scheme having been declined, along with a proposal that Murray should publish the 'Logic', Coleridge offered the Leighton volume to the publishers Taylor and Hessey in August 1823 under the title 'Aids to reflection' and they accepted, agreeing to include a life of Leighton (afterwards dropped from the scheme), and also to publish his 'Logic' manuscript (the 'Elements of discourse'), followed by the ambitious 'Assertion of religion'. The main body of the Leighton volume, meanwhile, which had begun by following the original scheme fairly closely, began to change shape as Coleridge completed his groupings of 'Prudential' and 'Moral and Religious' aphorisms and moved into the final one, devoted to the 'Spiritual'. The task of defining this for his culture brought to a head many of his most difficult problems. How far could the spiritual be aligned with the natural? Despite the fact that the earlier pages were already in proof, the scope of the work spread as Coleridge drew on passages from other early Anglican writers. Some of his comments were affected by anxieties about Derwent and his association with sceptical friends at Cambridge, including the young T. B. Macaulay (about which after a time he was able to report more reassuring news). In February 1824 he reported that the volume had been 'growing and new-forming itself' ('Collected Letters', 5.333) under his hand. 
Early in 1824, when Coleridge was visited by his wife and daughter, he was delighted to discover how marvellously the intellectual and imaginative powers of the young Sara had developed: she was, he said, 'every thing (save that her Health is delicate) that the fondest & most ambitious Parent could pray for' ('Collected Letters', 5.336). During her visit Henry Nelson Coleridge's diary recorded that he had become secretly engaged to her -- an attachment which was to cause Coleridge anxiety in view of the dangers associated with marriage between first cousins. 
Work towards completion of Coleridge's volume was affected by other events. In March he was elected a 'royal associate' of the Royal Society of Literature, with an annuity of $100 in return for a yearly essay. A misunderstanding of some sort with the Gillmans arose shortly afterwards, and he withdrew from their house for a few weeks, before a reconciliation brought him back. In June he was visited by Carlyle, whose acid, not altogether unappreciative, account in his 'Life of John Sterling' (1851) became famous, and in January 1825 Gioacchino de' Prati introduced him to the work of Giambattista Vico, which delighted him. March saw him delivering his first (and, as it proved, only) essay to the Royal Society of Literature, on the Prometheus of Aeschylus. 

'Aids to reflection in the formation of a manly character on the several grounds of prudence, morality, and religion' was finally published in June. The bishop of London (prompted by the Beaumonts) expressed his approval and favourable opinions came not only from previous well-wishers but from some who, like Joseph Blanco White -- a refugee priest from Spain who found its arguments a powerful support for the Anglicanism which he had since espoused -- were discovering him for the first time. Among enthusiasts for the volume was James Marsh, president of the University of Vermont, who liked it for encouraging its readers to think for themselves and more particularly for opposing 'pseudo-Calvinism'. Although Coleridge the poet had long had his admirers in North America, Marsh's American edition of 'Aids to Reflection' initiated a new wave of praise for him there as a religious thinker. Following the first crossing of the Atlantic under steam in 1826 a number of prominent Americans such as James Fenimore Cooper and Emma Willard visited him in succeeding years. 
Encouraged by the appearance of 'Aids to Reflection', Coleridge proposed six new disquisitions to Taylor and Hessey: on faith; on the eucharist; on the philosophy of prayer; on the Hebrew prophets; on the church; and on the use of the scriptures. Of these the last already existed, to be published only after his death as 'Confessions of an Inquiring Spirit' (1840). His delay may have been partly due to diffidence about presenting for general publication a view of books of the 'Bible' challenging uncritical and total acceptance of their inspiration while in his notebooks extensive work on the interpretation of others such as 'Genesis' was more or less taking for granted their divine status. He was also attracted for a time to the eloquent preaching of Edward Irving, the current focus of fashionable religious attention in London through his interpretations of biblical prophecy; soon, however, he became disturbed by Irving's lack of intellectual discipline. 
The great work or 'Logosophia' (referred to also as his 'Opus maximum') was again resumed, though the 'Logic' (thought of by some twentieth-century writers as the most coherent among Coleridge's achieved philosophical works) found no publisher and remained in manuscript. The major effort of his writing, meanwhile, went increasingly into marginal annotations on other writers and into the notebooks he had kept since youth -- fragmentary observations and critical comments which would not find full reproduction and commentary until more than a hundred years later. He was also generous with his time to those who visited him in a spirit of discipleship and free enquiry, including John Sterling, A. H. Hallam, and Richard Monckton Milnes, early members of the Cambridge Apostles. 
Former coolnesses were forgotten when Coleridge agreed at short notice to accompany Wordsworth and his daughter Dora on a tour of the Rhineland and the Netherlands from late June to early August 1828. He was in particularly good spirits that summer. His poetical works, which had gradually been growing over the years, were published in three volumes by Pickering -- not the last edition in his lifetime but the last to be produced fully under his supervision. During these years he could also be gay. In 1824 Robinson met him at a 'dance and rout' at the house of Joseph Henry Green, and heard him declaim on his favourite topics in the dancing-room (Robinson, 1.307). On 18 August 1828 he participated in a bachelor dinner party during which he and Theodore Hook threw glasses through the window panes and then participated in a sport of throwing forks at wineglasses. Lockhart described his 'roseate face... lit up with animation, his large gray eye beaming, his white hair flowing, and his whole frame, as it were, radiating with intense interest' as he joined in (Chambers, 308). 
The later history of Coleridge's opium taking, meanwhile, is obscure. He reports no further struggles to free himself from overwhelming addiction, and it is clear that in some sense the battle was over. Indeed, one might think that he had left off the drug entirely were it not for the existence of letters, including some to the Highgate chemist T. H. Dunn between 1824 and 1833, which make it clear that he had obtained supplies privately for some time before and was continuing to do so. It is possible that the short rupture between himself and the Gillmans in the spring of 1824 was connected with a discovery that he had been obtaining amounts surreptitiously; what is not clear is how far Gillman himself succeeded in regularizing his supply so as to contain the addiction. Two things can be established: that in 1832, when in letters of April he wrote to Green that it was '5 weeks' since he had taken laudanum, and to H. F. Cary of the 'miracle of grace' that had worked 'a sudden emancipation from a 33 years' fearful Slavery' ('Collected Letters', 6.899, 901), and when his wife could write in August that he had 'intirely left off the use of Laudanum' but had 'suffered greatly by the effort' (Potter, 165), he ordered supplies from Dunn both in January and December, suggesting that the 'emancipation' was at best short-lived. When he was on his deathbed two years later, also, his medical attendants gave him injections of laudanum to ease his pain. 
Continued orders for opium did nothing to assist Coleridge's financial state. Having received nothing from the 1828 edition of his poetical works, he participated in a reissue of 1829 and received $30 as an advance; $20 of this was sent to Mary Morgan, who, with Charlotte Brent, was now living in poverty following John Morgan's death in 1820 and had already been helped the previous December. He also made further publishing plans. In January 1829 he negotiated with Taylor (whose partnership with Hessey had been dissolved in 1826) terms for a second edition of 'Aids to Reflection', along with two volumes of his philosophical system and one on the use of words. A month later he was forced to give up further work on the first of these projects: a revised edition of 'Aids to Reflection' did appear later in the year but from the firm of Hurst, Chance & Co., substantial alterations being found only in the early pages. 
Religion had in the meantime come to the fore among national issues, as the position of Roman Catholics was debated and George IV agreed to a discussion in cabinet in January 1829. Coleridge, who had refused in that month to sign a petition against Catholic emancipation, felt that he must clarify his own position and turned back to his former plan for a disquisition on the church, producing -- with unexpected speed considering his state of health -- his pamphlet 'On the Constitution of the Church and State'. The work, remembered particularly for advocating the establishment of a 'clerisy', an educated class between the laity and the ordained clergy that should further the purposes of the church in a Christian society, confutes the supposition that in later life his work was invariably digressive and inconclusive. Drawing on the images of vine and olive, respectively, and recalling the benefits accruing from their cultivation side by side, he argued for preserving an intimate relationship between church and state. The argument, with its relevance to current concerns, was presented clearly and cogently; only the last pages left a ragged effect. A promised appendix entitled 'What is to be done now?', which may have been intended to provide a rounded conclusion, was never in the event added. A second edition was swiftly called for, nevertheless, and although published too late to affect the issue of Catholic emancipation, the legislation for which had been passed during the year, was seen by some readers as a powerful defence of the Anglican establishment. Others such as Keble and Pusey found that dealing with its arguments led them to assert the church's independent authority and the need to avoid state interference; the meeting in 1833 which launched the resulting Tractarian movement was held at Hadleigh rectory, home of Coleridge's friend Hugh J. Rose. When Newman read the pamphlet some years later, his rejection of Coleridge's presentation of Christianity as a religion of symbols was important in driving him to find authority in the Roman Catholic church. 
In the spring of 1831 Coleridge was irritated to find a poem on which he and Southey had earlier collaborated, 'The Devil's Walk', being republished as 'by Professor Porson' and took steps to ensure its reissue with the true authorship asserted. Parliamentary reform was very much in the air; while not committing himself to print on the subject he repeatedly voiced his opposition, and, when the legislation was eventually passed, his despair. A legacy of $300 from Adam Steinmetz and an annuity by a Mrs Dashwood in the last month of his life came too late to help establish financial independence, and in his will he could bequeath to his children little more than his affection and gratitude to the Gillmans. 
Although increasingly ill, and frequently confined to his room for long periods, Coleridge found it possible in 1833 to attend the meeting of the British Association in Cambridge, where he met Michael Faraday, who, he thought, had 'the true temperament of Genius' (Coleridge, 'Table Talk', 'Collected Works', 14/1.392-3), acquired at least one new follower, William Rowan Hamilton, and complained about the hardness of the beds: 'Truly I lay down at night a man, and arose in the morning a Bruise' (ibid., 392). He was visited in London by Emerson, who was disturbed to find him by now so rigid in his religious opinions, once again found himself much restored by bathing in salt water at the sea, and composed his epitaph, in which he prayed that he might be granted forgiveness rather than fame, and after his long death-in-life attain life in death. 
In the following spring the appearance of a red erysipelas streak on his cheek, associated by him with his night on the Brocken in 1799, convinced him that his end was imminent. He lingered for four months more, but with an increasing desire for liberation from the body. His mind, he said, remained unclouded: 'I could even be witty' ('Collected Letters', 6.992). In his last years 'by-gone images, and scenes of early life' would steal into his mind 'like breezes blown from the spice-islands of Youth and Hope' -- which, he went on, were the 'two realities of this Phantom World' (ibid., 705; Coleridge, 'Table Talk', 'Collected Works', 14/2.296). 
In July Coleridge became severely ill, though still without organic disfunction, and said farewell to his friends and relatives one by one. Green was called in to hear some final words for the 'Opus maximum', a declaration of the need to reaffirm God as the absolute good who is also the eternal 'I am' and yet to preserve a distinctity, allowing for the operation of the Logos. Finally he asked to be left alone 'to meditate on his Redeemer' ('Collected Letters', 6.991). On 24 July Gillman saw him fall into a sleep which became comatose and he died at 6.30 the following morning. At his request an autopsy was carried out, revealing an unusual enlargement of his heart, apparently of thirty years' standing. 
On 2 August Coleridge's body, followed in due time by those of other members of his family, was buried in a vault in Highgate churchyard, with a number of his young followers in attendance, including Charles Stutfield and John Sterling. When a new chapel was built for Highgate School in 1866 the vault became part of the building; there was some dispute as to responsibility for its maintenance, and it fell into disrepair. Eventually, in 1961, the remains of the Coleridges were reinterred in St Michael's Church, close to the Gillmans' house in The Grove. 
Observers differed about Coleridge's physical appearance, disagreeing even about the colour of his eyes. Most agreed, however, that their first impression changed once he opened his mouth. 'He is a wonderful man', wrote Dorothy Wordsworth in June 1797. 'At first I thought him plain, that is for about three minutes: he is pale and thin, has a wide mouth, thick lips and not very good teeth, longish loose-growing half-curling rough black hair. But if you hear him speak five minutes you think no more of them. His eye is large and full, not dark but grey; such an eye as would receive from a heavy soul the dullest expression; but it speaks every emotion of his animated mind. ('Letters of William and Dorothy Wordsworth', 1.189)' Coleridge's own self-description, written a few months before, had been equally unsparing, with not dissimilar positive touches: 'my face, unless when animated by immediate eloquence, expresses great Sloth, & great, indeed almost ideotic, good nature. 'Tis a mere carcase of a face: fat, flabby, & expressive chiefly of inexpression. -- Yet I am told, that my eyes, eyebrows, & forehead are physiognomically good -- : but of this the Deponent knoweth not. As to my shape, 'tis a good shape enough if measured -- but my gait is awkward, & the walk, & the 'Whole man' indicates 'indolence capable of energies'... I cannot breathe thro' my nose -- so my mouth, with sensual thick lips, is almost always open. ('Collected Letters', 1.259-60)' In middle life he became more corpulent; Keats's account of his 'alderman-after dinner pace' (Keats, 2.88) and Carlyle's evocation of his snuffling voice as he discoursed on 'om-m-mject' and 'sum-m-mject' (Carlyle, chap. 5) develop features of his former self-description. But although his early brilliance was sapped by disappointment and illness -- to the extent that even by 1806 the Wordsworths could hardly recognize him when he returned from Malta -- his physical resilience was almost as remarkable as his mental. Lamb's comment of 1816 has become famous: 'I think his essentials not touched, he is very bad, but then he wonderfully picks up another day, and his face when he repeats his verses hath its ancient glory, an Arch angel a little damaged' ('Letters of Charles and Mary Lamb', 3.215). Lamb recalled 'Paradise Lost' (1.742-3) again in another eulogy: 'He would talk from morn to dewy eve, nor cease till far midnight; yet who ever would interrupt him, -- who would obstruct that continuous flow of converse, fetched from Helicon or Zion?' ('Works of Charles and Mary Lamb', 1.351-2). In 1829 John Wheeler's account of their first meeting added a touch of the elfin: '... soon saw an elderly man come peeping out from the shrubbery... an elderly man scarcely of medium stature, of full habit. white & long hair with a full face, full forhead, prominent orbits of eyes... His respiration rather hurried & oppressive from taking 'snuff' in great quantities. (Coleridge, 'Table Talk', 'Collected Works', 14/2.429)' All would have agreed that such itemized descriptions had little to do with their central sense of the man: 'The only man I ever met', wrote Hazlitt, 'who corresponded to the idea of a man of genius' ('Complete Works', 5.167). 
From the beginning of his career Coleridge was a polarized man -- divided between attraction to what his own powerful imagination favoured, and a sense of the demands imposed by his original clerical background. The disjunction is already present in his poem of 1795 'The Eolian Harp', where he first indulges in the delights of near-pantheist speculation on a pleasant autumn evening and then reproves himself (in the person of Sara) for indulging unhallowed thoughts. It haunted his attraction to the sympathetic temperament of Sara Hutchinson, as against his belief in the indissolubility of marriage. It also played a key part in his opium addiction, where, not understanding the nature of withdrawal symptoms, he made repeated will-driven attempts to break free of the habit, only to collapse into resumption when the painful effects of deprivation overwhelmed him. In view of his post-mortem examination it is in any case likely that his physical debilities made the need for palliatives irresistible. 
The positive benefit of Coleridge's divided nature was an ability to think and work in more than one psychic dimension. At his best he could do this brilliantly as in 'The Rime of the Ancient Mariner', where the effect of dramatizing the conflicts in his own psyche was a lack of direct consistency assisting the sense of mystery. In the case of 'Christabel' and 'Kubla Khan', where the effect was also achieved, the conflicts ran too deep to allow full completion. Yet it is not in his poems that the effects of his self-division are experienced most sharply: there and in his more poetic prose descriptions he is always capable of a sensuous brilliance and delicacy which possess a virtue all their own. It is in his more philosophical works that the reader becomes conscious again and again that by trying to reconcile the moral and the natural, the ancient and the new, Coleridge is attempting a task beyond his powers and most probably beyond the powers of any human being. Yet the same developments have served to clarify his intellectual stature, showing how far he was caught in contradictions that in time became steadily more evident to his successors. In that sense he was a great allegorical figure. 
Commentators always had difficulty in characterizing the special nature of Coleridge's achievement: indeed, his true legacy lay, perhaps, in the creativity he awakened in those he met. Lamb, Wordsworth, Hazlitt, De Quincey, Byron, and Keats, touched by him in turn, each manifested the effects in the quality of their writing. According to Thomas Arnold 'I think with all his faults old Sam was more of a great man than anyone who has lived within the four seas in my memory' (A. Stanley, 'Life and Correspondence of Thomas Arnold, D.D.', 1844, 2.56). De Quincey, in an access of extreme enthusiasm after his death, termed him 'the largest and most spacious intellect,... the subtlest and most comprehensive, that has yet existed among men' (De Quincey, 'Coleridge', 'Tait's Edinburgh Magazine', new ser., 1, 1834, 509). 
Since the early 1820s it had been in Cambridge that his standing was strongest. Julius Hare, tutor of Trinity College, recalled how under the influence of Coleridge's conversation one felt one's soul teeming and bursting 'as beneath the breath of spring' (J. C. Hare, 'Memorials of a Quiet Life', 1873, 2.87); a number of students, including John Sterling and Frederick Denison Maurice, members of the Cambridge club which came to be known as the Apostles, agreed. 'To Coleridge', said Sterling: 'I owe education. He taught me to believe that an empirical philosophy is none, that Faith is the highest Reason, that all criticism, whether of literature, laws, or manners, is blind, without the power of discerning the organic unity of the object. (J. Sterling, 'Essays and Tales', 1848, xv)' Arthur Henry Hallam, another Apostle, called him 'the good old man, most eloquent' (A. H. Hallam, 'Writings', ed. V. Motter, 1943, 42-3, 160-71). 
Thinkers such as these produced what came to be known as the broad-church movement, and in some cases the beginnings of Christian socialism. Across the Atlantic, in the same years, Coleridge's influence, while affecting writers such as Emerson and Poe, was most strongly felt in religious and theological fields, particularly in New England and Vermont. It would in time extend to a few philosophers such as John Dewey, who maintained that he had shown how one might be 'both liberal and pious' (C. Lamont, 'Dialogue on John Dewey', 1952, 15-16). It is sometimes suggested in addition that Coleridge's influence was manifested in Tractarianism, though it should be noted that Newman and his associates, despite their respect, were concerned to combat the Coleridgean idea that the church could be rescued by treating its doctrines as symbolic. Coleridge's exhortation to concentrate on the statements in the 'Bible' that 'find' the reader, and his attempt to introduce into Britain critical modes of reading the 'Bible' that had become well known in Germany, proved similarly controversial, the eventual publication of his major statement under the concessive title 'Confessions of an Inquiring Spirit' being delayed until 1840. 
More secularly minded readers who found themselves beset by the growing doubts of the time found that the account in his 'Dejection' ode of the ills induced by over-developed habits of analysis rendered with unexpected exactitude a drabness of feeling they recognized from experience: indeed, such writers might recognize in his often fragmentary and divided thinking some self-contradictions of their own. The arguments in which he urged the reader to adopt an empirical approach to Christianity on the ground that only if one did so would the truth of the doctrines be revealed had a strong appeal for minds that wished to move from such questioning to action. Meanwhile, however, in his 'Life of John Sterling', Carlyle, a great proponent of the need for action, was stirred to write a chapter which disparaged Coleridge's reputation as a sage, blaming his influence for the propagation of 'strange Centaurs, spectral Puseyisms, monstrous illusory Hybrids, and ecclesiastical Chimeras, -- which now roam the Earth in a very lamentable manner!' (pp. 69-80). 
The divided response that can be discerned even within Carlyle's account when read in full was displayed more equitably by Matthew Arnold. While censuring Coleridge's moral weaknesses he believed his view that Christianity was identical with the highest philosophy to be one of the crucial ideas for his time: 'it is true, it is deeply important, and by virtue of it Coleridge takes rank, so far as English thought is concerned, as an initiator and founder'. It was, he thought, 'henceforth the key to the whole defence of Christianity' (M. Arnold, 'Prose Works', ed. R. H. Super, 11 vols., 1960-77, 10.226-7). Arthur Hugh Clough, Thomas Arnold's star pupil and a close friend of Matthew's, was less happy with such a view, on the other hand, writing in 1841 that he kept 'wavering between admiration of his exceedingly great perceptive and analytical power and other wonderful points and inclination to turn away altogether from a man who has so great a lack of all reality and actuality' (A. Clough, 'Correspondence', ed. F. L. Mulhausser, 2 vols., 1957, 1.106). Such modified attitudes were reinforced from 1859 onwards by the impact of Darwin's 'Origin of Species', as the forcefulness of earlier arguments concerning religion and morality declined and a new intellectual and moral stringency was demanded. The possibility of defending Christianity by retreating to permanent elements that would survive the assaults currently being mounted -- a hope which Coleridge's work had seemed to support -- faded as religious significance drained from the post-Darwinian universe. 
In these circumstances Coleridge's more permanent gifts came to be found less in his religious teaching than in his poetry, his criticism, and his psychological insights, including his capacity for viewing the mind at more than one level. As his ideas were rediscovered by aesthetes of the late nineteenth century, beginning with Walter Pater, he reached a new generation through the first full collection of his 'Letters' and the selection from his notebooks entitled 'Anima poetae', both of which were edited by his grandson and published in 1895. In the twentieth century such production of his writings turned into a flood, as the letters and notebooks were both edited in full and a collected edition of his entire works, including his marginal annotations, was set in process. Running, with their notes, to about fifty volumes, they dispelled for ever the legend (which he himself had sometimes helped to propagate) that he had been unproductive. 
During the twentieth century Coleridge's reputation was sometimes affected by new movements in literary fashion. The rise of imagism at the time of the First World War prompted one study of considerable power: John Livingston Lowes's 'The Road to Xanadu' (1929), in which the remarkable visual effects in the poetry were traced to remembered images he had discovered in his reading, particularly in travel books. Unfortunately, however, Lowes disparaged Coleridge's intellectual pursuits, encouraging a view of the poetry that concentrated simply on its vividness and its associative qualities. If the other concerns were in danger of being neglected, however, other studies showed that they could not be ignored. I. A. Richards's 'Coleridge on Imagination' (1934) renewed the sense of his critical theories and their importance, while studies towards the end of the century discussed the impact of contemporary political events and the extent of his own involvement. In other work Coleridge's relevance to religious thinking continued to figure strongly, while his psychological insights, contributing to what might be termed a 'psycho-synthetic' view of the mind, received constant attention, often in the form of sidelong references rather than extended discussion. The possibilities of thinking in such a way were explored further by writers such as Virginia Woolf, whose novels and literary criticism rested on a dual mode of perception similar to his, and Ted Hughes, with his belief that every poet must, like him, create his own mythology. With the growing interest in popular culture towards the end of the century Coleridge became iconic to a larger public, his problems with opium being reinterpreted by proponents of the drug culture while his supernatural poems provided a frequent quarry for new works in art and music; such matters as the nature of his relationship with the Wordsworths and even of the 'person from Porlock' who interrupted composition of 'Kubla Khan' were explored not only in biographical studies but also in poems and dramatizations. 
This tendency towards universal approbation has not gone unchallenged. From the middle of the nineteenth century negative views included accusations of plagiarism in which the note of moral reprobation often sounded. A century later the theme was resumed in Norman Fruman's 'Coleridge: the Damaged Archangel' (1961), which surveyed extensively the range of his unacknowledged borrowings. Other writers, by contrast, stressed his originality, which the fuller publication of his writings served only to emphasize. The countless writers whose writings betray the existence of their debts would no doubt endorse the tribute of Wordsworth, whose chosen word in 1834 was the same as his sister's had been in 1797 ('Letters of William and Dorothy Wordsworth', 1.188): Coleridge was 'the most 'wonderful' man he had ever known' ('Prose Works', 3.469). 
In spite of such admiration, nevertheless, commentators have always had difficulty in characterizing the distinctive nature of Coleridge's achievement, some of the best attempts recalling John Stuart Mill's description of Coleridge and Jeremy Bentham as 'the two great seminal minds of England in their age': 'By Bentham... men have been led to ask themselves, in regard to any ancient or received opinion, Is it true? and by Coleridge, What is the meaning of it?... With Coleridge... the very fact that any doctrine had been believed by thoughtful men, and received by whole nations or generations of mankind, was part of the problem to be solved, was one of the phenomena to be accounted for. ('Mill on Bentham and Coleridge', 40, 99-100)' In that formulation Coleridge the 'inquiring spirit', the bridge-builder between ancient truths and modern growings, receives a portion of his due that has increasingly supplemented his reputation as poet and critic. 


@@@@@


doc= 5889


Coleridge, Sara (1802-1852), writer and literary editor, was born on 23 December 1802 at Greta Hall, Keswick, the youngest of the three children of Samuel Taylor Coleridge (1772-1834), poet and philosopher, and his wife, Sara Fricker Coleridge (1770-1845). Although she spent little time in the company of her father, who, estranged from his wife, preferred London to the Lake District, young Sara and her two brothers, Derwent Coleridge (1800-1883) and (David) Hartley Coleridge (1796-1849), grew up with all the benefits of living in a well-known literary household. Sharing Greta Hall with their aunt and uncle, Edith and Robert Southey (1774-1843), the Coleridges were also close friends of William Wordsworth and his family. The ongoing literary labours of Wordsworth and Southey thus ensured an almost constant stream of visitors at Greta Hall, and by the age of twenty Sara had met many of the most famous writers of her day. This stimulating environment, the excellent tutelage of her mother and uncle, her own intellectual prowess, and the impecunious state of the Coleridge family all contributed to Sara's first literary efforts. 
When in 1818 Derwent found himself unable to afford study at Cambridge, Sara and Derwent, at Southey's suggestion, together began a translation of Martin Dobrizhoffer's book on Paraguay, 'Historia de Abiponibus' (1784). Derwent soon lost interest, but Sara persisted, and in January 1822 John Murray published 'An Account of the Abiphones, an Equestrian People of Paraguay'. Three years later she published a second translation, 'The right joyous and pleasant history of the facts, tests, and prowesses of the Chevalier Bayard' (1825). By 1825 Sara had visited her father in London and had become secretly engaged to her first cousin, Henry Nelson Coleridge (1798-1843). Their engagement was long and difficult. Each suffered from ill health, and Sara had already begun to depend on opium, a dependence which, like that of her father, was to continue throughout her life. After Sara and Henry finally married on 3 September 1829, they moved to London, where Henry practised law and where it was assumed that Sara would renounce her literary labours for the more dutiful roles of wife and mother. 
Sara and Henry lived at 21 Downshire Hill, Downshire Place, Hampstead, not far from her father's house in Highgate. Sara's first child, Herbert ['see 'Coleridge, Herbert (1830-1861)], was born on 7 October 1830; her second, Edith (1832-1911), followed in July 1832. Although she continued to read widely and to maintain an impressive correspondence, Sara became an invalid soon after the birth of her children. She suffered from a variety of physical and mental ailments, all of which were exacerbated by her increasing dependence on opium. In January 1834 she gave birth to twins, Florence and Berkeley, who lived only a few days and whose deaths plunged her into depression. Her illness notwithstanding, she worked hard educating her children, and later in 1834 J. W. Parker published a collection of poems, 'Pretty Lessons in Verse for Small Children'. Although the book went through five editions in almost as many years, Sara never considered it anything more than a family project. 'Pretty Lessons' was followed in 1837 by 'Phantasmion', a long prose fairy tale with numerous poems interspersed. 
The crucial event of this period was the death of Sara's father on 25 July 1834. His 'Poetical Works' had appeared the previous January, and his death was followed by a critical reassessment of his poetical and philosophical career, the most notorious of which was Thomas De Quincey's damning four-part serial in 'Tait's Edinburgh Magazine'. Although irate about De Quincey's discussion of her father's opium addiction and his failed marriage, Sara was more upset by the charges of plagiarism, and rather than sink to the level of undignified journalism, she and her husband began an editorial campaign that was designed to protect and preserve Coleridge's reputation. Aided by Sara, Henry Nelson Coleridge published 'Table Talk' in 1835 and four volumes of 'Literary Remains' between 1836 and 1839. In addition to assisting Henry, Sara began a systematic rereading of her father's works, an exercise that required analysis of his theological and philosophical predecessors. Plagued by ill health (she had three miscarriages between 1836 and 1839) and by a move to 10 Chester Place, Regent's Park, Sara nevertheless began work on a new edition of 'Aids to Reflection' (1825). 
Henry Nelson Coleridge never lived to see that edition. In May 1842 he collapsed with degenerative nerve disease. When he died the following January, Sara, after the appropriate period of mourning, assumed control of the editorial campaign, and although she took advice from her brother Derwent and from her cousin John Taylor Coleridge, it was her vision, her labour, and her scrupulous research that kept her father's works before the public eye. After seeing the 1843 edition of 'Aids to Reflection' through the press, the second volume of which included her own long essay 'On rationalism', Sara published 'Biographia literaria' (1847), 'Notes and Lectures upon Shakespeare' (1849), 'Essays on his Own Times' (1850), and 'The Poems of Samuel Taylor Coleridge' (1852). Each new edition was accompanied by a lengthy introduction or appendix in which Coleridge's theories were explicated, defended, or qualified. Her finest achievement was her edition of the 'Biographia', which took her four years and which continues to be acknowledged by modern scholars. Her introduction to that edition itself occupies almost an entire volume. 
In addition to her editorial labours, Sara wrote two reviews for the 'Quarterly Review', the first on Tennyson's 'The Princess' for the March 1848 number, and the second on a new edition of Beaumont and Fletcher the following September. By this time an entrenched member of the London literati, Sara counted among her correspondents Joanna Baillie, Elizabeth Barrett Browning, Anna Jameson, F. D. Maurice, Henry Crabb Robinson, William Gladstone, Henry Taylor, and Aubrey de Vere. She continued to read voraciously and offered opinions on everything from the inconsistencies of the Oxford Movement to architectural excesses of the Great Exhibition. When she died at her home at 10 Chester Place, on 3 May 1852, after a long and horrific battle with breast cancer, Sara Coleridge left hundreds of pages of unpublished manuscripts -- essays, letters, journals, poems, and theological dialogues in the style of Landor's 'Imaginary Conversations'. Many were fragments. For a woman who spent the greater part of her intellectual life putting her father's literary house in order, it is the last irony that she, arguably the most Coleridgean of Coleridge's offspring, was unable to order her own. 


@@@@@


doc= 5890


Coleridge, William Hart (1789-1849), bishop of Barbados and the Leeward Islands, was the only son of Luke Herman Coleridge (brother of Samuel Taylor Coleridge) of Thorverton, Devon, and Sarah, his wife, third daughter of Richard Hart of Exeter. His father died during his infancy, and he was educated by his uncle, the Revd George Coleridge, master of the grammar school of Ottery St Mary. He entered as a commoner at Christ Church, Oxford, and graduated BA (on 21 November 1811), MA (on 1 June 1814), BD (on 17 June 1824), and DD (on 18 June 1824). 
Soon after leaving Oxford (in 1811), Coleridge became a curate at St Andrew's, Holborn, in London, and afterwards he was secretary to the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge; he was also preacher at the National Society's chapel in Ely Place. On 25 July 1824 he was consecrated bishop of Barbados and the Leeward Islands at Lambeth. In 1825, he married Sarah Elizabeth, eldest daughter of Dr Thomas Rennell, dean of Winchester and master of the Temple; she was also a granddaughter of Sir William Blackstone, the judge. They had one son and one daughter, both of whom outlived him. 
The diocese of Barbados was made up of the islands of the British West Indies with, in 1826, the addition of British Guiana. Coleridge arrived in Barbados in January 1825 and almost immediately set out on his first visit, travelling to Trinidad, Grenada, St Vincent, and St Lucia. He found the diocese in an unsatisfactory condition, judging that the number of clergymen and churches was insufficient, and that there were too few daily schools and Sunday schools. In his first charge (delivered in 1830) he felt able to congratulate the congregation on the improved spiritual condition of the black population who, he noted, had almost entirely abandoned traditional grieving customs such as lamenting the dead with loud cries and leaving food at burial sites. 
During his episcopate Coleridge worked closely with the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel. The society provided all the diocese's clergy and managed the slave-worked Codrington estates and Codrington College on Barbados itself. It had attracted some odium from British abolitionists for not being strenuously engaged in the abolition movement, though from 1830 it was proceeding towards gradual emancipation in the belief that 'as Trustees of the Codrington Estates [they] are able not only to suggest a course, but to make the trial themselves, for the satisfaction of others; and to shew the planters how they may gradually enfranchise their Slaves without destruction to their property. (Pascoe, 202)' Coleridge seems to have been in full agreement with this course of action, for as he himself wrote: 'To prepare the minds of a mass of persons, so peculiarly situated, for a change such as this, was a work requiring the exercise of great patience and altogether of a most arduous nature. And it was chiefly owing to the Society of the Propagation of the Gospel that that day not only passed in peace, but was distinguished for the proper feeling that prevailed and its perfect order. (Pascoe, 203)' In a charge delivered in July 1838, just before the legal emancipation of slaves in the West Indian colonies, he stated that the native population flocked to the churches and chapels, and were civil in their behaviour and decent in their appearance. 
By the time of emancipation the number of communicants was unusually large, the number of diocescan clergy had risen to ninety-nine, and there were fifty-three parish churches and forty-two school houses. Of the many churches which had been damaged in the great hurricane which devastated Barbados on 11 August 1831, seven had been rebuilt, thanks partly to a parliamentary grant and partly to a grant of $2000 from the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel. Other institutions established or remodelled during Coleridge's episcopate included a diocesan committee of the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge, a clerical library, a branch association of the Negro Conversion Society, a 'daily meal' society, a medical dispensary society, four friendly societies, an asylum for the 'coloured poor', and three societies for the education of the 'coloured poor'. Soon after his arrival in the diocese Coleridge had also been engaged, together with the trustees, in the reorganization of Codrington College, Barbados. 
In 1842, after about eighteen years' zealous labour, Coleridge was compelled to resign his see through the failure of his health. The large diocese was then divided, the three archdeaconries of Barbados, Antigua, and Guiana being erected into separate sees. On the establishment of St Augustine's Missionary College at Canterbury, Coleridge became the first warden. He held the office until his sudden death, caused by a rupture of a vessel of the heart on 21 December 1849, at his home, Salston, in Ottery St Mary. 


@@@@@


doc= 5891


Coles, Cowper Phipps (1819-1870), naval officer and inventor of a gun turret, was born on 9 July 1819, the third son of the Revd John Coles (1787-1865) of Ditcham Park, Hampshire, rector of Silchester, and his first wife, Marianne Goodhead, 'nee' Rogers (died 1832). He passed his examination for a naval commission in 1838, and in January 1846 was promoted lieutenant. In October 1853 he was chosen by Sir Edmund Lyons, his uncle by marriage, as his flag-lieutenant on the 'Agamemnon' in the Mediterranean, and served in the fleet's attack on the Sevastopol forts on 17 October 1854. On 13 November he was made commander, and during 1855 commanded the paddle steamer 'Stromboli' in the Black Sea and Sea of Azov. On 27 February 1856 he was promoted captain. He married, on 11 March 1856, Emily (1829/30-1876), daughter of Henry Shepherd Pearson, with whom he had ten children. Sherard Osborn Cowper-Coles, the electrometallurgist and inventor, was their fourth son. 
While in the Sea of Azov, Coles designed and constructed a shallow-draft gun-raft, which was capable of carrying a heavy gun protected by an iron shield 4 inches thick. He was ordered home to superintend the construction of similar rafts for the projected attack on Kronstadt, a work that was prevented by the end of the war in May 1856. But from then he devoted himself to the study of defensive armour for ships and forts. The early idea of a raft and shield gradually transformed itself into a conical shield on a revolving turntable, suggested by Isambard Kingdom Brunel, for shore fortification, and finally into the simple cylindrical section for shipboard mounting. The system was attractive because it coincided with a sudden increase in the size and weight of naval artillery, making a broadside of four heavy guns appear to be an adequate replacement for fifty or sixty smaller weapons. Similar ideas were developed in the USA by John Ericsson, and the claims of the two men to the original conception have often been discussed. Probably the crude idea occurred independently to each, but their further progress reacted on each other. 
As finally developed, Coles's turret was far more sophisticated than Ericsson's, and the two men's ideas on the ideal ship to mount the turret were radically different. Both men were forced by the turret's weight to build low freeboard vessels: Ericsson created the 'Monitor', while Coles wanted to combine the turret with a full ship rig to create a first-class battleship. By securing the support of Prince Albert, after whom the first purpose-built British turret ship was named, and of Lord Palmerston, 'The Times', and large sections of the daily and service press, Coles secured the conversion of the steam battleship 'Royal Sovereign' into a mastless turret ship. After offering his patent rights to the Admiralty for $20,000, Coles was left to settle for $5000 in recognition of his efforts, and $100 for every turret installed during the term of his patent. This was in addition to being kept on full pay for most of the decade as an adviser. 
Despite successful trials in 1864, Coles was not satisfied with this limited application, and through his brother-in-law Captain G. T. P. Hornby used the Conservative Party to press for a fully rigged first-class ship to be built. The Admiralty ordered the chief constructor, Sir Edward Reed, to design this ship, ordered in 1866 as HMS 'Monarch', but Coles remained dissatisfied. Eventually the duke of Somerset allowed him to call on private industry to design his own ship. Coles selected Laird Brothers of Birkenhead, who had already built several turret ships for foreign governments, and their design was authorized on 23 July 1866, notwithstanding the submission of the controller of the navy, that it was doubtful whether the proposed freeboard, 8 feet, would be satisfactory for a seagoing cruising ship. The ship was named the 'Captain'. Coles intended that she should function as a seagoing cruising ship, and he was supported by public opinion. The Admiralty, which included many of his supporters, of whom the first lord and first sea lord were the most notable, laid the responsibility on Coles and the Lairds, and sanctioned her being commissioned, although it was found that the freeboard was nearly 2 feet less than had been designed. Apparently they did not realize that this was a source of great danger; and the responsibility they had mentioned referred to the cost of any necessary material alterations. 
The 'Captain' was commissioned early in 1870; after an experimental cruise she joined the Channel Fleet, accompanied it to Gibraltar, and on the way home, in a fresh gale off Cape Finisterre on the night of 7 September 1870, capsized and sank. Almost all aboard her were drowned, including Coles, who was travelling as the guest of Captain H. T. Burgoyne. 
Coles was a significant figure in the mid-nineteenth century naval technical revolution. His turret transformed the design of modern warships in the space of a decade, reflecting great credit on his abilities as a publicist and lobbyist. His single-minded determination, however, left him unable to see the other side of the debate, and this led to a decade of controversy with Reed and Admiral Sir Spencer Robinson. The duke of Somerset blamed his 'obstinate conceit' (Mallock and Ramsden, 388) and the support of 'The Times' for the 'Captain' disaster. Unfortunately, Coles combined a heavy system of protected gun mounting with outdated views on the necessity of a full sailing rig for first-class battleships. Lacking the scientific skill to assess the results of his efforts, he designed the 'Captain' with a heavier rig than the Admiralty-designed 'Monarch', which he was anxious to outperform, and so she capsized. The real line of development for the turret ship lay not in the masted type, but through the coastal designs to the mastless seagoing battleship 'Devastation', designed by Coles's arch rival Edward Reed and launched in 1871. 


@@@@@


doc= 5892


Coles, Elisha (c.1640-1680), lexicographer and stenographer, the son of John Coles (1623/4-1678), schoolmaster of Wolverhampton grammar school, and his wife, Joyce, was probably born about 1640 in Northamptonshire. He was the nephew of Elisha Coles the Calvinist, and has been often confused with his uncle's son, also Elisha Coles ['see under 'Coles, Elisha]. A schoolmaster like his father, Coles evidently possessed a playful sense of humour: 'I was born and bred [for a dozen years] in the very heart of 'England', I spent almost as many in her very eye, and after that as many more in [or about] the very head of the Kingdom' ('The Compleat English Schoolmaster', 103). (England's 'very eye' alludes to Oxford, and her 'very head' to London.) 
Coles entered Magdalen College, Oxford, towards the end of 1658, matriculated on 26 March 1659, and remained a chorister until 1661 when he left without taking a degree. Shortly afterwards, he set up as a schoolmaster in London (he was at Russell Street, near Covent Garden, by 1674), teaching Latin to English youths, and English to foreigners. Coles considered himself a perennial pupil, for 'Learning and Teaching are so nearly Related, that we cannot possibly suppose the one without the other' ('Syncrisis', 1675, preface). More than a decade passed before he submitted his efforts to the public: then from 1674 to 1677 works on shorthand, language instruction, and lexicography rolled regularly from the London presses. 
In 'The Newest, Plainest and the Shortest Short-Hand' (1674), a copy of which was in the library of Samuel Pepys, Coles presented the first historical survey of English shorthand, citing thirty shorthand authors and comparing fourteen alphabets. His own alphabet was apparently based on that of Thomas Shelton's second system ('Zeiglographia', 1650). Believing monosyllables to be the great stumbling block in English shorthand, Coles advanced the innovative notion of positioning characters on, above, and below a line for great versatility, a method not adopted until 1692 in Abraham Nicholas's 'Thoographia'. Coles's book was 'deservedly well received' (Kippis, 1.538). 
Also published in 1674 was 'The Compleat English Schoolmaster', a spelling-book that offers valuable information about seventeenth-century pronunciation and orthographic conventions. In 1675 two Latin textbooks appeared: 'Nolens volens, or, You shall make Latin whether you will or no'; and 'Syncrisis', a precursor of the 'Loeb Classical Library' series in its juxtaposition of Latin text and facing English translation. The popularity of 'Nolens volens', with its 'delightfully uncompromising title' (Mander, 'History', 289), quaint illustrations, and amusing frontispiece of a teacher lecturing his youthful charge, may be suggested by the fact that its title was parodied in 'Nolens volens, or, You shall learn to play on the violin whether you will or no' (1694). 
Coles was best-known as a lexicographer. 'An English Dictionary Explaining the Difficult Terms' (1676; 13 edns to 1732) was the first general dictionary to include both a wide range of dialect (from John Ray, 'Collection of English Words not Generally used', 1674), and 'canting terms', or criminal slang or flash talk (from Richard Head's 'The Canting Academy', 1673). ''Tis no disparagement to understand the Canting Terms: It may chance to save your throat from being cut, or (at least) your Pocket from being pickt' (foreword). Coles was granted a licence (27 February 1678) for the exclusive right to print for fourteen years 'A Dictionary, English-Latin and Latin-English' (1677; 27 edns to 1772), a work still in vogue after the publication of Robert Ainsworth's 'Thesaurus linguae Latinae compendiarius' (1736). 
Coles became second under-master at Merchant Taylors' School on 3 August 1677. In February 1678 he applied unsuccessfully for the mastership of Wolverhampton grammar school, a post left vacant by his father's recent death. It has been stated that he left Merchant Taylors' School 'upon some default, not now to be named' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.1275), but on 14 December 1678 Coles wrote from Dublin to resign and to inform the school that he had accepted the mastership of the free school of Galway, Ireland, at the behest of its founder, Erasmus Smith, saying that 'I aime at nothing more then ['sic'] to serve God comfortably & faithfully in my generation' (Mander, 'History', 156n.). His tenure there was brief, for he died at Galway on 20 December 1680 and was buried in the south aisle of the collegiate church of St Nicholas: 'He was a curious and critical person in the English and Latin tongues, did much good in his calling, and wrote several useful and necessary books for the instruction of beginners, and therefore 'twas pitied by many that he was unhappily taken off from his prosperous proceedings. (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.1275)' Coles may have written other works. An E. Coles penned an enthusiastic commendatory poem for William Hopkins's 'The Flying Pen-Man' (1674). The poem 'Christologia' (1671; published under different titles, 1679, 1680), with preface signed 'Elisha Coles, junior', has been attributed both to him and to his cousin Elisha. While there might be a wish to assign this pedestrian verse to the cousin, it is arguable that Elisha Coles lexicographer is the author. In addition, a work on penmanship by the 'Author of 'Nolens volens'' was advertised in November 1687 but was evidently never published. 


@@@@@


doc= 5893


Coles, Elisha (b. in or before 1608, d. 1688), writer on religion, was a native of Northamptonshire. Originally a trader in London, he had settled in Oxford by 1651, for on 23 May of that year he was appointed deputy registrar to the parliamentary visitors there in the absence of Ralph Austen, the registrar. In 1657 Dr Thomas Goodwin, president of Magdalen College, named him the college's steward. 
As a commissioner for the ejection of scandalous ministers in Oxfordshire, Coles served with such colleagues as Dr Joshua Cross and Dr John Palmer. Their ejection of Henry Beesley from the living at Swerford in 1658 was upheld by the council of state. On 11 August 1660 the commissioners responsible for the visitation of the university and its colleges ordered Coles's removal from his stewardship on the grounds that he had been improperly admitted. Coles then became a clerk in the East India Company. An Independent, he wrote 'A Practical Discourse of God's Sovereignty: with other Material Points, Deriving Thence' (1673), a work claiming to be grounded solely on scripture. According to his preface Coles had received some training in Calvinist tenets in his youth, but he was motivated to compose this 275-page treatise after discussions with some Arminians. Originally intended as a legacy for his children, the treatise was published after Coles received requests to do so from 'Antient and Sober Christians' (Coles, A4'r'). The third edition, issued by Nathaniel Ponder (who published John Bunyan's 'Pilgrim's Progress') and others in 1678, included commendatory epistles by Thomas Goodwin and (jointly) by John Owen and Samuel Annesley. The latter two praised Coles for his practical application of such doctrines as election, effectual calling, the atonement, and perseverance. 
Coles and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1715x20), had a son, also 


@@@@@


doc= 5894


Elisha Coles (fl. 1688), whom he apprenticed to a trade, and who should not be confused with his cousin Elisha Coles (c.1640-1680), the lexicographer. Coles died in his house in Scalding Alley, London, about 28 October 1688, 'aged eighty years or more' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.' 3.1274-6). He was interred in a nonconformist burial-ground, probably Bunhill Fields. He was survived by his wife and son, but the latter seems to have died before 1715, as he is not mentioned in his mother's will signed on 27 August in that year, and proved on 21 March 1720. 


@@@@@


doc= 5895


Coles, Gilbert (1617?-1676), Church of England clergyman, was born at Burfield in Berkshire, the son of Edmund Coles, then or later of Winchester, a clergyman. In 1626 Coles was admitted to Winchester College and on 6 November 1635, aged eighteen, he matriculated from New College, Oxford, where he obtained a full fellowship in 1637; he graduated BA on 13 June 1639 and proceeded MA on 12 April 1643. On 8 May 1648 he was one of those members of New College who formally refused to recognize the authority of the parliamentary visitors at Oxford. Coles was expelled by them from the university a week later, but was admitted a week after that as a fellow of Winchester. By this time he had acquired the rectory of East Meon in Hampshire; later he became rector of two other Hampshire livings, Easton, near Winchester, and Ashe. He was created DD at Oxford on 2 July 1667. 
Coles had married his first wife, Ann, by January 1654, when their son Gilbert was baptized at Lockerley, Hampshire, the first of two sons and six daughters baptized there in the period up to September 1660. After her death he married again, by a licence dated 26 June 1669, and when he made his will in July 1672 there were living: his second wife, Mary ('nee' Henderson); four daughters, Anne, Cicely, Martha, and Mary; and three sons, Gilbert, Edward, and Robert, the last an infant when his father died. On Gilbert, then eighteen, Coles, as he ruefully recalled in his will made in 1672, had spent $100 on two apprenticeships and on paying off his debts 'unworthily Contracted' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/352, 91'v'). 
Coles's 'Theophilus and Orthodoxus, or, Several conferences between two friends, the one a true son of the Church of England, the other fallen off to the church of Rome' was published in 1674. The author thought that Anglicanism had lacked effective champions ever 'since a puritan faction made the schism, disturbing the peace of the church and state; approving themselves better skilled at their weapons than their arguments; instead of writing against their adversaries, writing against their friends'. But 'since his majesty's miraculous and happy return, the church hath had time to breathe, and all things move in their own sphere' (sig. A2). In the following year, 1675, Coles resigned his Winchester fellowship, and on 4 August his son Edward, then of Mottisfont, near Romsey in Hampshire, was admitted as a fellow of the college. 
Gilbert Coles died on 19 June 1676, aged fifty-eight, and was buried in the church at Easton. He was wealthy enough to leave $1200 to his children, and property for the use and financial support of his wife, who survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 5896


Coles, John (1623/4-1678), translator, was born in Adderbury, Oxfordshire, the son of John Coles, a clergyman. Having been educated at Winchester College, which he entered in 1638, he was admitted as a scholar of New College, Oxford, on 19 August 1643 and matriculated there on 27 October aged nineteen, by which time he appears to have been also teaching at the grammar school in the college's cloister. He was made a full fellow of the college on 19 August 1645. Coles was ejected from the university by the parliamentary visitors in May 1648, before he had taken a degree. In 1652 he became first undermaster at the Merchant Taylors' School in London but resigned in 1658 when he was appointed master of Wolverhampton grammar school, of which the Merchant Taylors' Company were also trustees. With his wife, Joyce, who Coles married when he was still in Oxford ('but not to his content', according to Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 4.540), he had ten children, of whom the eldest, Elisha Coles (c.1640-1680), published books of lexicography. The maintenance of his family brought Coles into debt, from which the Merchant Taylors' Company extracted him on more than one occasion. 
Coles translated several parts of the romance 'Cleopatre' by Gauthier de Costes de la Calprenede, which describes the adventures of the daughter of Antony and Cleopatra. Although the translation was begun by Robert Loveday, Coles's collaboration, according to his address to the reader in the 1656 edition, led to the completion of part 4: 'It was committed to my hands, and finished in his lifetime, but whether he would have laid it by, or have sweetened it with some live-touches of his own, and permitted it to have been publick, I know not' (Calprenede, pt 4, sig. A1'r'). 
Coles deprecated this first offering, declaring a preference for 'sence before sound', and likened his subsequent efforts in translating parts 5 and 6 (both published 1656) to those of a candle that 'may be sometimes serviceable, when the Sun affords not his rayes' (Calprenede, pt 4, sig. A1'r'; pt 6, sig. A4'v'). His translations, however, have not always been correctly attributed and in the complete version of the romance (1665) Loveday is erroneously credited with parts 4, 5, and 6. This edition also contains Coles's version of part 7 (first published in 1658 under the title 'Hymen's praeludia, or, Love's Master-Piece', by which name the entire translation later became known). To all his publications are prefixed laudatory verses by, among others, Kenelm Digby and Thomas Manley. Taken together Coles's translations form a hefty work and, on completing part 7, he 'willingly quit[s] the employment' (ibid., pt 7, sig. A2'v'). Nevertheless, for all the romance's rambling, cumbersome narrative, his rendering is lucid and coherent and even allows of some elegant touches. It stands well alongside the earlier sections by Loveday and the later ones by James Webb and John Davies, and often exceeds them in terms of readability. 
In 1666 Coles published his thoughts on education in 'Apotheca scholastica'. Alongside the schoolmaster's unorthodox means of increasing his pupils' Latin vocabulary via rhyming English equivalents -- for example, ''Lepidus', pretty; 'Ingeniosus', witty; 'Lendosus', nitty' (Coles, 11) -- the book contains some verses in Latin and English and a Latin speech on Charles II's coronation. Coles was buried in Wolverhampton, Staffordshire, on 3 February 1678. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 5897


Colet, Sir Henry (c.1430-1505), merchant and mayor of London, was a younger son of Robert Colet of The Hale, Wendover, Buckinghamshire. He was apprenticed in 1446 to John Colet, mercer of London, his own elder brother. His marriage, 'c'.1465, to Christian, daughter of Sir John Knyvet of Buckenham Castle, Norfolk, and Alice Lynn of a London merchant family, gained him important contacts at court. Highly praised by Erasmus and Polydore Vergil, Christian was to survive her husband and children -- ten girls and ten boys, according to a window in St Antholin's Church -- and die in 1523. The only son to survive his father was John Colet, scholar and dean of St Paul's, London. 
Details of Colet's trade are few: trade with the clothiers of Essex, Suffolk, and Coventry may have supplied him with his main exports as a merchant adventurer; he also exported wool as a merchant of the Calais staple, and served as mayor of the staple of Westminster in 1499, 1500, and 1504. An alderman from 1476, Colet moved to Cornhill ward in 1487 where he stayed until his death. He served five times as master of the Mercers' Company, as MP for London in 1487 and 1489, and was twice mayor of the city. He was knighted during his first mayoralty of 1486-7, a period which included the battle of Stoke. His second mayoralty of 1495-6 coincided with war with Scotland and the Intercursus Magnus with the Netherlands, a treaty he facilitated by his personal bond when the city of London declined to proceed without further negotiations. He benefited from the Tudor accession and assisted the new king financially: he had a close relationship from 1480 at least with Reginald Bray (died 1503), long-time servant of the king's mother and then of Henry VII himself; a book of hours of Bray's wife appears to have passed to John Colet, the dean; he sold an estate at Ditesworth, Leicestershire, to Lady Margaret Beaufort, which went to endow Christ's College, Cambridge; and he is reputed to have escaped the impositions associated with Empson and Dudley. 
Colet was a parishioner of St Antonin's, London, when he died, and also of St Dunstan and All Saints, Stepney, where his son John held the living and where he and his wife enjoyed a country retreat. He made his will on 27 September 1505 and died on 1 October at Stepney, where he and his widow were buried. He had bought lands in twelve counties (worth over $170 p.a.) and in London, perhaps originally to provide for his large family. The death of his son Richard, aged about twenty-three in 1503, ended any hopes of a landed dynasty. The plans of his heir, John, to endow a school using the Buckinghamshire and Stepney lands in particular, may have met with Henry's approval, as he left $100 for university exhibitions. His executors were his widow and son. 


@@@@@


doc= 5898


Colet, John (1467-1519), dean of St Paul's and founder of St Paul's School, was born in January 1467, as attested by a contemporary document; Erasmus, always vague as to chronology, believed him to have been about thirty, two or three months younger than himself, when they first met in 1499. Colet's birthplace was almost certainly the London residence of his father, Sir Henry Colet (c.1430-1505), Mercer and twice mayor of London, and mother, Christian Knyvet (died 1523), in the parish of St Antholin, Watling Street. Both parents were from well-to-do stock, Henry Colet's relations being connected with the Mercers' Company and he a younger son of Robert Colet of The Hale, Wendover, Buckinghamshire; his wife was the eldest daughter of John Knyvet of Homerton, Huntingdonshire, and Buckenham Castle, Norfolk, and Alice ('nee' Lynn), of a London merchant family. Henry Colet and Christian Knyvet married about 1465-6, he to become wealthy and she to bear at least twenty children. Only John survived past 1503, when a brother, Richard, of Lincoln's Inn, was living; another brother, Thomas, died in infancy in 1479. According to Erasmus John was the eldest son and sole survivor of eleven sons and eleven daughters; he is followed by Polydore Vergil of Urbino, who arrived in England in 1502, and George Lily, son of the first high master of Colet's St Paul's School, William Lily. John Stow's 'Survey of London' (1598) records a stained-glass window in the former church of St Antholin, Watling Street, showing Sir Henry and Dame Christian with ten sons and ten daughters. 
Colet was survived by his mother by some four years; in her will, dated 13 January 1523 and proved on 2 November, she asks to be buried near her husband in St Dunstan and All Saints, Stepney. In letters of 1512 and 1516 Colet tells Erasmus that she is spending a healthy and contented old age in the country -- that is, in Sir Henry's house, Great Place, Stepney, which passed to the Mercers at her death -- and that she speaks often with pleasure of Erasmus; Erasmus wrote admiringly of her in 1521 and in 1532 recommended her stoical example to Bonifacius Amerbach. In 1510 the German theologian, physician, and magus Henricus Cornelius Agrippa was her guest, no doubt in connection with a visit to her son. On 1 December of that year Dame Christian was granted letters of fraternity by Christ Church, Canterbury. Co-executor of her husband and of her sons Richard and John, she was left well provided for and presented the Mercers with two silver-gilt standing cups and covers. 
Colet was taught the rudiments of Christian belief, good conduct, and Latin either at the school of St Antholin's Hospital in Threadneedle Street or the hospital school of St Thomas of Acon. His holy and religious nature, according to Polydore Vergil, impelled him towards divine studies, with St Paul as his preceptor, at both Oxford and Cambridge. The Oxford registers of congregation for 1464-1504 being lost, Anthony Wood's assertion in 1691-2 that Colet was a student at Magdalen College, Oxford, graduated BTh in 1501, and was incorporated DTh in 1504 lacks confirmation; the doctorate is mentioned in a letter from Erasmus; and at his election as dean he was styled 'sacre theologie professor', that is DTh. A John Colet is recorded at Cambridge University as questionist in Lent term 1485, when he would normally have spent four years in study, and in Lent term 1489 incepting as MA. Given family connections and holdings in the east midlands and Sir Henry's name among those few appealed to by the university in 1503-4 for funds to rebuild Great St Mary's, these entries almost certainly relate to his eldest son. At Cambridge Colet would have completed his necessary regency in 1490; later, he glossed the word 'philopompi' ('lovers of display') as 'Cantabrigienses' ('Cambridge men'). 
Before being ordained deacon on 17 December 1497 and priest on 25 March 1498 Colet had been admitted on 6 August 1485 to the rectorship of Dennington in Suffolk (which was in the gift of his mother's family and which he held until his death) and of the free chapel of Hilberworth, Norfolk, in 1486. Rector of Thurning, Huntingdonshire, a living in his father's gift, from 1490 to 1494 and canon of York and prebendary of Botevant from 1496 to 1519, he was also canon of St Martin's-le-Grand and prebendary of Goodeaster by 1497 until 1504. He held the living of Stepney -- in the 1530s the richest in England -- from 1499 to 1505, was canon of Salisbury and prebendary of Durnford from 1502 to 1519, rector of Lambourn, Berkshire, in 1505, and treasurer of Chichester, Sussex, from after 1508 to 1519. In a letter usually dated December 1504 but perhaps of mid-1505 Erasmus congratulates him on his deanship of St Paul's. Collated prebendary of Mora on 5 May 1505 and elected dean at the instance of the king on 2 June, he held both deanship and prebend until his death. 
Colet passed an indeterminate portion of the 1490s in France and Italy, visiting France first according to Erasmus. Though he is not mentioned in the extant university records of either Orleans or Paris, he spent time in both cities. Towards the end of 1516 the jurist Francois Deloynes wrote to Erasmus that he had been impressed with Colet's learning and holiness when they studied together at Orleans. In Paris Colet may have frequented the circle of conservative theologians with an interest in the Florentine Neoplatonist philosopher Marsilio Ficino; he did not then meet Erasmus, however, who arrived in the city in the late summer of 1495. 
Encouragement for a European journey must have come from the example of William Grocyn, Thomas Linacre, and William Lily, Grocyn's godson, who had improved their Latin and Greek in Italy and elsewhere, but precise dates for Colet's departure and return are lacking. By September 1492 he was in Rome, quartered in the English Hospice; on 13 March 1493 he inscribed himself, his parents, and his brother Richard in the Fraternitas Sancti Spiritus et Sanctae Mariae de Urbe, giving all four a share in the spiritual benefits of the fraternity's charitable works; and on 3 May was enrolled as 'confrater' of the English Hospice also. He may not have stayed in the city beyond that year. In Rome he was in contact with Christopher Urswick who, leaving in the late summer or early autumn of 1492, asked Colet to secure for him a manuscript of the 'Historia Bohemica' of Aeneas Sylvius Piccolomini (Pius II); Colet sent him a printed edition, with an apologetic letter, dated from Rome 1 April 1493. Urswick's annotations show an interest in the Hussite movement; Erasmus's report that Colet valued the stimulus of heretical writings suggests that he read Pius's book before passing it on, though his letter is merely complimentary to Urswick and to history, in stock humanist mode. It is likely that Colet followed Grocyn's, Linacre's and Lily's example in spending time in Florence. There were intellectual attractions for him in the city, Ficino was at Careggi nearby, and the distance along the land route to and from Rome was not great. 
The date of Colet's return to England is unknown: probably some time in or after 1495, and more certainly to Oxford, where he remained continuously until 1504 or 1505. Thereafter his only documented Oxford contacts are two dinners at Exeter College in 1516. From Oxford he had written to Erasmus, greeting him on his first arrival in England during late summer or autumn 1499; in Oxford that year they debated at least twice. When they met in 1499 (according to Erasmus in 1521), Colet had been giving successful free public lectures on the Pauline epistles in Oxford for some years. Polydore Vergil says that he lectured on St Paul in London. How far the manuscripts of one commentary on '1 Corinthians' and two on 'Romans' by Colet that survive preserve the text or even the substance of the lectures is unclear. The most satisfactory witness to Colet's approach to St Paul in the 1490s may be his letter of 1498-9 to Richard Kidderminster, abbot of Winchcombe, containing a series of precepts extracted from 'Romans' 1. 
Of letters between Colet and Erasmus some twenty-three survive; seven -- dating from 1499 to 1517 -- are from Colet. In a letter to Johannes Sixtinus of November 1499 Erasmus gives an animated account of Colet's heated after-dinner disquisition on the sacrifices of Cain and Abel ('Genesis' 4), putting his unmediated Pauline view that Abel's offering had been more acceptable 'by faith' ('Hebrews' 11: 4). His reaction to Erasmus's attempt to lower the temperature with a facetious 'Old Testament' fable is not recorded. Two letters to Colet of 1499, which Erasmus worked up and published ('Lucubratiunculae', 1503), give access to an earlier debate in the Augustinian College of St Mary, Oxford, on the agony in the Garden. Erasmus's arguments from reason and authority that Christ's human nature was expressed in his plea that the cup should pass from him were met by Colet's contention that this implied derogation of Christ's divinity; rather, he was prescient of Jewish guilt. 
At the end of the letters in 1503 Erasmus alludes to Pauline questions too delicate for public discussion, which might be aired on their walks together. That he does this in Greek is probably an adroit enhancement of his complimentary reference a few lines before to learning in both ancient languages acquired in Italy by Colet, who never, in fact, had more than a few words of Greek, as he acknowledged regretfully to Erasmus in 1516. The same year Erasmus reports Colet so conscious of his handicap that, stimulated by Erasmus's publication of the Greek 'New Testament' in his 'Novum instrumentum', he was working at it with John Clement, Thomas More's pupil-servant and alumnus of St Paul's School. In 1519 an anonymous contemporary stated that Colet knew no Greek. 
In the letter sent with his 'Lucubratiunculae' from Paris (1504?-5) Erasmus is delighted at Colet's doctorate and deanship, expresses surprise that Colet's Pauline and gospel commentaries have not been printed, enquires about money for copies of his own 'Adagia', and asks for help. His London stay (late 1505 - early June 1506) followed the death of Sir Henry Colet on 1 October 1505, which had made his son rich; in his father's memory, a little later, Colet commissioned from the Brabantine scribe Pieter Meghen imposing codices with Ghent-Bruges illustrations of the 'Vulgate' epistles and gospels (BL, Royal MS 1 E.v; CUL, MS Dd.7.3). 
Royal favour had secured Colet's translation from the academy to the important deanship of St Paul's. The prominence he achieved before being possibly robbed of a bishopric by death resulted partly from zealous performance of ecclesiastical duty, including his preaching and his insistence that his chapter mend their ways, partly from his refoundation of St Paul's School, and partly from his involvement in affairs of state. In London he continued his association with the Christian humanist circle to which Erasmus became a constant mentor, whether by intermittent physical presence or 'in absentia'. Thomas More, Erasmus's host during his third visit, was also a leading constituent of a group that included Grocyn, Lily, Linacre, Cuthbert Tunstall, William Latimer, Richard Fox, Urswick, John Clerk, Thomas Lupset, and Richard Pace, Colet's successor as dean of St Paul's, Latin secretary to Henry VIII, and diplomat, who in 1517 dedicated to Colet 'De fructu qui ex doctrina percipitur', addressed to the pupils of St Paul's School. Most of these, together with John Yonge and the Italians Polydore Vergil and Andreas Ammonius, belonged to Doctors' Commons, the loose association of civilians and clergy concerned with matters in the jurisdiction of the ecclesiastical courts. Colet was probably admitted in 1505. His closest English friend was More, his junior by ten years, to whom he was 'vitae meae magister' ('my life's overseer') and who, thinking him more learned and holy than anyone in England for centuries past, praised the bishop of Lincoln as a second Colet. Colet in turn thought More 'Britanniae unicum ingenium' ('the ablest man in Britain'), though he was out of sympathy with 'Utopia'. 
Of Colet's early activities as dean there are a few minor traces, some autograph, among papers from St Paul's (London, Guildhall Library, MSS 25121/1804, 25187); they include his visitation, using thirteen horses, of cathedral properties outside London in May and July 1506; new furniture and a cross; and armorial glass for his summer parlour at Stepney. More importantly, he framed statutes for the chapter, accepted by them after 20 June 1506 (a fair copy made by Meghen is lost), and exhibited to Wolsey in 1518. Conventional in their nature, they do not in themselves justify reports of the chapter's resentment, which is more likely to have resulted from Colet's authoritarian and high-minded expectations. On 28 April 1507 he added statutes for the Guild of Jesus associated with the cathedral. In 1510-11 the dean of St Paul's may have been involved in the campaign against Lollards of the bishop of London, Richard Fitzjames, on whose behalf he acted in other ecclesiastical matters, including censorship. He certainly took part in the drives of William Warham, archbishop of Canterbury, in 1511-12, being one of the formidable bench of examiners in two Kentish cases (8-19 May, 8 May - 3 October 1511). 
To Colet's seriousness and dramatic power as a preacher both Erasmus, comparing his name to Coheleth, and More bear witness. The substance of many sermons given in Oxford and in London must be represented in his Latin commentaries on St Paul and Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite; he also preached, according to Erasmus, on the creed and Pater noster as well as the gospels. That some of his homilies were in English is implied in Erasmus's statement that Colet had studied the English poets to prepare for preaching the gospel. From 1510 to 1517, with perhaps an interval in 1514, Colet regularly received 20's'. for the Good Friday sermon at court, although evidence of his preaching does not survive in quantity; his homily to the first assembly since 1504 of the convocation of Canterbury is the only one of which the text is extant. For the others, there remain only brief summaries, by Erasmus and an unknown reporter. Colet's surviving sermon was delivered in Latin on 6 February; internal evidence suggests the year was 1510, though the version printed in London by Richard Pynson gives 1511 and the printing has been assigned to probably 1512. The sermon has been an important element in Colet's later reputation as a precursor of the Reformation; an anonymous English translation, perhaps made in the Reformation interest, was printed in London by Thomas Berthelet probably in 1530-31. Taking as its text 'Romans' 12: 2 -- 'Be ye not conformed to this world: but be ye transformed in the renewing of your mind' -- the sermon was a strongly worded example of the critical and hortatory discourse usual on such occasions, without doctrinal emphasis but pressing on the clergy the need for an absolute purity of life and a restraint in temporal matters such as would justify the church in its claims to liberty from state interference and obedience from the people at large. 
Erasmus's account of sermons for which he is the sole witness as to content places Colet's candour in a context of difficulties, triumphantly resolved in his favour, first with the episcopate and then with Henry VIII. According to Erasmus, Colet had quoted in a sermon the Ciceronian maxim that an unjust peace was preferable to the most just of wars, at the very time that war with France was imminent. His clerical enemies attempted to make capital of this, and Colet was summoned to an interview with the king, who promised him protection. Then in a Good Friday sermon, which Erasmus briefly summarizes, Colet compounded his offence by declaring that war and Christianity could not accord. At this his enemies renewed their efforts and he was again summoned by the king, who required the easing of his conscience as to certain scruples and an undertaking from Colet to preach again in a way that would not sow doubt in the minds of the rough soldiery. That conversation over, Henry publicly embraced and commended Colet, so that his opponents, whose attempts to bring Colet down had included delation to Archbishop Warham for heresy, were discomfited. A laconic reference by Colet to Erasmus of October 1514 to unspecified problems with his bishop, Fitzjames, may refer to this situation. It is clear in any case, despite any distortion due to the vague chronology, antipathy to worldly and conventional ecclesiastics, and a generally admiring tone in Erasmus's narrative, that the Pauline Christianity of Colet's preaching had aroused resentment among his fellow clergy. 
In the same brief letter of October 1514 in which he complains of his bishop's harassment, Colet tells Erasmus of Thomas Wolsey's translation to the archbishopric of York. Just over a year later he was chosen to preach, in Westminster Abbey on 18 November 1515, in honour of Wolsey's elevation to the cardinalate. The sermon survives only in notes taken by a listener, from which it appears to have begun with Wolsey's praises before passing to a discourse on the secular authority and nobility of the cardinalate, and dilating upon its spiritual significance and its correspondence in the ecclesiastical hierarchy to the burning red seraphim in the celestial. 
The first surviving indications of Colet's intention to apply his patrimony to education by the reconstitution of St Paul's Cathedral school in new premises, reflecting a preoccupation with education as prerequisite for spiritual regeneration, belong to 1508. Precedents for his preference for laymen as trustees had existed for more than a century. According to Erasmus he believed reputable married men to be least corrupt; he may also have thought them more trustworthy than the chapter and more businesslike than churchmen in general, as well as less vulnerable in the clutching times that were already threatening the church. In his selection of the Mercers, there may also be a hint at preservation of his father's memory. Admitted a freeman of the company without payment in 1508, in April 1510 he opened and concluded negotiations with them for the school's endowment, and on 27 June obtained the chapter's consent to the school's ordinances. In March 1511 the site at the east end of the churchyard was formally transferred to the Mercers, with whom Colet was in constant consultation; on 17 June 1512 he 'shewed forth and read' the school statutes to their court of assistants, petitioning the pope in the same year for a bull to confirm the statutes and annul the power over schools of the chancellor of St Paul's. The statutes describe the school buildings as finished in 1512; it is doubtful whether any extant manuscript of them dates from before 1517-18; that inscribed by Tunstall or another as having been deposited in the hands of the high master on 18 June 1518 gives both 1512 and 1517 as completion date. 
On 4 November 1511 Colet had devised property, in what was perhaps a draft will intended for the court of husting in the city of London, to the Mercers for the school's benefit. A longer and fuller will for that court, dated 10 June 1514, may be connected with the intention announced by Colet to retire from active life. In that year he built himself a 'nidus' (nest) -- Erasmus calls it a very splendid house -- in the precincts of the Charterhouse at Sheen; his will of 1519 requires that all 'boardwork' and 'painted images upon the walls' remain there. 
Dedicating his school to the Virgin and the Christ Child, Colet retained power over the appointment of its teachers. Lily was high master by 27 July 1510, when he was granted a stall in the cathedral choir; though he was a good Graecist, it is uncertain how much Greek was taught before 1516. No record of John Ritwise, Lily's son-in-law and first surmaster (second master), is extant from before 18 December 1517, when Colet petitioned Wolsey on his behalf; a chaplain was envisaged by 1513 and a chantry established in 1514. Colet's intention, avowed in his statutes, 'specially to incresse knowledge, and worshipping of god and oure lorde Christ Jesu, and good Cristen lyff and maners in the Children' is clear in his close definition of the required moral, intellectual, and physical conditions for pupils and teachers. Acceptance of Erasmian humanist ideas about the need for Greek and of how Latin should be taught, with brief lip-service to pagan Latin, are overwhelmed by a rigidly literal and passionately expressed insistence on Christian morality. The authors prescribed are the fathers of the church and other early Christian writers (with two late ones, Baptista Mantuanus and Erasmus himself), pure in doctrine as in expression, to the utter exclusion of the language of scholasticism, 'adulterate, of the later blind world... rather... blotterature than literature'. In this, boys 'of all nations and countries indifferently' to the number of 153, large by contemporary standards and referring to the miraculous draft of fishes, were to be instructed without fee. The masters, who might be (married) laymen or in orders (but without benefice), were allotted good salaries and perquisites. Knowledge of reading and writing, and of the catechism, qualified for entry; the creed, in Erasmus's Latin verse ('Institutum Christiani hominis'), was required reading, along with Colet's own Latin accidence in English adapted to young needs, preceded by prayers and precepts for living ('Aeditio', 1509?; first extant edition 1527). Colet probably commissioned from Lily 'Rudimenta', a Latin syntax in English, later frequently reprinted with the 'Aeditio', and certainly 'De constructione', a more advanced syntax in Latin. Erasmus, on request, revised this so thoroughly that neither man would thereafter acknowledge it as his: it was first printed as an anonymous work in 1513. Though Colet's conservative curriculum seems later to have been abandoned in practice, the method of Latin teaching used at St Paul's was influential, and modifications of the grammatical works for the school enjoyed a long life as the 'Paul's', 'Royal', and 'Eton' grammars. Erasmus, less inflexible than Colet in attitude to classical learning, though refusing to teach in the school, defended it against criticism, helped with appointments, and advised on how to deal with Linacre, whose Latin grammar Colet had rejected as too advanced for his purposes. He also wrote for it 'Concio de puero Jesu', and suggested an inscription for the schoolroom. His 'De copia' (1512), aimed at improving rhetorical fluency and dialectical invention and hugely influential throughout Europe, was prescribed for the school by Colet, to whom it had been dedicated; 'De ratione studii' (1512), a blueprint for Christian humanist aims and methods in education, has special reference to St Paul's. 
The original stone schoolhouse at the east end of old St Paul's, rebuilt on the same site in 1670, after the great fire, was again replaced in 1822. In 1884 the school moved to Hammersmith, where a new and larger building had been erected for it, and in 1968 to new premises across the Thames in Barnes. 
The selection of Colet to preach on 18 November 1515 at Wolsey's receipt of the red hat makes clear his alliance with the rising power of the new cardinal. This is confirmed by his appointment by convocation in December that year to the five-man committee that was to inquire into the dispute about ecclesiastical revenues that led to Warham's being forced out of the chancellorship of England and replaced by Wolsey. To the cardinal's favour he must have owed his place in the king's council. His entry date is not documented and he was never one of the small number that constituted its core, though on 18 June 1517 he was made a member of its committee to hear poor men's causes, an appointment renewed on 18 June 1518. His attendance is recorded at three at least of a minimum of eight meetings between 25 June and 6 November 1518. 
In 1517 Colet's health had begun to deteriorate; he suffered the first of three attacks of the sweating sickness which, weakening him and exacerbating a liver condition revealed by his autopsy, led to his death on 16 September 1519. His last will, dated 22 August 1519 and proved in the prerogative court of Canterbury on 5 October, required that he be buried in St Paul's Cathedral near the image of St Wilgefortis, where he had made 'a little monument'. Erasmus writes of an unassuming grave identified by the letters 'Joan. Col.'. In 1548 George Lily recorded the existence of a more elaborate tomb and the Latin verses by his father hung up beside it (there was also a prose epitaph); and in 1575-6 the Mercers laid out a large sum for marble for it. A coloured miniature attributed to Sir William Segar and thought to be of 1585-6, on the cover of the Mercers' Hall copy of the school statutes, shows a 'transi' tomb, with a bust of Colet; there is an engraving in William Dugdale's 'History of St Paul's Cathedral' (1658). Refurbished in 1618, the tomb survived the great fire and in 1667-8 was taken down and laid, with the effigy, in Convocation House Yard. In 1680 what was believed to be Colet's coffin was found and investigated by members of the Royal Society. 
Colet was a grave and impressive presence, tall and handsome. Several representations survive. The kneeling, tonsured figures in the miniatures at the opening of Colet's 'New Testament' manuscripts (1506-9) are conventional representations of a cleric. Two closely contemporary portraits only have a claim to authenticity. Of one, attributed to Pietro Torrigiano and probably made from a death mask about 1520, there is a plaster version of uncertain date in Mercers' Hall. The portrait drawing made before 1535 by Hans Holbein the younger during his second visit to England is most likely based on this image. An engraving by Willem or Magdalena van de Passe is in Henry Holland's 'Heroologia Anglica' (1620); there are eighteenth-century portrait engravings by George Vertue and Francesco Bartolozzi. Colet invariably wears clerical robe and bonnet; Segar's miniature of the tomb shows him pen and book in hand. The head of the full-length statue by Sir Hamo Thornycroft (1901) in the grounds of St Paul's School is of the Torrigiano-Holbein type. 
Erasmus saw in Colet a quick-tempered but pure Christian with a fertile, powerful, profoundly serious mind, always bent on seeking the moral. As aids to self-control he used prayer and fasting; as guides to goodness of life scripture, especially St Paul, the early fathers and the Pseudo-Dionysius. His views, impatiently expressed, were individual, definite, and strongly held. Benevolent towards children, he loved chastity (by his own testimony he deprecated marriage); and he delighted in sacred reading and holy conversation, particularly with friends, with whom he would relax his severity. Sometimes tight-fisted with money and needing reminders of a patron's duty, intolerant both of undue pomp and of slovenliness, he did not follow certain English habits, dressing habitually in plain black woollen, being frugal with food and drink, and not celebrating mass daily. Mistrusting religious and collegiate institutions, conventional piety, and over-scrupulosity in confession, he was intolerant of pilgrimage and particularly of the cult of images and relics as vulgarly practised -- as is recollected by Erasmus in 'Modus orandi Deum' (1524), where Colet is named, and taken up more fully in 'Peregrinatio religionis ergo' ('A pilgrimage for religion's sake'), which records their experiences and reactions at Canterbury about 1512-14 ('Colloquies', 1526). There Colet is thinly disguised as Gratianus Pullus ('Gratiane colte' in the English version printed in probably 1540). In 'Pia confabulatio' (1522) Colet's trust in faith and prayer is commemorated. 
Erasmus, paying Colet's eloquence the stock humanist compliment of comparison with Plato's, also recounts how Colet was taken in by the feigned arguments against rhetoric of 'Antibarbari'. Colet also amused him by reporting that a bishop had denounced St Paul's School as idolatrous because poets were part of its curriculum, and by passing on another English cleric's foolish Latin etymology. Erasmus, judging Colet's written Latin to be fluent rather than pedantically correct, surmises that he failed to publish for this reason; he remarks also that Colet had not been entirely persuaded to adopt the 'new' humanist mode in speaking that language and retained his childhood habit of pronouncing 'ie' as 'ii' ('De pronuntiatione'). 
What Colet read is more easily characterized than precisely when, where, and in what form, manuscript or print, he read it, let alone when he used it. Besides his own works, his will mentions a manuscript 'New Testament' and St Jerome. 
Among his English contemporaries Colet was unique in his firsthand knowledge and use of Florentine Neoplatonism, with its combination of esoteric philosophy and Christian piety; he was also familiar with the work of some of those who had felt its impact. His heavily annotated copy of Marsilio Ficino's 'Epistolae', in the edition of Venice, 11 March 1495, is now in All Souls College, Oxford; he must at least have had in his hands a copy of Ficino's 'Theologia platonica' (1482), from which he quotes; and he probably knew Ficino's translations of Plato (a copy of the edition of 1491 was in England then), Plotinus, and the 'Corpus hermeticum'. Colet also read and used such writings by Giovanni Pico della Mirandola as the 'Heptaplus' (printed 1490?), 'Apologia' (printed 1482), and 'Oratio', as well as perhaps 'Adversus astrologiam divinatricem', all included in Pico's 'Opera omnia' of 1496 and 1498. It was probably from Pico that he derived his interest in the Hebrew cabbala, which was strengthened by his reading of Johann Reuchlin's 'De verbo mirifico' (1494); and that interest was augmented by Cornelius Agrippa, with whom in 1510 he toiled over St Paul and who made acknowledgement to Colet's teaching. In a letter of 1517 to Erasmus, who the year before had assured Reuchlin of Colet's good opinion of him, however, Colet professed to prefer the 'love and imitation of Christ' to Reuchlin's recent speculations in his 'De arte cabbalistica'. The meditations, commentaries, and denunciatory preaching of Girolamo Savonarola (1452-1498), which might have been expected to appeal to Colet, have left no explicit trace in his extant works; nor have other Savonarolan writings circulating in the England of his time. He may have known Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite in Ficino's Latin versions (1496) and certainly used Ambrogio Traversari's (1436), in the second edition of Pseudo-Dionysius's 'Works' overseen by Jacques Lefevre d'Etaples (Paris, 1499), for his responses to the 'Celestial' and 'Ecclesiastical Hierarchies'. Like Lefevre, he remained unmoved by Erasmus's publication in 1505 of Lorenzo Valla's treatise showing that their author was not the convert of St Paul ('Acts' 17: 34; the belief that he invited Grocyn to lecture on Pseudo-Dionysius at St Paul's is erroneous). He cites the fifteenth-century Christian Virgil, Baptista Mantuanus; and uses the etymologies in Nicolo Perotti's standard 'Cornucopiae'. 
Other modern works included Erasmus's 'Novum instrumentum' of 1516; he interested himself in progress towards 'Novum Testamentum', its second edition (1519), and joined in opposition to Edward Lee's strictures. Among Colet's books would also have been Erasmus's 'Lucubratiunculae' (1503), which included the 'Enchiridion militis Christiani' whose 'philosophia Christi' so chimed with his own; 'Copia' (1512), dedicated to him, and other educational works; 'The Praise of Folly' (1511); 'Institutio principis Christiani' (1516); and the commentary on 'Romans' (1517), of which he was critical. He would also have had a copy of Pace's 'De fructu' (1517). In the British Library are two transcripts by Meghen, perhaps for Colet: an incomplete, undated glossed psalter and Lefevre's translation of the Pauline epistles, printed in 1512 (BL, Royal MSS 1 E.iii, 1 D.xi-xv). 
In Colet's library would have figured the early Christian writers he read, according to Erasmus, while he was in Europe. St Augustine, to whom Erasmus reports Colet as 'iniquior' ('more prejudiced', probably in favour), is most often cited and has left other traces. Colet himself refers to St Jerome; St John Chrysostom; St Ignatius of Antioch; Lactantius, the Christian Cicero (also commended to St Paul's School); and Polycarp of Smyrna. He quotes the Pseudo-Clementine 'Recognitions' and Origen (whom he seems to have known both directly and indirectly), and cites Philo Judaeus and Pseudo-Aristeas (probably indirectly). Erasmus adds St Ambrose and More's favourite St Cyprian; he arranged to have his edition of Jerome sent to Colet on 2 October 1516. 
Among the transmitters of the pagan wisdom so suspect to Colet as a means to scriptural exegesis, he refers to Cicero (whom he devoured, according to Erasmus), Ovid, Suetonius (whose life of Claudius he invokes in connection with 'Romans' 13), Terence, Varro, and Virgil. Of late antique writers he knew Macrobius; and of medieval, Thomas Aquinas's 'Summa theologica' and 'Catena aurea'; St Anselm (perhaps indirectly); Durandus; Gratian; Pseudo-Ivo of Chartres; and Leo I (the Great), whom he cites explicitly in relation to the extra-scriptural verities entrusted to the church by the Holy Spirit. Though his own theology was biblical and Neoplatonic, he had received and retained a training in scholasticism discernible in his preference, reported by Erasmus, of Scotus to the defining, presumptuous, and worldly Aquinas. His mass books and books of devotion included an illuminated Flemish book of hours (now at Stonyhurst College), once owned by Dame Katherine Bray (died 1507), widow of Sir Reginald Bray, which bears a petition in his hand for prayers for her soul and Colet's. 
Colet's Jerome, with unspecified printed books and his bed and bedding from his house in the grounds of the Sheen Charterhouse, he left to one John Bambrughe. Thomas Lupset, 'my scholer', was to have such printed books as he needed; those remaining went to poor students and others 'who have been scholars with me'. Some of the manuscripts of Colet's own works went to St Paul's School. Other codices reached the royal library. In the three volumes containing the epistles (1506) and gospels (1509), Erasmus's new version was transcribed by Meghen from the edition of 1522 into the space originally left for commentary; pages were added and the set completed with a separate volume containing both versions of 'Acts' and 'Apocalypse'. The three may have been augmented for Henry VIII and the fourth, written for him and Katherine of Aragon (Hatfield House, Cecil papers, MS 324), appropriated by Lord Burghley to add to his other Meghen manuscripts, including the fair copy of Colet on Pseudo-Dionysius (BL, Add. MS 63853). 
Colet's surviving writings are almost exclusively in Latin. Some, listed by sixteenth-century authorities such as John Bale (1548, 1557-9) and John Pits (1619), are not extant; others remained in manuscript, often singly. Works in English, chiefly sermons perhaps, are also lost, the few printed English versions all dating from after his death. The English of his convocation sermon may be Lupset's; and the English in which Latin accidence is presented in his printed 'Aeditio' and the few miscellaneous texts preceding it, most likely Colet's, is just possibly that of a translator. Editions of his grammatical work from before 1527 are not extant, and no printing is known of his 'Right Fruitful Monition' from before 1534. An English paraphrase of the Lord's prayer attributed to him was not printed until 1534. Of his extant manuscripts only the school statutes and a prayer to the Virgin (almost Colet's only surviving reference to Mary) among the annotations in the All Souls Ficino are in the vernacular. 
The only Latin work by Colet to have been printed in his lifetime is his convocation sermon. Some codices of the Latin works, according to a note in one of them, probably by Tunstall, were lost 'incuria puerorum' ('through the carelessness of the boys' [or 'of his servants']). The rest, remaining in manuscript until the nineteenth century, present severe chronological problems; assigned by some to his Oxford period, they have also been seen as belonging to the second decade of the sixteenth century. Colet's chief Latin works are: two commentaries on St Paul's epistle to the 'Romans', one on the whole epistle, the other, unfinished, on the first five chapters; a commentary on '1 Corinthians'; a commentary on '1 Peter', with maxims from other Pauline epistles; a commentary on, or rather a series of responses to, the 'Celestial' and 'Ecclesiastical Hierarchies' of the Pseudo-Dionysius; two brief tractates, 'De sacramentis' and 'De corpore Christi mystico'; an unfinished commentary on the account of creation in the opening chapter of 'Genesis'; and annotations of the 'Epistolae' in which Ficino briefly explained his doctrines. None of the manuscripts bears a date; the make-up of one, in particular, may confirm Bale's report that works were discovered 'unbound' ('divaricatis pagellis') after Colet's death. 
Colet's copy of Ficino's 'Epistolae' could have been acquired in England or France, but is more likely to have been an Italian purchase. His annotations of it must postdate its publication on 11 March 1495, though they, still less the transcripts and notes in his hand on its flyleaves, need not belong to a single period. The transcripts consist of two polished letters from Ficino to Colet, one brief, playing self-deprecatingly with light and sun imagery; the other longer and dealing with the currently important questions of intellect and will, on which Colet's position remained voluntarist. They are accompanied by two awkwardly expressed drafts, again in Colet's hand, of a short letter to Ficino. That these indicate a Florentine visit and a meeting with Ficino (1433-1499) at Careggi is at least likely; Pico della Mirandola (1463-1494) Colet seems to have known only through his writings. Exactly how long after his return Colet jotted down that he would do his best, 'next Monday, at the usual time and place', to expound '1 Corinthians' is unsure. 
One of the manuscripts of Colet on '1 Corinthians' (CUL, Gg.4.26, which contains more than one work and may consist of loose papers gathered together by a later hand) is autograph, on paper, the script sometimes careful, sometimes hurried, with Colet's diagrams, corrections, and insertions and an occasional single word in Greek. The other manuscript (Cambridge, Emmanuel College, MS III.3.12) is a fair copy on vellum by Meghen, with no Greek or diagrams and only minimal signs of later intervention. The unique manuscript of the commentary on the whole of 'Romans', a scribal transcript with corrections and insertions by Colet, begins the Cambridge University Library codex: it concludes with the word 'Oxoniae'. Colet's commentary on the first five chapters of 'Romans', addressed to a young man named Edmund and ending imperfectly, in Meghen's transcript, with additions and corrections by Colet, begins Cambridge, Corpus Christi College, MS 355: it too is unique. The maxims extracted from the Pauline epistles and the brief commentary on '1 Peter' exist only in Trinity College, Cambridge, MS O.4.44. The hand of this is more Italianate than any of those in other Colet manuscripts; its old royal library pressmark is of 'c'.1548. 
Colet's commentary on 'Genesis' is addressed to an unidentified Ralph and breaks off, unfinished, at 1: 14; it exists uniquely in a fair copy, probably not by Meghen, which occupies the second part of Corpus Christi College, MS 355. The treatise on Christ's mystical body, like the unique surviving copy of the letter to Kidderminster, is preserved in Colet's autograph in the Cambridge University Library manuscript; which also contains a perhaps scribal transcript, with Colet's additions and corrections, of his responses to the texts he selected from the 'Celestial Hierarchy' of the Pseudo-Dionysius. Meghen's transcript of Colet on both 'Hierarchies' and 'De sacramentis' constitute BL, Add. MS 63853, where the text of the 'Celestial Hierarchy' is a fair copy of the Cambridge University Library manuscript, incorporating Colet's changes. A copy made from the British Library manuscript later in the sixteenth century is now in St Paul's School Library. 
Meghen's copies, with the second part of the Corpus Christi codex, apparently constitute a sort of collected edition intended to preserve the views of its author, for his private use. That three of its constituents are unfinished and at least two addressed to specific persons suggests that, if they record Colet's Oxford lectures, they do so in a modified form. When the collected edition was put together is uncertain; it may have been soon after Colet left Oxford and came into his inheritance, about the time when he was employing Meghen on his 'New Testament' manuscripts. Meghen had been working for English patrons from about 1503 at latest; no date later than 1509 appears in any undoubted surviving work of his for Colet, and the hand of the transcripts is stylistically related to his work of about that time. Some at least of Colet's emendations and annotations on some of the copies may have been made at any time before September 1519; a few headings and annotations were added after his death, probably by Tunstall. 
In responding to Pseudo-Dionysius's 'Ecclesiastical Hierarchy' Colet quotes at length from Pico's 'Apologia' or 'Oratio', repeating the substance of the quotation in both his commentaries on 'Romans'. Pico's mode of regarding the creation in the 'Heptaplus' is simplified and moralized in Colet's commentary on 'Genesis', and the 'Heptaplus' quoted both in his commentaries on '1 Corinthians' and the whole of 'Romans'. To Pico he is indebted for at least one quotation from the commentary on 'Romans' by Origen, whom Erasmus names as Colet's favourite. 'Contra Celsum', available through Cristoforo Persona's Latin version in manuscript or print (1482), he cites once, to emphasize the allegorical character of the writings attributed to Moses; he also knew Origen on 'Romans' in Rufinus's Latin, first printed in 1506. Colet's awareness of the Greek father of allegorical exegesis, regarded by Erasmus as first after St Paul among the interpreters of scripture who go beyond the literal meaning, may belong to the same time as his preoccupation with what he could know through Pico and Reuchlin of the Hebrew cabbala as a guide to hidden biblical significance. 
The chronological and interpretative problems of Colet's surviving works are not diminished by the constancy both of his exegetical method -- which is homiletic, individual, idiosyncratic, and, by the end of his life, old-fashioned, especially in its failure to take account of Greek -- and of the attitude to humanity and divinity at its root. His tendency to respond unsystematically to those sections of a given text that support him in his search for what he called 'living wisdom', visible most clearly in his annotations of Ficino and in his encounter with Pseudo-Dionysius, is also apparent in his Pauline commentaries. These do not attempt to treat every biblical verse, nor are they preoccupied with theology, philology, or history. Colet's single-minded purpose is to move men to holiness by instructing them in the relevance to it of selected propositions. Insisting on the primacy and inexhaustible meaningfulness of scripture, he applies everything in it, in the Pauline manner, to Christ, the great exemplar. Spiritual significance being both pervasive and paramount can be truly grasped and imparted, not through knowledge but through grace, only by the spiritual man, who is not necessarily a priest. All but dualistic in his estimate of diabolic power, troubled by the world's depravity, Colet is continually severe against the flesh. Only by asceticism and prayer can the grace be sought that will lead through purgation and illumination to perfection and the soul's union with God. 
Attachment to the Neoplatonism he knew from the Pseudo-Dionysius, from Ficino's original works, and Ficino's translations of Plato and Plotinus must have strengthened Colet's mistrust of scholasticism and partiality to St Paul. Mistrust would have been augmented by his association with Erasmus, whose influence on him was plainly immense; the importance of Colet in the formation of Erasmus's thought, long regarded as proven, less so. Always capable of opposing or rejecting the positions to which the more learned and acute Erasmus sought to steer him, however, Colet remained profoundly his own man as he attempted to arrive at holiness through a true perception of scripture. 
Colet's posthumous influence, limited by his reluctance to publish and exerted indirectly through St Paul's School, is entirely English. The same may almost be said of his reputation. Though, as the Basel reformer Johannes Oecolampadius noted, Colet's name echoes through the writings of Erasmus, only two other continental scholars, Marquardt von Hattstein and Martin Bucer, are recorded as catching its resonance. The long retrospective assessment of his friend and patron that Erasmus addressed, almost two years after Colet's death, to Justus Jonas in the hope of dissuading him from conversion to Lutheranism, failed in that attempt, though its publication in the year of its composition (it is dated 13 June 1521) must have attracted attention. 
This biographical memorial letter, an extended comparison of the well-to-do dean of St Paul's with the poor Franciscan, Jean Vitrier, as exemplars of true piety, was intended also to demonstrate to Jonas how far criticism of the church of the time could go without apostasy. It was early converted to their use by English reformers. On 2 July 1533 an English translation by Matthew Tyndall was sent by Tyndall to Thomas Cromwell, and Erasmus's letter itself was drawn on by John Foxe in 'Actes and Monuments' (1563). Foxe added the testimony of two Lollards that they had gone to London to hear Colet preach, but also rightly names Colet as among persecutors of their sect. By then Colet had disappeared from English Catholic consciousness and his transformation from a firmly faithful member of the pre-Reformation Catholic church, unorthodox in opinion and less than discreet in expression, to a reformer 'avant la lettre' was well under way. In 1529 William Tyndale had reported him as in trouble with his bishop for rendering the Pater noster in English; in 1552 Hugh Latimer had him in danger of burning as a heretic; and in 1562 John Jewel, bishop of Salisbury, attempted to enlist him among the forerunners of protestantism -- to which the Catholic Thomas Harding in 1566 retorted: 'as for John Colet, he hath never a word to show, for he wrote no works'. 
If Colet's protestant reputation depends to an extent on the protestant interpretation of the testimony of Erasmus in this letter and elsewhere, the same is true, in a sense, about Colet's reputation at large, at least until the later twentieth century, when Erasmus's accounts came to be treated with greater caution. There are ways in which Colet's situation 'vis-a-vis' Erasmus parallels that of Thomas More, of whom Erasmus also gave an account in a Latin letter, addressed to a Lutheran sympathizer, Ulrich von Hutten, in 1519, and with whom he corresponded more copiously than with Colet. The letters are alike in presenting their subjects as they were before the convulsions of the Reformation, in which More was deeply involved and which Colet was spared by death. More, however, was already famous in the European humanist community for his 'Utopia' and his poems (which Erasmus had helped him to publish), and for his involvement in the controversies that followed the 'Praise of Folly' and Erasmus's new 'New Testament'. From both before and after Erasmus's letter, firsthand evidence from More's own writings has long been available in quantity. For Colet, that was lacking until the later nineteenth century. Erasmus, with his discreetly flattering accounts of his and Colet's debates and other dealings, sometimes affected in recollection and by a tendency to favour his own part, is often the only witness to important aspects of Colet's life and character. Like Erasmus's estimates of others, More included, the portrait of Colet in the letter to Jonas of 1521 has elements in it of a self-portrait. 
Colet's protestant reputation is discernible in Samuel Knight's biography (1724, reprinted 1823), which was based on the seventeenth-century collections of White Kennett, bishop of Peterborough (BL, Lansdowne MS 1030); it is still visible in the work of the nineteenth-century pioneer in Colet studies, J. H. Lupton, surmaster of St Paul's School. Much is owed to Lupton who, in a series of volumes published between 1867 and 1876, made available for the first time Colet's Latin writings with, for the most part, accompanying English translations, to which he added a translation of Erasmus's letter to Jonas and a 'Life' of his hero. Lupton's imperfect texts and versions were for well over a century, with the important exception of Jayne's edition and translation of Colet's marginalia to the 'Epistolae' of Marsilio Ficino, virtually the only published means of access to Colet's writings; they have been superseded only partially by O'Kelly and Jarrott ('1 Corinthians', 1985) and Gleason ('De sacramentis', 1989). Lupton was much influenced by his friend Frederic Seebohm's 'Oxford Reformers of 1499', particularly in his ideas about Colet's originality and his importance for the English church. Their Colet gave place only in the second half of the twentieth century, especially in the study of Gleason (1989), to a Colet made more credible by a fuller appreciation of the religious and intellectual context of his time. 


@@@@@


doc= 5899


Coley, Henry (1633-1704), astrologer and mathematician, was born on 18 October 1633 in the parish of St Mary Magdalen, Oxford, the son of a joiner. His birth was said to have occurred at 32 seconds after 2.14 p.m., 'a sufficiently exact Estimate' for astrological analysis, according to his friend John Kendal (Kendal, 30). He was probably related to Thomas Coley, an Oxford tailor who served as a common councillor from 1603 to 1630. His astrological 'accidents' record that he had smallpox at nine, almost died from plague at ten, and suffered a severe attack of ague at fourteen. In the spring of 1648 he became clerk to 'a Person of Military Command' in the parliamentary army. In 1652 he settled in a 'better' employment, before moving to London on 1 April 1654, where he worked as a ladies' tailor in Gray's Inn Lane. He married in May 1656 and had a child the following year, though the match proved short-lived and unhappy. After his wife's death he married again in April 1660, and this time was 'reasonably happy' (Kendal, 30-31). A son born in September 1661 survived only six days. 
In his spare time Coley taught himself mathematics, astrology, Latin, and French, and in 1669 he published the fruits of his astrological studies as 'Clavis astrologiae, or, A Key to the Whole Art of Astrology'. Its second part, 'Genethliaca', has a separate title-page and carries the date 1668. Though described as merely an introduction, the work is a thorough and systematic account of nativities and the practice of horary astrology, explaining for the first time, for English readers, the innovations of Kepler in this branch of astrology. It was very well received. A massively expanded second edition followed in 1676, with 750 pages of text and a further hundred pages of astronomical data drawn from Kepler and Jean-Baptiste Morin. It was dedicated to Elias Ashmole and carried a glowing tribute by William Lilly, who hailed it as complementing and completing his own 'Christian Astrology' (1st edn, 1647). 
The success of the 'Clavis' encouraged Coley to launch an annual almanac in 1672, which he continued, under various titles, until his death. Coley's admiration for William Lilly -- 'that great Luminary of Astrology' -- and Lilly's reciprocal respect led to the older man's 'adopting' the younger as his son. After Lilly's serious illness in November 1675 Coley helped him with his celebrated annual 'Merlini Anglici Ephemeris', staying at Lilly's house at Hersham, Surrey, each summer to complete the task. Coley himself, unable to get away from London, composed the edition for 1679 but assured Lilly that he had followed his methods and that he would be able to amend the proofs. After Lilly's death in 1681 Coley continued the title himself. He became one of the linchpins of the almanac business of the Company of Stationers, compiling several titles besides his own, and investing some of his savings in the company. Aspiring authors often sent him their manuscripts for approval, including ten in 1683 alone. 
In 1663 Coley moved to a house in Baldwin's Gardens, Baldwin's Court, off Gray's Inn Road, where he taught astrology and mathematics, boarded some of his pupils, and received clients. By the 1670s he had a very flourishing practice. Writing to Lilly in July 1677, he complained that he was visited all day long by 'Scholars and Querents, little can be don 'till night, and by Candle light I do most of my work' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Ashmole 240, fol. 213). In his almanacs he advertised tuition in arithmetic, logarithms, geometry, trigonometry, geography, astronomy, navigation, dialling, surveying, and music, besides astrology. He was a respected mathematician, consulted by Edmond Halley to help him calculate the moon's parallax. Joseph Moxon was a close friend and acknowledged Coley's substantial contribution to his mathematical dictionary, 'Mathematics Made Easy' (1679). In 1686 Coley published a revised edition of William Forster's textbook 'Arithmetic, or, That Useful Art Made Easie', designed for 'Merchants, Factors, Accomptants'. His almanac for 1687 contained mathematical calculations by Sir Jonas Moore, and the 1691 edition featured a brief discussion of gravitation, referring readers to Isaac Newton for further information. An enthusiast for the new science in general, Coley declared that the telescope and microscope had revealed wonders unknown to any earlier age, and that Europe now far outstripped all previous civilizations. He had a wide circle of friends, among them the virtuosi Elias Ashmole, John Aubrey, and Sir John Hoskins, astrologers such as John Gadbury (for a time), George Parker, William Salmon, and Charles Bernard, and the whig journalist Henry Care, and counted numerous country gentlemen and lawyers among his clients and patrons. John Brown, surgeon to Charles II and senior surgeon at St Thomas's Hospital, Southwark, was also a patron. 
Coley took a warm interest in the reform of astrology, a lively issue in the second half of the century, arguing that it must be founded on experiments like other sciences. His own interests lay mainly in the refinement of nativities and of horary astrology. On judicial astrology, especially concerning politics, he was more cautious than many of the other leading practitioners of his time. His almanacs offered mostly vague and innocuous prophecies for England and western Europe, though he was happy to promise 'vast slaughter' of Turks and Tartars in 1684 ('Merlini Anglici Ephemeris', 1684, sig. A5). More typically he remarked that whig astrologers were rash to predict the death of Louis XIV, 'for Kings and Princes have long Arms, and can reach a person when he least expects it' (ibid., sig. B3). At home his almanacs preached obedience to the government of the day, with varying degrees of enthusiasm. The 1685 edition gave full details of the Popish Plot, but he had no difficulty in hailing 'Great James' the following year and remained obedient to the very end of James's reign. The edition for 1690, however, took a strongly protestant, patriotic line, and by 1692 he was hailing William III as 'Our King by Miracle, as well as Right' ('Merlinus Anglicus Junior', 1692, sig. A3), and predicting that he would lead his victorious armies to the very heart of popish France. In the late 1690s Coley drew attention to the still bolder predictions of his former pupil John Holwell and others that a millennial age was at hand: a messianic emperor arising in the north would crush France and bring about the ruin of Rome and conversion of the Turks and Jews. Characteristically Coley remained noncommittal, observing cautiously, 'let our own Experience confirm or contradict' ('Merlinus Anglicus Junior', 1698, sig. C7'v'). 
Coley is best known as William Lilly's successor. George Parker described him in 1699 as a 'Person of a quiet and peaceful Disposition' (Parker, 'Ephemeris', 1699, sig. A3'v'). Aubrey agreed that he was 'as good a natured man as can be' ('Brief Lives', 1.181). Coley did not avoid controversy altogether, however. John Gadbury, whose 'Ephemerides' he had criticized as inaccurate, hit back in 1684 by accusing Coley of plagiarizing his work in 'Clavis astrologiae'. Some years later, in 1698, John Partridge mocked Coley's almanac 'Nuncius Syderius' as 'Duncius Syderius', and attacked him for selling astrological sigils and charms. Claiming that Coley was selling bogus charms to prevent unwanted pregnancies or retain a lover, charging 4 and 6 guineas respectively, Partridge urged dissatisfied customers to indict him for fraud under the statute of 1604. Despite these attacks, Coley's learning and modesty secured him an unusually wide range of friends, from radical whigs to neo-Jacobites. The portrait attached to the first edition of 'Clavis astrologiae' shows a soberly dressed young man, wearing his hair long. Coley died in London on 30 April 1704. 


@@@@@


doc= 5900


Colfe, Abraham (1580-1657), Church of England clergyman and benefactor, was born in Canterbury on 7 August 1580, the eldest son of Richard Colfe (died 1613), a Church of England clergyman, and his first wife, whose maiden name was Thorneton; he was a nephew of Isaac Colfe. After early education at Canterbury Cathedral grammar school, Abraham Colfe matriculated at Oxford from Christ Church in November 1594 and graduated BA in October 1599. 
Colfe was still in residence at Christ Church when, in April 1601, 'publicly in hall' he made what the vice-chancellor, George Abbot, and the dean, Thomas Ravis, described as a 'very offensive' outburst, passionately commending the earl of Essex as a great general, 'Veri Dux', and 'Pater Patriae', whose very virtue had been the cause of his overthrow ('CSP dom.', '1601-3', 35). A month later he wrote a supplicatory letter to Secretary Robert Cecil from Newgate prison, offering an eloquent if disingenuous explanation of his conduct. Likening himself to Icarus, 'indiscreetly' flying too near Essex, who 'shine[d] like the sun in his height', he had intended to praise his virtues, 'and darkly to point at his death under the history of Cicero', but not, as a loyal subject, to challenge his condemnation (ibid., 44). 
Shortly afterwards Colfe must have transferred to Cambridge to resume his studies for he obtained his MA from Trinity College there in 1603, the year in which he was ordained. Although there is no university record of further degrees, he was later described as having a DD. He was curate of Lewisham, Kent, from 1604 to May 1610, when he succeeded Hadrian Saravia in the vicarage. Three months earlier, having obtained a dispensation for pluralism, he had also become rector of St Leonard Eastcheap, London, but he continued to live in Lewisham; about this time he married Margaret Valentine, 'nee' Hollard ('c'.1566-1644), the widow of a local tanner, whose family connections, especially with the Leathersellers' Company, were to become important to him. 
Identifying himself with the interests of his Lewisham parishioners, whom in 1614 and 1615 he helped to a successful defence of their rights over Westwood Common, Colfe only occasionally officiated in person in his London parish, but his preaching was apparently well received by the pious in that congregation. Feeling that 'a minister should labour earnestly... to stir up all professed Christians' ('Hasted's History', 1.258n.), Colfe, on the evidence of his will, took preaching very seriously, usually delivering two sermons on Sundays and, for the last twenty years of his life, expounding the 'Bible' on Wednesdays, Fridays, and holy days. He was one of the earliest members of Sion College, and was a benefactor of the library. As early as 1626 he determined to buy land to found and endow charitable institutions, and in 1634 proposed to convey land from the manor of Sydenham to the Leathersellers' Company for pious uses. 
Relations with some inhabitants of Lewisham were soured during 1642 and 1643 when Colfe and others resisted parliamentary orders to admit John Batchelor, soon to be notorious for licensing sectarian books, as a weekly lecturer at Lewisham. Colfe complained that 'at the instigation of their impudent lecturer' (Black, xxiv) the parishioners tried to turn him out of the living by proceeding against him before the committee of plundered ministers, but in the event he remained in place until his death, although he lost his London living to Henry Roborough in 1647. 
Continuing the charitable impulses shared by his wife, whose funeral monument erected in Lewisham church after her death in 1644 celebrates her 'having bene above 40 yeares a willing nurse, midwife, surgeon and in part physition to all both rich and poor, without excepting reward', in 1652 Colfe founded and opened a free grammar school in the town. As his will of 7 September 1656 explained, it was intended for thirty-one boys drawn from the Blackheath hundred; the trustee was not, 'as he shall answer for it at the Judgement seat of Jesus Christ', to admit the sons of the wealthy, and there were very strict limits on the extent of corporal punishment ('Hasted's History', 1.258n.). He died on 5 December 1657 in Lewisham, leaving no children of his own but having had a good relationship with his stepsons, whom he had assisted during his life. He was buried in Lewisham church. Charitable bequests dominated his will, with money left for '30 or 40' chained bibles for the use of strangers and parishioners, and a library of books left to the school. In 1662 his trustees built almshouses in Lewisham in accordance with his instructions, and in 1664 the ownership and governorship of his various charitable institutions were vested by act of parliament in the Leathersellers' Company. 


@@@@@


doc= 5901


Colfe, Isaac (1558/9-1597), Church of England clergyman, was born at Canterbury, the fourth son of Almundus or Amandus Colphe and his wife, Katherine Bradfield. He was the brother of Joseph (a future mayor of Canterbury) and Richard; the latter was the father of Abraham Colfe. His parents were probably Huguenot refugees who arrived in England having left their estate at Guines, near Calais, after the reconquest of the town by the French in 1558. The family took up residence at the West Gate in Canterbury. Isaac entered Broadgates Hall, Oxford, as a commoner in 1576; he is recorded as matriculating on 23 July 1579, aged twenty, and graduated BA on 17 February 1580, proceeding MA on 4 July 1582. On 20 June 1583 he married Alice Caxston, a widow of Lydd; their sons Isaac and Jacob were educated at Oxford, at Christ Church and All Souls (perhaps as an unofficial poor scholar) respectively. Colfe was presented to the vicarage of Stone in Oxney, Kent, on 25 February 1585 but resigned on his appointment as vicar of Brookland near Lydd. He seems to have been in good standing with the town's authorities, to whom he dedicated a sermon preached there in 1587 on the anniversary of Elizabeth's accession. On 18 June 1596 he was inducted to the mastership of Kingsbridge Hospital, Canterbury, and on 5 August the same year was collated one of the six preachers of the cathedral. Colfe died on 15 July 1597 and was buried in the chapter house of Canterbury Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 5902


Colgan, John (1592?-1658), hagiographer, was born in the parish of Donagh, co. Donegal. Little is known of his background and early years: it is not clear whether a reference in a 1607 letter of George Montgomery, Church of Ireland bishop of Derry, to John MacColgan, son of the rector of Donagh, and a skilled student of law at Glasgow and speaker of both Irish and Latin, is to the same man. By 1615 at the latest he had left Ireland for the continent and, having been ordained about 1618, entered the Franciscan order at St Anthony's College, Louvain, on 26 April 1620. He continued his theological studies there under Father Robert Chamberlain and Father Thomas Fleming. It is very likely he subsequently taught scholastic philosophy at Aachen before being appointed lector of theology at Mainz in 1628. He returned to Louvain some time before June 1634, when he was stated to have been novice master at St Anthony's. Already in the early 1620s when he had just entered Louvain, Father Hugh Ward, Brother Michael O Cleirigh, and Father Patrick Fleming were engaged in collecting and editing Irish historical and, in particular, hagiographical materials and Colgan's correspondence in the 1620s suggests interests in this work, although his activities in the field are only vaguely known before 1635. In November that year Father Ward died and Colgan succeeded him as professor of theology at Louvain and as director of this work. 
Under Colgan the project crystallized into a plan for a seven- or eight-volume work. The first volume from this proposed scheme went to the press on 24 November 1643, and appeared in 1645 as 'Acta sanctorum veteris et maioris Scotiae, seu, Hiberniae sanctorum insulae'. It comprised 270 lives, containing the lives of all saints whose feast days fell in the first three months of the year, with the exception of Brigid and Patrick. It is in the preface to 'Acta sanctorum' that Colgan uses the title annals of the four masters for the annalistic compilation of Michael O Cleirigh and collaborators, 'Annala Rioghachta Ereann', and it is by this title that this illustrious work has since been known. 'Acta sanctorum' was actually the third volume of the projected scheme. The first was to have consisted of the 'sacred and profane history of the country, its kings, the Irish apostolate abroad etc' and never appeared. The second projected volume was published two years after 'Acta sanctorum', and was the occasion for the casting of a new set of Irish type: 'Triadis thaumaturgae' was a collection of sources for the lives of Patrick, Brigid, and Columcille. According to Father Luke Wadding, the fourth projected volume, containing the lives of the saints for the next three months of the year, was in the press soon after. However, it never appeared. The cost of publishing seems to have been the crucial issue. The two published volumes owed their appearance to, respectively, Hugh O'Reilly, archbishop of Armagh, and Thomas Fleming, Colgan's former tutor and then archbishop of Dublin. Various appeals were made but it is likely that a lack of patrons for the remaining volumes proved a fatal stumbling block. 
In June 1651 Colgan was appointed commissary of the three Irish Franciscan colleges of Louvain, Prague, and Vielan. However, complaining of severe ill health, he asked to be relieved of the position the following February. He also declined a request from his order to write a reply to Father Zacharius Borenius's stricture of the Franciscan observants. In 1655 he published a short work on John Duns Scotus which revolved around the hotly disputed question of his nationality and that of all those to whom the term 'scotus' had been applied. 
Colgan died at St Anthony's College, Louvain, on 15 January 1658. A printed obituary notice survives in the Franciscan Library, Killiney. At his death Colgan is believed to have left several volumes of the hagiographical project completed in manuscript. Father Thomas Sheeran took charge of the work but in the years before his own death in 1673 he managed to see only Thomas Sheeran's 'Vita S. Rumoldi' and Patrick Fleming's 'Collectanea sacra' through the press. Colgan's unpublished work appears to have been extant in the mid-eighteenth century but does not seem to have survived the dispersal of the Louvain archives after the French Revolution. 
A contemporary assessment of Colgan may be taken from the comments of Nicholas Verunlaeus, historiographer to the king of Spain and a professor at Louvain, in the preface to 'Acta sanctorum': 'Well have you merited, O most learned Colgan, of heaven and earth, of your country and the whole world. Others of your fellow countrymen have arisen in these times to vindicate in arms the Catholic religion.... You vindicate the saints of your country with your pen.... Your glory will be that you restore her saints to the Island of Saints, that the church accepts them, and that the world acknowledges them.... With infinite labour you have brought their lives to light, with incredible industry, you have described them, now with immense study and work you make them available. (O'Donnell, 26)' Three centuries later it was evident that 'no writer on this subject during the last three hundred years, however eminent, has or could have dealt with the subject without continual reference to him' (Jennings, 'Introduction', iv). Ludwig Bieler's 1958 assessment was that, while 'Acta sanctorum Hiberniae' had been succeeded by the work of Charles Plummer, 'Triadis thaumaturgae' had yet to be superseded, despite the faults modern scholars might find with it. With regard to the Patrician materials Bieler's 1971 'Four Latin Lives of St Patrick: Colgan's 'Vita secunda, quarta, tertia and quinta'' now provides such a successor, although the 'Triadis' sections on Brigid and Columcille remained unchallenged at the end of the twentieth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 5903


Collard, Frederick William (bap. 1772, d. 1860), piano manufacturer, son of William and Thamosin Collard, was baptized at Wiveliscombe, Somerset, on 21 June 1772. At the age of fourteen he went to London and worked for Longman, Lukey, and Broderip, music publishers and piano makers, at 26 Cheapside. In 1799 Longman & Co. fell into commercial difficulties, and a new company, consisting of John Longman, Muzio Clementi, Frederick Augustus Hyde, F. W. Collard, Josiah Banger, and David Davis, took over the business, but on 28 June 1800 Longman and Hyde retired, and the firm henceforth was known as Muzio Clementi & Co. After some time Collard's brother William Frederick became a partner, and on 24 June 1817 Banger left the company. On 24 June 1831 the partnership between F. W. Collard, W. F. Collard, and Clementi expired, and the two brothers continued the business until 24 June 1842, when W. F. Collard retired, and F. W. Collard, then sole proprietor, took into partnership his two nephews, Frederick William Collard jun., and Charles Lukey Collard. After 1832 the pianos which had long borne the name of Clementi began to be called Collard and Collard, and many patents were taken out for improvements in both the action and the frame of the instruments; Clementi's serial numbers were continued in Collard and Collard's square pianos. The firm soon gave up the business of music publishing, and confined themselves to piano making, except that they had also the contract for supplying bugles, fifes, and drums to the regiments of the East India Company until 1858. To the Great Exhibition of 1851 Collard sent a square semi-grand, which was awarded the council medal by the musical jury (the award was not confirmed, owing to some feeling of jealousy), and two small cottage pianos, which subsequently sold well. 
The firm suffered twice from large fires; on 20 March 1807 the factory in Tottenham Court Road was burnt to the ground, and on 10 December 1851 a new factory, in Oval Road, Camden Town, was entirely destroyed. F. W. Collard died at his home at 26 Cheapside on 31 January 1860, aged eighty-eight, having lived in the same house since his arrival in London in 1786. 
In 1929 the Chappell Piano Company took over Collard, whose business had already run down, and production stopped in 1971. A fire destroyed all Collard records in 1964. 


@@@@@


doc= 5904


William Frederick Collard (bap. 1776, d. 1866), his brother and partner, was baptized at Wiveliscombe on 25 August 1776, and, in addition to an inventive genius respecting improvements in pianos, also developed a taste for lyric poetry. He married Sarah Dean, the granddaughter of the Essex psalmodist and composer John Arnold Collard. He retired from business in 1842, and died at Folkestone on 11 October 1866. 


@@@@@


doc= 5905


Colledge, Thomas Richardson (1796-1879), surgeon and missionary in China, received his medical education in London under Sir Astley Cooper. He practised in Canton (Guangzhou) and Macau and some other Chinese ports, first under the East India Company, and then under the crown, and was superintending surgeon of the hospitals for British seamen. During his residence in Canton and Macau he founded the first infirmary for indigent Chinese -- Colledge's Ophthalmic Hospital. He was also the founder, in 1837, of the Medical Missionary Society in China, having published in 1836 two pamphlets on medical missions, and continued as president of the society to the time of his death. On the abolition of the office of surgeon to the consulate at Canton in May 1841, and his consequent return to England, regret was expressed by the whole community, and a memorial of his services was addressed to the queen by Portuguese residents of Macau, which caused Palmerston to grant him an annuity from the civil list. 
Colledge took the degree of MD at King's College, Aberdeen, in 1839. He became a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians, Edinburgh, in 1840, a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1844, and a fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons, England, in 1853. The last thirty-eight years of his life were spent in Cheltenham, Gloucestershire, where his courtesy and skill won him regard. He died at his home, Lauriston House, Cheltenham, on 28 October 1879. His widow, Caroline Matilda, died on 6 January 1880. 


@@@@@


doc= 5906


College, Stephen (c.1635-1681), poet and political activist, was born in Watford, Hertfordshire, where he married and began a family. Neither the names of his parents, nor that of his wife (who probably predeceased him), are as yet known. He saw military service during the Second Anglo-Dutch War (1665-7), when he also became acquainted with another antic poet of the Restoration, John Wilmot, earl of Rochester. College (or Colledge, the spelling he may have preferred himself) relocated to London thereafter, becoming a freeman and pursuing his trade as a joiner. In 1680 he was living in Water Street in St Ann Blackfriars parish. 
College was a reformed protestant who had exchanged presbyterianism for the restored Church of England in 1660, but he returned to his presbyterian roots in reaction to the coercive practices of Restoration Anglicanism. Remaining an occasional conformist, he respected Anglican divines like John Tillotson; and he hoped for union between a reformed establishment and those dissenters who were prepared to embrace a more comprehensive church. He was friendly with Titus Oates, Israel Tonge (who died in his house), and several other Popish Plot witnesses. He appeared at the trial of Lord Stafford to support the credibility of a chief witness for the prosecution. He constructed several of the effigies for the London pope-burning processions of 1679-80. Bishop Gilbert Burnet described him as 'an active and hot man', and he was known to his contemporaries as the Protestant Joiner ('Burnet's History', 2.296). 
College became notorious as the author and reciter of satirical poems and ballads that translated the religious and political concerns of the parliamentary opposition into the language of ordinary people. At the centre of the flourishing popular print culture of 1679-81, he is known to have read his work in London coffee houses and public houses, where he was observed 'bawling against the government' ('State trials', 8.610). He was also a defender of the Long Parliament, which he believed had 'stood up for the rights of the people' (ibid., 691). The satires of 1679-80 that have been attributed to him vary in quality; but they consistently turn anti-popish language against the court and against James, duke of York, the Catholic successor to Charles II. 
Another particular target of College's pen was Lord Chief Justice Sir William Scroggs, who was blamed by the whigs for the acquittal of suspected Catholic conspirators. College depicted Scroggs as a bloated persecutor of protestants who followed in the sanguinary footsteps of his father, falsely identified in whig rumour as a butcher. Indeed, College invested Scroggs with all the attributes of the loathed Thomas Wolsey (another supposed butcher's son), including the papal rewards of a cardinal's cap and legatine authority. College further directed his poetic attacks against Catholic nobles, courtiers, and royal favourites, 'who would convert us by a sea of blood, and turn the laws of England out of doors by standing army, pensioners and whores' (S. College, 'Truth brought to light', Lord and others, 2.15). 
College's ultimate target, however, was Charles II himself. 'Alas! poor nation,' he wrote in 1679, 'how art thou undone by a bad father, and now a worse, his son!' (Lord, 2.16). An advocate of parliamentary solutions to the nation's crisis, College also endorsed popular action: 'We'll die at our doors ere in Smithfield we'll burn' (S. College, 'A lampoon on Lord Scroggs', Lord, 2.289). He has been credited, accurately or not, with the invention of 'the protestant flail', a weapon with which ordinary people could defend themselves against menacing Catholics who sought to 'enthrall' and to 'enslave' the nation (S. College, 'Justice in masquerade', Lord, 2.284). 
College's success as a popular spokesman brought him to the attention of London whig leaders like Sir Robert Clayton and Sir Thomas Player, and of such whig grandees as the earl of Shaftesbury and William, Lord Russell. In his capacity as a joiner College was asked by them to search the Westminster cellars on the eve of the 1680-81 parliament for incendiary devices that might have been planted by Catholics. In March 1681 College attended the brief third Exclusion Parliament in Oxford, which was dissolved within days of its opening, when the Commons proceeded again with a bill to exclude the duke of York from the throne. College came to Oxford with arms and in the company of William, Lord Howard; William, Lord Paget; and the earls of Clare and Huntingdon, who were also armed. He was seen about town engaging in political conversation, and he distributed blue ribbons with the slogan 'No Popery, No Slavery'. He was involved in an altercation outside the meeting place of the House of Lords, and he returned to London in the company of the City MPs. 
College was also armed at Oxford with the satirical ballad 'A Ra-Ree Show' (1681). The poem depicted Charles II as a deceptive showman, as a master of political puppetry who held 'freeborn fools' in contempt, and who intended to substitute 'brave strong government' for the rule of king in parliament (S. College, 'A raree show', Lord, 2.427, 429). The ballad also criticized the bishops and the clergy of the Anglican church as inclined to popery, and it recalled the punishment of Charles I 'for fleecing England's flocks' (ibid., 429). It concluded with a call 'to pull down raree show' (Charles's duplicitous political game), to preserve parliament, and to 'free... the nation', for 'the hunt's begun... like father, like son' (ibid., 430, 431). According to hostile sources, the ballad was sung in Oxford and at Lord Lovelace's country house, 'where some Aldermen, and choice Lads of 'London'', reportedly including Clayton and Player, 'got drunk, and trolloll'd it bravely' (North, 'Examen', 101-2). A companion piece to the ballad was a cartoon in which Charles II was shown being knocked over by agents of parliament, while bishops and courtiers were stuffed into the king's bag of political tricks. A second cartoon that circulated at Oxford was also associated with College: 'A Prospect of a Popish Successor' [1681] depicted the duke of York in the guise of a devil and the Anglican bishops as papal minions. 
College was seen at the April 1681 treason trial of Edward Fitzharris, the Irish informant, from whom the whigs had hoped to secure further revelations about Catholic plotting, and from whom the court hoped to secure revelations damaging to the whigs. Fitzharris's ultimate tale about a whig conspiracy at Oxford did not save him from the scaffold. But Fitzharris's story did provide the government with a pretext for arresting College, his fellow London whig activist John Rouse, and lords Shaftesbury and Howard. 
College was now caught up in the loyalist counter-offensive of 1681-2, which was designed to rally the nation around Charles II as the near victim of violence supposedly intended by the whigs. The court's real target was Shaftesbury, but the prosecution of College -- for his alleged involvement in a design to raise a rebellion and to seize the king -- provided a dress rehearsal for the case against Shaftesbury. On 8 July 1681 College was tried before a Middlesex grand jury who returned a verdict of 'ignoramus' to the charge. Impanelled by the whig sheriffs Slingsby Bethel and Henry Cornish, the jury was truly made up of College's peers: most of the jurors were nonconformists and tradesmen. With Shaftesbury's fate much in mind, the whigs celebrated this outcome, but loyalists protested that justice could not be found in London. 
The ministry responded by arguing that since College's alleged treason had occurred in two places, London and Oxford, he could be tried in either locality. The Joiner was accordingly indicted again in Oxford. The government carefully planned a second case against him, hoping even to turn College's anti-papal rhetoric against him by finding evidence that he was secretly a Catholic. 
From the Tower, Shaftesbury assisted College in his Oxford defence, providing him with the hired legal assistance of Aaron Smith and Robert West. The duke of Buckingham's lawyer, Edward Whitaker, also sought to aid him. Recognizing the importance of the trial, the 'buisy factious partymen' of London flocked to Oxford to show their support for the Protestant Joiner (North, 'Life of the Lord Keeper', 74). The home of the mathematician John Wallis, who was a friend of John Locke, became a meeting place for those hoping to assist College. The result of his Oxford trial on 17 August was a foregone conclusion, however, given that a jury of dutiful loyalists had been as carefully assembled as the whig jury of London had been. Sir George Jeffreys, the former recorder of London, who had been a target of whig reprisals in parliament, was a chief counsel for the prosecution. 
A variety of political witnesses, many of them once useful to the whigs, claimed that College was at the heart of a design against the king. They cited 'A Ra-Ree Show' to demonstrate College's treasonable intentions. College's defence, which he claimed he 'took out of the [law] books myself', was a spirited one ('State trials', 8.585). The proceedings, which began at 9 a.m., did not conclude until 3 a.m. the following morning. Deprived of legal papers provided by Aaron Smith, which the judges claimed were libellous, College presented himself as a victim of judicial miscarriage: 'My Lord Coke says, it is the birth-right of every Englishman to have counsel in matters of law, and [John] Lilburne had it... in his Trial' (ibid., 573). College denied that he was the author of the verses in question or of the cartoon they inspired. He called Titus Oates and others to discredit the witnesses against him, and he sought to turn the political tables on the court. According to him, the charges really emanated from the papists, who sought to undermine those who had uncovered their disloyalty by false reports of whig plotting: 'This is a most horrid conspiracy to take away my life; and it will not stop here, for it is against all the Protestants in England' (ibid., 575). 
Found guilty, College was executed in the Oxford Castle yard two weeks later, on 31 August, after declining to offer information against whig leaders. He protested his innocence to the end, but he acknowledged that in 'heat of talk' he had sometimes 'uttered some words of indecency... concerning the King' ('True Copy of the Dying Words', verso). Gilbert Burnet was particularly outraged by the behaviour of Chief Justice Sir Francis North at the trial, and other whig observers also alleged numerous legal irregularities in the proceedings against College. In a final letter to his son Stephen, College urged him to forgo 'that folly of Riming, for... it will do you hurt' (Clark, 2.553n.). Charles II permitted his remains to be buried (at St Gregory by Paul in London) rather than exposed. 
College continued to be a critical public figure after his death. Loyalist lampoons celebrated his demise as a sign of the nation's recovery from the political courses of 1641. Aphra Behn included an outspoken London joiner in 'The Roundheads' (1682), and John Crowne presented College in the character of the Bricklayer, 'a bold, saucy, factious fellow', in 'City Politiques' (1683). Loyalists were also determined to employ College's story as a warning to articulate 'mechanicks' to observe their proper places. Even Lord Macaulay, writing a century and a half later, judged College from an aristocrat perspective, dismissing him as 'a noisy and violent demagogue of mean birth and education' (Macaulay, 1.252). 
For contemporary whigs, however, College became the most important victim of Catholic intrigue since Sir Edmund Berry Godfrey. His apotheosis as an image of the virtuous protestant citizen was instantaneous, and his picture was hawked in the London streets. The tory propagandist Sir Roger L'Estrange sought unsuccessfully to prevent this popular canonization of College. By 1683 the Protestant Joiner was revered in London as 'good Stephen College' and as a 'martyr for the people's privileges' ('CSP dom.', 'July-Sept 1683', 309). Indeed, the government's treatment of College was an important factor in drawing some of his political acquaintances into the conspiracies of 1682-3. Among those involved in conspiracy were the attorneys who had aided College in his Oxford trial, Robert West and Aaron Smith; his fellow joiner William Hone, who may have worked with College; and College's sister, who remained in touch with West after College's death. According to West, the Rye House conspirators intended to try Lord Keeper North at Oxford for his part in College's case and to 'hang him upon the same post on which Colledge was hanged' ('State trials', 9.422). One version of the manifesto for the duke of Monmouth's 1685 rebellion also stressed the 'barbarous murder of Stephen Colledge under pretence of law' as a rationale for resistance (Harley MS 6845, fol. 257). 
College's story was prominently recounted in the whig martyrologies published after the revolution of 1688. Historians have generally followed whig observers in believing that College was the victim of judicial murder. His poetry and his political behaviour were indiscreet; but the evidence for the treasonable actions attributed to him was largely contrived. 


@@@@@


doc= 5907


Colles, Abraham (1773-1843), surgeon, was born on 23 August 1773 at Milmount, near Kilkenny, Ireland, the second son of William Colles (1745-1779), a quarry owner, and Mary Anne (died 1840), daughter of Abraham Bates, of co. Wexford. At some point during the time of his education, in Kilkenny grammar school, a flood swept away part of the house of a local physician, Dr Butler, and carried a work on anatomy into a field near Colles's home. The boy picked it up and returned it to the doctor, who then gave him the book, and this, it is said, led to Colles's choice of medicine as a profession. He entered Trinity College, Dublin, in September 1790, and eleven days later was apprenticed to Philip Woodroffe, resident surgeon in Dr Steevens' Hospital. In spite of showing early literary promise he refused to give up medicine, even though Edmund Burke, a family acquaintance, recommended that Colles publish his writings entitled 'Remarks on the condition of political satire'. When Colles's uncle talked of the name he was sacrificing, the youth replied: 'A name, sir! Yes, as an author, and then not a dowager in Dublin would call me in to cure a sore throat' (Fallon, 30). 
Having graduated BA in February 1795, and obtained the diploma of the Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland in the same year, Colles studied at Edinburgh for two sessions, and graduated MD in 1797 with a thesis, 'De venaesectione'. He next went to London, where he stayed for some time, assisting Astley Cooper in the dissections for his work on hernia, and attending the London hospitals. In 1797 Colles returned to Dublin with little means and no connections to assist him. At first he practised medicine and was appointed visiting physician to the Meath Dispensary. He also became an active district visitor for the Sick and Indigent Roomkeepers' Society, a charitable gesture that brought him to the attention of a number of members of his profession. In 1799 he gave up being a physician on receiving the appointment of resident surgeon to Dr Steevens' Hospital. This he held until 1813, when he became visiting surgeon to the same hospital. 
Colles quickly became a masterly surgeon, being cool, dexterous, and resourceful. A number of his operations were significant advances. When he first tied the subclavian artery for aneurysm, the operation had been attempted only twice in England, and never in Ireland. He was the first man in Europe successfully to tie the innominate artery. In his 'Treatise on Surgical Anatomy' (1811) he discussed the forms of hernia and various important surgical operations in a manner which showed his deep and accurate study developed over many years of daily dissections. His name is, however, best-known in connection with the Colles fracture of the radius, a common fracture just above the wrist and usually the result of a fall on the palm of the hand; despite its frequency this had escaped the notice of previous surgeons. His paper on the subject appeared in the 'Edinburgh Medical and Surgical Journal', in 1814. 
Colles was also influential in introducing new principles for the use of mercury in the cure of syphilis, replacing the high dosages, which practitioners following John Hunter's example used, with a more cautious approach that helped to revive the flagging reputation of the treatment among surgeons. Through this Colles came into a long conflict with Richard Carmichael, a fellow Irish surgeon, whose experience in the Peninsular War had made him cynical about the effectiveness of mercury. 
As surgeon of Dr Steevens' Hospital, Colles had quickly begun clinical and surgical teaching. In 1802 he failed to win the chair of anatomy and surgery at Trinity College. He then unsuccessfully challenged the election in law, and never after had anything to do with that institution. He immediately became active in the Medico-Chirurgical Society, and was soon its president, and in the following year he was appointed surgeon to Cork Street Fever Hospital. In 1804, however, he became professor of anatomy and surgery in the Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, an office he held for thirty-two years. 
Colles's ability as a lecturer greatly extended the reputation of the college and of the Dublin medical school, with the number of students rising from 60 on his arrival to about 1000 by 1836. On his retirement the Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland voted on an address stating that he 'had been the principal cause of the success and consequent high character of the school of surgery in this country' (McDonnell, 2). In his lectures Colles was always careful to prevent the influence of preconceived theories on his own and his pupils' judgement. His lectures were published in 1844 in the 'Dublin Medical Press', and separately in two volumes, from notes by Simon McCoy; for many years they were among the most easily comprehended and practical extant. 
Colles's practice, both as physician and surgeon, was very remunerative, for many years exceeding $5000 per annum. He remained surgeon to Dr Steevens' Hospital until 1841. He was twice president of the Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, in 1802 at only twenty-eight years old, and again in 1830, and he was offered a baronetcy in 1839, but declined it. In 1807 he married Sophia, daughter of the Revd Jonathan Cope, rector of Ahascragh; they had a large family. In the same year he took a house in St Stephen's Green, Dublin, and he lived in the same square for the rest of his life. Colles died on 16 November 1843 and was buried in Mount Jerome cemetery. A son, William Colles, became regius professor of surgery in Dublin University and was also president of the Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland in 1863-4. 
Though somewhat lacking in imagination, Colles had great perspicuity and possessed the skill of recognizing the salient points of any matter. Cautious in criticism, he expressed simple ideas in clear language. He was cheerful, generous, and modest, a liberal in politics, and a protestant in religion, despising fanaticism and charlatanism. He was never shy of frankly admitting his mistakes. On one occasion at a post-mortem examination of a patient on whom he had operated for stricture of the rectum, he turned to the class and said, 'Gentlemen, it is no use mincing the matter; I caused the patient's death' (McDonnell, 15). Colles was of medium build, well-proportioned, and of dignified manner, with a shrewd, clear eye, a fine forehead, and a decided mouth. 


@@@@@


doc= 5908


Collet, John (c.1725-1780), painter, was born in London, the son of a public office holder. He was a pupil of the landscape artist George Lambert, and also attended the St Martin's Lane Academy. His work was first exhibited in 1761 at the exhibition of the Free Society of Artists held in the Strand, in the form of three landscapes; in total forty-seven paintings by Collet would hang at the society's exhibitions between 1761 and 1783. The following year 'A Gypsy Telling some Country Girls their Fortune' was submitted to the society, its title suggesting the direction in which Collet's style was developing, away from conventional landscapes towards humorous genre pieces. Frequent, if not always flattering, comparisons were drawn by contemporaries between Collet's work and that of William Hogarth, often citing a lack of moral guidance and instruction in the former's 'oeuvre': in his 'Anecdotes of Painters' Edward Edwards notes 'pieces of humour... less satirical than narrative, more ludicrous than witty, and oftentimes displeasing' (Edwards, 67). Similarly an anonymous critic at the Free Society's exhibition of 1767 surmises that 'The colouring of Hogarth is here greatly excelled, his humour agreeably kept up, and was this painter not to follow him in his debauched scenes, but to keep to innocence only, he would be surpassed by none of his contemporaries. ('GM', 1767)' Despite the lack of moral instruction, Collet's work appears to have acquired an increasing popularity with the public and a number of publishers, including Robert Sayer and Carington Bowles, sold engravings after many of his paintings. A substantial selection of these prints can be found in the British Museum's collection of political and personal satires. 
The habits and pretensions of the professional and middle classes were a popular subject for Collet's brush. Typical of this focus is 'The Ladies' Disaster' ('c'.1771), engraved by James Caldwell, where the hat, cap, and wig of a fashionable young lady are blown into the arms of an amused onlooker. The often absurd intricacies of social etiquette were equally mocked by Collet in popular paintings such as 'Grown Ladies Taught to Dance' and its companion piece 'Grown Gentlemen Taught to Dance' ('c'.1768), both reproduced in mezzotint for Robert Sayer. The latter composition even found its way onto the stage, introduced as a sequence in a pantomime. Conversely the stage itself could prove a source of inspiration: in 1775 Collet produced a series of paintings based on several scenes, including 'The Drinking Scene in the Convent', from Richard Brinsley Sheridan's comedy 'The Duenna'. 
Collet's interest in social behaviour embraced not only the manners of the middle and upper classes; many of his paintings focus upon scenes of low life and debauchery set against London's urban sprawl. While producing paintings which illustrated the pleasures and pursuits of the capital's bourgeoisie, such as 'Promenaders in St James's Park' (V&A), Collet appears to have been equally adept at picturing less refined activities. In 'Covent Garden Piazza and Market' ('c'.1775; Museum of London) the elegant and imposing facades of the piazza contrast sharply with a bustling melange of pickpockets, street musicians, hawkers, and traders. Finely drawn social distinctions, however, were often blurred to comic effect: in 'May Morning' ('c'.1760; Museum of London) Collet presents a milkmaid sporting a silver-draped garland and a chimney-sweep parading in a gentleman's wig, such festivities and street customs temporarily challenging and reinterpreting the usual class structure. 
In contrast to many of the personae within his paintings, Collet himself was considered to be 'a man of grave manners and conversation... [who] maintained a very respectable character', a respectability furthered by the inheritance of what contemporaries termed a 'fortune' from a relative (Edwards, 67). He appears to have remained a bachelor throughout his life. Formerly of Millman Street, Chelsea, London, he resided at Cheyne Row, Chelsea, where he died on 6 August 1780. His considerable estate was divided between the families of his two sisters, Philippa and Mary, and several close friends. He was buried at Chelsea on 11 August 1780. 


@@@@@


doc= 5909


Colleton, John (1548-1635), Roman Catholic priest, was the son of Edmund Colleton or Collington (died 'c'.1576), gentleman, of Milverton, Somerset. In 1565 John Colleton entered Lincoln College, Oxford, but took no degree. He had grown up a protestant but converted to Catholicism about 1568 before leaving for the continent in the early 1570s. His family converted to Catholicism on Colleton's return to England. His father was arrested as a recusant soon afterwards and died in Gloucester prison about 1576. 
In 1572 Colleton joined the Carthusian order at Louvain at the age of twenty-three or twenty-four. A speech impediment made him think that he wished to live a contemplative rather than an active religious life. However, after about a year he left the order because of his deteriorating health. The fact that he was a bad singer also seems to have influenced his decision to leave. The last of his six music teachers 'delivered my unaptness to the Prior in these tearmes, That he could teach a Cow to bellow in tune, as soone as me to sing in tune. Further, my state of body, and unaptness to sing was such, that two of the Senior Monks of the house, advised me to content my selfe with an other state of life, namely, to take Priesthood and go into 'England'. (Colleton, 'Just Defence', 300)' Colleton arrived at the English College in Douai on 14 January 1576. He was ordained at Binche on 16 June and was sent to England on 19 July the same year, using the alias of Peters. In England he finally recovered his health. He worked as a missionary priest in several places until the arrival in England of the first Jesuits, Edmund Campion and Robert Persons. Colleton was arrested in the company of Campion at Lyford, Berkshire, on 17 July 1581. A few days later he was a prisoner in the Tower of London. On 31 July he was moved to the Marshalsea, thus escaping torture. On 20 November Colleton was tried together with nineteen other priests on the charge of having plotted, at Rome and Rheims, the murder of the queen and an invasion of England. As Colleton could prove that he had not been out of the country he was acquitted, but remained in prison until he was exiled on 15 January 1585, together with other leading missionary priests such as William Bishop and Thomas Worthington. Colleton then visited the English College, Rheims, and spent some time in Rome. At Rouen he met Persons, who apparently tried to dissuade him from entering the religious life because of his inclination to melancholy. Colleton lived abroad until 1587, when he returned to England, settling first in London and later in Kent. 
From about 1600 Colleton became involved in the appellant or archpriest controversy (1598-1602), the virulent and bitter controversy between a group of Catholic secular priests, the appellants, and the English Jesuits, about the organization and control of the Catholic mission in England. Colleton sided with appellants such as John Mush, opposing the appointment in 1598 of Archpriest George Blackwell and the political influence of the Jesuits, especially Robert Persons. In their attempts to organize the English clergy Colleton and Mush became known as the more moderate or responsible appellants, though their opinions did not differ fundamentally from those of their party who chose to express themselves in an extremist manner. Though Colleton was never a prisoner at Wisbech Castle, he signed the appeal at Wisbech on 17 November 1600. In 1601 he was suspended by Blackwell, who deemed him and the appellant movement schismatic. In order to defend himself Colleton at this time published a learned contribution to the archpriest controversy, 'A Just Defence of the Slandered Priestes' (1602), a theological work which was also intended to answer Persons's 'A Just Apologie, or Defence of the Catholike Ecclesiastical Hierarchie' (1601). In 1603 Colleton signed the declaration of allegiance to Queen Elizabeth and the appeal to the pope. In 1604 he wrote 'A Supplication to the King's most Excellent Majestie', an anonymous petition to James I for the toleration of Catholics. 
In 1608 Colleton was appointed archdeacon of London by Archpriest George Birket. Despite his protestations of political submission to the English sovereign and his repudiation of the pope's deposing power, Colleton refused to take the oath of allegiance. He was once more arrested, about 10 December 1609, and sent to the Clink prison. Apparently he was free to work in Sussex for a brief span in 1610 but subsequently spent several years in prison. From 1613 to 1618 he was in the Clink, Southwark, and from 1621 in the New prison. Although he was ordered to be banished he remained in prison until 5 April 1622 when he was released. When in 1623 William Bishop was consecrated the Roman Catholic bishop of Chalcedon and created the chapter Colleton was constituted the first dean and vicar-general for the eastern district. Because of his great age and declining health Colleton was assisted by George Fisher, alias Musket, the archdeacon of Surrey and Middlesex. 
During the latter part of his life Colleton lived and worked as chaplain in the household of the recusant Sir William Roper of Well Hall in Eltham, Kent. He died at Eltham on 19 October 1635, the cause of his death unknown. He was buried the following day in the churchyard of Eltham parish. 


@@@@@


doc= 5910


Colley, Sir George Pomeroy Pomeroy- (1835-1881), army officer, was born in Dublin on 1 November 1835, the third and youngest son of the Hon. George Francis Colley, formerly Pomeroy (1797-1879), commander in the Royal Navy, of Rathnangan, co. Kildare, and his wife, Frances (died 1 March 1871), third daughter of the Very Revd Thomas Trench, dean of Kildare, and niece of first Baron Ashtown. George Francis, third son of Revd John Pomeroy, fourth Viscount Harberton (1758-1833), assumed the surname Colley in 1830. George junior (who was to assume the additional prefix surname Pomeroy on 8 May 1880), after touring Europe with his parents and receiving his early education at Cheam School (1841-7), entered the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, in 1849, and passed out first in 1852. He was appointed to an ensigncy without purchase in the 2nd foot on 28 May 1852. After service in Ireland and promotion to lieutenant without purchase, Colley was posted to the Cape Frontier with his regiment in August 1854, where he was employed in building a settlement for military colonists, surveying the Transkei, and as a border magistrate. He rejoined his regiment when it was ordered to China in February 1860 and, after receiving promotion to captain on 12 June 1860, saw action at the capture of the Taku (Dagu) forts and in the advance on Peking (Beijing). He returned briefly to the Cape and then entered the Staff College, Camberley, in February 1862. Finding the teaching undemanding, he worked on his own and passed out first in only ten months instead of the usual two years, with the largest aggregate of marks ever obtained. Colley acquired the habit of spending the early hours in the study of subjects, including economics, apart from his chosen profession; he spent his leave on sketching tours and became an accomplished watercolourist. He also played the flautina and, later, became an authority on South African birds. Evelyn Wood believed him the 'best instructed soldier I ever met' (Wood, 'From Midshipman to Field Marshal', 2.112), while Garnet Wolseley thought him 'one of the very ablest men I ever knew' (Wolseley, 'Story of a Soldier's Life', 2.317). 
Colley was slight in build but well-proportioned, and his receding hairline gave greater prominence to a strong brow, taken to be a mark of his intellect, though his eyes were said to be soft. In the last three years of his life he was bearded. Despite his accomplishments Colley often appeared shy and modest, and was given on occasion to self-doubt. None the less, as Frederick Roberts wrote, Colley was 'the kind of Englishman who feels one is equal to three foreigners' (Royal Archives, Ponsonby MSS, Add MS A36/20, Ponsonby to wife, 3 March 1881). 
Having been promoted to a brevet majority on 6 March 1863 (major on 12 May 1875), Colley served as brigade major at Devonport. In 1867 he became an examiner for the Staff College at the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, and the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich. In 1869, however, his appointment to head garrison instruction in England was vetoed on the grounds that he was too junior, and Colley himself turned down the post of military secretary in Bombay. He worked on a number of papers for the War Office, and was then professor of military administration and law at the Staff College from July 1871 to November 1873. During this period he wrote a long article, 'Army', for the ninth edition of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica', completing it a few days before being summoned to join Wolseley's Asante expedition in November 1873. Colley, now lieutenant-colonel, demonstrated considerable administrative skills in reorganizing the expedition's carrier transport. He was a member of the Wolseley ring, those talented officers favoured by and associated with Wolseley. 
After receiving his colonelcy and being appointed CB (March 1874) as a result of his services, Colley joined Wolseley's special mission to Natal in February 1875, designed to reform the administration and persuade the colonists to accept a southern Africa federation. Colley acted as colonial treasurer, but unaccountably succumbed to nerves and lapsed into silence in a major speech to the legislative assembly on 20 May, to Wolseley's surprise and consternation. Colley then undertook an extensive tour of the Transvaal, Swaziland, and Mozambique. Having expected to take up a post at Aldershot, Colley found himself instead in April 1876 military secretary to the new viceroy of India, Lord Lytton, and in April 1878 he became the latter's private secretary, a position he held until February 1880. Colley exercised considerable influence, Sir Neville Chamberlain noting on one occasion that, while Colley 'is always present but sits away and says nothing' he 'has given the Viceroy the key to the discourse and is his real military mentor' (Forrest, 153). A strong advocate of a 'forward policy', Colley played a significant role in formulating British political and military policy, leading to the Second Anglo-Afghan War in November 1878. 
Colley, who was appointed CMG in 1878 and created KCSI on 29 July 1879, chose to remain with Lytton rather than become commandant at Camberley in 1877, and in 1878 he was considered too junior for the Cape command. The duke of Cambridge, the commander-in-chief, regarded Colley as one of those intriguing to get Wolseley the Indian command. Accordingly Wolseley had to fight hard to secure Colley as chief of staff in Zululand in May 1879, and Colley received only the rank of brigadier-general, rather than major-general as Wolseley had wished. With the renewal of the Second Anglo-Afghan War in September 1879 Colley was immediately recalled to India. 
Wolseley, however, succeeded in having Colley appointed his successor as governor of Natal, high commissioner for south-eastern Africa, and commander-in-chief in Natal and the Transvaal with the rank of major-general on 24 April 1880. Colley arrived back in South Africa in June at a critical moment with the Boers in the Transvaal, which Britain had annexed in 1877, becoming increasingly restive. The political settlement of Zululand, however, seemed a more pressing problem and Colley was misled as to Boer attitudes by the faulty judgement of Sir Owen Lanyon ['see 'Lanyon, Sir (William) Owen], the British administrator in the Transvaal. On 17 December 1880 a Boer republic was proclaimed and on 20 December a British column, moving from Lydenburg to Pretoria, was fired upon at Bronkhorstspruit. Colley's small force was widely dispersed, though he had initiated a consolidation prior to the outbreak of hostilities by abandoning three posts in the Transvaal. The six remaining imperial garrisons there were all besieged by the Boers. Because he had declined to employ colonial volunteers in the belief that to do so would lead to unacceptable escalation, Colley's field force totalled only twelve infantry companies, with a handful of mounted troops and some seamen landed from HMS 'Boadicea'. 
Colley had never exercised independent field command and underestimated the Boers' military capability. His decision to advance before reinforcements reached him and despite wet summer weather, which made all movement difficult, was partly governed by the urgent need to relieve the besieged garrisons. In north Natal, finding his route into the Transvaal blocked by some 2000 Boers at Laing's Nek, Colley attempted a frontal assault on 28 January 1881. On this the last occasion regimental colours were carried into action Colley was repulsed with 197 casualties, including several of his own staff. At Ingogo on 8 February he moved to reopen the line of communications between Newcastle and his base at Mount Prospect, which had been cut by the Boers. He drove them back, but suffered another 150 casualties and was forced to retire to his base. Having been reinforced by a column under Wood and fearing the damage done to British prestige by his reverses, Colley and his acting chief of staff and fellow Wolseley protege, Colonel Herbert Stewart, resolved to turn the Boer position at Laing's Nek by seizing the commanding heights of Majuba, some 2000 feet above it. Gladstone's government, newly in office following the 1880 general election, had begun negotiations with the Boers, but Colley regarded the seizure of Majuba as a legitimate move to strengthen the British bargaining position. 
It was also said that Colley was urged to further action by his wife. Colley's marriage, on 14 March 1878, to Edith Althea Hamilton, daughter of Major-General Henry Meade 'Tiger' Hamilton and sister to a future general, Bruce Hamilton, had taken many by surprise. Edith Colley was regarded as highly intelligent, but also extremely ambitious to the extent that, according to Wood, she 'obliterates apparently every thought of the personal danger which [Colley] has undergone' (Royal Archives, 038/276, Wood to Queen Victoria, 27 Feb 1881). Indeed it was remarked that, when the first train arrived at Pietermaritzburg in October 1880, while Colley stood on the footplate, Lady Colley was at the engine's throttle and, thus, symbolically in control of her husband's destiny. It is clear from Colley's own touching last letter to her, in which he lamented that he could not believe in a hereafter, that he loved her deeply. 
Colley chose to take a mixed force from the 58th and 92nd foot and the naval contingent, in all a total of just 365 men, conceivably to allow all to share in the anticipated victory, though some suggested it was intended to give as much prominence to the short-service recruits of the 58th as to the long-service veterans of the 92nd. Colley's aide-de-camp and brother-in-law, Bruce Hamilton, was too ill to accompany the force, but two other future generals were present with the 92nd, Ian Hamilton and Hector MacDonald. After an eight-hour climb to Majuba's summit on the night of 26 February 1881 Colley considered his men too tired to entrench and, in any case, both he and Stewart believed the position impregnable, Colley remarking, 'We could stay here for ever' (Lehmann, 'First Boer War', 239). On the following morning (27 February), the Boers began to ascend the mountain, making skilful use of dead ground and pinning down the defenders with accurate rifle fire. Indeed, while the defenders suffered 285 casualties including 92 killed, it is estimated that the Boers lost only two dead and four wounded. Panic overtook the British as the Boers reached the summit, and Colley was shot through the head at about 1.30 p.m. while trying to rally his men. 
Some 17,000 troops were now on their way to South Africa, but Wood was directed to conclude an armistice; agreement restoring the Transvaal self government was reached on 21 March 1881. Colley's body was brought down from Majuba and buried at Mount Prospect cemetery, Natal, on 1 March 1881. Majuba came to be seen as a national humiliation such that 'Remember Majuba' was to become a rallying cry at the time of the South African War in 1899. 
After Colley's death Lady Colley played the widow's role to the full. She married on 17 February 1891 Wentworth Blackett Beaumont (1829-1907), MP, from 1906 first Baron Allendale. In the light of this her second marriage and swift and lucrative separation in 1891, Wolseley eventually believed she had married Colley as a matter of convenience. She died on 19 May 1927. 


@@@@@


doc= 5911


Colley, John (fl. 1440), Carmelite friar and theologian, joined the order in Doncaster, the town in or near which he may have been born. He studied at Oxford University, where he reached the level of 'lector', and John Bale claims that only an early death prevented him from incepting as a doctor. He is said to have been an elegant Latin writer, and an eloquent preacher who had a unique ability to adapt his words to his audience. Bale preserves the titles of four of his works: 'De laudibus apostolorum', 'De passione Christi', and collections of letters and of sermons; none of them survives. 


@@@@@


doc= 5912


Colliber, Samuel (fl. 1718-1737), author, published in 1727 'Columna rostrata, or, A Critical History of English Sea Affairs', a naval history largely concerned with the Dutch wars of the seventeenth century. The work was once thought to derive some value from the fact that Colliber had been familiar with Dutch and French, and had examined the works of writers in those languages, but it is now entirely superseded. A second edition was published in 1742. 
Colliber wrote also a number of semi-religious or rather pantheistic tracts, including 'An Impartial Enquiry into the Existence and Nature of God' (1718), which ran through several editions; 'The Christian Religion Founded on Reason' (1729); 'Free Thoughts Concerning Souls' (1734); and 'The Known God, or, The Author of Nature Revealed' (1737). They display considerable ingenuity of argument, the style of which, as well as occasional illustrations, shows him to have had some knowledge of mathematics, Latin, and Greek, as well as Locke's 'Essay on Human Understanding' (1690) and Samuel Clarke's Boyle Lectures, 'A Demonstration of the Being and Attributes of God' (1704). Central to all of Colliber's work is the nature of God, souls, and matter which leads him to related fields concerning human perception and the characteristics of space, time, and the relationship of man to animals. 
Nothing is known of Colliber except what little is gathered from his writings. Although he wrote on religious subjects, he was not a clergyman; and though he wrote on naval subjects he was not a seaman: in his own words he was a 'layman' discussing subjects best left for 'Divines'. He may possibly have served for some little time in the navy as a volunteer, or more probably as a schoolmaster. 


@@@@@


doc= 5913


Collier, Arthur (1680-1732), metaphysician, was born on 12 October 1680 at the rectory, Langford Magna, Wiltshire, the third and eldest surviving son of Arthur Collier (died 1697), the rector of Langford Magna, and his wife, Anne, daughter of Thomas and Joan Currey of Misleton, Somerset. The rectory of Langford Magna had been presented to Joseph Collier, Collier's great-grandfather, in 1608; he owned the advowson, and the benefice continued to be enjoyed by his descendants: it was held in trust by Francis Eyre between the death of Arthur Collier sen. in 1697 and the succession of Arthur Collier jun. in 1704. Collier's grandfather, Henry Collier, had been ejected from the living during the Commonwealth; two of his sons, Henry and Joseph, had taken part in Penruddocke's rising at Salisbury, and were transported into slavery in Jamaica for their pains. Henry Collier was restored to his living in 1660, dying in 1672, when it was inherited by his son, Arthur Collier sen. Collier attended school in Salisbury, and was entered at Pembroke College, Oxford, in June 1697, migrating thence to Balliol College in October 1698, along with his younger brother, William. 
Their father having died on 10 December 1697, Arthur Collier inherited the living, and, having taken priest's orders, was instituted to it in 1704. He held it until his death in 1732, having previously sold the advowson for 1600 guineas to Corpus Christi College, Oxford. Arthur and William were deeply interested in metaphysics, and both read Descartes and Malebranche. By the age of twenty-three Arthur had come to believe that there was no such thing as an external world, a proposition he defended in a series of writings. He lived close to John Norris of Bemerton, whose 'Theory of the Ideal World' (1701-4) was praised by Collier; Norris was another English follower of Malebranche, and a defender of Platonist immaterialism. Collier reached his position independently of Bishop Berkeley; a manuscript version of his tract 'Clavis universalis, or, A new inquiry after truth, being a demonstration of the non-existence or impossibility of an external world' (1713) dates from January 1708, a year before the appearance of Berkeley's 'Theory of Vision', and he claims to have waited 'ten years' before publishing the work (A. Collier, 'Clavis universalis', 1713, 1). Whatever the true relationship between their work, their similarities can largely be attributed to their common indebtedness to Malebranche. Collier's work was dry and scholastic, and it remained unpurchased and unread when Berkeley's more stylish work was beginning to be taken up. The 'Clavis universalis' was later highly commended by both Sir James Mackintosh and Dugald Stewart, who thought him unduly neglected; a German translation was made by J. C. Eschenbach in 1756. The 'Clavis' was reprinted in Samuel Parr's 'Metaphysical Tracts by some English Philosophers of the Eighteenth Century' (1837). Collier corresponded about the work with Samuel Clarke, to whom he had sent a copy, in 1714. He remained unknown, however, though he took a keen interest in the controversies of the time and wrote letters to Daniel Waterland, Francis Hare, Benjamin Hoadly, and William Whiston. He was intimate with Bishop Burnet; he occasionally preached at Salisbury Cathedral. His sermons, most of which were prepared for his own parishioners, were unaffected by his metaphysical opinions. 
Collier was an unorthodox high-churchman, and an opponent of occasional conformity; he opposed Henry Sacheverell, and acted as a mediator in the Bangorian controversy, about which he wrote in the Jacobite 'Mist's Journal' in 1719. He was a mystic, believing that all things were comprehended through God, and his greatest interest lay in understanding the opening verse of 'Genesis'; he was also inclined to Arianism, and was an Apollinarian on the subject of the incarnation. These questions are addressed in 'A Specimen of True Philosophy... not Improper to be Bound up with the 'Clavis universalis'' (1730), and in his very rare tract, 'Logology: a treatise on the logos or word of God in seven sermons on St. John's gospel, chap. i. verses 1, 2, 3, and 14' (1732). Such speculations led him to correspond with William Whiston, whom he invited to Salisbury, but they left him some way from his neighbour, the Salisbury deist Thomas Chubb, whom he made it his business to oppose. 
Collier married in 1707 Margaret (died 1749), the daughter of Nicholas Johnson, paymaster of the army, and his wife, a sister of Sir Stephen Fox. Fox was an executor of Johnson's will and guardian of his children, in which capacity Collier brought an action against him in 1710: the case was heard in a chancery suit, the issue of which does not appear. Mrs Collier is said to have been extravagant, and he also lived beyond his means: hence the sale of the advowson of Langford Magna. He died at Langford Magna in 1732, and was buried on 9 September 1732 in Langford church. His brother William, who became rector of Baverstock in 1713, took a keen interest in metaphysics and horseracing, and also died in 1732. Arthur Collier's wife and four children survived him. One son, Arthur, a civilian, died in 1777; Charles became a colonel; Jane Collier was the author of 'An Essay on the Art of Ingeniously Tormenting' (1753); Margaret Collier accompanied Henry Fielding on his voyage to Lisbon. Collier's papers were rediscovered in a house in the close at Salisbury; many had been burnt earlier by servants. Many of these papers were published, along with a memoir, by Robert Benson, in 1837, at the behest of Dr Fowler of Salisbury, a pupil of Dugald Stewart. 


@@@@@


doc= 5914


Collier, Sir Francis Augustus (1783?-1849), naval officer, was the son of Vice-Admiral Sir George Collier (1738-1795) and his second wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Fryer. He entered the navy in 1794, and after a few years' service in the channel was, early in 1798, at the wish of Nelson, appointed to the 'Vanguard', Nelson's flagship in the Mediterranean and at the battle of the Nile. He was afterwards moved into the 'Foudroyant', with Nelson and Sir Edward Berry, and continued serving in the Mediterranean until the peace of Amiens in 1802. He was promoted lieutenant on 11 April 1803, commander on 25 January 1805, and captain on 13 December 1808. In those years he was on routine active service in the West Indies. On 8 December 1815 he was made a CB, and in February 1818 was appointed to the 'Liverpool' (50 guns), going out to the East Indies. In December 1819 he was sent to the Persian Gulf, in naval command of a joint expedition against the 'Joasmi pirates'. Recent reinterpretation has suggested that the supposed piracy was a pretext for the destruction of rival traders by the East India Company. The pirates' chief fortress, Ras al-Khaimah, was captured, their fortifications all round the coast were blown up, and their shipping was destroyed; on 8 January 1820 a formal treaty of peace was signed, and piracy, on the part of the Arabs, was declared to be at an end for ever. The treaty was fairly well kept and put an end to national piracy in the area, although other piracy continued. 
Collier returned to England in October 1822. From 1826 to 1830 he was commodore on the west coast of Africa. His services in the Persian Gulf had been rewarded by the Persian order of the Lion and Sun; he was knighted on 28 July 1830, and made KCH on 1 January 1833. On 14 March 1831, following the death of his first wife, of whom no details are known, he married Catherine, daughter of Thomas Thistlethwaite of Southwick Park, Hampshire; he had at least one child. 
From 1841 to 1846 Collier was superintendent of Woolwich Dockyard, and in 1846 commanded a squadron in the channel. On 9 November 1846 he became a rear-admiral, and in April 1848 was appointed to the command of the China station; he died suddenly of apoplexy at Hong Kong on 28 October 1849. 


@@@@@


doc= 5915


Collier, Sir George (1738-1795), naval officer, was born in London on 11 May 1738, the son of George Collier. He was promoted lieutenant on 3 July 1754 and served on the home station, and under Sir George Pocock in the East Indies. Having been made commander on 6 August 1761, he was posted to the 'Boulogne' frigate on 12 July 1762, and commanded her until the peace in the following year. On 3 September 1763 he married Christiana, daughter of Richard Gwyn of Middleton Hall, Carmarthen; they had one son. He was then appointed to the 'Edgar', guardship at Plymouth, which he commanded for three years; and afterwards to the frigates 'Tweed', 'Levant', and 'Flora'. During his stay on shore prior to the American War of Independence he adapted for the stage a version of 'Beauty and the Beast' under the title 'Selima and Azor'. Collier's production was the work of a man of refined taste with a passion for literature, and it was well-received at the Drury Lane Theatre in 1776. 
In the previous year Collier seems to have been sent to North America on some special service, the circumstances of which are not known, but for which he received a knighthood on 27 January 1775. He was then appointed to the 'Rainbow' (44 guns), in which he sailed for America on 20 May 1776. Shortly after his arrival on the station he was charged by Lord Howe with the duties of senior officer at Halifax, and on 17 June 1777 he received the thanks of the assembly of Nova Scotia for his defence of the province. On 8 July 1777, after a long chase, he captured the 'Hancock', a large frigate which the American revolutionaries had recently built and commissioned, and which was added to the British navy as the 'Iris'. In the following month, on intelligence of an imminent invasion of Nova Scotia, Collier burnt the magazines and stores at Machias, where the American invasion force was gathering and, proceeding along the coast, destroyed some thirty assembled vessels. For this well-timed service he was again officially thanked by the governor and council of the colony on 24 August 1777. 
Collier continued in this command until February 1779, when, by the recall of Rear-Admiral James Gambier, the command of the station temporarily devolved on him. He was summoned to New York, and hoisted his broad pennant in the 'Raisonnable' (64 guns). The strength of the squadron was then severely depleted by the redeployment of all the ships of force in the West Indies. Nevertheless Collier immediately proposed to Sir Henry Clinton, military commander-in-chief, a joint expedition to the Chesapeake, which accordingly got under way, Clinton supplying 2000 men under the command of General Matthews. On 9 May the squadron anchored in Hampton Roads, and over the next fortnight it destroyed or captured 137 vessels (including ships of war built or building, privateers, and merchant ships). Within twenty-four days the squadron was back at New York, having destroyed stores valued at an estimated $1 million or more. Collier later co-operated with Clinton in expeditions up North River and along the coast of Connecticut, and burnt a great number of boats and small vessels. 
In early July 1779 Collier received news that a settlement lately established in Penobscot Bay was under attack by sea and land. He immediately proceeded there, with a force of four frigates and the 64-gun ship, but Collier's ships were obliged to anchor for the night at the mouth of the bay, and the Americans used the delay to re-embark their troops and the greater part of their stores. The next day, as the British squadron advanced, the American forces fled up the river, and, being closely pursued, set fire to and destroyed four of their own ships; four more armed vessels fell into Collier's hands. On his return to New York, Collier found that Vice-Admiral Marriot Arbuthnot had come out to assume the command. Collier could not have expected to retain his position but his correspondence indicates he was aggrieved at being superseded by the less able Arbuthnot after his own brilliant defence of Penobscot. Collier returned home in the 'Daphne' frigate, arriving at Portsmouth on 27 November 1779. He kept a journal of his part in the American War of Independence, which he subsequently prepared for publication as 'A detail of some particular services' (NMM, JOD/9 and BGR/28) and later printed in the 'Naval Chronicle' (32, 267-96, 353-83). This followed a similar record of his visit to Paris and Brussels in 1773, later published as 'France on the Eve of the Revolution' (1865). 
Early in 1780 Collier was appointed to the 'Canada' (74 guns), which he commanded in the channel during the summer of 1780, and at the relief of Gibraltar by Vice-Admiral George Darby in the spring of 1781. On the homeward voyage he chased and came up with the Spanish frigate 'Leocadia' (44 guns), which he took after a short though spirited resistance. Collier had been divorced from his first wife, Christiana, in March 1772, and on 19 July 1781 he married Elizabeth, daughter of William Fryer, an Exeter merchant; they had four sons and two daughters. 
Owing, it is said, to some discontent with the government, or dissatisfaction with Lord Sandwich, then first lord of the Admiralty, Collier resigned his command on his return to England. There is nothing to suggest that Collier was personally at odds with Sandwich, and his decision may have been prompted by a failed bid for patronage. In 1784 he was returned to parliament as member for Honiton. After his return from America in 1779 he had incurred displeasure in the Commons by expressing the belief that the war could not be won by the means and men employed. During Pitt's ministry he similarly earned no favours for his opposition to the government's attempt to limit the powers of the regent in 1786. It was Collier's belief that his defence of the prince of Wales cost him his flag. He had no further naval employment until 1790, by which time he had ceased to represent Honiton. In the crisis following the Spanish action at Nootka Sound he was appointed to the 'St George', but he considered himself insulted by an order to prepare her to receive a flag officer, in light of his previous service as an independent commander. With the approval of his brother officers he wrote to the Admiralty, and the order was revoked. The 'St George' was paid off when the threat of war receded, but after its return he was promoted rear-admiral of the white on 1 February 1793, and advanced to vice-admiral of the blue on 4 July 1794. In the following January he was appointed to the command-in-chief at the Nore, but by then his health would no longer support the burden, and he was compelled to resign the position a few weeks later. 'In person', it was noted in the 'Naval Chronicle', 'Sir George was of a middle stature; active, and well made. His countenance was open and manly -- his eye blue, and beaming with intelligence; his hair light, and complexion fair' ('Naval Chronicle', 32, 265). Collier: 'was an enemy to the mode of manning the navy by impressment. He conceived it perfectly practicable to attract all the youthful mariners on our coasts, by a wise and liberal system of reward and promotion; in which case he thought the use of the lash might safely be abolished -- cases of theft only excepted. (ibid.)' His life during the last fifteen years was embittered by a feeling that his really distinguished service in America, during the few months of his independent command, had not received due recognition. He died in Manchester Square, London, on 6 April 1795. 
All four sons from Collier's second marriage served in the armed forces. George, the eldest, reached the rank of lieutenant-colonel in the Coldstream Guards, and died of wounds received at Bayonne on 10 May 1814. The second son, Francis Augustus Collier, entered the navy and served under Schomberg, and Nelson, and died a rear-admiral in 1849. Henry Browne Collier passed through all the ranks of the navy, latterly as a 'yellowed' flag officer, and died in 1872. The fourth son, Charles, had an army career, serving in the cavalry in Bengal. His two daughters were Louisa and Georgina. 


@@@@@


doc= 5916


Collier, Giles (bap. 1622, d. 1678), Church of England clergyman, was born at Norton, near Evesham, Worcestershire, and baptized there on 13 October 1622, the son of Giles Collier. In 1637 he entered New Inn Hall, Oxford, as a battler or servitor and graduated BA in 1641. Having left Oxford he proceeded MA in 1648 at the time of the parliamentary visitation. At the end of the first civil war of 1642-6 Collier 'clos[ed] then with the Presbyterians' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.1171). He took the covenant in 1648. In May 1646 he became rector of Aston Somerville, Worcestershire, and in 1647 he became vicar of Blockley, Gloucestershire. He also kept a school in his vicarage at Blockley. 
When the Worcestershire association of ministers was formed in 1652 Collier was one of the earliest members. He was also one of the leading members of the Evesham branch of the association. He became an assistant to the Worcestershire ejectors in 1654. 
On 1 January 1655 Collier wrote to Richard Baxter, then in London, asking Baxter to stay with him on his way back to Kidderminster. He also remarked on the 'inconvenience' of 'idle profane ignorant curates' being allowed 'to creepe into our Parishes and baptize etc with the 'Common praier booke''. Next Collier stressed 'how expedient 'tis that a law be made against the observation of Christmas, hereby Episcopal men their keeping it up will be at an end, whereby our ignorant and superstitious people are much hard'ned against us' ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 162-3). In an appendix of 1656 to his 'Vindiciae thesium de sabato' (1653) Collier argued, against his clerical neighbour Edward Fisher of Mickleton, Gloucestershire, that there was no valid reason for the keeping of Christmas. 
At the Restoration Collier, to the surprise and chagrin of neighbouring 'episcopal men', conformed and so kept the living of Blockley. The years before his death in 1678 were marked by a feud with his parishioner Thomas Childe of Northwick and by attempts to prosecute other parishioners for working on the sabbath. In a letter of 27 June 1678 to the Oxford mathematician John Wallis he wrote that two of his daughters had died of smallpox. His own death occurred in July 1678 and he was buried on 31 July in the chancel of Blockley church. 
In his will of 27 July 1678 Collier mentioned his wife, Mary (died 1695), possibly the daughter of William Stephens of Broadway who was baptized in 1621, and his sons Stephen and Nathaniel, both clerks in holy orders. To Nathaniel he left Matthew Poole's 'Synopsis criticorum'; to his 'daughter Hering' he left 'the Reversion at Littleton [near Evesham] purchased of my Father Stephens'. There was also an unspecified bequest of money to 'the honest Poore of Blockley, such who being able do ordinarily come to Church' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/358). 


@@@@@


doc= 5917


Collier, Jeremy (1650-1726), anti-theatrical polemicist and bishop of the nonjuring Church of England, was born on 23 September 1650 at Stow-cum-Quy, Cambridgeshire, son of Jeremy Collier, a fellow of St John's College, Cambridge, under the Commonwealth, and at the time of Collier's birth master of Aldenham School, Hertfordshire, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Smith, of Stow-cum-Quy. He was educated at the free school at Ipswich, where his father became master in 1663. He was admitted sizar at Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, on 6 June 1666 and again on 10 April 1669, where he graduated BA in 1673 and MA in 1676. He was ordained deacon on 24 September 1676 and priest on 24 February 1678. He was chaplain to Mary Sackville, 'nee' Bagot, countess of Dorset, at Knole House in Kent from 1677 to 1679 and rector of Ampton, in Suffolk, from 1679 to 1685. In 1685 he resigned his benefice and moved to London. There, according to the entry in the 'Biographia Britannica', believed to be based on notes by Collier, he obtained a lecturer's appointment at Gray's Inn, but there is no record at the inn of his having held the post. If he did he was displaced in 1689 when he failed to swear allegiance to William III and Mary II on the ground that his oaths to James II were still valid. 
Collier had already published two of his sermons in 1686 and 1687 and he now began to publish pamphlets and tracts on political issues, especially on the question of the validity of the succession of William and Mary to the throne. In his 'The Desertion Discussed. In a Letter to a Country Gentleman' he controverted arguments published by Gilbert Burnet in 'An Enquiry into the Present State of Affairs'. Collier's pamphlet advanced a favourite argument of the supporters of James II in 1689, that since the king had left London under duress and in fear of his life his departure should not be construed as an abdication and that, therefore, though the king was temporarily absent, the throne was not vacant. William was consequently, in Collier's view, a usurper and his landing at Torbay constituted an armed rebellion against the civil power, which violated the Restoration Anglican doctrine of non-resistance. Collier was seized by the government and committed to several months' imprisonment in Newgate. He was, however, finally released without trial and during the next three years wrote several further pamphlets opposing the revolution settlement in church and state, including 'Vindiciae juris regii', published in 1689, where he argued that security in the kingdom could come only from divine hereditary right, and 'Dr Sherlock's 'Case of Allegiance' Considered with some Remarks on his Vindication', in 1691, replying to William Sherlock's justification of his decision to abandon the nonjuror position and take the oaths to William and Mary in 1690. Other pamphlets discussed the nature of a 'de facto' monarch and the duties of clergy towards bishops who occupied the sees of nonjurors. Collier's writings argued that the Church of England was in schism from the true church, represented by the nonjurors, who in Collier's view came as close as possible to the practices of the early church and maintained the independence of the spiritual order and its representatives from the state. The civil order was an expression of the divine will; in collaborating with the revolution of 1688 and concurring in the removal of James II churchmen were rejecting the structure of Christian society and opening the doors to moral as well as political disorder. 
In 1692 Collier was again briefly imprisoned on allegations that he and another nonjuring clergyman, George Newton, had visited Romney Marsh with the intention of opening communications with James II. They were interrogated by Daniel Finch, second earl of Nottingham, secretary of state, but no solid evidence could be produced and the two clergymen were released on bail. Collier then surrendered to the authorities, as giving bail implied his acceptance of the authority of William and Mary's courts. During his brief imprisonment in the king's bench that ensued, he wrote another pamphlet justifying his position, entitled 'The Case of Giving Bail to a Pretended Authority'. Collier was released from the king's bench on the application of his friends. His early pamphlets had been written on the assumption that the revolution, as a rebellion against divine authority, would lead to the collapse of civil order, which would swiftly lead to the restoration of James II as the only means of guaranteeing social stability, but 'A Perswasive to Consideration', published in 1693, accepted that William's rule was probably permanent and called on James's supporters to 'glory in Persecutions and despise Contempt' (Hopes, 161). In 1694 and 1695 he published his 'Miscellanies', which in later editions from 1697 was called 'Essays upon Several Moral Subjects'. One of the essays, 'Upon the office of a chaplain', demonstrated Collier's pugnacious sense of his own independence and of the proper independence of the church. The essay was probably influenced by Collier's experience as a chaplain at Knole. In it he inveighs against the attitude of members of the aristocracy who treated their chaplains as domestic servants. He intended to enhance the self-respect of chaplains as well as remind their employers that churchmen should not be expected to be servile. 
On 3 April 1696, when Sir John Friend and Sir William Parkyns were to be executed for their parts in the assassination plot against William III, Collier, with two other nonjuring clergymen, Shadrach Cook and William Snatt, accompanied them to Tyburn and gave them absolution by laying on of hands, as Collier argued was the practice of the early church. Since neither Friend nor Parkyns had publicly repented of their roles in the plan to murder the king, the clear implication of the absolution ceremony was that the two prisoners were being absolved of the general human sins of a lifetime, of which their plot against the king was not part. Collier and his colleagues thereby gave their tacit approval to the plot by demonstrating that they did not consider it sinful. Collier, to avoid possible arrest, was compelled to go into hiding. His house in London was raided by the authorities on 6 April and papers and documents were seized. This did not, however, prevent him from publishing 'Defence of the Absolution' on 9 April. On 25 April he published a second pamphlet replying to a published declaration signed by Thomas Tenison, archbishop of Canterbury, and John Sharp, archbishop of York, and twelve bishops, that Collier and his two colleagues offered 'an open affront to the Laws both of Church and State' ('A Declaration', 11). Cook and Snatt were tried on a charge of absolving traitors on 2 July, were found guilty, and released. Collier evaded arrest and was outlawed. For six or seven months he remained in hiding, but gradually during 1697 he drifted back into normal life without any further punitive measures being taken against him, although he remained an outlaw for the rest of his life. 
Collier's concern for the threat posed to the moral order of society was widely shared by churchmen influenced like Collier by late seventeenth-century study of the primitive church. The religious societies, the first initiated by Anthony Horneck in London in 1678, and the societies for the reformation of manners, which sprang up in London during the 1690s, sought to provide the moral discipline which many high-churchmen felt the church should be empowered to enforce upon the laity. The involvement of dissenters in the societies for the reformation of manners showed that concern about the decline of moral standards was not limited to churchmen anxious to demonstrate the Church of England's proximity to the ideals of the primitive church. However, the movement was a divided one, as high-churchmen remained suspicious of the involvement of dissenters in the societies for the reformation of manners, and disagreed about whether the societies existed to thank God for his mercy in delivering England from Catholicism in 1688, or (as would have been consistent with Collier's point of view) to combat the collapse of the moral order consequent upon William's invasion. Outside the clergy and the religious societies there was widespread anxiety about profane speech and scandalous behaviour, which included criticism of the stage for providing examples of immoral conduct. The government of William III indicated that it accepted this argument when in 1697 the lord chamberlain issued orders against the 'Prophaneness and Immorality' of the theatre. 
For Collier the condition of the stage provided the most telling example of the moral anarchy that he had predicted would follow the rejection of James II and the establishment of a government that, as it was founded upon rebellion against the civil and moral order, was constitutionally incapable of guaranteeing such order. Collier must have been aware that his campaign against the stage was one with which a larger number of readers would identify compared to his intellectual advocacy of the restoration of James II. In his anti-theatre writings there is a vigour, a verbal resilience, a clarity and directness of invective which is absent from his other moralizing, solemn pieces. This is clearest in his justly famous first contribution on the subject, 'A Short View of the Immorality and Profaneness of the English Stage, together with the Sense of Antiquity upon this Argument', which appeared in 1698. Its thunderous periods ring with a sense of the joy of battle. Altogether, between 1698 and 1708 Collier published six pieces of writing on this theme: some of them (such as 'A Letter to a Lady Concerning the New Playhouse', 1708) are only a few pages long, whereas the original 'Short View' ran to 268 pages and his 'A Second Defence of the 'Short View'' (1700) is 142 pages long. 
Collier claimed in 'A Short View' that his objections were not to the theatre itself, but to particular practical matters of behaviour, such as obscene language, oaths, blasphemy, and sexual innuendo. He regarded these as corrupting, whether or not they were actually intended to corrupt, although he implied that there was malicious intent in many cases. Each chapter dealt with a particular concern: the first was headed 'The immodesty of the stage', the second, 'The profaneness of the stage', the third 'The clergy abused by the stage', and the fourth 'The stage-poets make their principal persons vicious and reward them at the end of the play'. About all these matters of social and religious observance he went into great detail, quoting multiple examples from many contemporary plays to illustrate the various offences about which he complained, and here and there excusing himself from giving chapter and verse because of the 'smuttiness' of the language used in that particular passage. At the opening of the book he proposed: 'The business of Plays is to recommend Virtue and discountenance Vice; to shew the Uncertainty of humane greatness, the suddain Turns of Fate, and the Unhappy Conclusions of Violence and Injustice: 'Tis to expose the Singularities of Pride and Fancy, to make Folly and Falsehood contemptible and to bring every thing that is Ill Under Infamy and Neglect. (Collier, 'A Short View', 1)' The playwrights, Collier argued, were setting out to turn this purpose against itself. God had intended women for modesty but instead female characters were frequently depicted as aggressive and lewd, particularly those of high social status. Noblemen were presented as competing in debauchery when their place in the civil order demanded that they be presented as virtuous and responsible. Collier found that deceitful characters often triumphed, being rewarded with material prosperity and promotion in the social hierarchy, when drama that reflected moral truth should have cast them low. He thought the language of the stage was lewd and blasphemous, alluding to sexual acts and casually invoking heaven and hell, reducing people to the level of ignorant beasts. He was also aggrieved by dramatic portrayals of the clergy, who too frequently appeared as fools when they should be worthy of respect as the maintainers of religion and virtue. To Collier it was essential that the stage should portray a society that respected the alliance between social rank and virtue in both the civil and religious spheres. If it could not then it was questionable whether the theatre should continue. 
Although there were several contemporary dramatists whose works presented Collier with examples of immorality John Dryden in particular articulated a creed that called all Collier's principles into question. Collier's opposition to Dryden underlies his general dislike of the theatre. Dryden had, thirty years before Collier wrote 'A Short View', expressed in its most perfect form in 'An Essay of Dramatick Poesie' and 'A Defence of an Essay', both published in 1668, the essence of the aesthetic dilemma which the single-minded Collier resolved by overlooking. Including but not confining his definition to stage poetry, Dryden, in the 'Defence', wrote: 'I am satisfied if it cause delight: for delight is the chief, if not the only end of Poesie: instruction can be admitted but in the second place, for Poesie only instructs as it delights' (Dryden, 'A Defence', 5-6). Collier argued of Dryden's work: 'The strength of his Defence lies in this choice maxim, that the Chief End of Comedy is Delight. He Questions whether Instruction has any thing to do in Comedy; If it has, he is sure 'tis no more than its secondary end; For the business of the Poet is to make you laugh. (Collier, 'A Short View', 156)' Collier was paraphrasing from Dryden's preface to 'An Evening's Love', published in 1671, where Dryden argued that 'Comedy is not so much oblig'd to the punishment of the faults which it represents, as Tragedy' (Dryden, preface to 'An Evening's Love', 209) on the ground that 'the faults and vices are but the sallies of youth, and the frailties of human nature, and not premeditated crimes' (ibid.). For Collier youthful folly was not an excuse, and theatre existed to correct, not indulge, human weakness. Dryden, introducing the concept of delight as aesthetic appreciation in the 'Defence' was concerned with the particular kind of writing best suited to tragedy, and not comedy. Collier conflated the argument taken from the 'Defence' with that from the preface to 'An Evening's Love' and equated delight with laughter (a connection Dryden never made) and therefore in Collier's estimation with frivolity and triviality. Nevertheless, though he misunderstands -- or pretends to -- Collier, reading Dryden's 'A Defence of an Essay', recognizes a most dangerous opponent -- a man whose life is guided by a God who is to Collier a total stranger. For Dryden: 'The employment of a Poet, is like that of a curious Gunsmith, or Watchmaker: the Iron or Silver is not his own; but they are the least part of that which gives the value: the price lyes wholly in the workmanship. (Dryden, preface to 'An Evening's Love', 212)' The extent to which the workmanship matches, measures up to, and enhances the intrinsic beauty of the iron or the silver is the gauge by which aesthetic delight is judged, said Dryden. But Collier regarded words, however or wherever deployed, as instruments by which to tell people what they should believe and how they should behave. 
Dryden never published a pamphlet of rebuttal or recrimination against Collier, but did occasionally refer ironically to him in other places. In an epilogue that Dryden wrote for a revival of John Vanbrugh's adaptation of Francis Beaumont's and John Fletcher's 'The Pilgrim', in 1700, Dryden managed to get in a sly comment on Collier's allegiance to the cause of divine right monarchy and his assumption that the restoration of James II would improve society's morals: '
Perhaps the Parson stretch'd a point too far 

When with our Theatres he wag'd a war. 

He tells you, That this very Moral Age 

Receiv'd the first Infection from the Stage. 

But sure, a banisht Court, with Lewdness fraught, 

The Seeds of open Vice returning brought. 
(Dryden, epilogue to 'The Pilgrim', 265)' And in the opening passage of 'Cymon and Iphigenia' Dryden wrote: '
The World will think that what we loosely write, 

Tho' now arraign'd, he read with some delight; 

Because he seems to chew the Cud again 

When his broad comment makes the Text too plain 

And teaches more in one explaining page 

Than all the double Meanings of the Stage. 




What needs he Paraphrase on what we mean? 

We were at worst but Wanton; he's Obscene. 
(Dryden, 'Cymon and Iphigenia', 513)' The 'Short View' provoked immediate replies from four of the playwrights whom Collier had attacked: William Congreve, John Vanbrugh, Thomas D'Urfey, and John Dennis, all of whom published pamphlets before the end of 1698 defending their own plays and ridiculing Collier's arguments. Of these the first three tended to be petulant and to rely on scorn and a tone of broad mockery. Dennis, however, in 'The Usefulness of the Stage to the Happiness of Mankind, to Government, and to Religion', took Collier's statements one by one and suggested that their passionate pronouncements often failed to take historical and social fact into account. Dennis argued that it was not the theatre that had corrupted society but, as Dryden would imply in his epilogue to 'The Pilgrim', the licentious court of Charles II. Theatre educated the public against superstition and the pretensions of priests. 
Another critic, the journalist George Ridpath, took an opposite path, extending Collier's argument to suggest that the stage was wholly evil and had always been so. Ridpath's 'The Stage Condemn'd', which also appeared in 1698, gave a complete history of the stage from earliest times, purporting to show that the most responsible opinion in every age was always against all theatrical representations. He also included the entire text of Inigo Jones's and William Davenant's court masque 'Britannia triumphans', performed before Charles I on twelfth night, 1637, which fell on a Sunday, so the reader 'might see what sort of Religion or Evening Sermons, it was that the Court and Laud's Faction of the Church then aimed at' (Ridpath, 30) and question the reputed piety of Charles I. Ridpath both articulated a wider objection to and condemnation of the stage than Collier, and implicated Collier, a nonjuror and Jacobite, as part of the movement that encouraged the immorality of the stage in the first place. 
Collier replied to his critics with 'A Defence of the 'Short View of the Profaneness and Immorality of the English Stage'', which appeared in 1699. In the following year Collier published 'A Second Defence of the 'Short View of the Profaneness and Immorality of the English Stage'', in reply to James Drake's 'Antient and Modern Stages Survey'd' (1699). The 'Second Defence' introduced no new arguments against the stage, but sought to discredit Drake by finding flaws in Drake's history and his translations from Latin and Greek authors. 
Perhaps the most reasonable, logical, and best argued refutation of Collier was Edward Filmer's 'A Defence of Plays, or, The Stage Vindicated', published in 1707 but written at some point before Filmer's death in 1703. Filmer's book refutes Collier chapter by chapter; his concluding statements condemn Collier's methods and intentions, alleging that he had manipulated the controversy to keep it alive, and always intended to destroy, not reform, the theatre. Apparently unaware that Filmer was dead, Collier replied in 1708 with 'A Further Vindication of the 'Short View'... in which the Objections of 'A Defence of Plays' are Considered', which offered no new ideas but forcefully reiterated his original case. 

'A Short View of the Immorality and Profaneness of the English Stage' was widely approved and immensely influential in and beyond Collier's lifetime. Even Filmer conceded that it was 'A Piece! That has been receiv'd by the World with a general Applause, and stood the Shock of some of the greatest Wits of the Age' (Filmer, 1-2). A presbyterian alderman of London and MP for Reading, Sir Owen Buckingham, gave Collier 20 guineas as a reward for the book. Collier was aware that he had found an audience, and his defences of 'A Short View' were usually shorter and more pointed summaries of his arguments that could be easily digested by his readership. Collier's warnings seemed confirmed when new productions of 'Macbeth' and 'The Tempest' in 1703 were followed by the great storm of 26-7 November that year. Collier published 'Mr Collier's Dissuasive from the Playhouse, in a Letter to a Person of Quality', in the wake of the storm. The Society for the Promotion of Christian Knowledge established a committee to supervise the regulation of the playhouses and draw up reasons to recommend their suspension. They also bought 200 copies of the 'Dissuasive' for distribution outside churches. 
Before the end of the first decade of the eighteenth century both Richard Steele and Colley Cibber had publicly declared that they approved of Collier's attack and both of them claimed that their own plays were influenced by Collier's views. Steele went so far as to say of 'The Lying Lover', of 1703, 'Mr. Collier had, about the time Wherein this was published, written against the Immorality of the Stage. I was (as far as I durst for fear of witty Men, upon whom he had been too severe) a great Admirer of his Work and took it into my head to write a Comedy in the Severity he required. (Steele, 'Mr Steele's apology for himself and his writings', 311)' There can be no doubt that Collier's expressed views influenced the emergence of the sentimental or genteel comedy which, with a few exceptions, dominated English theatre writing until well into the nineteenth century. 
Collier clinches his argument, from his point of view, by making it clear that he intends to be no respecter of persons: 'As for Shakespear, he is too guilty to make an Evidence: But I think he gains not much by his Misbehaviour; He has commonly Plautus's Fate, where there is most Smut there is least Sense' (Collier, 'A Short View', 50). Here again Collier's fingerprints can be discerned on the eighteenth-century adaptations of Shakespeare by Colley Cibber, Nahum Tate, and others. 
Collier's publications subsequent to 'A Short View' that were not part of his campaign against the stage were designed both to furnish him with income and to further his case for the independence of the church's authority from that of the civil power, as well as to emphasize the perfection of the early church as an ideal. 'The Great Historical, Geographical, Genealogical and Poetical Dictionary' appeared in 1701; a supplement followed in 1705 and an appendix in 1721. The 'Dictionary' was translated largely from Louis Moreri's 'Grand dictionnaire historique', first published in Lyons in 1674 and revised in Amsterdam by Jean Le Clerc in 1691, but it contained new material on English and church history from Collier. He did not write entries dealing with events after 1688, presumably because his Jacobite sympathies would conflict with the interest of the publisher. Thomas Hearne dismissed the work as inaccurate, but it sold well. Meanwhile Collier also published 'An Ecclesiastical History of Great Britain' in two volumes published in 1708 and 1714. This was better regarded by Hearne and by other scholars and was still thought of as a valuable church history by William Hunt in his entry on Collier for the 'Dictionary of National Biography' in 1887. The 'Ecclesiastical History' derived its constitutional history from the work of Robert Brady, who had been master of Gonville and Caius when Collier was an undergraduate, and who had argued that the English constitution was not handed down from the Anglo-Saxon period or earlier, but instead rested on the conquest of William I. Collier sought to demonstrate, in contrast to the comparatively recent origins of the civil power, 'the continued existence in England of the bearers of the divine commission, free both from papal and royal interference' (Hopes, 171). The nonjurors were presented as the representatives of an unchanging ecclesiastical tradition handed down from the early church. The 'Ecclesiastical History' brought accusations that Collier was a Roman Catholic sympathizer from Gilbert Burnet and others, but Collier never sought union with the Church of Rome, and continued to reject its doctrine and claim to supremacy. 
By the second decade of the eighteenth century Collier seems to have become established officiating to a small congregation in an upper room in Broad Street, London, perhaps assisted by Samuel Carte, brother of the historian Thomas Carte. He rejected approaches during Anne's reign that encouraged him to take the oaths and rejoin the established church, and supported the continuation of the nonjuring episcopate. On 14 May 1713 he was consecrated a bishop of the nonjuring Church of England, alongside Nathaniel Spinckes and Samuel Hawes, by George Hickes, nonjuring bishop of Thetford, and the Scottish episcopalian bishops James Gadderar and Archibald Campbell. Collier and his colleagues were 'catholic bishops', ministering to nonjurors without regard to diocesan borders. Hickes died in December 1715, and on 23 July 1716 Collier was elected his successor as primus of the nonjuring communion. By this time he had probably married Cecelia Deacon ('fl'. 1697-1733), widow of William Deacon (died 1706), a mariner, sometime housekeeper to Hickes, and mother of the nonjuring churchman Thomas Deacon (1697-1753), whom Collier had ordained in March. A letter from Archibald Campbell on Collier's death reveals that Collier had been married before, but no details of his first wife are known. 
A project of the nonjurors that Collier took forward from 1716 was the scheme for union with the Eastern Orthodox churches in the hope that this would further perfect the nonjuring Church of England as the descendant of the primitive church. A concordat was prepared in consultation with Arsenius, archbishop of Thebais, a representative of the Egyptian church. The Russian emperor, Peter the Great, acted as an intermediary between the English nonjurors and the Greek, Russian, and Egyptian Orthodox churches. The nonjurors were willing to accept patriarchal authority, with Jerusalem as their mother see, thereby avoiding recognition of Rome as the patriarchate of the West, but were reluctant to accept transubstantiation and the invocation of the saints. Following the death of Peter the Great in 1725, negotiations ceased. By this time the nonjurors were themselves divided by an internal schism. 
Collier had shared with Hickes a preference for the eucharist as prescribed by the 1549 prayer book over that of 1662. Collier sought to introduce a revised form of this service influenced by his study of early Christian writers. The new liturgy would have introduced four usages not known in the 1662 prayer book; water was to be mixed with communion wine, prayers for the church were to encompass the faithful departed as well as the church militant on earth, a prayer was to be said for the descent of the holy ghost on the consecrated elements, and a further prayer would offer the consecrated elements to God as symbols of Christ's body and blood. Despite opposition from most of the nonjuring clergy, who were supported in exile by James Stuart, the Old Pretender, whom most nonjurors regarded as the rightful King James III, Collier imposed what he referred to as 'Primitive and Catholic Usages' (Overton, 294) on 20 December 1717, and from then on he regarded those nonjurors who adhered to the prayer book of 1662, the non-usagers, as schismatic. Collier led a pamphlet war with his critics: 'Reasons for Restoring Some Prayers and Directions as they Stood in the First English Reformed Liturgy' appeared in 1717 and reached its fourth edition the next year, when Collier also published a new service book for the use of his division of the nonjurors. The usagers came to predominate among the nonjurors, helped by respect for Collier and his scholarship, which was superior to that of the leader of the non-usagers, Nathaniel Spinckes. 
Collier continued to publish despite declining health, and from about 1718 the nonjuring scholar Samuel Jebb served as his librarian. 'Several Discourses upon Practical Subjects' appeared in 1725 and 'God not the Author of Evil' in 1726. He was reported in 1725 to be 'very poor in his old age' (Self, 11), a condition blamed on the demands of Mrs Collier, who was alleged to aspire to govern the nonjuring church. Collier remained passionately sincere and unwaveringly true to his principles. Dogma and doctrine he held, but, in the last analysis, not wisdom. Worn down by gall-bladder disease, he died in London on 26 April 1726 and was buried in the churchyard of St Pancras, London, on 29 April; he was survived by his widow and stepson. 


@@@@@


doc= 5918


Veale, George (b. 1757, d. in or before 1833), viola player, was baptized on 2 October 1757 at St Andrew's Church, Holborn, London, the son of Timothy Veale and his wife, Elizabeth. He was first heard of in 1784, when he took part in the Handel memorial concerts. He played in the Covent Garden Theatre band and took part in the oratorio performances at the Drury Lane Theatre. He was admitted to the Royal Society of Musicians in 1788, and during the 1790s played in the annual concerts in St Paul's Cathedral sponsored by the Royal Society of Musicians. From 1812 to 1817 he played in the band at Drury Lane. 
It used to be thought (incorrectly) that Veale was the pseudonymous author of a satire on Dr Burney's 'Musical Tour' entitled 'Musical Travels through England' (1774), which appeared under the name of Joel Collier. The second edition contains a fictitious account of the last illness and death of Collier. It was later suggested that it was written partly by John Laurence Bicknell and partly by Peter Beckford. 
Veale had died by 6 January 1833, when the Royal Society of Musicians gave his sister $12 to cover his funeral expenses. 


@@@@@


doc= 5919


Collier, John (1708-1786), satirist and caricaturist, was born at Church Lane, Urmston, Lancashire, on 16 December 1708. He was the third of nine children of John Collier, Church of England clergyman ('c'.1676-1739) and his wife, Mary Cook (died 'c'.1726). John initially attended Urmston School, but plans for his education were abandoned when his father's sight failed. In 1722 he was apprenticed to a dutch-loom weaver at Newton Moor, near Mottram, where his father had family links. 'Hating slavery in all shapes', as he later put it (Corry, iii), he left after a year and spent the next few years as an itinerant schoolmaster in the region of Manchester. In 1729 he became assistant schoolmaster to Robert Pearson, the decrepit curate of Milnrow, near Rochdale, formally taking over the post of schoolmaster in 1742 after Pearson's death. Richard Townley of Belfield, a local mercer and landowner, became his patron. Collier supplemented his meagre income by private teaching and by acting as hedge lawyer, composing letters, wills, indentures, and other documents. He acquired notoriety through squibs, satires, poetry, and practical jokes, on one occasion blasting the 'Prickshaw witch' (a local conjuror) with fire and water. 
On 1 April 1744 Collier married Mary Clay ('c'.1726-1786), a young Huddersfield midwife with a family connection in Milnrow, brought up in London. Notwithstanding the early exhaustion of her fortune the marriage seems to have been a success and produced nine children, seven of whom survived into adulthood. 
In 1746 there appeared under the name Tim Bobbin, Collier's first and most famous work, 'A View of the Lancashire Dialect, or, Tummus and Mary', the earliest significant piece of Lancashire dialect to be published. Subsequently expanded to include a glossary, illustrations, and other material, it went through seven editions in his own lifetime and was prolifically pirated both before and after his death. Running short of money Collier in 1750 reluctantly accepted an offer from an admirer, Richard Hill, of the well-paid post of clerk at his woollen clothworks at Kebroyd, near Halifax. Finding himself 'metamorphosed from a petty monarch, to a species of slave' ('Works', 214) he soon rebelled against the discipline of work and jubilantly returned to Milnrow at Christmas 1751 to take up his old post of schoolmaster, later declaring: 'Liberty in rags, is preferable to dependance in gorgeous trappings' ('Works', 247). 
Collier now developed his trade as a painter, increasingly with the help of his sons, producing inn signs, painted panels, and grotesque caricatures which were widely distributed, reaching the American colonies via a Liverpool merchant. He promoted and distributed his own work, travelling all over northern England collecting and delivering orders and commissions for books and pictures and consuming the proceeds as he went. Publicans were among his best customers, and he theirs. In 1773 was published his 'Human Passions Delineated', an upmarket edition of his caricatures which acted as a catalogue, in which he described himself as the 'Lancashire Hogarth'. His writings occasionally brought him into conflict with authority. His 1757 intervention in Manchester's food riots, 'Truth in a Mask', and his 1760 'Remarks on the reign of George II' both had to be printed clandestinely, bearing the imprint 'Amsterdam'. During the American War of Independence he openly sided with the colonists and was reportedly indicted for producing a picture libellous on the king. His politics, however, were those of the court jester: when he signed himself 'reforming John', it was as a drunkard rather than as a radical ('Works', 244). His targets were the standard butts of eighteenth-century satire: old wives, 'Oliverian dotards', Methodists, Scots, tax-eaters, fops, courtiers, lawyers, and swindling printers. He reserved his fiercest hostility for wealthy clergy and pluralists, thick on the ground thereabouts, best expressed in the epitaph: '
Full three feet deep beneath this stone 

Lies our late vicar Forster 

Who clipp'd his sheep to the very bone 

But said no Pater Noster. 

' In his declining years Collier was conveyed around Milnrow in an armchair equipped with wheels, while his wife's was adapted as a sedan chair. He died there, unreformed and contented, on 14 July 1786, having lived heartily up to his own motto, 'Laugh and be fat'. His wife had died the previous month, and they were buried close together in Rochdale churchyard. His three eldest sons were apprenticed to coachmakers and subsequently had notable careers, Charles as portrait painter, Thomas as persecuted radical, and John successively as artist, historian of Newcastle upon Tyne, and lunatic, his insanity recognizable as a bizarre caricature of his father. 
Commentators in all ages have had trouble in allocating a cultural level to Tim Bobbin. Two local radicals, Robert Walker (writing as Tim Bobbin the Second in 1796) and James Butterworth (as Paul Bobbin in 1819), later attempted to appropriate his reputation to the radical cause. Walter Scott visited his grave in 1818, and he was revered by later generations of dialect writers. Metropolitan contemporaries were prone to view him with condescension as a naive rustic, a product of the culture he portrayed. The 1810 London edition of 'Human Passions' systematically softened his caricatures, while an 1828 edition of the 'Lancashire Dialect' was supplied with more conventionally crafted pictures by George Cruikshank. The Victorian antiquary W. E. Axon thought his pictures 'execrable... gross and cruel', while the 'Dictionary of National Biography' found them 'grotesque' and 'absolutely devoid of artistic merit'. Collier himself referred to 'my old trade of boggart-painting' ('Works', 242). He drew, however, not only on traditions of inn sign and carriage painting but on the work of Hogarth and on Flemish low-life art, and encountered Flemish and London artists in Lancashire. 
Similarly, while Corry regarded Collier's poetry as 'incorrect, coarse and vulgar' (Corry, xxvi), he was in fact well educated, familiar with Chaucer, the classics, and contemporary literature of all kinds, and pursued antiquarian interests. In 1771, 'having a natural antipathy to tyranny in writing, as well as politics' ('Works', 105), he launched a learned and devastating satirical assault on the Revd John Whitaker's overblown 'History of Manchester', claiming (for example) that a find identified by Whitaker as a Saxon lachrymatory was in fact a witch bottle, filled with piss, and comparing the whole to 'the towering smoke of Ossian' ('Works', 108). His 'Lancashire Dialect' similarly was serious but not solemn, based on careful collection and glossing of the language he heard, and influential in defining the comic figure of the impoverished Lancastrian, downtrodden, ridiculous, and obtusely irrepressible. Samuel Bamford, author of a fine poem, 'Tim Bobbin's Grave', spoke the dialect but thought Collier's orthoepy betrayed his Mersey region origins and issued his own edition in 1850. Later scholars of dialect agreed that Collier's version of south-east Lancashire dialect was the closest surviving English relative of Anglo-Saxon. The unorthodox vigour of Collier's etchings, the informal directness of his prose, and the eloquent vulgarity of his verse appeal directly from the eighteenth century to the present. 


@@@@@


doc= 5920


Collier, John Payne (1789-1883), literary editor and forger, was born on 11 January 1789 in New Broad Street in the City of London, the second of five children of John Dyer Collier (1762-1825) and his wife, Jane Payne (1768-1833), the spirited and artistic daughter of a London sugar refiner. 
John Dyer Collier, talented, headstrong, and luckless, was the son of a prosperous London apothecary, whose capital stake of $10,000, given him at his majority, he dissipated in the Spanish merino wool trade. Subsequently he tried farming in Essex, but was bankrupted in 1802; he studied law briefly and in extremes turned to journalism. He edited the 'Monthly Register' for Charles and John Wyatt (1802-3), translated fiction, and published an 'Essay on the Law of Patents' (1803) and a 'Life of Abraham Newland' (1808); in 1804 he joined the staff of 'The Times' as a law and parliamentary reporter, and later moved on to the 'Morning Chronicle' (1808-15). In 1816 he embarked on his final literary venture with the purchase of the moribund 'Critical Review', which he converted from tory to liberal in its politics, and from post-Augustan to Romantic in its literary predilections. This he edited, with the assistance of his son, until its final collapse eighteen months later. John Payne, educated at home and taught shorthand by his father, had himself joined 'The Times' by 1806, and also participated largely in the family enterprise of supplying, by subscription, handwritten newsletters to provincial papers. 
Many details of Collier's early life are recorded in the diaries and correspondence of Henry Crabb Robinson, who lodged with the family from 1806 to 1813 and remained devoted to most of them -- but especially to Jane -- thereafter. A religious nonconformist and a liberal idealist, John Dyer Collier numbered among his acquaintances William Godwin, Thomas Holcroft, William Hazlitt, and Leigh Hunt, and through Robinson the Colliers became intimate with Charles and Mary Lamb and friendly with the Wordsworths and S. T. Coleridge. When in 1811-12 Coleridge gave a series of lectures on Shakespeare and Milton, John Payne Collier took down several in his professional shorthand, to which alone they owe their preservation. Encouraged by Robinson, Collier took up the study of law and was admitted to the Middle Temple on 31 July 1811, but journalism continued to dominate his working hours. In 1812 he left 'The Times' for the rival 'Morning Chronicle', but was back at 'The Times' in 1815 for a second stint as parliamentary reporter; after being dismissed in mid-1823 by his old comrade Thomas Barnes (1785-1841), Collier returned to the 'Chronicle', where he remained until 1847. In the 1830s and 1840s he also served as theatre critic for 'The Observer' and wrote, anonymously, for other periodicals. 
On 20 August 1816 Collier married a cousin of his mother, Mary Louisa Pycroft (1787-1857), the daughter of William Pycroft, a Whitechapel sugar refiner; their first child, a daughter, born in 1817, was followed over the next ten years by two sons and three further daughters. By the time of his marriage Collier had begun to collect early English literature on a modest scale but with considerable discrimination, and to publish both verse and antiquarian essays, first in the 'British Lady's Magazine' (1815). He was responsible for more than forty literary reviews in his father's 'Critical Review', for which he also wrote a series of sixteen essays on pre-Restoration literature, under the heading 'Bibliotheca antiqua' (1816-17). In 1818-19 Collier temporarily succeeded Frederic Shoberl (1775-1853), a family friend, as editor of Ackermann's 'Repository', to which he also contributed numerous articles and poems under a variety of pseudonyms; nine essays 'On the English dramatic writers who preceded Shakespeare' appeared in the 'Edinburgh Magazine' (1818-21). A series of mildly indiscreet sketches of leading barristers and magistrates, signed 'Amicus Curiae' and first published in Leigh Hunt's 'Examiner', were collected by Collier as 'Criticisms on the Bar' (1819), and proved an embarrassment to his legal career -- 'foolish, flippant, and fatal to my prospects, if ever I had any', he remarked of it later ('DNB'). Almost simultaneously he suffered a 'scrape' with the House of Commons over an episode improperly reported in the 'Morning Chronicle', and while he was pardoned, and even praised for his candour and courage in response, the long-term professional effect was again negative. He was not called to the bar until 6 February 1829, and never seriously practised. 
Collier's two-volume 'Poetical Decameron', a series of informative but arcane dialogues on early English popular literature, appeared in 1820, and in 1822 he brought out, privately and anonymously, 'The Poet's Pilgrimage', a laboured Spenserian allegory, which in old age he believed his own best claim to remembrance; it was reissued under his name in 1825, and drew tempered praise from Charles Lamb, its dedicatee. His first editorial work (1825-7) was the completion of a new edition of Robert Dodsley's 'Select Collection of Old Plays', begun by Octavius Gilchrist; Collier's notes, signed 'C.', appear throughout the twelve volumes, and he added six plays previously unedited. Five further plays edited by Collier were separately published by Septimus Prowett in 1828-9 and reissued as 'Five Old Plays' in 1833. The same publisher in 1828 engaged Collier to provide the text for a series of engravings by George Cruikshank illustrating the popular Punch and Judy puppet show. By 1881 at least eight English editions of the resulting 'Punch and Judy' had appeared; Collier's play-text, based loosely on a performance by Piccini, remains standard, and his introductory history of puppet theatre is still often cited. 
By the late 1820s Collier was at work on his most important, if flawed, work of scholarship, a 'History of English Dramatic Poetry and Annals of the Stage' (to about 1660), which John Murray published in three volumes in 1831 ('HEDP'). Although some whimsical fictions and slight literary impostures had found their way into Collier's earlier works -- from the 'Critical Review' in 1819 to verse by 'Lord Byron' in 'Punch and Judy' -- here, for the first time 'in extenso', fabrications of historical evidence and documentary text are interspersed in an otherwise meticulous and original scholarly work. Some twenty instances of fakery have by now been identified in 'HEDP', mostly involving text for which no source has ever come to light, but several are based upon physical forgeries in the British Museum manuscript collections, the State Paper Office, and among the Alleyn and Henslowe papers at Dulwich College. Collier's personal responsibility both for the unsubstantiated reports and for the forged handwritten material in public repositories was long disputed, not least by himself, but the accumulation of subsequent evidence seems to rule out the agency of any other mischievous perpetrator. Why he should thus have marred a work of great merit, and blighted a literary career already successfully advanced, has always vexed his biographers, but whatever the reason or reasons, once indulged, his propensity for invention never subsided. For decades, however, no one suspected 'HEDP' of corruption, and it served most Victorians as a blameless authority and the principal guide to its subjects. 
Collier dedicated 'HEDP' to William Spencer Cavendish (1790-1858), sixth duke of Devonshire, the leading private collector of old English drama, who had befriended him and commissioned him at $100 a year to be his part-time librarian in London. For a time Devonshire's patronage made the lucrative appointment of Examiner of Plays, in succession to George Colman the younger, seem a possibility, but this came to nothing. Collier oversaw for the duke a fine facsimile of an Inigo Jones sketchbook in 1831, organized his old plays, and procured for him many significant additions, including quartos from the Richard Heber dispersal of 1834-6; he also contributed valuable catalogue notes to part IV of that sale, the richest portion of Heber's early poetry and popular prose (1834), and on the day bought what he could for himself, as well as for Devonshire. 
Under Devonshire's sponsorship Collier became in 1832 the twelfth member of the new Garrick Club, long to be a favourite haunt, although he was later passed over for the Athenaeum. In December 1830 he was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries, put forward by Francis Douce and Thomas Amyot; he later served as treasurer (1847-9) and vice-president (1849-56), and recycled at least one youthful invention, originally aired in the 'Critical Review', in the society's 'Archaeologia'. Following the publication of 'HEDP' he gained access to the largely uninvestigated collection of books and manuscripts kept at Bridgewater House by Lord Francis Leveson Gower, afterwards Lord Egerton (1833) and earl of Ellesmere (1846). Collier produced an elaborate printed catalogue of the rarer English books in the Bridgewater collection (1837), and in 1840 edited a selection of 'Egerton Papers' for the Camden Society. The family muniments, particularly those relating to James I's chancellor, Sir Thomas Egerton, yielded material for three Shakespearian tracts, published by Collier through the learned bookseller Thomas Rodd: 'New Facts Relating to the Life of Shakespeare' (1835), 'New Particulars etc.' (1836), and 'Farther Particulars etc.' (1839). Alongside genuine material, however, Collier again printed a number of forgeries and fabrications, including 'antique' ballads of his own composition, as well as several 'contemporary' letters and documents referring to Shakespeare that he claimed to have found among Egerton's uncatalogued papers. 
In 1837 Collier became a sub-editor at the 'Morning Chronicle', and for the next two or three years was responsible for many of the paper's political columns and leading articles. By 1841, however, he was displaced and his salary cut, and he returned to the tedious routine of the parliamentary gallery. He now projected and advertised (in 'Reasons for a New Edition of Shakespeare', 1841) an elaborate eight-volume edition of Shakespeare, which was published by Whittaker in 1842-4 and embodies some spurious 'contemporary' annotations from a 'First Folio' at Bridgewater House. A few new details in the life of Shakespeare included there are also spurious, and many old impostures are repeated. In 1838 Collier participated in founding the Camden Society, devoted to reprinting 'materials for the Civil, Ecclesiastical, or Literary History of the United Kingdom', and, in 1840, the Percy and Shakespeare societies (ballads and popular literature; drama and theatrical history). For the Camden Society he produced four volumes, including the first edition of John Bale's 'Kynge Johan' (1838), prepared from the manuscript he had purchased on Devonshire's behalf, and for the Percy Society he was responsible for ten more little volumes over the years 1840-44. In addition to serving as director of the Shakespeare Society and editing four volumes of its papers, Collier wrote or edited a further twenty-two volumes under its imprint (1841-51). These included a life of Edward Alleyn (1841) and an edition of Philip Henslowe's diary (1845), both based upon manuscripts at Dulwich College, and both valuable in part, but again riddled with fabricated material, some of it based on forged interpolations in the Dulwich originals. Two volumes of extracts from the registers of the Stationers' Company (Shakespeare Society, 1848-9), and a continuation in 'Notes and Queries' (1861-3), are likewise contaminated: several forged additions to the original registers, especially those attributing authorship, have been blamed upon Collier, as well as a large number of otherwise unknown 'contemporary' ballads published as illustrative matter in the extracts. 
In 1847 a royal commission was appointed to inquire into the management of the British Museum, and through the influence of its chairman, Lord Ellesmere, Collier was named secretary at a stipend of $300 a year for the limited duration of the inquiry; he thereupon resigned from the 'Morning Chronicle', which paid him less for more work. In two privately printed tracts addressed to his patron, and in appearances before the commission as an expert witness, Collier determinedly opposed Sir Anthony Panizzi (1797-1879), then keeper of printed books, by advocating a printed rather than a manuscript catalogue of the library. His views were publicly ridiculed by Panizzi, and the final report of the commission (1850) endorsed Panizzi's original plan. Collier was unsuccessful in an attempt to rejoin 'The Times', but was granted a civil-list pension of $100. He left London for good in the spring of 1850, taking his wife and four daughters to Holyport, Berkshire; at the end of 1853, following the death from consumption of the two eldest daughters, the family moved for the last time, to Riverside, Maidenhead. 
In 'The Athenaeum' for 31 January 1852 Collier announced his discovery of a 'Shakespeare Second Folio' (1632) extensively 'corrected' in a mid-seventeenth-century hand. In 1853 he published the annotations, mostly providing plausible new readings, as a volume of notes and emendations to his 1842-4 Shakespeare, and gave in the preface an account (later somewhat adjusted) of his purchase of the volume from the bookseller Thomas Rodd the younger (died 1849). This was followed in the same year by a one-volume edition of Shakespeare incorporating the emendations, and in 1858 by a new six-volume critical edition; the folio itself, usually called the 'Perkins folio' from an ownership inscription on its cover, was presented by Collier to the duke of Devonshire in 1853. 
Over the next years the emendations of Collier's anonymous 'Old Corrector' were attacked on textual grounds by a wide range of commentators, including his young friend J. O. Halliwell, later Halliwell-Phillipps (1820-1889), his former friend Alexander Dyce (1798-1869), and his professed adversaries S. W. Singer (1783-1858), Howard Staunton (1810-1874), C. M. Ingleby (1823-1886), and A. E. Brae (1800/01-1881). Brae alone, in newspaper articles and in 'Literary Cookery' (1855), suggested the possibility of forgery, and simultaneously cast doubt on the shorthand transcripts of Coleridge's 1811-12 lectures, which Collier had announced in 1854; this provoked Collier to an unsuccessful libel action against the publisher of the pamphlet, John Russell Smith. Other of Collier's 'discoveries' were questioned in the 1850s, chiefly by Halliwell, who condemned some of the Bridgewater papers in 1853, never suggesting, however, that Collier had forged them. Collier himself continued his editorial labours, preparing a volume of Michael Drayton's poems for the Roxburghe Club (1856) and beginning an elaborate new edition of Spenser, which finally appeared, in five handsome volumes, in 1862. His patrons Ellesmere and Devonshire died in 1857 and 1858, and on 10 December 1857 his wife, Mary Louisa, of cancer. 
Continued speculation about the 'Perkins folio' led Sir Frederic Madden, keeper of manuscripts at the British Museum, to request a sight of the book, and in May 1859 the seventh duke of Devonshire placed it on loan there, where Madden, his assistant N. E. S. A. Hamilton, and Nevil Maskelyne, keeper of the mineral department, examined it carefully. Hamilton and Maskelyne published their findings in three letters to 'The Times' (2 and 16 July), asserting that the annotations in ink were recent forgeries in a mock seventeenth-century hand, frequently corresponding (in content) to pencilled notes in an undisguised modern hand, found elsewhere in the margins; furthermore, microscopic analysis by Maskelyne showed that in some cases 'old' ink notes had been penned over similar pencillings, likewise undeniably modern. Collier replied on 7 and 20 July, again testifying that all the ink notes had been present when he purchased the book, and declaring -- although he had not yet been accused of it -- that he had inserted none of the suspect pencil or ink annotations. Hamilton, aided and encouraged by Staunton, Ingleby, and Madden, continued to pursue the matter, and to work up a case against Collier himself. Early in 1860 Hamilton published an inquiry into the Perkins affair that also questioned some of the Bridgewater and Dulwich papers, as well as a petition in the State Paper Office, naming Shakespeare, which had first surfaced in 'HEDP'. Collier immediately published a reply in 'The Athenaeum' (6 Feb 1860), expanding it to a pamphlet in the following weeks, but Hamilton's attack was soon followed by others, including a review of the controversy by T. D. Hardy of the State Paper Office (1860) and a lengthy 'Complete View' by Ingleby (1861). 
Collier's steadfast refusal to comment further on the various accusations -- of forgery in person, of complicity in deceit, or even of sustained carelessness -- convinced many of his guilt, but by 1862, when he published his long-delayed Spenser to critical approval, public interest in the Perkins controversy was all but extinct. Unwilling to remain idle, in May 1862 Collier projected a scheme of reprinting rare English works of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries in limited editions offered only by subscription. Through 1871 no fewer than eighty-one volumes appeared, ranging from pamphlets of a few pages to substantial texts such as 'England's Parnassus' and 'Tottell's Miscellany'. At the age of seventy-four Collier began work on his 'Bibliographical and Critical Account of the Rarest Books in the English Language', a compilation of old and new notes on minor Tudor and Stuart literature, published in two stout volumes by Joseph Lilly in 1865; it was immediately reprinted in New York and remains valuable for the out-of-the-way material it describes, despite its perpetuation of fabricated report. In the 1860s and 1870s Collier privately published several other books, including a romanticized autobiography for the years 1832-3 ('An Old Man's Diary', 1871-2) and selections of ballads both from the seventeenth century ('Broadside Black-Letter Ballads', 1868) and of his own composition ('A Few Odds and Ends', 1871); he described his 'Twenty-Five Old Ballads' (1869) as 'taken' from a seventeenth-century manuscript, but all the ballads were in fact written by Collier himself. 
Between 1875 and 1878 Collier published his final edition of Shakespeare, issued to subscribers in forty-three parts, purporting to offer 'the purest text and the briefest notes'. On its completion he revised, very lightly, his 'History of English Dramatic Poetry' for George Bell (1879), modifying only a few of the suspect entries of 1831. Now aged ninety, increasingly frail and nearly blind, Collier seldom left his home at Maidenhead, where an unmarried daughter kept house for him. He died there on 17 September 1883, and was buried in Bray churchyard three days later, survived by two sons and two daughters. Many of his rare English books had earlier been sold to J. O. Halliwell or to Frederic Ouvry (1814-1881), Collier's nephew by marriage, and the bulk of his remaining books and papers were offered by Sothebys on 7-9 August 1884, when they made $2105 16's'. 6died At that sale the British Museum acquired one of Collier's forged volumes of ballads (lot 214, now Add. MS 32380) and Dulwich College purchased a transcript in Collier's hand of Edward Alleyn's diary (lot 200), examination of which confirmed the case for his having forged interpolations in the original manuscript. Other papers remained in the family, but most, including Collier's late diary (1872-82), his 1811 shorthand notes of Coleridge's lectures, an incomplete autobiography, and the so-called Hall commonplace book, containing ballads in a faked seventeenth-century hand, have now found institutional homes, principally at the Folger Shakespeare Library, Washington, DC. 
Collier's personal life, although dogged by overwork and ill health, was not overall an unhappy one. Despite the falling away of old friends such as Frederic Madden and Alexander Dyce in the mid-century, he was cherished in old age as 'the Nestor of all living Restorers of our Old Literature' by Edward Arber ('Transcript of the Registers of the Stationers' Company', 1875, 30), flattered by Swinburne, and courted by such new friends as J. W. Ebsworth (1824-1908) in England and H. H. Furness (among many others) in America, where his following remained loyal. His critical and editorial achievement over seventy years would ensure him a high place between Edmond Malone and the moderns, had not much of it been tainted by fraud or caprice, or by the contagion of doubt that exposures have fostered. Countless genuine and acute scholarly observations -- many of them still held in suspicion, unjustly -- will always be overshadowed by a minority of impostures. Even his 1862 Spenser, regarded by G. F. Warner as 'an excellent edition' ('DNB') and widely employed by Collier's editorial successors, incorporates fabricated emendations by Michael Drayton -- forged in Collier's own copy of the 1612-13 folio -- and the task of sorting out Collier's true from false scholarship, in literally hundreds of questioned or questionable instances, has continued for a century and more. 


@@@@@


doc= 5921


Collier, Robert Porrett, first Baron Monkswell (1817-1886), judge, was born at Mount Tamar, near Plymouth, on 21 June 1817, the eldest son of John Collier (1769-1849), a merchant, and his wife, Emma, fourth daughter of Robert Porrett, of North Hill House, Plymouth. The firm of Collier & Co., corn and timber merchants, had been established in Southside Street, Plymouth, in 1676. Collier's father, who ran the business, was agent for Lloyds for nearly fifty years, and vice-consul for Norway, Sweden, and Portugal. Formerly a member of the Society of Friends, he was an alderman for Plymouth, a justice of the peace, a deputy lieutenant of Devon, and Liberal MP for Plymouth from 1832 to 1841. With such a family background it is not surprising that Robert Collier should have developed an interest in commercial, maritime, and international law. He was educated at Plymouth grammar school and then received private tuition from Revd John Kempe, curate of Tavistock, before entering Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1836. Poor health forced him to give up reading for honours and he left the university for a period, returning to take an ordinary BA degree in 1843. He had already developed political ambitions, making speeches at Launceston in 1841 with a view to contesting the seat, though he did not go to the poll, and later becoming an active member of the Anti-Corn Law League, addressing league meetings in Covent Garden Theatre. On 14 April 1844 he married Isabella Rose (1815-1886), daughter of William Rose Rose of Wolston Heath, Warwickshire. 
Collier joined the Inner Temple on 4 June 1838 and was called to the bar on 27 January 1843. He practised from 1 Mitre Court Buildings, Temple, and joined the western circuit and the Devonshire, Plymouth, and Devonport sessions. His first case to attract public attention was 'R. v. Serva' at Exeter assizes in July 1845. Some Brazilian slave traders had killed an English naval officer on board the Brazilian vessel the 'Felicidade', and they were tried for murder in this country. Serjeant Manning defended some of the prisoners, Collier the others. Collier made a very vigorous speech at the trial in Exeter and, after successfully laying the matter before the home secretary (Sir James Graham) and Sir Robert Peel, a very learned speech on the question of jurisdiction when the point was reserved for all the judges in November. On his next visit to Exeter he had nineteen briefs. In 1845 he published a treatise on the 'Railway Clauses Acts', followed in 1849 by an account of the law relating to mines, and in 1851 by a letter to Lord John Russell on reform of the superior courts (2nd edn, 1852). 
Local influence and wide practical knowledge gave Collier a good practice; he was an excellent jurist and an eloquent, sharp, and witty advocate. He was recorder of Penzance from July 1848 to March 1856. On 8 July 1854 Lord Cranworth granted him a patent of precedence (QC) at the age of thirty-seven and after only eleven years at the bar; and he was elected a bencher of the Inner Temple. From 1854 to 1863 he was one of that brilliant quartet, Montague Smith, Collier, Karslake, and Coleridge, who dominated the western circuit during its golden age. In the earlier part of that period there was friction on the circuit between him and Coleridge which permanently affected the relations between them. 
In July 1852 Collier was elected Liberal MP for Plymouth, holding the seat until October 1871. He made his maiden speech in the House of Commons on 29 November 1852 on the 'Courts of Common Law (Ireland) Bill', supporting the fusion of common law and equity in England and their administration in one common court. After that he spoke frequently and with good effect, especially on the Russian blockade on 20 February 1855, but chiefly on questions of law reform. In 1859 he was appointed counsel to the Admiralty and judge-advocate of the fleet. In 1862 the American minister, Adams, consulted him about vessel 'no. 290' being built at Liverpool for the Confederate navy. In his opinion (23 July 1862) he said that he thought it was the duty of the port authorities to detain her, but before the government could take action she had escaped to a destructive career on the high seas as the 'Alabama'. On 2 October 1863, when Sir William Atherton retired and Sir Roundell Palmer was promoted to be attorney-general, Collier was appointed solicitor-general and knighted, and filled the office with success until the Liberal government resigned in 1866. One of his first duties as solicitor-general was to defend the government's record on the Confederate cruisers, including the 'Alabama', in the House of Commons on 4 March 1864. In December 1868 Collier became attorney-general with Coleridge, after an initial refusal, as solicitor-general. In 1869 he was responsible for the 'Bankruptcy Bill' in the House of Commons. 
In August 1870 Collier was appointed recorder of Bristol on the death of Serjeant Kinglake, thereby causing a by-election in his constituency. Plymouth Dockyard was suffering badly from cuts in government expenditure, and at his adoption meeting an amendment was passed that he should resign the recordership. Although there were good precedents for the attorney-general holding the recordership of Bristol, which was one of the most valuable in the country, he decided to resign the position, amid widespread criticism in 'The Times', the 'Law Journal', and elsewhere, and was duly re-elected as MP for Plymouth without opposition. 
Collier ran into another storm in 1871. On 5 August he moved the second reading of the 'Judicial Committee of the Privy Council Bill' in the House of Commons, providing for the appointment of four salaried judges on the judicial committee. The appointments were limited to persons of high judicial authority: the new judges had at the date of their appointment to be or have been English superior court judges or Indian chief justices. Two Indian chief justices were found, and Sir Montague Smith was promoted from the court of common pleas. The fourth vacancy was refused by three English judges and likely to be refused by more, because the act made no provision for the clerks of the new judges. To solve the problem the lord chancellor, Hatherley, appointed Collier to the vacant seat in the court of Common Pleas, which he held for a few days (7 to 22 November) only before Gladstone appointed him to the judicial committee. The 'Collier Juggle' was technically legal, but in blatant conflict with the spirit of the act, and a long and bitter controversy ensued, notably captured in a 'Punch' cartoon (16 Dec 1871). There were letters from both chief justices, Cockburn and Bovill, published in 'The Times', and motions of censure in both houses of parliament. The government won by only a single vote in the House of Lords, and by twenty-seven in the House of Commons thanks to a brilliant speech by Sir Roundell Palmer. Collier held this post until his death, and he was frequently responsible for giving literary shape to the judgments of the privy council. On 1 July 1885 he was created Baron Monkswell, of Monkswell, Devon. 
Collier was highly versatile and accomplished. At Cambridge he wrote some clever parodies, and published a satirical poem called 'Granta'; and he also wrote some very pretty verses both in Latin and English. He was an excellent scholar, publishing a translation of Demosthenes' 'De corona' (1875), and a good billiard player. But it was chiefly in painting, of which he was passionately fond, that he was distinguished. As a young man he drew very clever caricatures in the H. B. manner. When solicitor-general he painted in St James's Park, and he exhibited frequently at the Royal Academy and Grosvenor Gallery, especially pictures of the neighbourhood of Rosenlui, Switzerland, where he spent many vacations. He was president of the Devonshire Association in 1879, and his presidential address at the annual meeting at Ilfracombe dealt mainly with the progress and development of the art of painting. His wife died suddenly on 10 April 1886. In failing health he went to the Riviera, and died at Grasse, near Cannes, on 27 October 1886. He was buried at Brompton cemetery on 3 November. He had three children: Robert, second Baron Monkswell (1845-1909); John Collier (1850-1934), a well-known artist who painted the portraits of a number of eminent lawyers, including Lord Chancellor Halsbury; and Margaret Isabella, who married Count Arturo Galletti di Cadilhac. Mary Josephine Collier, Lady Monkswell, the diarist, was his daughter-in-law. 


@@@@@


doc= 5922


Collier, Thomas (d. 1691), Baptist preacher, may have been the yeoman farmer of that name from Witney, in Surrey, prosecuted in 1634 for withholding tithes. Nothing is certainly known of his birth or early life. 
Collier was reported to have acted as a teacher of a church at York, whose origins are obscure, though elements of the earl of Manchester's army, arriving before the city in June 1644 at the onset of the famous siege, were already said to have been infected by 'either Anabaptisme or Antinomianisme, or both' ('Letters and Journals of Robert Baillie', 2.185). During that winter, or perhaps the next, several were rebaptized by immersion in the River Ouse, and when the future Quakers William and Anne Dewsberry were married at York, probably in 1646, Anne was already a member of a Baptist congregation there. This church may very well have been that taught by Collier. 
But Collier had left before then and was far from York, active as a travelling lay preacher. Though proof is lacking, the pattern of Collier's itinerary is consistent with attachment to the army. He was in correspondence with John Sims, arrested in May 1646 at Middlezoy, a village near Taunton where the army had camped after the battle of Langport on 10 July 1645. And he was reported to have been expelled from Guernsey for 'turbulent behaviour', possibly among the troops besieging Castle Cornet. Released from prison in Portsmouth, he toured through Dorset, Hampshire, and Sussex, and, having preached at Guildford at the end of May 1646, made his way to London. Letters passed between him, local adherents, and other evangelists. To Thomas Edwards he appeared as 'a master sectarie, a man of great power among them, and hath Emissaries under him, whom he sends abroad' (Edwards, 3.41). At least at Taunton, Collier seems to have been able to found, or at least help sustain, a functioning organization, though it is not known how long this or other possible fruits of his early evangelism survived. But as orthodox ministers grimly surveyed the trail of theological destruction in the wake of the preacher -- 'the first that sowed the seeds of Anabaptism, Anti-sabbatarianism and some Arminianism... in these parts' -- they were forced to concede that 'doubtless it was strong poison he gave them that wrought so strongly at first' (ibid., 3.29). 
The hostility of the presbyterians was wholly reciprocated. In 'Certaine Queries, or, Points now in Controvercy', which George Thomason picked up on 24 July 1645, Collier called upon parliament to 'dismiss that assembly of learned men who are now called together for to consult about matters of religion', since he knew 'no rule in the Book of God for such an assembly' (Collier, 'Certaine Queries', 27). Also during 1645, in his 'Three Great Quaeries', Collier took issue with the Arminianism later attributed to him. In terms of predestination, he opposed the Arminians, while defending a heavily qualified doctrine of general redemption. In most points, he remained a high-Calvinist, but one whose theology of free grace tended, in the early years, to undermine the role in salvation of obedience to the law. This strongly spiritualistic and antinomian tendency was widespread among the radical army chaplains, and it alarmed the orthodox at least as much as did Arminianism itself. Men such as Robert Baillie felt justified in lumping the two together because of the licence they seemed to offer to saints who jibbed at church discipline. In works of the later 1640s, indeed, Collier stressed the spiritual aspects of religion to the point of denying significance to formal ordinances. Later, he acknowledged having held these views, now seen as errors, in order to repudiate them decisively. 
The earliest definite evidence of Collier's formal employment in the army is the payment to him of $31 13's'. 9died in May 1650, for duties undertaken not earlier than August 1647, as chaplain to Colonel Twistleton's New Model regiment of horse. In the autumn of 1647 he was accustomed to speak with 'both opportunity and freeness' at the army headquarters at Putney, and there delivered, on 29 September, the sermon later published as 'A Discovery of the New Creation'. This address incorporated much of the Leveller programme, and breathed reforming zeal and millenarian expectancy. Christ's kingdom would soon be established: 'nations shall become the nations of Christ and the government shall be in the hands of the saints'; 'tyrannical and oppressing laws and courts of justice' and other grievances would be taken away (Collier, 'Discovery', 32, 35). At the Whitehall debates in December 1648, he opposed Ireton's defence of magistratical powers to punish in religious matters, because this was to claim for the state 'power from God, and not from the Agreement of the people' (Firth, 2.125). Collier, however, did not join the Levellers in protesting against the political solution imposed by the army generals in the winter of 1648-9. He issued a pamphlet which defended the execution of the king and attacked the corruption and betrayals of parliament, but urged that in settling a peace, 'those who are saved spiritually know best what is good for the nations temporal well being' (Collier, 'Vindication', 6). The army generals were identified and defended as having set about the necessary task of destroying enemies whom readers would have understood to include the Levellers. 
In the early 1650s, Collier was active in Somerset and also seems to have retained some relation with the army. Accounts of a sermon at Axbridge in 1651 reported him to be living at Westbury. At a dispute at Wiveliscombe on 4 May 1652, he appeared, according to a hostile witness, 'guarded as it were with some soldiers, and a great company of his furious disciples', engaging an army captain as a moderator in the debate (Fullwood, sig. C2'r'). Collier continued to demand a radical separation between the spheres of religion and the state. In 1652 he asked rhetorically of the commissioners for the propagation of the gospel 'whether a State-maintenance for the Ministery of Christ, be agreeable to any Rule in the Gospel?' (Collier, 'Font-Guard', sig. P1'v'). 
But there was also pressure upon Collier and other Baptist leaders to deal with disorderly practices in their churches and with the influence upon them of seeking, ranting, and now quaking, which tended towards the subversion of external authorities, of church, and scripture. Baptist associations were founded partly in order to help establish and police 'orderly walking' in the face of these challenges. Collier helped build one such organization, aligned with the Particular Baptist churches of London, in the west country. He reported to the several churches from its first general meeting at Wells on 8-9 November 1653, and from many subsequent gatherings. This body was welcomed by the Baptists it sought to organize. But the proposal to ordain Collier as a 'messenger' empowered to spread the word outside the already constituted congregations of the association aroused dissension, and even after the ceremony, at Bridgwater in May 1654, a minority remained unhappy. Ordination merely legitimated Collier's existing practice, and he acquired through it no new powers or any titles, such as general superintendent. But the absence for many years of any such formal qualification may indicate the attachment of local Baptists to informal practices favouring lay initiative. The new concern for order was reflected in other ways. Collier attacked the Quakers as Levellers, writing angrily against those who undermined the gospel 'under pretence of holiness and light within' and 'their pernicious ways in stirring up to despise dominion and to speak evil of dignities and government' (White, 'Association Records of Particular Baptists', 90). 
Yet Collier did not play the unambiguously restraining role of men such as William Kiffin: more than other Calvinistic leaders, he continued to stress the active role of ordinary church members, and especially the development of their gifts in prophesying. This originated in the mid-1640s, and drew from the millenarian mood among the saints of the new model, which Collier had both shared and helped to strengthen. Dampened for a time, perhaps, by the more prosaic routines of rural life, his hopes were never quite extinguished. In 1652 he asked 'Whether it be not the duty of the Magistrate to permit the 'Jews', whose Conversion is promised, and we pretend to expect it, to live peaceably amongst us?' (Collier, 'Font-Guard', sig. P2'r'). During the rule of the first Rump Parliament and the early protectorate, the saints experienced as a double affront to their great expectations the fortune hunters who clustered round the centres of power. Febrile high politics helped rekindle the flames of millennial anticipation, both in organized circles of the Fifth Monarchists and among others, such as Thomas Collier, who did not adopt that name. 
Collier and they, however, confronted a widening gap between the prospect of Christ's imminent rule on earth and the apathy of so many, even among the churches, to the message of its prophets. And thus, letters signed by Collier, Captain Nathaniel Strange, and others strained to urge upon the congregated saints of the western counties the need for fervent prayer, so that God would 'guide those who wait for Zion's redemption... searching after and hastening unto the fulfilling of all the glorious promises and prophesies which relate to the downfall of all that rise up against the work of Christ in both themselves and in the earth. (White, 'Association Records of Particular Baptists', 81)' It may not be thought surprising that some interpreted such injunctions as a call to arms. In 1658 at Dorchester, a meeting was held between Baptist representatives (millenarian and moderate) and others who expected, and hoped to hasten by military force, the coming of the fifth monarchy. Government spies reported the presence of Kiffin, who sought to restrain the participants from uniting in violent activism. Thomas Collier presided over at least one of the sessions. His political role is not certainly known, but his opposition in 1657 to the open insurrectionism of Tillinghast may suggest that he sided with the moderates. 
After the Restoration, Collier continued his activities in the Baptist cause in at least two counties. He was reported to be teaching at Axbridge, Somerset, in 1669, and was licensed there in 1672 as a Baptist preacher, at the house of Edward Woollcot, an associate in the town in 1651. In 1672 he was also licensed as a teacher at North Bradley, Wiltshire, where there was soon a clash with the London leaders. Collier's dogmatics continued to arouse their hostility. During the 1650s he had moved towards a more orthodox Calvinism, though his 'Somerset confession' still differed in points of detail from that issued in 1646 by the seven London Particular Baptist churches and expounded by Benjamin Cox. Thirty years later Collier published a synopsis of his views on election, general redemption, and Christology, which ranged him against Cox's son Nehemiah. Finding Collier's views heterodox, the London leaders persuaded the young Cox to write a refutation, 'Vindiciae veritatis' (1677), and in October 1676 themselves descended on North Bradley 'to settle some disorder' arising from his 'unsound doctrine or new notions' (Hayden, 185). 
But in response to all this, and to a new and very orthodox Calvinist second London confession of faith (1677), the unrepentant Collier published his own, appending to it a critique of the official version, which was endorsed by the Western Association in 1691: it seems his personal prestige in Somerset was undiminished by the Londoners' campaign. Certainly his antipathy to official positions deepened. Collier's last work, 'A Doctrinal Discourse of Self Denial' (1691), attacked those who 'teach the people, a justifying, saving faith without works' (Collier, 'Doctrinal Discourse', 70-71). In its strict demands upon the saints, the book stood opposed to the incipient libertarianism of its author's youth. But these were sides of a single coin: his continuing rejection of outright determinism as a source of self-satisfaction and falsity in faith. And thus, in a reignited radicalism of almost half a century's vintage, Collier raged against the ethos of Williamite England: 'self it is that rules, in city and country, self profit and advantage it is, that manageth all callings... self honour, self pride and self will it is that is the cause of most of the wars and blood in the world;' and this spirit ruled 'not only in the profane but in professors too' (ibid., 36). Thomas Collier died before the publication of his last book. John Collier, who was perhaps a relation, informs us in his preface that the author delivered his manuscript 'but a day or two before he died'. 


@@@@@


doc= 5923


Collignon, Catherine (bap. 1754, d. 1832), translator, was the daughter of Dr Charles Collignon (1725-1785), physician and professor of anatomy at Cambridge, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Vandactselver, and was baptized on 29 November 1754 at Holy Sepulchre, Cambridge. Two elder sisters had died in infancy. At the suggestion and with the encouragement of senior members of the university and others she undertook in middle age a full, uncorrected, and literal translation from the French of the 'Dictionnaire historique' compiled by the Abbe Jean-Baptiste Ladvocat (died 1765) of the Sorbonne. The original had become scarce in England. Her translation, of which 750 sets were printed, was issued in four volumes by the Cambridge University printer between 1799 and 1801 as 'An Historical and Biographical Dictionary'. 
In later life Catherine Collignon lived at Bromley, near Bow, in Middlesex where she died, a wealthy woman, on 4 February 1832. She was buried in her cousin's vault at St Mary Aldermary, London. Most of her fortune was willed to relatives, but she made a number of charitable bequests, for example to the London Hospital, and to societies for the indigent blind and for deaf mute people. Doubtless in recognition of her father's long association with it, she left $1000 in stock to Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge. 


@@@@@


doc= 5924


Collignon, Charles (1725-1785), anatomist and physician, born in London on 30 January 1725, was the son of Paul Collignon, a minister of the Dutch church in Austin Friars, London, who was a native of Hesse-Cassel, Germany. He died when his son was still young. After attending school in Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk, Collignon was admitted a pensioner of Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1743, where he graduated MB in 1748 and MD in 1754. While still a student Collignon visited France, London, Edinburgh, and Leiden, before returning to Cambridge in 1750; in 1751 the university granted him a licence to practise. During the same year he married Elizabeth Vandactselver in Colchester. The marriage produced four children; only Catherine Collignon (bap. 1754, d. 1832) survived her father. She translated from the French the Abbe Ladvocat's 'Historical and Biographical Dictionary'. 
Collignon settled in St Sepulchre's parish, Cambridge, and established himself in practice in the town. He began lecturing in the university in 1754 and was 'much esteemed by all his pupils' (Rook, 341). Collignon emphasized the importance of a knowledge of anatomy for physicians, the desirability of a better legal supply of bodies for dissection, and the importance of post-mortems to improve knowledge of disease. It is said that in March 1768 Laurence Sterne's body turned up in Collignon's dissecting room a few days after it had been buried in London. Collignon's 'Compendium anatomico-medicum' (1756) provided a general introduction to students of anatomy. This was followed in 1763 by 'Tyrocinium anatomicum' in which he stated that 'the first and principle end of the study of the human body should be to awaken in us an aweful sense of the amazing power of the creator' (Rook, 342). Collignon's next book, 'Enquiry into the structure of the human body relative to its supposed influence on the morals of mankind', was a more philosophical work that intended 'to remove the objections that have been made against Providence by some, as if he had formed men of such materials as almost necessarily impelled them to illicit actions' (Rook, 343). 
Collignon became a governor of Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, in 1766 and in September that year he was appointed physician, a post he held until his resignation in 1775. A year after his resignation he published 'Explanatory Remarks on the Great Utility of Hospitals for the Sick and Poor', which was unusual in that it argued that those suffering from incurable illnesses, epilepsy, and venereal diseases should not be denied admission into hospitals. Collignon's other works were 'Medicinia politica, or, Reflections on the art of physic as inseparably connected with the prosperity of the state' (1765) and 'Moral and Medical Dialogues' (1769); according to Rook, the latter are 'so pretentiously elaborated that they are almost unreadable' (Rook, 343). Collignon was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1770. 
The Revd Cole, who knew Collignon well, says of him: 'He is an ingenious, honest man, and if they had picked the three kingdoms for a proper person to represent an anatomical professor, they could not have pitched upon a more proper one, for he is a perfect skeleton himself, absolutely a walking shadow, nothing but skin and bones; indeed, I never saw so meagre a figure, such as one can conceive a figure to be after the flesh and substance is all dried away and wasted, and nothing left to cover the bones but a shrivelled dry leather; such is the figure of our present professor of anatomy, 19 June 1770. (Rook, 339)' Collignon died on 1 October 1785 in Cambridge. A collection of his writings, 'The Medical Works of Charles Collignon MD', was published the next year. 


@@@@@


doc= 5925


Colling, Charles (1751-1836), stockbreeder, was the second son in the family of two sons and two or three daughters of Charles Colling (1721-1785), farmer, and Dorothy Robson (died 1779). He succeeded his father in the occupancy of a farm at Ketton, near Darlington, in 1782, shortly after a visit he paid to Robert Bakewell (1725-1795), the well-known breeder at Dishley, Leicestershire. 'It is generally supposed that the great lesson that Charles Colling learnt during the three weeks he spent at Dishley was the expediency of concentrating good blood by a system of in-and-in breeding... What he really learnt at Dishley was the all-importance of 'quality' in cattle, and he resolved to devote himself to the preservation and amelioration of the local cattle on the Tees and Skerne. (Bates, 'The brothers Colling', 5-6)' On 23 July 1783 Colling married Mary Colpitts (1763-1850), who was almost as interested as her husband in the breeding of improved shorthorns and who helped him a great deal. 
Colling bought his first good bull from his elder brother, Robert Colling, and it was later known as Hubback. This bull was mated while at Ketton with cows -- afterwards famous -- called Duchess, Daisy, Cherry, and Lady Maynard. In 1795 one of Hubback's female offspring produced, by another celebrated bull called Favourite, a roan calf, which grew to be the famous Durham Ox. By the time it was five and a half years old it weighed 3024 lb, and it was sold as a show animal for $140. After five months' exhibition, its then owner refused $2000 for it, and for the next six years he took it around the country. A portrait of the Ox, painted by John Boultbee and engraved by John Whessell, was published in March 1802. At ten years old the Ox weighed about 3800 lb, but after dislocating its hipbone it was killed at Oxford in April 1807. A still more famous animal was Comet, born in the autumn of 1804, which 'Charles Colling declared to be the best bull he ever bred or saw, and nearly every judge of shorthorns agreed with him' (Bates, 'The brothers Colling', 16). 
On 11 October 1810 Colling sold off his entire herd at a public auction, which was very well attended. Comet sold for 1000 guineas, and the forty-seven lots went in all for $7116 18's'., or an average of $151 8's.' 5died A testimonial was presented to Colling by forty-nine subscribers in the shape of an inscribed silver-gilt cup. 
Charles and Robert Colling, in making the shorthorn into a good beef animal, applied the principles developed by Robert Bakewell in breeding longhorn cattle. They were regarded as next in importance to Bakewell in improving the cattle of the United Kingdom. Thomas Bates and Thomas Booth built on their work, and Amos Cruikshank of Sittyton (1808-1895) produced Scottish shorthorns based on Colling stock. Robert Colling died in 1820, but Charles lived on in retirement until his death on 16 January 1836. He had no descendants. 


@@@@@


doc= 5926


Colling, Robert (1749-1820), stockbreeder, was born in December 1749, the eldest son in the family of two sons and two or three daughters of Charles Colling (1721-1785), farmer, of Ketton, near Darlington, and his wife, Dorothy Robson (died 1779); his brother was Charles Colling. After receiving some education, he was apprenticed to a grocer in Shields, but because of poor health he came home to his father's farm and embarked on an agricultural career. 
After spending some time at Hurworth, co. Durham, Colling took a farm nearby at Barmpton, under the Lambton family. At first he kept only dairy cows, and had no plans to breed shorthorns. The foundation of his pedigree herd was a yellow-red and white bull (known in shorthorn history as Hubback), originally bought on the advice of his brother Charles for 8 guineas, and afterwards sold to his brother for the Ketton herd. A 'shyness' sprang up between the brothers, which became accentuated in March 1793, and the Barmpton and Ketton herds for some time lived apart, though later more amicable relations were restored. When in October 1810 Charles Colling sold off his Ketton herd of shorthorns, Robert's herd at Barmpton became the centre of interest to the breeders of shorthorns, which had then become fashionable. 
A famous white heifer (daughter of the bull Favourite), which at four years old weighed 1820 lb, was painted by Thomas Weaver; an engraving of the picture was made by William Ward, and published on 13 December 1811, with a dedication to Robert Colling. The heifer was purchased by two butchers and exhibited at Christmas 1811 at the stables of the Three Kings, Piccadilly, as 'the greatest wonder of the world of the kind', and then weighed 2448 lb. 'The same system of in-and-in breeding that had been in vogue at Ketton was pursued without interruption at Barmpton, and that without any admixture of fresh alloy' (Bates, 'Brothers Colling', 22). Robert carried on his herd until Michaelmas day 1810, when it was sold by auction; sixty-one lots fetched $7852 19's'. Colling died unmarried at Barmpton on 7 March 1820, leaving his property to his brother Charles, and a final sale was held on 3 October 1820. 
Colling was considered a model all-round farmer -- good cattle, good sheep, good crops, neat hedges, neat farm-buildings -- but, not being so much of a specialist, he was less known than his more businesslike and versatile brother, Charles. 


@@@@@


doc= 5927


Collinges, John (1623/4-1691), clergyman and ejected minister, was born at Boxted, Essex, the son of Edward Collinges, a minister. Educated at the neighbouring grammar school of Dedham, he was influenced by the puritan clergyman John Rogers and his successor, Matthew Newcomen. His father died when he was fifteen, leaving 'little above $50 a year to maintain my Mother, and self and two sisters young and sickly' (Collinges, 'New Lesson', 9), but John was allowed to complete his schooling. On 9 April 1639 he was admitted as a sizar at Emmanuel College, Cambridge, 'where I lived, though in no height, yet in no want, by the favour of my learned tutor'. Collinges was a diligent student, graduating BA in 1643, but fell 'into the temptations of those sinful times' and acquired 'a hatred of holiness' (ibid., 10). The sharp disapproval of Newcomen helped him towards a different path. He proceeded BD in 1653 and DD in 1658. 
Before 18 October 1645 Collinges became a chaplain to the family of Isaac Wyncoll of Bures, Essex, whose eldest daughter, Elizabeth (died 1692), he later married. They had at least one son and two daughters. In 1645 he was also installed as rector of Alphamstone, Essex, in the place of Rowland Steward, accused in March 1644 of gambling, drunkenness, and adultery. The living, according to a terrier of 1637, comprised a parsonage house, barn, stable, and more than 20 acres. In 1646 Collinges moved to Norwich and became vicar of St Saviour's and also of St Augustine. The sequestered minister of the latter, Joseph Reading, returned in an effort to unseat him but on 1 December 1646 the committee for plundered ministers ordered Collinges to continue in both parishes. Already in September 1646 Collinges had been invited by Sir John Hobart of Chapelfield House, Blickling, 'to take my chamber in his house whilst I discharged my ministerial office in the county, and to take some oversight of his family as to the things of God' (Collinges, 'Par nobile', 21). Soon after her husband's death in 1647 Frances, Lady Hobart: 'converted some less useful lower rooms of her house into a chapel which was conveniently capacious of more than 200 persons. Here she obliged me at first to preach a lecture every week, and to repeat one or both of my sermons every Lords Day at night, after the more publick sermons were finished in the Town. (ibid.)' Collinges was a signatory of the attestation of Norfolk ministers in 1648, and was selected by Norwich corporation to read the afternoon sermon on the day of thanksgiving appointed after the royalist riot in the city in May 1648. On 2 February 1650 he was named by the committee of plundered ministers to serve the parish of St Stephen, Norwich, where on 21 June 1654 he was formally admitted as vicar; also in 1654, he was appointed assistant to the Norfolk commission into the ministry. Collinges was a prolific controversialist. His opponents included Theophilus Brabourne, and those such as William Sheppard who advocated lay preaching. On church organization he had firm views: 'I believe Presbyterian Government will be in credit at the great day (when Christ shall have trod all his enemies under his feet) yet from my soul I wish that all God's people had one heart and one way' (Collinges, 'New Lesson', 11). And, 'if the Devil were aske a courtesie of a state, he should aske no more than 1) An universall toleration, and 2) an uncontrouled liberty for every one to preach and expound scriptures' (Collinges, 'Responsoria ad erratica pastoris', 1652, 37). On 28 November 1660 the Commons rejected a bill which would have curtailed episcopal power and allowed some latitude in the forms of worship; Collinges later recalled this as disastrous: 'Whether the wisdom of his Majesty, or that party of the House of Commons who then opposed the passing of it into an Act, were greater let the experience now of twenty years more determine, which for the most part have been years of confusion and disorder as to matters of religion. (Cliffe, 42)' On 26 April 1661 Collinges was licensed to continue preaching at St Stephen's, and he served in that year as a commissioner at the Savoy conference, which sought to amend the prayer book in a direction acceptable to moderate dissent. In 1661-2 he was involved in a law suit against the dean and chapter of Norwich, patrons of St Stephen's, for recovery of a yearly pension of 53's'. 4died Collinges was ejected with the other dissenting ministers in August 1662. Shortly afterwards Chapelfield House was searched by the authorities. The lord lieutenant, Horatio, Lord Townshend, felt obliged to apologize for the intrusion, but warned against allowing 'any scandalous number to meet' (Cliffe, 111); after the death of Lady Hobart in November 1664 Collinges wrote an affectionate account of her life and virtues. He maintained close links with the family and was described in 1688 as chaplain to Sir Henry Hobart, Sir John Hobart's son. In 1669 Collinges was reported to be preaching, with Benjamin Snowden, to 'about 300 Presbyterians and Independents at the house of John Barnham, hosier' in the parish of St John Maddermarket, Norwich. On 30 April 1672 he was licensed as a presbyterian teacher at John Wilson's house in St Stephen's, and on 14 May Norwich corporation leased to his congregation the East Granary behind St Andrew's Hall. At Easter 1674 Collinges was presented by churchwardens of St Laurence for not receiving the sacrament. 
Collinges played a notable role in the civic struggle of 1678-81 in Norwich, when local and national politics collided. Robert Paston (Viscount Yarmouth), lord lieutenant of Norfolk, was determined to make the city an Anglican royalist stronghold and had obtained Bishop Sparrow's assurance that proceedings against Collinges would follow a by-election of February 1678. No action was taken, however, until in July 1678 rumours circulated of a plot on Bishop Sparrow's life; on the orders of Yarmouth the mayor arrested the suspects, who included Collinges. They were obliged to give security of $500 each for good behaviour, and appear at the next quarter sessions. In a letter of 22 July 1678 Yarmouth reported that 'Dr. Collinges, a man long famous in that country for his ill-affections to the Crown' was 'under a process for nonconformity and preaching in conventicles'. But the chancellor of the diocese of Norwich was sent 'a minatory letter from an unknown hand to desist in the prosecution' ('CSP dom.', 'March-December 1678', 306) and the justices summoned to the quarter sessions conspicuously failed to attend. The tories won all three general elections of 1679-81 and controlled the court of aldermen and the Norwich assembly; but the recorder of Norwich, Francis Bacon, 'refused to assist Mayor Davey in investigating the case against John Collins' (Evans, 271). Collinges continued in his ministry. One tory described him in 1682 as 'a man of some learning, which he employs in promoting Presbytery, and, were he removed, tis probable many of that sect would fall off' ('CSP dom.', '1682', 54). His survival probably owed something to Sir John Hobart, the cousin and heir of his former patron, now a leader of the anti-court party in Norwich. 
In 1685 Collinges was twice arrested as a 'non juring suspect' ('Lothian MSS', xii), but then seems to have lived quietly until James II issued his declaration of indulgence of which Collinges took full advantage. On 14 April 1687 the bishop of Norwich wrote scathingly: 'Dr. Collins who not long since sent me wonderfull submissive letters is now grown very pert and pragmatical, and tells some of the Clergy of this City, that now he stands upon a levell with them, and well remembers the horrid persecutions of the saints, and that he had rather owne the kindness of the indulgence then submitt to the unreasonable Terms of the Church of England.' He concluded dismissively that Collinges was 'made up of spleene and choler and is not much to be regarded' ('Calamy rev.'). In 1689 a new meeting-place, certified on 19 July, was built for Collinges and his congregation in the parish of St John Colegate, and in the winter of 1689-90 his salary was given as $56 a year. His last days were spent in implementing the union of presbyterians and congregationalists. He died at Walcott, Norfolk, on 17 January 1691, aged sixty-seven, and was buried there on 20 January; his funeral sermon was preached by Martin Fynch. His wife, Elizabeth, died the following year. 


@@@@@


doc= 5928


Collingridge, Peter (1757-1829), vicar apostolic of the western district, was born on 10 March 1757 at Fritwell, Oxfordshire, the son of Peter Collingridge and his wife, Mary. He may have received his early education in England. What is certain is that he entered the Franciscan friary of St Bonaventure, Douai, where he received the habit on 26 June 1773. Record of his ordination was probably destroyed by the revolutionaries, although it is known that he was lecturing in both philosophy and theology even before he was ordained. In 1788 he was elected guardian of the friary. 
After some twenty years in Douai, Collingridge returned to England to work at St George's Fields, Southwark. After a short spell in Coventry he was appointed to the Sardinian embassy chapel, Lincoln's Inn Fields, London. On 2 January 1807 he was named titular bishop of Thespiae and coadjutor to Bishop G. W. Sharrock, vicar apostolic of the western district, but his consecration did not take place until 11 October. Bishop Poynter performed the ceremony at St Edmund's College, Ware. Collingridge succeeded Sharrock on 17 October 1809 and moved the episcopal residence from Bath to the Benedictine convent at Cannington, near Taunton. 
Emancipation was the major issue which divided the Catholic community and its leaders. The matter was urgent, and Collingridge felt that 'by not accepting even an imperfect emancipation, numbers of non-Catholics were being prevented from entering the Church' (Dockery, 89). Although a regular himself who had already welcomed the Benedictines to Downside, near Bath, and who had been the first of the vicars apostolic to allow the Jesuits to resume their work after their reinstatement in 1814, Collingridge was nevertheless said to be 'prepared to accept legislation for Emancipation which, as a condition, would have sacrificed the regular clergy' (Norman, 82). Popular suspicions were based on the perception that, unlike the seculars, their endeavours were under the direction of superiors who lived abroad. Collingridge aligned himself with Bishop W. Poynter of the London district against Bishop John Milner (midland district) in being prepared to accept the guarantees then on offer from the government. However, he was not prepared to accept emancipation at any price. 
Bishop Collingridge was given the help of a coadjutor in 1823. Peter Augustine Baines, a former Benedictine and now titular bishop of Siga, was of an entirely different mould, whose ambition it was to put the Catholic community in the region 'on the map' and to provide a supply of secular clergy for the growing industrial areas of the vicariate. Because he judged the religious orders to be ill-equipped for such a task, he approached Downside with a view to turning it into a seminary for seculars. In this serious error of judgement Collingridge acquiesced, and therefore some of the ensuing acrimony must be laid at his door. 
Collingridge was a devout, forgiving man. Franciscan simplicity remained his way of life, even as far as begging hay for his horse. Such traits endeared him to his impoverished flock of some 5500 souls scattered throughout Wales and the west country. (At that time the chief centres of Catholic population were at Bristol, Bath, and Plymouth, with a strong enclave in and around the estate of Lord Arundell at Wardour in Wiltshire.) 
Collingridge died on 3 March 1829 at the Benedictine convent at Cannington, Somerset, where he had lived, and was buried in the bishop's garden there. When the body was exhumed in 1914 prior to its reinterment at Downside, the curious formation of his skull as shown in a contemporary drawing was confirmed. The simplicity of his tomb in the north choir of the abbey church is in sharp contrast to the adjacent, more ornate, monument to his successor. 


@@@@@


doc= 5929


Collings, Samuel (d. 1793?), painter and caricaturist, exhibited regularly at the Royal Academy between 1784 and 1789. Paintings accepted were 'Children in the Wood', 1784; 'The Chamber of Genius', from which an engraving was made, 1785; 'The Triumph of Sensibility', 1786; 'The Convict: a Portrait', 1787; 'Chalk Pit Near Lewisham', 1788, and 'Frost on the Thames, Sketched on the Spot', 1789. The last was sold at Christies on 11 March 1960, and is now at Yale University, as is the self-portrait offered in the same sale. These are the only known oil paintings by the caricaturist. A signed watercolour titled 'Elijah Going up to Heaven' is in the British Museum (1881-11-12-174). Other paintings that formed the subject of engravings are a pair in the style of William Hogarth's 'The Rake's Progress', titled 'The Heir Disinherited' and 'The Disinherited Heir', aquatinted by F. Jukes, and portraits of George III and Lord Thurlow. 
Collings appears to have abandoned painting to concentrate on his work as a caricaturist during the last few years of his life. His earliest dated pieces in this vein appear to be the folding plates published in the 'Wit's Magazine' in 1784. Of the seven signed plates, four were engraved by William Blake. Another engraved by Smith, 'Gilpin Going Farther than he Intended', is probably the earliest illustration of Cowper's famous character. Collings's best-known caricatures are the twenty designs reproduced as etchings by his friend Thomas Rowlandson, published anonymously in two parts under the title 'Picturesque Beauties of Boswell, Designed and Etched by Two Capital Artists' (1786), reprinted in the mid-nineteenth century as the work of Rowlandson. Six of Collings's drawings for the series are in the Victoria and Albert Museum (Dyce bequest, 754-9), including two unused designs. The figures portrayed are similar to those by Rowlandson himself, but in Collings's other work his style is closer to that of Hogarth and the other early caricaturists. The two friends also collaborated to produce a similar satire on Goethe's 'Sorrows of Werther'. Other periodicals in which Collings's caricatures appear are the 'Carlton House Magazine'; 'Attick Miscellany'; and 'The Bon-Ton Magazine, or, Microscope of Fashion and Folly'. Caricatures published under the pseudonym Annibal Scratch have also been attributed to him. He is thought to have died at an early age. He was described by Henry Angelo as 'a great tavern goer... [whose] fate was lamented, he being found dead on the steps of an hotel' (Angelo, 1.133) in Soho. 


@@@@@


doc= 5930


Collingwood, Cuthbert, Baron Collingwood (1748-1810), naval officer, was born on 26 September 1748 on The Side, Newcastle upon Tyne, the eighth child and eldest son of Cuthbert Collingwood (1712-1775), a merchant in Newcastle, and Milcah (1713-1788), daughter of Reginald Dobson of Barwise near Appleby, Westmorland. Two more sons followed. His father was of an old but impoverished Northumberland family. 
Collingwood attended Newcastle Free School under Hugh Moises, a renowned teacher, until he was twelve, when, on 28 August 1761, he and his next brother, Wilfred, joined the frigate 'Shannon', commanded by their mother's cousin, Captain Richard Brathwaite. The brothers were to serve together for the next twelve years. The 'Shannon' was employed mostly off Norway and in the Channel Fleet until she paid off in February 1763 at the end of the Seven Years' War. After eighteen months at home the brothers rejoined the 'Shannon' under Captain Boteler in October 1764, and spent most of the next year in Commodore Thomas Graves's expedition to west Africa. Brathwaite resumed command in October 1765 and the brothers followed him into the frigate 'Gibraltar' the following February. In March 1767, after eight months off Newfoundland and Cadiz, Brathwaite and the Collingwoods transferred to the frigate 'Liverpool', in which they went back to Newfoundland for eighteen months and then served almost continuously in the western Mediterranean for three and a half years. As well as a return to Cadiz, it was Cuthbert's first experience of the waters off Minorca and Toulon, which he was to know so well forty years later. The 'Liverpool' paid off in March 1772 and the brothers joined the 'Lenox' (74 guns), guard-ship at Portsmouth, commanded by a fellow Northumbrian, Robert Roddam. In the following year Cuthbert spent six months in the West Indies in the 'Portland' (50 guns) and the 'Princess Amelia' (80 guns). 
In February 1774, after another six months in the 'Lenox', Collingwood joined the 'Preston' (50 guns), flagship of Vice-Admiral Samuel Graves, and sailed for Boston, Massachusetts, as war with the American colonists grew imminent. At the battle of Bunker Hill on 17 June 1775 he landed with what he described as 'a party of seamen, supplying the army with what was necessary for them' ('Naval Chronicle', 23, 380). For his services Graves promoted him lieutenant from that date. It had been a long apprenticeship -- he had been at sea for thirteen years as able seaman, midshipman, and master's mate, had passed the examination for lieutenant in 1772, but was without an influential patron. He joined the 'Somerset' (74 guns) as fourth lieutenant immediately after Bunker Hill and returned home in February 1776. 
Collingwood's next appointment, as first lieutenant of the sloop 'Hornet', which he joined in March 1776 and which sailed for the West Indies in December, was an unhappy experience under a brutal captain, Robert Haswell. During one period of six months Haswell ordered the flogging of a third of his ship's company. In September 1777 he brought against Collingwood charges of contempt, disobedience of orders, and breach of the captain's instructions. Collingwood was court-martialled and acquitted of all charges but advised by the court to conduct himself with more 'alacrity'. 
With the arrival in Jamaica of Rear-Admiral Sir Peter Parker as commander-in-chief, Collingwood's fortunes were transformed. In July 1778 Parker appointed him to succeed Lieutenant Horatio Nelson, a friend since 1773, as second lieutenant of the 'Lowestoffe' (32 guns, Captain William Locker). In December Parker took him into his flagship, the 'Bristol' (50 guns), as second lieutenant and in June 1779, recognizing his qualities, gave him his first command, the brig 'Badger', again succeeding Nelson. 
On 22 March 1780 Collingwood was made post captain, less than five years since his promotion to lieutenant, and sent to San Juan, Nicaragua, to take command of 'Hinchinbroke' (28 guns) from Nelson, who had caught a dangerous fever during an expedition against the Spaniards. Collingwood found that four men, including the first lieutenant, had just died, seventy men were ill with fever, and the ship was 'very leaky'. Despite his erecting a hut ashore for the sick and regularly washing the ship with vinegar, another 154 men died on board during the next four months out of a ship's company of 200. More died in hospital after the ship's return to Jamaica in August. Deaths from fever in the army and the transport ships were on a similar scale. 
After this harrowing experience Collingwood was given command of the 'Pelican' (24 guns). In August 1781, after capturing a French frigate and five privateers, she was wrecked on the Morant keys near Jamaica in a hurricane. After ten days of extreme privation the ship's company, her carronades, and most of her stores were saved and taken back in a frigate sent from Jamaica. Collingwood was honourably acquitted at the mandatory court martial, and he and his ship's company were commended for 'doing everything becoming good officers and men' (18 Aug 1781, TNA: PRO, ADM1/5318). 
Collingwood returned to England in 1782 after four and a half years of active employment during the American War of Independence. The kindness he received from Sir Peter Parker was touchingly recalled twenty-five years later in a letter to Parker (by then admiral of the fleet) eleven days after Trafalgar: 'Had it not been for the fall of our noble friend... your pleasure would have been perfect -- that two of your own pupils, raised under your eye, and cherished by your kindness, should render such service to their Country as I hope this battle will in its effect be. (1 Nov 1805, NMM, RUSI/NM/214(i))' After eighteen years' sea service, most of it abroad, Collingwood was ashore for a year before receiving his next command, the 'Sampson' (64 guns); but with the war over she paid off in April 1783. However, he was immediately appointed to the frigate 'Mediator' and sailed again for the West Indies, where he was joined the following year by Nelson in the 'Boreas' as senior captain. Nelson, supported by Collingwood, saw it as his duty to uphold the navigation laws and prevent illegal trading in the islands by foreigners (now including Americans), which was considered harmful to the lawful trade of Canadians and Nova Scotians. The captains received no support, indeed opposition, from their commander-in-chief, Rear-Admiral Sir Richard Hughes, but their actions to suppress the trade were fully approved of by the government in London. 'This station has not been over pleasant', wrote Nelson to Captain Locker. 'Had it not been for Collingwood, it would have been the most disagreeable I ever saw' (5 March 1786, Nicolas, 1.156). They had recently drawn each other's portraits. In July 1786 the 'Mediator' returned home and Collingwood spent four years in Northumberland, 'making my acquaintance with my own family, to whom I had hitherto been as it were a stranger' ('Naval Chronicle', 23, 381). 
In July 1790, on the threat of war with Spain after the Nootka Sound incident, Collingwood took command of the frigate 'Mermaid' and sailed once more for the West Indies. With the end of the dispute 'Mermaid' returned home in April 1791 and Collingwood to Northumberland. On 16 June he married in Newcastle, Sarah ('bap'. 1762, died 1819), daughter of John Erasmus Blackett, a well-to-do merchant and four times mayor of Newcastle. Sarah was the granddaughter of Robert Roddam (1711-1744) of Hethpoole and Caldburne (not Admiral Robert Roddam, as is often stated). Later in the year they moved to Morpeth, where their daughter Sarah was born on 28 May 1792, followed by a second child, Mary Patience, on 13 August 1793. 
On 22 February 1793, three weeks after the outbreak of war with France, Collingwood took command of the 'Prince' (90 guns) at Plymouth. In July she hoisted the flag of Rear-Admiral George Bowyer and sailed with the Channel Fleet until the end of the year. Bowyer and Collingwood then transferred to the 'Barfleur' (98 guns) and took part in the five-day engagement culminating in the battle of the Glorious First of June (1794). 'Barfleur' was warmly engaged on 29 May and throughout the main battle three days later. Bowyer lost a leg early in that encounter and as he fell was caught by Collingwood, who then conducted Bowyer's subdivision as well as fighting his own ship. But, though Bowyer was created a baronet, Collingwood was not one of the captains specifically mentioned in Lord Howe's report and he was therefore not awarded the gold medal. He was deeply hurt. 
In July 1794 Collingwood transferred to the 'Hector' and in December to the 'Excellent' (both 74 guns). After a few months off Ushant he sailed for the Mediterranean and joined the fleet guarding Corsica and blockading Toulon. In the defeat of the much larger Spanish fleet off Cape St Vincent on 14 February 1797 'Excellent', famed for the rapidity of her gunfire, had a most distinguished share. She was quickly in action with the 'Salvador del Mundo' (112 guns). 'Soon after, her colours being struck and her fire ceasing, I hailed her, and understanding she surrendered shot ahead under the lee of the next ship in succession (the San Ysidro) when the former ship rehoisted her colours' (14 Feb 1797, TNA: PRO, captain's log, 'Excellent'). 'Excellent' then engaged the 'San Ysidro' (74 guns), which struck after a short but fierce engagement, the first to surrender to the British fleet. Collingwood immediately pressed on to assist Commodore Nelson in the 'Captain' by engaging the 'San Nicolas' (80 guns), 'giving her a most awful and tremendous fire' (Nicolas, 2.345). This caused her to 'run on board' the 'San Josef' (112 guns) and enabled Nelson to capture both ships. 'Excellent' with other ships then engaged the Spanish flagship, 'Santissima Trinidada' (136 guns), for an hour and inflicted much damage, but she had to be abandoned when several Spaniards which had seen little action came to her assistance. Nelson wrote the next day to Collingwood: 'My dearest Friend. 'A friend in need is a friend indeed' was never more truly verified than by your most noble and gallant conduct yesterday in sparing the 'Captain' from further loss' (NMM, LBK/15). 'Nothing', wrote Vice-Admiral William Waldegrave, 'could exceed the spirit and true officership which you so happily displayed yesterday... May England long possess such men as yourself -- 'tis saying everything for her glory' (ibid.). 
Gold medals were awarded to all flag officers and captains. When Collingwood was told this by John Jervis (now earl of St Vincent) he replied that he could not receive his while that for 'the First of June' was withheld. 'To receive such a distinction now would be to acknowledge the propriety of that injustice.' 'That is precisely the answer which I expected from you', replied St Vincent; in due course both medals were sent to him by Lord Spencer, the first lord, who wrote rather lamely: 'The former medal would have been transmitted to you some months ago if a proper and safe conveyance had been found for it' (3 April 1797, NMM, COL/14). 

'Excellent' spent the next twenty-one months blockading the Spanish fleet in Cadiz, and returned home in November 1798. For a few months from September 1797 Collingwood was appointed a commodore by St Vincent with command of the Cadiz blockade. 'Excellent' paid off at Portsmouth in January 1799 and Collingwood was able to go to Morpeth to visit his family, whom he had last seen for eight days in December 1794. On 14 February 1799 he was promoted rear-admiral of the white and in May hoisted his flag in the 'Triumph' (74 guns). His division sailed immediately to reinforce Lord Keith in the Mediterranean. After an unsuccessful search for a French fleet under Admiral Bruix, Keith and his fleet returned to Ushant in August to find that the French had entered Brest a week earlier. 
Thereafter, until May 1802, Collingwood was almost continuously at sea blockading the French in Brest with occasional visits to Torbay and Cawsand Bay, usually for shelter from gales. In January 1800 he transferred his flag to the 'Barfleur'. On 1 January 1801 he was advanced to rear-admiral of the red, and on the 27th his wife, their elder daughter, and her little dog arrived on a visit to Plymouth while he was dining with Nelson. But the same evening he had to sail for Brest, leaving them to wait six weeks for his return; they then had two weeks together before he returned to Ushant. It was not until May 1802, two months after the signing of the peace of Amiens, that Collingwood was able to strike his flag, go home to Morpeth, and have a rare opportunity for his legendary pastime of planting acorns to provide timber for ships of the line of the future. 
With the resumption of war in May 1803 Collingwood left home and on 3 June hoisted his flag in the 'Diamond' (38 guns). He never saw his wife or children again. He sailed at once, joining Admiral William Cornwallis off Ushant -- 'Here comes my old friend Coll, the last that left and the first to join me' (J. Ralfe, 'Naval Biography of Great Britain', 1828, 2.341). During the next two and a half years he was in command of a detached squadron blockading the enemy fleets on the Atlantic coasts of France and Spain except again for occasional brief visits to Cawsand Bay or Torbay for shelter. He changed his flagship frequently to avoid quitting his station for repairs or victualling. 'Venerable' (twice), 'Minotaur', 'Colossus', 'Culloden', 'Prince', and 'Dreadnought' all flew his flag in this unglamorous, testing, but essential task. On 23 April 1804 he was promoted vice-admiral of the blue, and on 21 May 1805, after ten days in Cawsand Bay, he sailed for Cadiz with eleven ships of the line, never to see England again. 
While Nelson was searching for Villeneuve's fleet in the West Indies, Collingwood blockaded Cadiz and Cartagena. On 20 August, when he was off Cadiz with only three ships and a frigate, Villeneuve's fleet sought refuge there after its return from the West Indies thinking, wrongly, that Nelson was on its tail. For his skill in deceiving the enemy as to the size of his force and for resuming the blockade the moment all thirty-six ships had entered Cadiz, Collingwood received high praise: 'Everybody in England admired your adroitness', wrote Nelson (Nicolas, 7.114). Ten days later Collingwood had twenty-six ships of the line off Cadiz, on 29 September Nelson arrived to resume command of the fleet, and on 10 October Collingwood, as second in command, transferred his flag to the 'Royal Sovereign' (100 guns). 
At Trafalgar on 21 October, with thirty-three French and Spanish ships facing twenty-seven British, Collingwood led the lee column. His flagship was the first to engage the enemy -- 'See how that noble fellow, Collingwood, carries his ship into action!', exclaimed Nelson (J. Ralfe, 'Naval Biography of Great Britain', 1828, 2.342). The 'Santa Ana' (112 guns), the Spanish vice-admiral's flagship, was his main target and after a two-hour duel, during which she was at times assisted by four other ships, she struck to the 'Royal Sovereign', which had lost two of her masts. Collingwood received a slight wound; indeed nearly all on the 'Royal Sovereign''s quarterdeck and poop were either killed or wounded. 
At the end of the day, with the Franco-Spanish fleet defeated, Lord Nelson dead, and the 'Royal Sovereign' unable to manoeuvre, Collingwood transferred to the frigate 'Euryalus' (Captain Blackwood) and assumed the command-in-chief of the victorious though much damaged British fleet. He was faced with a formidable task. Seventeen enemy ships had been captured, one had sunk, four escaped south to be caught by Strachan two weeks later -- 'really a nice nick', as Collingwood told Admiral Duckworth (2 Dec 1805, priv. coll.) -- and eleven fled towards Cadiz. But early the next day an onshore gale sprang up and blew with increasing severity for five days. Collingwood has been criticized for not following Nelson's intention to anchor the fleet at the end of the battle, but many ships had lost their anchors or had their cables shot and this, with the heavy swell preceding the gale, made anchoring impossible for most ships. The first priority was for disabled British ships and enemy prizes to be taken in tow. As the gale grew more violent many of the prizes were wrecked on the rocky coast; others had to be destroyed to prevent their recapture, which enemy survivors indeed attempted on the 23rd, losing two more ships in the process. Disabled British ships and four prizes were towed to Gibraltar; no British ship was lost. 'Collingwood's desire to preserve the prizes was as great as anyone in the fleet', wrote William Blackwood (although a devotee of Nelson) to his wife on the 25th. 'Could you witness his grief and anxiety (who has done all that an Admiral could do) you would be very deeply affected' ('Blackwood's Magazine', July 1833, 13). 
Wounded Spanish prisoners were sent ashore, an act of humanity by Collingwood which the Spaniards never forgot, and in return British wounded were given beds in Spanish hospitals. In 'Euryalus' Collingwood was soon joined by Admiral Villeneuve and two other senior prisoners of war. His official dispatch, his letter of thanks to the fleet, and his call for a day of thanksgiving for the victory, written in his cramped and heaving quarters, are masterpieces of the English language. 
On 9 November 1805 Collingwood was promoted vice-admiral of the red and created Baron Collingwood of Caldburne and Hethpoole, two small properties inherited by his wife. 'I hear considerable difficulty arose in finding where my estate lay, and what it was called. I thought all the world knew I was no Land-Lord' (Collingwood to Mrs Moutray, 9 Dec 1805, 'Public and Private Correspondence', 1.226). He was also awarded a pension of $2000 p.a. for life with, after his death, $1000 to his widow and $500 to each of his daughters. Not having a son he was anxious that his title should descend through his daughters but to his deep disappointment this was not allowed. Gold medals were awarded to all admirals and captains, making Collingwood one of only three officers (with Nelson and Sir Edward Berry) to win three gold medals throughout the twenty-two years of war. 
With the abandonment of his plans to invade England, Napoleon turned his attention to the domination of the eastern Mediterranean, the Ottoman empire, and the route to India. The Mediterranean thus assumed major strategic importance just as Collingwood took over as commander-in-chief. His fleet had to watch enemy fleets in Cadiz, Cartagena, and Toulon, secure the bases of Gibraltar, Malta, and Sicily, maintain squadrons in the Adriatic and the Levant, and protect British trade while denying it to the enemy. Collingwood was the only servant of the government in the Mediterranean who, with responsibilities from Cadiz to Constantinople, could survey the whole theatre; thus in many ways he became the originator and co-ordinator of British policy, diplomatic as well as naval. 
Since communication with London was so slow and uncertain Collingwood had to make his own political judgements as changing circumstances required, conducting 'political correspondence with the Spaniards, the Turks, the Albanians, the Egyptians, and all the States of Barbary' (who supplied beef and water to the fleet) (Collingwood to his wife, 8 Nov 1808, 'Public and Private Correspondence', 2.286). To these he could have added the kingdoms of Sardinia and Sicily, the governor of Malta, and British ambassadors, generals, and consuls as well as ministers in London. At the same time he had to operate and administer a fleet of up to eighty ships, including thirty of the line. To assist him in these tasks Collingwood had the part-time services of his young flag captain (Richard Thomas), his flag lieutenant, and his competent but even younger secretary, W. R. Cosway. In his conduct of the fleet he was able to delegate business in the normal way to his subordinate flag officers and captains in the various regions of his command. But he was not by nature a delegator and in his political and diplomatic work there was nobody to whom he could delegate: 'I do everything for myself, and never distract my mind with other people's opinions. To the credit of any good which happens I may lay claim, and I will never shift upon another the discredit when the result is bad. (ibid., 2.286)' Collingwood lacked the charisma of a Nelson and did not have the opportunity to command a fleet in a major battle. He was a man of great rectitude and drove himself hard, though his seemingly cold professional exterior concealed a much softer heart and sensibility. This is revealed in his letters to his family and friends, by his dry sense of humour, and by the respect in which he was held in his ships. He was good at encouraging youngsters, and had a reputation for keeping his ship's company, even the troublesome, contented as well as proficient with a minimum of corporal punishment. He insisted they should be called by their name or 'sailor' rather than 'you there', and took particular care over their comfort and health. He experimented with treatments for scurvy and invented a ventilator to improve the flow of fresh air in the lower decks; on one occasion, after fifteen months at sea without letting go an anchor, there was not a sick man among the 750 in his ship. As a supreme commander, which he virtually was in the Mediterranean, Collingwood had intelligence and patience that were ideal for his strategic and diplomatic tasks, and he held throughout the confidence of the foreign secretary and the first lord. He has, perhaps justly, been criticized for spending so much of his time at his desk, but his administrative burdens were enormous and he had no chief of staff or first captain to help him. Some writers seem to have undervalued his diplomatic skills and the respect in which he was held by allies, foes, and neutrals. Probably none of his contemporaries, including Nelson, could have conducted the command so successfully. 
Ten days after Trafalgar, Collingwood transferred from 'Euryalus' to the 'Queen' (90 guns) -- to be reunited with his devoted dog, Bounce -- and in April 1806 to the 'Ocean' (98 guns). His flagship took him to wherever at the time was the most danger from the French or he could best assist an ally. For his first nineteen months this meant blockading Cadiz or Cartagena. In July 1807 he led a squadron to the Dardanelles in support of an attempt by Sir Arthur Paget to coerce Turkey away from her alliance with France. They arrived just as news was received of the treaty of Tilsit between Russia and France. Paget was unable to persuade Turkey to break with France but Collingwood ensured that the Russian fleet did not fall into French hands. 
The safety of Sicily, essential for the maintenance of the fleet and for its strategic position, was always an anxiety, and a strong squadron had to be maintained off the island to forestall a French invasion from Italy. In January 1808 five French ships of the line escaped from Rochefort, entered the Mediterranean, and joined Vice-Admiral Ganteaume's five ships at Toulon. The combined squadron sailed on 10 February. When Collingwood at Syracuse learned of this on the 22nd he was set the triple tasks of finding them, bringing them to battle with sufficient force, and guarding Sicily, which seemed their most likely objective. To his great chagrin they eluded him and retired to Toulon. 'My heart was bent on the destruction of that fleet, but I never got intelligence where they really were until they were out of reach... Their escape was by chance, for at one time we were very near them without knowing it. (Collingwood to Admiral Lord Radstock, 18 June 1808, 'Public and Private Correspondence', 2.162)' Shortage of frigates was, as ever, the drawback. Piers Mackesy's account of the incident refutes the 'Dictionary of National Biography''s criticism of Collingwood for failing to bring the French to battle ('Mariner's Mirror', 41, 1955, 3-14 and 137-48). The 'Dictionary of National Biography''s criticism of Collingwood's 'general order' for battle of 23 March 1808 is similarly well answered in the 'Naval Review' (24, 1936, 384). 
In May 1808 Spain rose against Napoleon's invasion of its country. Collingwood sailed immediately to Cadiz to provide assistance: 'There was great joy amongst the Spaniards when I came here... My first business was to remove all those doubts of our good intentions which I succeeded in... When I went on shore the multitudes of people was immense that came to receive me. (Collingwood to W. Spencer-Stanhope, 20 Aug 1808, priv. coll.)' They had not forgotten his chivalry after Trafalgar. Now he gave them much valuable political guidance and sent his frigates to assist their army against the French invasion of Catalonia. 
In April 1809 Collingwood shifted his flag from 'Ocean' to the 'Ville de Paris' (110 guns). Although the blockade of ships and troop convoys in Toulon was still essential, the weight of naval effort shifted eastwards. Turkey was no longer an enemy and Austria had once more become an ally. Frigates and brigs were sent to support Austria in the Adriatic, destroying trade and capturing forts, garrisons, and castles, 'scaling towers at midnight and storming redoubts at mid-day... Those youths [the captains] think that nothing is beyond their enterprise and they seldom fail of success' (Collingwood to Rear-Admiral Thomas Sotheby, 30 June 1809, 'Public and Private Correspondence', 2.376). 
In October, on Collingwood's initiative and with the reluctant assent of the military commander, Sir John Stuart, the Ionian Islands of Zante, Cephalonia, Ithaca, and Cerigo were liberated from the French in order to provide a foothold in the Adriatic should the French attack Greece or Turkey. They remained under British protection until 1864. Later that month, having withdrawn his ships from a close blockade of Toulon, Collingwood was off Minorca hoping to lure the French fleet of seventeen of the line to sea. But only five men-of-war and a convoy of eighteen vessels for Barcelona sailed. Nevertheless two of the ships and seventeen of the much needed storeships were captured or sunk. 
From 14 November 1809 to 7 January 1810 Collingwood's flagship lay in Port Mahon, Minorca -- the longest period he had spent in harbour for over seven years. After a further period off Toulon he returned to Port Mahon on 25 February. His health was rapidly deteriorating and on 6 March, having turned over his command to Vice-Admiral Purvis, he sailed for England. Reassured to find his flagship underway, he rallied and said 'then I may yet live to meet the French once more' ('Public and Private Correspondence', 2.427). But twenty-four hours later he died (probably from cancer of the stomach) on board the 'Ville de Paris', aged sixty-one. He had spent only one year ashore in seventeen years of war and was worn out in the service of his country. 
As early as August 1808 Collingwood had written to Lord Mulgrave, the first lord, asking to be relieved because of his very weak state of health, which he attributed to the long time he had been at sea. To this Mulgrave wrote that he knew 'not how I should be able to supply all that would be lost to the service of the country and to the general interests of Europe by your absence from the Mediterranean... Through a variety of difficult and delicate arrangements, political as well as professional, your Lordship has in no instance failed to adopt the most judicious and best-concerted measures. (6 and 25 Sept 1808, NMM, LBK/40)' Collingwood's acceptance was characteristic of his overriding sense of duty and he had stayed on for another eighteen months. But by February 1810 his health had further deteriorated and he applied again to Mulgrave to be relieved. After his death, but before news of it reached London, Admiral Sir Charles Cotton was appointed as his successor. Collingwood's body was taken to England, landed at Greenwich on 26 April, and, after lying in state there, was buried on 11 May in the crypt of St Paul's Cathedral near his friend Nelson. There are monuments to him in the south transept of St Paul's and in Newcastle Cathedral, and a statue on a massive pedestal at Tynemouth, defended by four guns from his flagship at Trafalgar. Three battleships have been named after him, and the Royal Navy training establishment at Fareham has been called HMS 'Collingwood' since 1940. 


@@@@@


doc= 5931


Collingwood, George (c.1679-1716), Jacobite insurgent, was born in Eslington, Northumberland, the eldest son of William Collingwood ('c'.1654-1715), gentleman, and Mary ('b'. 1659), daughter of Sir Richard Forster of Stokesley, second baronet. He held estates at Eslington worth approximately $900 per annum. The family were staunch Roman Catholics and maintained a Jesuit priest at Eslington. One contemporary described George as 'a very pious gentleman and well-beloved in his country' (Patten, 141); his brother Thomas became a Jesuit priest and served as chaplain to the Selby family of Biddlestone, Northumberland. In 1710 George married the Hon. Catherine Browne (1684/5-1776), daughter of Henry Browne, fifth Viscount Montague (marriage bond 3 June 1710). Catherine was a fellow Roman Catholic, and her father had served as secretary of state to James II in exile. They had three daughters: Isabella ('b'. 1711), Barbara ('b'. 1712), and Catherine (died 1761). 
George Collingwood took part in the Jacobite rising of 1715, joining the Northumbrian forces raised by the earl of Derwentwater. It was said that he joined only at his wife's insistence; however it is known from his correspondence that he was in close social contact with other Catholic gentry of the north-east who also rallied to the Jacobite cause. He joined the march to Preston, where he was taken prisoner. He was among the gentry prisoners ordered to be taken to London for trial. Once in the capital he would probably have faced a couple of years in gaol before being released under the general pardon of 1717. Like the majority of the Northumbrian gentry Jacobite insurgents he would have forfeited his estates but not his life. However at Wigan he had an attack of gout and, unable to travel to London, was transferred instead to Liverpool. In the north-west the government wished to prevent any further disturbances and acted swiftly and uncompromisingly against the dissidents. George Collingwood was tried on 9 February 1716. According to Lady Cowper, his wife wrote to a friend in London for assistance but received the following reply: 'I think you are mad when you talk of saving your Husband's Life. Don't you know you will have five hundred Pounds a Year Jointure if he's hanged, and that you won't have a Groat if he's saved?' ('Diary', 78). No reprieve was forthcoming, and on 25 February 1716, aged about thirty-seven, George Collingwood was hanged, drawn, and quartered at Liverpool. His estate at Eslington was forfeited and sold to the Liddell family of Ravensworth, co. Durham. 


@@@@@


doc= 5932


Collingwood, Roger (fl. 1495-1517), mathematician, originated in the diocese of Durham, of unknown parentage. He was admitted as a questionist in May 1495 to the University of Cambridge, probably to Queens' College, graduating BA in 1496 and MA in 1499. During his tenure of a fellowship at Queens' in 1497 to 1510, Collingwood resided partly at Cambridge, where he held the first known mathematics lectureship in 1501-2, 1504-7 (receiving a fee of $4 in 1506), and 1514-17, and partly on the continent, where he was permitted to study canon law. He was living away from Cambridge in 1502-3, in Paris, and in 1507-11. 
Collingwood's lectureship had probably been instituted by his teacher, Bishop Richard Foxe, patron of humanism and founder of Corpus Christi College. He was dean of chapel at Queens' in 1503-4, was appointed rector of Albury in Surrey in 1509, and served his college as senior proctor in 1513. Collingwood was also a practising mathematician and under the name of Carbo-in-ligno left a treatise in manuscript, 'Arithmetica experimentalis', dedicated to Bishop Foxe, and preserved in the library of Corpus Christi College. Nothing is known of Collingwood's subsequent life nor of the circumstances of his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 5933


Collins, Anthony (1676-1729), philosopher and freethinker, was born on 21 June 1676 at Isleworth, Middlesex, the eldest child of Henry Collins (1646/7-1705), lawyer, and Mary Dineley. He was educated at Eton College and then at King's College, Cambridge, from 1693 to 1696, but did not take a degree. At King's his tutor was Francis Hare, the future bishop of St Asaph and of Chichester. It was from Hare, Thomas Woolston wryly observed, that Collins 'imbibed his Notable notions about Religion and Liberty' (T. Woolston, 'Fourth Discourse on the Miracles of our Saviour', 1727, v). He was admitted to the Middle Temple on 24 November 1694, although a career in law, in the footsteps of his father and grandfather, did not attract him. On 8 July 1698 he married Martha Child ('bap'. 1676, died 1703), a daughter of the prominent banker, lord mayor of London, and MP Sir Francis Child (1641/2-1713) and his wife, Elizabeth Wheeler (1651/2-1720). Their marriage was governed by a settlement stipulating that the extensive properties accumulated by Collins's father and grandfather in Middlesex and Essex were to be held in trust. The couple had four children, two sons and two daughters; the elder son died in infancy, and the birth of the second daughter occasioned the death of her mother, in 1703. 
Early on Collins came to know and be influenced by two other well-known freethinkers, John Toland and Matthew Tindal. Collins financially assisted Toland, who dedicated two books to him: 'The Fables of Aesop' (1704) and 'Adeisidaemon, sive, Titus Livius a superstitione vindicatus' (1709). Henry Dodwell, Thomas Hearne, and Thomas Burnet, among others, claimed that Collins helped Tindal to write a number of other works, especially 'The Rights of the Christian Church'. Collins's intense friendship with John Locke, whom he came to know in 1703, was seminal to his intellectual and personal development. Locke treated him like a son and saw in him an intellectual successor, nurturing his philosophical talents. Collins later arranged for Locke's letters to him to be published, together with other scarce materials and unpublished manuscripts shown to him by Locke, in 'A Collection of Several Pieces of Mr John Locke' (1720), edited by his friend Pierre Des Maizeaux. The most significant compliment that Locke bestowed on him, in a letter of 29 October 1703, was that Collins's love of truth for its own sake was as great as that of anyone he had known. The theme of the love of truth, especially in religion, pervades Collins's writings. 
Collins made his debut as an author with 'A Letter to the Learned Mr Henry Dodwell', prompted by the controversy that the nonjuring Dodwell aroused with his 'An epistolary discourse, proving, from the scriptures and the first fathers, that the soul is a principle naturally mortal' (1706). Newspaper advertisements show that it appeared in print in November 1706, well before the work commonly thought to have been Collins's first, 'An Essay Concerning the Use of Reason in Propositions', which was published in March 1707. Like all his writings it appeared anonymously. Dodwell had notoriously argued that though the soul was naturally mortal God had immortalized it with the Christian revelation to save the blessed or punish the wicked. In a reply to Dodwell, Samuel Clarke argued that the soul was naturally immortal by proving that it was immaterial. Furthermore Clarke maintained that consciousness could not be attributed to a material subject and accused Dodwell of thoughtlessly publishing views that encouraged sceptics in their attempts to undermine religion. Collins addressed his letter to Dodwell as a defence of his right to publish his opinions even if, as Collins made clear, he disagreed with most of them. Collins argued that Clarke's argument for the soul's immateriality was misguided because, like Locke, he held it to be neither in the power of unaided human reason to prove such a conclusion nor necessary for the defence of religion. Unlike Locke, however, Collins maintained that experience suggested a material subject of consciousness. In a series of exchanges with Clarke over the next two years Collins argued that Clarke had been mistaken to infer that if consciousness belonged to a material and divisible subject it would necessarily belong to all parts, which would be an absurd conclusion. He also defended the idea that human liberty, defined as the power of acting as one wills or pleases, is compatible with necessity. He developed this view in 'A Philosophical Enquiry Concerning Human Liberty' (1717) and insisted that the endemic obscurity of such philosophical debates could be ended only by using clear and distinct ideas. His arguments were rebutted by Clarke, and their exchange was overshadowed in significance only by Clarke's correspondence with Leibniz. His philosophical duel with Clarke was regarded by the French philosopher Jacques-Andre Naigeon as having established Collins's place in eighteenth-century thought. 
In 'An Essay Concerning the Use of Reason in Propositions' (1707) Collins attacked the clergy for insisting that the mysteries of religion, such as the Trinity, are not only 'above reason' but also are required to be believed as a condition of Christian faith. Like Toland in 'Christianity not Mysterious' (1696), he claimed that we cannot assent to what we do not understand; the proper response is suspension of belief. In 'Priestcraft in Perfection' (1710) and 'An Historical and Critical Essay, on the Thirty-Nine Articles of the Church of England' (1724) he challenged the power of the bishops to settle controversies of faith and their claim to possess a divinely sanctioned authority in religion akin to the divine right of kings. Such claims struck him as expressions of 'priestcraft' and assaults on the rights of individual reason. In 'A Vindication of the Divine Attributes' (1710) he examined the views of the Huguenot philosopher Pierre Bayle on the intractable problem of evil for a Christian monotheistic theology and criticized Archbishop William King's attempt to evade this difficulty by claiming that God's attributes only bear an analogy to their human counterparts. Collins showed that King's solution removed the possibility of human beings emulating divine attributes and came dangerously close to an atheist's view. His handling of the controversy displayed his talent for sceptical modes of argument, asserting little in his own right while showing how proposed solutions to theological difficulties only exacerbated the problem that gave rise to them. 
At the core of Collins's philosophy is his defence of 'freethinking'. He first used the term in 'A Discourse of Free-Thinking' (1713), where he defined it as the impartial use of the understanding to determine the meaning of propositions, and to judge their truth or falsity, their probability or improbability on the strength or weakness of available evidence. He argued that freethinking, so defined, is a universal right and in religion a duty. In defending the latter he catalogued how the clergy differed on nearly every issue -- so much so that some readers saw his real purpose as being to show that all these differing opinions were false. There were dozens of replies in Britain and on the continent, where a French translation soon appeared, including responses from Jonathan Swift, George Berkeley, Benjamin Hoadly, Richard Bentley, and Francis Hare. The theme common to the attacks was that freethinking was nothing more than a disguise for a covert, self-serving, sceptical, atheistic, and libertine agenda. The work was publicly burnt by the common hangman, and the controversy was said to have occasioned the second of two journeys that Collins made to the Netherlands, the first having occurred in 1710. 
About 1716 Collins moved from London to rural Essex, where he assumed the responsibilities of a country gentleman. He served as JP, and as county treasurer restored the county's chaotic finances to good order. Whether in London or the country he was praised by those who knew him for his upright moral character, and as such his life was a standing reproof that freethinking was a licence for moral libertinism. In 1720 he collaborated with John Trenchard, a friend of his, and Thomas Gordon on a famous paper, the 'Independent Whig', in which they attacked clerical claims to authority and accused the high-church clergy of practical atheism. Among the closest of his friends who frequently visited him was Pierre Des Maizeaux, whose reviews of Collins's works drew them to the attention of continental readers. One of the many attractions of Collins's house to Des Maizeaux was its splendid library. When it was auctioned after his death there were more than 7000 lots, including complete runs of continental periodicals and pamphlets. Collins boasted to Dodwell that his collection of works by Anglican divines could rival anyone's. He owned rare manuscripts of biblical criticism by Spanish Jews and a copy of the scandalously irreligious work 'La vie et l'esprit de Spinosa', better known as the 'Treatise of the Three Imposters'. Collins remained a widower until the premature death of his son Anthony, in 1723, after which he married Elizabeth Wrottesley (died 1737), fourth daughter of Sir Walter Wrottesley, third baronet (1659-1712), and his first wife, Eleanor Archer (died 1694), in 1724. She was the sister of Hugh Wrottesley (died 1725), a lawyer at Lincoln's Inn and a book collector, to whom Des Maizeaux dedicated 'A Collection of Several Pieces of Mr John Locke'. 
The period from 1723 until Collins's early death from the stone, from which he suffered throughout this time, was highly productive. Starting with 'A Discourse of the Grounds and Reasons of the Christian Religion' (1724), he subjected the argument from prophecy, widely relied on to demonstrate the truth of Christianity, to painstaking scrutiny. The truth of Christianity would be demonstrated, he argued, only if Jesus Christ could be shown to be the Messiah prophesied by the 'Old Testament'. But, he claimed, the 'Old Testament' Messiah was a temporal not a spiritual figure; furthermore the 'Old Testament' prophecies were not uniquely and literally fulfilled in Jesus. Although William Whiston had explained this mismatch between the 'Old' and 'New Testaments' by arguing that scriptural texts had been corrupted with the object of undermining Christianity, Collins masterfully set the rival accounts against each other. Following the Dutch scholar Grotius, he accepted that even the most defensible text supported only typical fulfilment of the prophecies by Jesus, and then only by extended analogy. Thus, working from premises granted by others in the classic sceptical manner, Collins accepted both that the text was suspect and that its most defensible interpretation fell short of the proof required. 
Collins's fondness for such modes of argument makes it difficult to place him. He himself repeatedly claimed to be nothing more than a freethinker who was prepared to follow reason wherever it took him and ready to expose the weakness of conventional arguments. Some, like Voltaire, viewed him as a deist and a scourge of Christianity, whereas others, such as Berkeley, saw him rather as an atheist. Others still, like Clarke, maintained that in practice all these positions reduced to the same. The attacks on Collins's 'Discourse of Free-Thinking' were skirmishes compared with the outpouring occasioned by his 'Discourse of the Grounds and Reasons' and his subsequent works. Some such as Edward Chandler, bishop of Lichfield, and John Rogers, sometime chaplain to George II, urged the state to take action against him for questioning widely held and well-established views whose maintenance, they argued, was crucial to good order. In his last works Collins responded to his critics by arguing that it was in the interests of both the state and society to extend, not restrict, the rights of free expression and of religious toleration in worship as well as belief. These rights were necessary to give effect to the right of free examination and to promote rather than undermine the peace and well-being of communities. For him they were the real legacy of the protestant Reformation. 
Collins died on 13 December 1729 at Cavendish Square, London, and was buried in the new burial-ground belonging to St George's, Hanover Square. He left his library to his widow, who sold it at auction, and his manuscripts to Des Maizeaux. Des Maizeaux, upset that Collins left him only $50, sold the manuscripts to Elizabeth Collins, an action that he quickly regretted but was powerless to undo. She took pains to ensure that they would not see the light of day. Collins is known to have drafted defences of his position on the liberty and necessity of human action, and referred in his published works to other manuscripts on subjects such as ecclesiastical history and miracles, but at the beginning of the twenty-first century all remained undiscovered. 


@@@@@


doc= 5934


Collins, Arthur (1681/2-1760), genealogist, was the son of William Collins, a gentleman usher to Charles II's consort, Queen Catherine of Braganza, and his wife, Elizabeth Blyth, daughter of Thomas Blyth. It seems likely that the family was Roman Catholic and that record of birth and marriage would have been found among the records of the Portuguese embassy chapel, which have not survived. Collins is said to have been given a liberal education and to have dissipated a large fortune in his youth. Certainly, he later spent much on his publishing ventures. He is first noticed as a bookseller at 'the Black Boy, opposite St Dunstan's Church in Fleet Street', in partnership with Abel Roper, a name which appears among those of the publishers of Dugdale's 'Baronage' issued in 1675-6. 
From most written letters of his forty-seven years in publishing peerages, Collins appears to have lived in Enfield and, towards the end of his life, in Holloway. He married in 1708, though the identity of his wife is unknown. Of several children, one son was a lieutenant in the Royal Navy who served in two campaigns in the Netherlands, at the battles of Fontenoy, Falkirk, and Culloden, and died in 1756. Another was Major-General Arthur Tooker Collins, whose name may give a clue to the identity of his mother. 
In 1709 the first edition of Collins's 'The peerage of England, or, An historical and genealogical account of the present nobility... collected as well from our best historians, publick records, and other sufficient authorities, as from the personal information of most of the nobility', was published anonymously, although it was described on the title-page as 'printed... for Abel Roper and Arthur Collins'. An octavo volume of only 470 pages, it supplied a want by its meagre accounts of noble families and of peerages conferred after the publication of Dugdale's 'Baronage'. In the preface to the larger second edition, again printed for A. Collins (2 vols. and supplement, 1712-16), Collins spoke of the extraordinary success of the first. In the text of the 1712 edition Collins inserted rather crude woodcuts of armorial bearings, 'as they may be serviceable to instruct young gentlemen in the terms of Heraldry', which would not be 'a sufficient excuse for their not being done in a more commendable manner, were it not known to be an almost impracticable work of printing them with these sheets to any manner of perfection' (A. Collins, 'The Peerage of England', 2nd edn, 1, pt 1, 1712, preface). 
In 1716, in expectation of a situation in the custom house, Collins gave up his business in Fleet Street, but his 'Baronetage of England, being an Historical Account of Baronets from their First Introduction' appeared in 1720 with a dedication to John Anstis, Garter king of arms. Collins's preface stressed the care he had taken with documentation and described great 'discouragements' in compiling the work caused by the failure of many families to let him see their pedigrees. The bibliographer Thomas Moule described the work as being 'as free of error as any of his successors in this laborious pursuit' (Moule, 308). In March 1723 Collins wrote to Sir Robert Walpole stating his continued poverty and expectations of some provision from the government; he explained that he did not intend to publish any more editions of the 'Baronetage' but was instead preparing an enlarged peerage. A single-volume instalment was issued in 1727 as 'The English baronage, or, An historical account of the lives and most memorable actions of our nobility, with their descent, marriages, and issue'. Dedicated with a flattering note on Sir Robert Walpole and an account of his family in the preliminary address to the reader, Collins commemorated the elevation to the peerage of Sir Robert's eldest son. He stated that 'with much labour, and at no small expense' he had made large collections of material for his 'Baronage' and that he intended to publish the peerage in order of precedence. He admitted to having a manuscript of Dugdale's work with many additions by Gregory King, Lancaster herald, to which he had added his own researched notes. 
Greatly benefiting from King's work, Collins published his 'Proceedings, precedents and arguments, on claims and controversies concerning the baronies by writ and other honours' in 1734, dedicated to Spencer Compton, earl of Wilmington. In 1735 the first edition to be entitled Collins's 'Peerage' appeared in three volumes, with engravings of the arms, crests, and supporters of the then existing peers. In a second edition of 1741 he added copious references to his authorities and dedicated the four volumes to the duke of Rutland, the earl of Halifax, and Walpole, which brought him some of the financial support he required. Thomas Wotton edited Collins's work for another edition, published as 'The English Baronetage' (5 vols., 1741) but more accurately known as 'Wotton's Baronetage', in which the volume on marquesses and earls was dedicated to another benefactor, the earl of Shaftesbury. Acknowledging the assistance of Collins, Wotton admitted his obligations to the works of Peter Le Neve, which he had purchased in 1731. 
In the preface to his two-volume supplement (1750) to the 1741 edition of the 'Peerage' Collins complained that he had spent his fortune in researches and would be unable to publish the results without help. Pathetically, he contrasted the neglect of himself with the favour which had been shown to Dugdale and Ashmole. In a plaintive letter to the duke of Newcastle, dated 3 February 1752, he wrote that he was engaged on a new edition of the 'Peerage' but did not have the funds to pay for a transcriber. At the same time he acknowledged kindness from Lord Granville. In a subsequent letter to the duke of Newcastle he blamed his poverty on the cost of printing his account of Newcastle's mother's family, the Holles family, and asked for a warranty for some money. Ultimately he received a pension of $400 a year from the king, which enabled him to complete the third of the enlarged editions of his 'Peerage' (1756), dedicated to the king, the earls of Shaftesbury, Holdernesse, and Northumberland, and the marquess of Abergavenny. This was the last to be overseen by Collins himself. His confidence had been so enhanced that he could proudly write, 'I am not conscious of delivering the least untruth; my accounts of these, and other families I have published, being warranted by Records and Informations I cannot distrust... and my readers may be appraised by the authorities I have cited, and which prove the difficulties of the undertaking, and the expense that attends the performance. (A. Collins, 'The Peerage of England', 3rd edn, 1756, preface)' He acknowledged the assistance of antiquaries such as Charles Townley, Clarenceux king of arms. 
Three posthumous editions of Collins's 'Peerage' were published: the fifth edition was edited by the engraver Barak Longmate, and brought the work up to date, and the final edition (1812), edited by Sir Egerton Brydges, became the standard work before the appearance of G. E. Cockayne's 'Complete Peerage'. In his preface Brydges described the exceptional and indefatigable industry of Collins, and the general accuracy, which rivalled Dugdale, whose method Collins had, by and large, followed. 
Collins exhibited modesty in describing himself as a printer or a bookseller. He did not presume to call himself an author for some ten years. His general disinterestedness must be set against what may often seem to be adulation of birth and rank. In his own words he stated that his only inducement to persevere was 'an innate desire to preserve the memory of famous men' (A. Collins, 'Historical Collections of the Noble Families of Cavendish, Holles, Vere, and Harley, and Ogle', 1752, preface). He was, none the less, self-assured as a scholarly researcher. Carlyle, in his rectorial address to the students of Edinburgh University, acknowledged that he 'got a great deal of help out of poor Collins', when writing his life of Oliver Cromwell, and he pronounced Collins's 'Peerage' to be 'a very poor peerage as a work of genius, but an excellent book for diligence and fidelity' ('DNB'). In a letter of 9 February 1752 to the duke of Newcastle, Collins says: 'I have left, in manuscript, an account of my family, my life, and the cruel usage I have undeservedly undergone' (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 8.392), but no trace of its survival or of other papers has been discovered. He had expended not only a lifetime of labour but all that he possessed, as he observed with customary candour and innocence of courtly customs in his last preface: 'I could cite instances of other authors, that have been preferred, though it has been my hard fate to be soliciting the chief of power (his Majesty and the royal family excepted) for several years without effect, and have not been wanting in setting forth, by printed case, my pretensions to preferment, a Place having been resigned to me by a relation, and given from me to proceed on the work I have been engaged in, with a promise of being better provided for. (A. Collins, 'The Peerage of England', 3rd edn, 1756, preface)' Collins was an assiduous researcher and a prolific compiler and editor. To several smaller and unpublished works, he added an ephemeral package of papers on peerage, families, and other matters published between 1732 and 1756. These works, which would challenge scholars of any era, included 'The Life of William Cecil, Lord Burleigh' (1732), 'The Life and Glorious Actions of Edward, Prince of Wales, Commonly called the Black Prince' (1740), which, with 'The History of John of Gaunt' (1740), was written for the uncompleted 'English Baronage' of 1727. Similarly, he published genealogical and historical accounts of the Harley, Sackville, Percy, Windsor, and Carteret families, and made extensive use of the papers owned by the Sydney family to publish 'Letters and Memorials of State' from the reign of Queen Mary through to that of Charles II. He published a volume of papers belonging to the Cavendish, Holles, Vere, Harley, and Ogle families, with the financial help of the countess of Oxford. 
Collins died on 16 March 1760 in Holloway, aged seventy-eight, and was buried in Battersea church. It is known that he was survived by his son Major-General Arthur Tooker Collins, who died on 4 January 1793, leaving a son, David Collins. David Collins was judge-advocate in New South Wales, lieutenant-governor of Van Dieman's Land, and author of 'An Account of the English Colony in New South Wales' (2 vols., 1798-1802). 


@@@@@


doc= 5935


Collins, Charles Allston (1828-1873), painter and writer, was born on 25 January 1828 at Pond Street, Hampstead, Middlesex, the second son of the landscape and genre painter William John Thomas Collins RA (1788-1847) and his wife, Harriet Geddes (1790-1868), a teacher and writer, daughter of Lieutenant Alexander Geddes and his wife, Harriet Easton. Geddes's sister was the portrait painter Margaret Carpenter. Born, according to Percy Fitzgerald's 'Memoirs of an Author', 'a blue-eyed red-haired bonny bairn' (Fitzgerald, 1.297), he was named after his godfather Washington Allston (1779-1843), the American history painter. Charles's eldest brother, to whom he was very close, was the novelist William Wilkie Collins. Collins grew up in the Hampstead, Highgate, and Bayswater areas of London where his neighbours included the landscape painter John Linnell and his family. Collins was tutored at home by his mother. Like his father, subject to depression, he too became exceedingly religious and adopted high-church practices. 
In 1843 Charles Collins entered the Royal Academy Schools where he formed lasting friendships with William Holman Hunt and especially John Everett Millais, and met other members of what subsequently became the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood. However, in spite of Millais's nomination, the sculptor Thomas Woolner (1825-1892) later blocked Collins's election to the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood. Collins and Millais spent the summer of 1850 painting in Oxfordshire and between September and November stayed at the home of the printer Thomas Combe in Walton Street, Oxford. There Millais drew a portrait of his friend, whom he nicknamed Saint Carlo, depicting a nervous, anxious, chiselled face with high eyebrows and large eyes. Millais presented this portrait to Combe, and it later formed part of the Combe bequest to the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford. Collins's evident nervous temperament may have been aggravated by an accident five years earlier in which he nearly drowned. As a result Collins was petrified by water. Millais wrote, 'One could not induce him to commit his body (for fear of drowning) within a coffin bath of hot water' (Peters, 105). At Oxford, Collins painted a portrait of Mrs Combe's uncle, William Bennett, which, as Malcolm Warner has observed, was probably intended as a pendant to Millais's portrait of the printer (both Ashmolean Museum, Oxford); both works were presented by the artists to Combe. It was also probably during this time that Collins began his most famous work, 'Convent Thoughts' (Ashmolean Museum, Oxford), which he exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1851. It was purchased by Combe and formed part of his growing collection of Pre-Raphaelite paintings. A powerful painting, it depicts a young nun, probably a novice, standing in an enclosed garden holding a passion flower, the symbol of the crucifixion. In her other hand is an illuminated medieval book. Part of her shadow is glimpsed in the lily pond before her. In common with other works by the Pre-Raphaelites, Collins's painting was attacked and parodied. 'The Times', on 7 May 1851, accused them of Catholic tendencies, an 'absolute contempt for perspective and the known laws of light and shade', and attacked their strangeness and use of form. Ruskin, in letters to 'The Times' of 13 and 30 May 1851, vigorously defended the artists and praised Collins's painting for its meticulous attention to botanical detail. 
Other works from the 1850s include 'Berengaria's Alarm' (exh. 1850; Manchester City Galleries), the challenging and highly original 'May in the Regent's Park' (1852; Tate collection), and 'Good Harvest of '54' (1855; V&A). Collins's exceptional skills as a portrait painter are seen in 'Georgina Hogarth as 'Lady Grace'' (1855) in his brother's drama 'The Lighthouse' (1855). This portrait is noteworthy for the depiction of its subject's startling eyes and intense pupils. He was represented at the 1857 Pre-Raphaelite exhibition at Russell Place by 'The Long Engagement' and 'The Fuchsia', both of which have disappeared from view. However, Millais and other contemporaries observed that Collins often failed to follow through his ideas, leaving drawings and paintings half-finished. William Holman Hunt noted in his 'Pre-Raphaelitism' that the talented and idealistic Collins: 'could have held the field for us had he done himself justice in design and possessed courage to keep his purpose... he continually lost heart when any painting had progressed half-way toward completion, abandoning it for a new subject, and this vacillation he indulged until he had a dozen or more unfinished canvases never to be completed. (Hunt, 2.314)' In a letter of 1855, Charles Collins confessed to Holman Hunt 'the extreme suffering and anxiety which painting causes me' (Hunt MSS, Hunt. L.). Whenever he tried to paint, he had acute stomach pains. In 1857 he gave up painting and attempted to make a living as a writer. Introduced by his elder brother to Charles Dickens and his circle, Collins contributed both fiction and non-fiction to 'Household Words' (1858-9), the 'Cornhill Magazine' (Dec 1867 - March 1868), and 'Macmillan's Magazine' (1860-66). Most of his writing appears in Dickens's 'All the Year Round', including his first book, 'The New Sentimental Journey' (1859), sketches of his Parisian visits, which was published in parts between 11 June and 9 July 1859. 'The Eye Witness and his Evidence of many Wonderful Things' (1860) is an anthology of all twenty-one of his 'Our eye-witness' accounts. 'A cruise upon wheels: the chronicle of some autumn wanderings among the deserted post-roads of France' was published in 1862. He wrote three novels: 'The Bar Sinister: a Tale' (1864); 'Strathcairn' (1864); and 'At the Bar: a Tale' (1866). Wilkie Collins, writing his brother's entry in the 'Dictionary of National Biography', believed that Charles's prose writings showed 'rare ability in the presentation of character... gave promise of achievement in the future, never destined to be fulfilled'. 
Collins married Katherine Elizabeth (Kate) Macready (1839-1929), the youngest daughter of Charles Dickens, on 17 July 1860, at Gad's Hill. There were no children. The couple lived in France and London. Collins wrote to his mother that in London 'we are paupers -- abroad we are rich' (Peters, 231). Increasingly he and Kate became estranged. Kate said after Collins's death that she had wished to obtain a legal separation but her father was opposed to it. G. H. Fleming, the biographer of Millais, bluntly describes the reason for the disintegration of the marriage: 'Charles Collins was incurably impotent' (Fleming, 190). His brother Wilkie wrote in the 'Dictionary of National Biography', 'The last years of [Charles's] life were years of broken health and acute suffering, borne with a patience and courage known only to those nearest and dearest to him.' Just before his own death, Charles Dickens encouraged Collins to illustrate 'The Mystery of Edwin Drood' (1870). 
On 9 April 1873 Charles died at 10 Thurloe Place, South Kensington, aged forty-five, from a cancerous tumour in the stomach. He was buried in Brompton cemetery on Monday 13 April 1873 in a grave covered by a flat granite slab without text or an inscription. His widow, Kate, observed an obligatory year of mourning before remarrying another painter, Charles Edward Perugini (1839-1918). As Wilkie Collins remarked, 'it was in the modest and sensitive nature of the man to underrate his own success. His ideal was a high one; and he never succeeded in satisfying his own aspirations' ('DNB'). 


@@@@@


doc= 5936


Collins, Charles James (1820-1864), writer, was connected with the London press for more than twenty years, during which time he was on the parliamentary staff of 'The Sun', 'Daily Telegraph', and 'The Standard'. He edited the 'Comic News' from 1847 and helped to found, and edited (from 1861), the 'Racing Times'. He died at his home, 9 Manor Terrace, Brixton, on 31 December 1864, leaving a widow, Phoebe. 
Collins was the author of 'Kenilworth', a burlesque, and other dramas of a similar character, and of novels such as 'Dick Diminy, or, The Life and Adventures of a Jockey' (1855; 2nd edn, 1875), 'Sackville Chase' (3 vols., 1863-5), 'Matilda the Dane: a Romance of the Affections' (1863), 'Singed Moths: a City Romance' (3 vols., 1864), and 'The Man in Chains' (3 vols., 1864). 


@@@@@


doc= 5937


Collins, David (1756-1810), colonial official and army officer, was born on 3 March 1756 at Cross Street, London, the third surviving of the eleven children of Arthur Tooker Collins (1718-1793) and his wife, Henrietta Caroline Fraser. His father was an officer of marines, while his mother came from a cultivated 'middling gentry family' of Park, King's county, Ireland. His paternal grandfather, Arthur Collins, a noted antiquarian and genealogist, published extensively on the British nobility. 
Collins began his education in London, but studied at Exeter grammar school from 1765 until 1770 after his father went to Plymouth in command of a detachment of marines. He himself joined the marines as an ensign in 1770 and was gazetted second lieutenant on 20 February 1771. A year later he sailed aboard HMS 'Southampton' for Denmark to take into safe keeping Queen Caroline Matilda, the wife of King Christian and a member of the British royal family. Having been arrested for a liaison with the king's physician, the queen was released following demands from England and brought home. 
Three years later, in March 1775, Collins sailed to the American colonies, where he fought at Bunker Hill on 17 June 1775 and later rose to first lieutenant. After evacuating loyalists from Boston to Halifax, Nova Scotia, in 1776 he returned home and for three years was adjutant of marines at Chatham. His wife, whom he had married at St Paul's Church, Halifax, on 13 June 1777, travelled with him. She was Maria Stuart Proctor (died 1830), the daughter of Captain Charles Proctor of Halifax. The couple had one daughter, who died young. Collins was promoted captain-lieutenant in August 1779 and captain in July 1780, and from February 1781 until January 1783 he served aboard the 'Courageux' in the channel squadron. He took part in the relief of Gibraltar under Lord Howe, and two days before the declaration of peace, on 3 September 1783, he was placed on half pay. For the next three years he and his wife lived at Rochester in Kent. On 24 October 1786 Collins was appointed deputy judge-advocate to the detachment of marines destined for the penal settlement at Botany Bay and to a position with the same title for the settlement itself. However, his means were insufficient, obliging him to seek assistance from his father, who had helped him secure the appointment. 
Collins served in New South Wales between January 1788 and August 1796. Experienced, level-headed, and reliable, he became Governor Arthur Phillip's confidential secretary. The departure of the marines in December 1791 reduced his responsibilities and salary, and he sought to return to England where his wife and father were ill (the latter died in 1793). Only a strong sense of duty kept him in the colony. His integrity prevented him succumbing to the corruption that arose following Phillip's departure in December 1792, when the officers of the New South Wales Corps gained power. He concentrated on his legal duties, and won praise from Phillip's eventual successor, John Hunter, for his ability and zeal. 
Collins knew no more law than could be gained from laymen's texts and military service, and as judge-advocate he operated under difficulties; he lacked the assistance of clerks and presided over a criminal and civil court system that made no provision for trial by jury. Hampered by his lack of expertise, he followed governors' wishes too readily, doing too little to assert the independence of the judiciary. Some of his judgments were questionable, but he achieved a 'rough and ready' justice, demonstrating that humane treatment of convicts could achieve more than undue severity. 
In August 1795, after serving longer in New South Wales than any other first fleet officer, Collins sailed home. Despite numerous applications for promotion he was given only the brevet rank of lieutenant-colonel of marines (1 January 1798), with the substantive rank of captain. While in England on half pay he successively published, in 1798 and 1802, the two volumes of 'An Account of the English Colony in New South Wales' that made his name as a writer. 
Collins's first volume drew on his extensive experiences 'en route' from England and in the colony. It was a well-illustrated chronological account, with a wealth of information about events and people, much of it available nowhere else. A gregarious man, Collins had a keen eye for detail and a lively curiosity. He depicted the lives of the white settlers and devoted attention to the Aborigines, providing a description of their language and culture that was for long the best available. The second volume covered the years 1796 until 1800, the period following his departure from Sydney, but was based only on material available in England and possessed none of the detail and freshness of its predecessor. Volume 1 also had shortcomings: the writing lacked literary merit according to the conventions of the time, and revealed little of the inner workings of government or of the malpractices of the New South Wales Corps. Nevertheless, the two volumes formed one of the earliest pieces of historical writing in Australia and stand out as the most important of the journals by officers of the first fleet. Maria Collins, who wrote several novels, produced an abridgement in 1804, by which time her husband's career had taken a new turn. 
On 4 January 1803 Collins was commissioned lieutenant-governor and sent in command of a party of troops and convicts to establish a settlement in Bass Strait designed to protect the region from French claims. He sailed aboard HMS 'Calcutta'. Judging Port Phillip to be unsuitable, and with Governor P. G. King's approval, he moved to Van Diemen's Land, reaching the mouth of the Derwent River on 16 February 1804. For the next six years he controlled this penal outpost, founding a town at Hobart and a varied economy based on farming, grazing, sealing, and whaling. The region was isolated, some of the officers were corrupt, the convicts were unreliable, and supplies were uncertain. Accommodating 500 free settlers who had been sent from the former settlement at Norfolk Island between 1806 and 1808 created further problems. So too did the presence between March 1809 and January 1810 of the intemperate Governor Bligh, nominally his governor-in-chief, who had been removed from office in Sydney by the New South Wales Corps. Bligh was unduly critical of Collins, as was the British government, which accused him of failing to curb waste and fraud. 
Collins's sudden death at Government House, Hobart, on 24 March 1810, at the age of only fifty-four, apparently in good health, aroused suspicions of suicide, or even murder by corrupt officers. A more likely cause was a coronary attack brought on by isolation, financial worries, and overwork. Whatever the case, he had lived long enough to make a mark on Australian history. The personal cost had been considerable, involving exposure to hardship and long separation from his wife and friends. In Sydney he found consolation in the company of Ann Yeates, by whom he had a son and a daughter, and at Hobart successively with the convict Hannah Power and with the Norfolk Islander Margaret Eddington, who bore him a girl and a boy. He believed that nature had intended him 'for the tranquil rather than the bustling walk of life', perhaps as a scholar or priest (Collins to his father, 12 Sept 1791, Collins MSS, Mitchell L., NSW, 1.58). His career took him in other directions, but, besides his judicial work in Sydney and the settlement at Hobart, where he was buried, his enduring legacy was his book, which at least partly fulfilled his early aspirations. 


@@@@@


doc= 5938


Collins, Greenvile (d. 1694), naval officer and hydrographer, sailed between 1669 and 1671 with Sir John Narborough as master of the 'Sweepstakes' on a voyage to the south seas. He was in sole charge of navigation on this voyage. In 1676 he was master of the 'Speedwell' (Captain John Wood) on a voyage to try to discover a north-east passage to China and the East Indies. Wood had been on the 'Sweepstakes' and, like Narborough, held Collins in high regard. The voyage ended with the wreck of the 'Speedwell' off Novaya Zemlya, but the crew were rescued and brought home. Collins's journal was the most important surviving record of this voyage and its use brought him to the attention of the king. He was given the mastership of the 'Charles' galley, in which he sailed in 1677 for Tangier, transferring to the 'James', the 'Newcastle', and finally the 'Plymouth', Narborough's flagship, as master in each case. In 1679 he was gazetted captain and made commander of the 'Lark' (18 guns). His journal records his time in the Mediterranean and his encounters with the Algerines, and the maps drawn to accompany the text show Collins's hydrographic skill. 
In 1681 Collins was made commander of the 'Merlin' yacht (8 guns), in which he was to undertake the first comprehensive survey of the coasts of Britain. Yachts were small, handy boats which did not draw much water and this made them ideal for surveying. There was certainly a need for such a survey since the best existing charts, mainly Dutch 'waggoners', were known to be defective, and there was no systematic way of collecting and disseminating the better sketch maps and information which experienced seamen made of areas and noted in their journals: the fact that the work was entrusted to Collins was a tribute to his skill and shows the extent to which he had won royal notice by this date. It also followed his own proposals of 1680 in which he both lamented the parlous state of the charts then available and outlined the methods by which he could conduct an improved survey. The work was supported financially and supervised by Trinity House, of which Samuel Pepys insisted that Collins be made a younger brother. (In 1693 he was made an elder brother.) 
The survey took seven years and was undertaken from the 'Merlin', 'Monmouth', 'Martin', and the 'Younge Spragge'. Collins probably used existing charts and seamen's sketches and notes, as well as his own observations in this remarkably ambitious undertaking. From 1683 Collins was allowed to style himself hydrographer in ordinary to the king. Charts were published as they were completed but in 1693 when the work was completed, and about one third of the charts were engraved -- in itself a laborious task -- they were privately published together as 'Great Britain's Coasting Pilot' by Freeman Collins, who may have been Greenvile's brother, and sold by Richard Mount. The work was in two parts and covered England and Scotland: Greenvile Collins announced his intention of producing a third part devoted to Ireland, but nothing came of the plan. A bill of 1694 itemizes the cost of the survey and shows that Collins spent $40 on instruments, and charged $80 for the 120 manuscript maps he delivered, $200 per annum in expenses for the seven years of the survey, and his wages of $394 10's'., making a total of $1914 10's'., of which he had received a small proportion in advance. He finally received the rest in arrears. The huge cost of the work, more than three times Collins's original estimate, as well as Collins's death go to explain why the Irish section was not completed and why there was some criticism of the work when it appeared. 
In 1694 Collins was made master of the 'Fubbs' yacht but on about 25 March of that year he died. In 1695 his widow, of whom no more is known, received $500 from the treasurer of the navy. His 'Coasting Pilot' was republished in 1723 by Mount and Page, a course of action which he would not have approved since he thought all masters' journals should be scrutinized by Trinity House and charts constantly updated from them; a further nineteen editions were published to 1792. Had his plan been adopted then, although his own charts would have been more rapidly superseded, mariners would have benefited still more from his modern vision of hydrography. 


@@@@@


doc= 5939


Collins, Hercules (d. 1702), Particular Baptist minister, appears to have received little formal education. A keen interest in Christianity showed itself at an early age, which may indicate religious parentage. Beyond this, though, nothing is known about his parents. By the mid-1670s he may have been a member of Petty France Particular Baptist Church, London. On 23 March 1677 he was appointed pastor of Wapping Particular Baptist Church, situated at that time between Broad Street and Old Gravel Lane, Wapping. Ten years later, in 1687, Collins led the congregation in a move to a location on James Street, Stepney, where a new building was erected for worship. Although this came after the declaration of indulgence issued by James II in April of that year, plans for the new building had been in the making before the declaration. The move is typical of the vigorous leadership that Collins exercised within his church and the larger Baptist community in London. 
In 1684 Collins was imprisoned in Newgate under the provisions of the 'Five Mile Act'. His earlier defence of nonconformity in 'Some reasons for separation from the communion of the Church of England, and the unreasonableness of persecution upon that account' (1682) may have been a factor in his imprisonment. When toleration for nonconformists did come in 1689, Collins was involved in the national assembly of Particular Baptists that gave official sanction to the confessional document known as the second London confession of faith, the doctrinal standard for the British Particular Baptist community throughout the next century. 
Although Collins had not had the advantage of a learned education, he was well versed in theology. This is evident in his publications. In 1680 he published a Baptist version of the 'Heidelberg Catechism' (1562), which he entitled 'An Orthodox Catechism'. A steady stream of books and tracts issued from his pen in the 1690s, dealing with such subjects as divine sovereignty ('Mountains of Brass, or, A Discourse upon the Decrees of God', 1690), believers' baptism ('Believers Baptism from Heaven, and of Divine Institution', 1691), and the death of infants ('Truth and Innocency Vindicated', 1695). A final work, 'The Temple Repair'd' (1702), is an eloquent plea for Baptist churches to serve as seminaries for aspiring ministers. 
By the time of his death, in London, on 4 October 1702, Collins was probably preaching to an auditory of around 700 people. His funeral sermon was preached by fellow Baptist John Piggott and subsequently printed. It contains the scantiest of biographical particulars. He was buried in Bunhill Fields, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 5940


Collins, John (c.1576-1634), physician, was born in Surrey, and matriculated as a sizar at St John's College, Cambridge, about 1591, where he gained a fellowship on Lady Margaret's foundation on 7 April 1598. He proceeded BA in 1596 and MA in 1599. From 1600 to 1604 he was Linacre lecturer at St John's while pursuing his MD. The college then gave him leave to 'travaile [three years] beyond the seas for his increase in learning' (Baker, 457). It is unclear where he studied, but he returned in 1608 and received his MD. On 8 November 1626 he succeeded John Gostlin as regius professor of physick. 
Collins was the first regius professor who was also a fellow of the London College of Physicians, having been admitted a candidate 'the day after Palm Sunday' 1611 ('Annals', vol. 3, fol. 7). He became a fellow on 7 May 1613, censor in 1615, and anatomy lecturer in 1624. This last post was also held at times by William Harvey. Although they were contemporaries and colleagues Collins seems not to have been persuaded by Harvey's theory of circulation, thus affirming Harvey's famous statement that no one over forty years of age accepted his views. It would be incorrect, however, to dismiss Collins's medical thought as entirely traditional. There is evidence that he was influenced by Paracelsian chemical theory and prescribed mercury (Webster, 11). He was also responsible for establishing 'anatomies' (dissections) as a required part of the Cambridge medical curriculum in 1627. The original Grace and an eyewitness account of an anatomy during Collins's tenure survive (Heywood and Wright, 2.358-9, 364). 
In 1630 Cambridge suffered a severe outbreak of plague. Collins and vice-chancellor Henry Butts were responsible for handling the crisis. They organized and administered the policy of isolation and had a pest-house built on Midsummer Common. Collins and Butts apparently enforced the quarantine strictly, since the fellow Joseph Mede complained, 'You see what it is to have a physician among the heads. We cannot have leave to scarce take the aire' (Birch, 1.47). It seems that degree requirements could be flexible at such times of emergency when students had to disperse on short notice. Collins would later acknowledge this when he differentiated between degrees ''pestilentae'' and ''eminentae'' ('of the plague' and 'of prominence'; Fuller, 166). In 1634 the registrar of the College of Physicians wrote to Collins complaining of the lax degree requirements at Cambridge. The main complaint of the college concerned the practice of granting degrees and licences to foreign trained practitioners who lacked, as the college saw it, proper training. Caught between his two professional affiliations Collins wrote an impassioned plea to his friend William Clement acknowledging the problem but confessing he was powerless to change such a long-standing practice ('Annals', vol. 3, fol. 147). On 7 August 1616 Collins was licensed to marry Judith Easton, a widow. Collins died at Cambridge in December 1634 and was buried in the chapel of St John's College on the 14th. By his will, dated 8 December and proved on 24 December, he bequeathed most of his 'phisick books' to St John's College, and $100 to buy more (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/166/108). 


@@@@@


doc= 5941


Collins, John (1626-1683), mathematician and scientific administrator, was born on 5 March 1626 at Wood Eaton near Oxford, the son of a poor nonconformist minister. Though not allowed to preach in church, Collins's father was permitted to do so in prisons, and he added to his small income by proof-reading for a publisher. Nevertheless, his financial situation did not allow him to provide for the higher education of his son. 
Collins attended a grammar school in the Oxford area, but when orphaned at the age of thirteen he became an apprentice of the bookseller Thomas Allam, outside the Turl Gate, Oxford. After Allam's business failed, he worked for three years as a junior clerk under John Marr, clerk of the kitchen to the prince of Wales (afterwards Charles II). Marr, eminently skilled in mathematics, had constructed sundials for the king's garden. With him Collins began to learn accounting and several areas of applied mathematics, including dialling (the theory of the construction of sundials), and during this time he probably lived at court. About the time that the king removed to Oxford, Collins went to sea for seven years (1642-9) on board an English merchantman, engaged as man-of-war in the Venetian service. He became acquainted with all aspects of navigation and, in his leisure time, continued his education in accounting, mathematics, and Latin. 
On his return to London, Collins earned his living as an accountant and teacher of writing (of which his clear hand is a proof) and mathematics. As accountant to the allom (alum) farmers he built up a network of correspondents that later helped him to procure books and mathematical news from overseas. About 1670 he married Bellona, laundress of the table linen to the queen, and the younger daughter of William Austen, head cook to Charles II; they had seven children. 
After the Restoration, Collins was appointed accountant to the Excise Office, a post he held for about a decade. In March 1669 he declined a lucrative offer from the surveyor-general, Sir James Shaen, to go to Ireland. In 1671 he lived in a house 'next to the sign of the Three Crowns in Bloomsbury Market, London' (Rigaud, 1.140). For about three years he was secretary to the council of plantations, exchanging this post in 1672 for that of manager of the farthing office, when he moved to a 'fair dwelling-house' (1.201) in or near Fenchurch Street. This post, however, ceased to exist about five years later, when Collins failed with his arguments against the issue of tin farthings. 
For lack of capital Collins was unable to realize his intention of setting up a stationer's shop and printing books (a pension of $50 a year from the Excise Office was not paid for several years). Thus in 1677 he accepted a small post as accountant to the Royal Fishery Company. In spite of good credentials and patronage (Sir Philip Warwick strongly recommended him to various offices), he was not able to obtain a well-paid permanent office. Among the various remunerative tasks he engaged in was the disentangling of intricate accounts, a facility for which he became well known. 
In spite of his limited education, in October 1667 Collins was elected fellow of the Royal Society. It was here that he had the opportunity to render the services for which he is remembered. For about ten years he served the society as a kind of unofficial secretary for all kinds of mathematical business. (The official secretary, until his death in 1677, was Henry Oldenburg who, in mathematical questions, relied heavily upon Collins's advice and assistance.) Collins conducted an extensive correspondence with some of the leading mathematicians in Britain and abroad, and he also drafted the mathematical details for Oldenburg's correspondence with these mathematicians (who included Barrow, Gregory, Huygens, Leibniz, Newton, Pell, Sluse, Tschirnhaus, and Wallis among others); Isaac Barrow called him 'Mersennus Anglus'. Collins obtained current mathematical news and foreign books for the Royal Society and its fellows, often in exchange for British scientific publications. 
Collins was extremely well acquainted with the publishing business, especially in London. In the difficult years after the great plague (1665) and the fire of London (1666) he saw through the press several important mathematical and scientific works: Thomas Salusbury's 'Mathematical Collections' (1661-5); Isaac Barrow's 'Lectiones opticae' (1669), 'Lectiones geometricae' (1670), and 'Archimedes' (1675); John Wallis's 'Mechanica' (1669-71) and 'Algebra' (1685); Jeremiah Horrocks's 'Opera posthuma' (1672-8); and others. However, his attempts to have some of Newton's early mathematical works published had no success. 
Collins's own published works reveal competence in elementary applied mathematics but not a creative mind. His most important books are 'An Introduction to Merchants' Accompts' (1652), 'The Sector on a Quadrant' (1658), 'Geometrical Dialling' (1659), and 'The Mariners' Plain Scale' (1659). He also published 'A Plea for the Bringing in of Irish Cattel, and Keeping out Fish Caught by Foreigners...' (1680) and 'Salt and Fishery' (1682). His main interest in the field of theoretical mathematics was the (numerical) solution of algebraic equations; for an understanding of the new infinitesimal methods he lacked the necessary background. He greatly underestimated the seminal force of the mathematical ideas of Descartes, while propagating the significance of the contributions of some of his countrymen, such as Oughtred or Harriot. 
Collins was described as 'a man of good arts, and yet great simplicity; able, but no ways forward', and of great modesty. His skill in accounting seems to have been generally acknowledged, as well as his understanding of the intricacies of trade. Above all his acquaintances praised his disinterested love of science and willingness to serve it wherever he could. He was a lover of music and an able player of the viol da gamba. 
In 1682 Collins was invited to advise on a proposed canal between the Isis and the Avon, and while engaged on the project became ill with asthma and consumption (which he was said to have contracted while riding on a hot day and drinking too much cider). He never recovered and died at his lodgings on Garlick Hill in London on 10 November 1683; he was buried in the parish church of St James Garlickhythe on 13 November. 
Due to his extensive correspondence, Collins's papers are an important source for the study of Restoration science. Most of them, formerly in private hands, were rarely made available to historians, but are now in Cambridge University Library. Some of them were printed in Rigaud's 'Correspondence of Scientific Men of the Seventeenth Century' (1841). Always eager to establish the priority of English mathematicians, Collins collected letters written by Newton in the 1670s on the subject of the infinitesimal calculus, partly with the intention of preparing a book on English mathematical achievements. After the outbreak of the priority dispute between Newton and Leibniz, well after Collins's death, this collection became an important source of evidence, and an edited selection of the letters was published on behalf of the Royal Society as 'Commercium epistolicum' (1712). 


@@@@@


doc= 5942


Collins, John (1632?-1687), Independent minister, born in England but educated in America, was the son of Edward Collins (died 1689), a deacon of the Congregational church at Cambridge, Massachusetts. Collins graduated from Harvard College in 1649, proceeding MA in 1652, and was incorporated MA at the University of Cambridge in 1654. He was a fellow and tutor at Harvard for some eighteen months in 1651-3. In the latter year he returned to Britain and was appointed to preach in Scotland and was given $50 for his journey and an income of $200 for the first year. In 1659 he was acting as chaplain to General Monck, whom he accompanied from Scotland to London. Collins was present in a neutral capacity when Monck interviewed the Independent deputies from London, following which in March 1660 Monck dismissed his Independent chaplains and turned to the presbyterians. 
Collins held no preferment at the time of the 'Act of Uniformity' of 1662, but is included by Edmund Calamy among the silenced ministers. Subsequently he succeeded Thomas Mallory, who had been ejected from the lectureship of St Michael, Crooked Lane, as pastor of an Independent church in Paved Alley, Lime Street, London. In 1669 Collins is recorded as preaching in Bell Lane, Spitalfields, and on 29 May 1672 he was licensed as a congregational teacher at Duke's Place, Aldgate. He was also one of the six original Pinners' Hall lecturers appointed in 1672, and was obviously very popular among his congregation: Cotton Mather related how when Collins was on his deathbed Matthew Mead 'poured out before God for his recovery' and there 'was hardly one dry eye to be seen in the great congregation' (Mather, 'Magnalia', 4.200). Nathanael Mather wrote of him, 'Hee is one of the best preachers in or about London as most agree; some say the best' ('Letters', 68). Edmund Calamy described him as 'a man mighty in the scriptures, and one of a sweet temper, and very charitable to all good men, without confining himself to a party' (Calamy, 'Abridgement', 2.838). 
Collins maintained strong links with Massachusetts. In 1672 he added a personal recommendation to the collective one of London Independents which he had signed in favour of Leonard Hoar's candidacy as president of Harvard, later having cause to draw attention to the caveats in the original endorsements when Hoar proved a less than successful choice. He also acted as an unofficial agent for the colony, receiving and disbursing funds on its behalf and relaying back to the governor news of court politicking around the New England colonies. He paid, and later stopped on his own authority, the retainer to John Rushworth to represent the colony at court. When plans were in train in early 1675 to purchase the propriety of Maine and New Hampshire for the duke of Monmouth, Collins acted vigorously in investigating the matter on behalf of Massachusetts. Collins informed Governor John Leverett 'if my owne industry, with the help of Major Thomson [the East India merchant Maurice Thomson], had not sifted this busines, about which I have taken many a step, [Rushworth] had not the least crevise of light into this busines; all he hath and what now hee prosecutes is upon my information. ('Hutchinson Papers', 2.206-7)' Collins himself had an interview with the earl of Anglesey, the lord privy seal, over the business. However, Collins continued, his own situation, especially as the renewal of the persecution of dissent loomed, limited the direct influence he could wield for the colony: he had 'not bin at Whitehall but twice in many years; and persecution is pretty hot, and if it goes on I may expect a prison for my living in the towne' (ibid.). In 1683 Collins was rewarded by the Massachusetts general court for his services for the colony when it lacked an official agent with the grant of 500 acres of land in Quenetusset in the Nipnuck country. 
Collins apparently wrote very little. A sermon on 'Jude' was published in 1663 in 'A Compleat Collection of Farewell-Sermons' by silenced ministers, in which he discussed how to retain and manage faith. Another sermon, 'How the religious of a nation are the strength of it', was published anonymously in Samuel Annesley's 'A Continuation of Morning-Exercise Questions and Cases of Conscience' (1683). He also wrote two prefatory epistles, one to Ralph Venning's 'Venning's Remains, or, Christ's School' (1675) and the other to a work by the New England divine Jonathan Mitchel, 'Discourse of the Glory to which God hath called Believers' (1677). 
Collins was subject to recurring bouts of ill health. At the beginning of August 1687 Nathanael Mather reported that 'Mr Collins is in a weak & wasted condicon as to his bodily health (by a scorbuticall diarrhoea as the physicians agree which hath hung upon him these many years). He is now at Tunbridg, by which waters he hath formerly had reviving many times. ('Letters', 67-8)' On this occasion, however, the cure had little effect. Collins died less than four months later, of a dropsy, and was buried at Bunhill Fields on 22 November 1687. His will, made three weeks earlier, gave his residence as St Giles Cripplegate; his mother and father, as well as his wife (whose name we do not know), were all alive at that point. Collins's only daughter had died in 1674; of the four sons named who survived, two -- Thomas and John -- entered the ministry. Nathanael Mather, who provided a Latin epitaph for Collins, succeeded him as pastor of the Lime Street congregation, and was in turn succeeded by Collins's son Thomas, who was elected co-pastor in 1697. 


@@@@@


doc= 5943


Collins, John (c.1725-1758/9), landscape painter, was born in London; he is of unknown parentage. He was patronized by the aristocracy from an early age and studied art in Italy at the expense of the duke of Ancaster, the marquess of Exeter, and others. On his return to London he painted scenes for one of the principal theatres, probably Covent Garden, but was most highly regarded by contemporaries for his landscapes. Vertue says of his style: 'his pencil free and neat his composition rich his skyes and distance hills soft and delicate' (Vertue, 155). Comparing his landscapes with those of William Jackson, John Hayes reproduced his 'Landscape with River and Hills', signed and dated 1853, in 'William Jackson of Exeter' ('The Connoisseur', 173, 1970, 20). Of these Gaspardesque landscapes, perhaps the best-known are a set of six landscape views with figures from Tasso's 'Jerusalem Delivered', etched by Paul Sandby, E. Rooker, P. C. Canot, and others, and published by his widow, Elizabeth Jane Collins. He caught an infectious fever and died at a silversmith's in Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London, in 1758 or 1759, leaving her and two children. 


@@@@@


doc= 5944


Collins, John (1741-1797), literary scholar, was probably born at St Erth, Cornwall, on 28 September 1741, the only son of the Revd Edward Collins (1692-1755), vicar of St Erth, and Elizabeth (died 1749), daughter of Nicholas Kendall, canon of Exeter and archdeacon of Totnes. John Collins was educated at Eton College and in the same class as George Hardinge, his friend at school and later his generous benefactor. From Eton, Collins matriculated at the Queen's College, Oxford, on 10 May 1759, and was awarded a BCL degree in 1766. Having taken holy orders, he was sent to Ledbury, Herefordshire, where he was rector. In 1769 he married his cousin Mary ('c'.1745-1781), only daughter of Walter Kendall of Pelyn, Lanlivery, Cornwall. 
Edward Capell, the Shakespearian editor and scholar, was not known personally to Collins. Yet when George Steevens, in the preface to his 1773 edition of Shakespeare, published some characteristically cutting remarks on the labours of his rival Capell, an anonymous pamphlet refuting these criticisms, 'A Letter to George Hardinge', was published in 1777 by Collins. Capell was deeply grateful for this defence, and before his death in 1781 he appointed Collins, who visited him during his last illness, an executor, leaving him a large sum of money, together with books and manuscripts, as well as the copyright of his important 'Notes and Various Readings to Shakespeare' (2 vols.). In return Capell obtained 'a promise... the discharge of which I leave to [Collins's] honour and (I am proud to say) his friendship' (Nichols, 'Illustrations', 8.593). Thereafter Collins oversaw the publication of the 'Notes' and 'The School of Shakespeare' which Capell had failed to get published in their entirety. 
After his wife's death in 1781, Collins's health deteriorated, and for the rest of his life he struggled with mental anxieties and financial problems. Collins seems to have had a contradictory personality: he was scholarly, very personable, with a clear voice and a cheerful manner, but he also seems to have inherited the 'inflammable temperature' and 'strong prejudices' of his father (Polwhele, 157-8), which may have precluded higher office. His schoolfriend Hardinge, who had revived their friendship after a chance visit to Ledbury, together with other old friends helped him financially, though not everyone appealed to responded positively. Lord Camelford wrote briskly to Hardinge that there was 'no chance of any preferment... till [Collins] becomes a 'citoyen actif'... a better recommendation than all your nonsense of suffering merit and genius' (Nichols, 'Illustrations', 6.133). 
In the 'European Magazine' (7, 1785, 52), Collins is dubbed 'a sleep-compelling divine'; his 'Letter to George Hardinge' is styled 'a heavy half-crown Pamphlet', and Johnson is credited with some rough remarks on Collins's grief at the loss of his wife. These anecdotes are, however, attributed to George Steevens and therefore may be altogether fictitious, or at least coloured by Steevens's unprincipled streak. It is generally accepted that Steevens, possibly in revenge for the accusation of plagiarism levelled against him in 'A Letter to George Hardinge', fathered on Collins notes of a suggestive nature in the second Johnson-Steevens edition of Shakespeare (1778). However, Steevens had already attached the name Collins to questionable notes in his 1773 Shakespeare, before John Collins entered the Shakespearian fray in 1777, and again in the 1803 edition, six years after John Collins's death. It is therefore unclear exactly which notes the mischievous Steevens intended as an embarrassment to John Collins and which to some other hapless Collins, long since forgotten. 
John Collins died at Penryn, Cornwall, on 20 March 1797. His name, along with those of his wife and four of their six children, is recorded on a monument in Lanlivery church. 


@@@@@


doc= 5945


Collins, John Ulric (c.1750-1807), army officer in the East India Company and diplomatist, is of unknown parentage; although his name suggests Irish ancestry, there is evidence for an early connection with Devon. An East India Company cadet, Collins sailed for Asia on 2 December 1769 on board the 'Vansittart' and arrived at Madras on 26 July 1770. As there were then limited vacancies in the commissioned ranks of the Bengal army, he joined the select picket of gentleman cadets, a separate company of young men waiting to be commissioned into a regiment which, in the field, formed part of the advance guard. With the select pickets he likely saw action in 1774 during the Rohilla War. Three years later the 19th native infantry regiment was created, and Collins obtained his commission. Initially known as Jack by his fellow officers, he was anyway regarded as vain. Later, as his style became increasingly pompous, he was called King Collins, or Little King Collins. In November 1780 Collins was made a captain, and in 1785 was appointed military storekeeper at Fort William, Calcutta. On 24 November 1790, in Calcutta, he married Charlotte (1772-1857), daughter of William and Elizabeth Wrangham of St Helena. The couple had two sons, George Theophilus (1792-1833) and Henry John ('b'. 1793). 
By the early 1790s Collins was Calcutta's town major. From 1793 he was the private secretary to Governor-General Sir John Shore. Made a lieutenant-colonel on 27 July 1796, early in the next year he travelled with Shore to Lucknow to meet Asaf ud-Daula, nawab-vizier of Oudh. In January 1798, after Asaf ud-Daula's death, he was again in Lucknow, when Shore secured the succession of the late ruler's brother Saadat Ali against the claims of Wazir Ali, the late ruler's son. Days before relinquishing office in March 1798 Shore appointed Collins resident to the court of Sindhia, the Maratha leader based at Gwalior who, possessing a powerful army, dominated the Delhi-Agra tract. Taking charge of the residency in September 1799 while Sindhia was at Poona, Collins resided at Fatehgarh. In October 1799, while leading his lavishly clothed personal escort to Jaipur and carrying Rs 10,000 from Governor-General Mornington for the raja, he secured the surrender of Wazir Ali, who was accused of murdering the Benares resident George Cherry. On 29 May 1800 Collins became a colonel. He attended Sindhia's court on two occasions, between February and May 1802 and February and August 1803, and twice failed to negotiate Sindhia's peaceful accession to the governor-general's system of subsidiary alliances. The second mission's failure and his frustrated departure from Sindhia's camp on 3 August 1803 was the immediate cause of the Second Anglo-Maratha War. 
In September 1803 Collins, 'en route' to Hyderabad and suffering from gout, met General Arthur Wellesley and members of his staff. Captain John Blakiston later described the occasion: 'In front of a noble suite of tents, which might have served the great Mogul, we were received by an insignificant, little old-looking man, dressed in an old fashioned military coat, white breeches, sky-blue silk-stockings, and large glaring buckles on his shoes, having his highly powdered wig, from which depended a pig-tail of no ordinary dimensions, surmounted by a small, round black silk hat, ornamented with a single black ostrich feather, looking altogether not unlike a monkey dressed up for Bartholomew fair. There was, however, a fire in his small black eye, shooting out from beneath a large, shaggy, pent-house brow, which more than counter-balanced the ridicule that his first appearance naturally excited.' Blakiston notes how they laughed at 'the little man' and his warnings about Sindhia's deadly efficient artillery (Blakiston, 1.144-5). At this time Collins may also have kept a zenana. 
In recognition of his efforts as resident with Sindhia, Wellesley made Collins his honorary aide-de-camp and in early 1804 appointed him resident to the nawab-vizier of Oudh. In 1805, a still gouty Collins described himself as infirm. He died at Lucknow on 11 June 1807 and, with sons of the nawab-vizier attending, was buried that day near the Aminabad bazaar with full civil and military honours. A Christian cemetery, the Kallan-ka-Lat, or Collins's monument, grew around his imposing tomb. 


@@@@@


doc= 5946


Collins, John (1742-1808), actor and poet, was born in Bath and baptized at Bath Abbey on 24 September 1742, the son of William Collins, a tailor, and his wife, Elizabeth. After serving an apprenticeship to a staymaker Collins became an actor. His first appearance was at Bath. A number of other actors named Collins were active at the time, and it is not always clear from contemporary records which was which. For example, in his 'Memoirs', Charles Lee Lewes claimed that Collins had been in George Farquhar's 'The Recruiting Officer' (as Captain Plume) at Covent Garden, but failed on account of a cold and returned to the provinces, but this is not borne out by the playbills. If it was John Collins who acted at Birmingham in 1762, it was the beginning of a long association with that city. When he appeared in Dublin in 1764 Collins was announced as from Edinburgh, and proved 'a very respectable acquisition to the Irish stage' (Hitchcock, 2.133-8). There was a Collins in Roger Kemble's company in Coventry and Bath in 1766 and 1767-8, and Margaret Cavendish Bentinck, duchess of Portland, recommended a Collins to Garrick in 1767. Garrick was unimpressed, describing him as having 'the most unpromising aspect for an Actor I ever saw -- a small pair of unmeaning Eyes stuck in a round unthinking face' (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA', 3.398), a physical description that could apply to John Collins. 
Anthony Pasquin's suggestion that Collins worked as a miniature painter in Ireland appears, according to Strickland, to be based on a confusion between Collins and his wife, Ann Shellard or Shillards, whom he married at Walcot church in Bath on 24 January 1768. She was a portrait painter who died, at an unknown date, after surgery for breast cancer. They had no children. 
Collins's main claim to theatrical fame lies in his development of a kind of cabaret performance that combined his own light verse with songs, imitations of popular actors, and dialect performances. Dr Thomas Campbell of Clogher, who saw Collins perform his show in London in 1775 as 'A Lecture upon Oratory', noted that 'the fellow displayed good enunciation and good sense' (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA', 3.399). Early in 1776 Collins was in Belfast, acting in 'The West Indian' and performing his entertainment as 'The element of modern oratory'. He was apparently a member of the company at the King Street Theatre, Birmingham, for some seasons and, according to the 'Carlisle Magazine' (5 Oct 1776), was the author of a tragedy, 'King Charles I, or, The Royal Martyr', staged in Birmingham in September of that year, which he followed with his 'satirical, mimical and analytical lecture on modern oratory'. He was also apparently co-owner of the Concert Booth, 'a small theatre in Moseley Road' (newspaper cutting, Birmingham Central Library) that burned down in 1778. Sylas Neville saw Collins in Norwich on 6 November 1784, and noted in his diary that 'he gives specimens of bad as well as good acting' (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA', 3.399) and that his best imitations were of Garrick, Barry, Macklin, and Powell, each in character. 
In 1788 Collins was living at 7 Shorter Street, Wellclose Square, London. In 1790 he was a partner with King and Chapman in a bookseller's at 38 King Street, Covent Garden, where he performed in the evenings. In February that year the 'Biographical and Imperial Magazine' praised his 'union... of classical wit with eccentric humour'. Collins performed his entertainment in many venues in London and in the provinces, bowing out in 1795 at York. The performance generally went under the title of 'The Brush' or 'The Evening Brush', because, according to an advertisement of 1793, it was intended 'for rubbing off the rust of care'. Collins thus became popularly known as Brush Collins. 'The Brush' was published in Newcastle about 1800, and a well-used partial manuscript is now in the Birmingham Central Library. According to James Winston, Collins may have been an innkeeper in Plymouth and an auctioneer in Bath in the 1790s, but he was performing and living in Birmingham in 1793 and about 1798 became joint owner with Miles Swinney of a newspaper, the 'Birmingham Chronicle', for which he wrote many poems and essays on local events. Collins probably owed his inclusion in the 'Dictionary of National Biography' to William Palgrave's decision to reprint one of these poems, 'Tomorrow', in 'The Golden Treasury'. At that point only his surname was known, but further details soon emerged, mainly through 'Notes and Queries', to form the basis of his entry. In 1804 Collins and Swinney published a collection of his poems and songs under the title 'Scripscrapologia, or, Collins's Doggerel Dish of All Sorts'. Miss Brent, a niece, lived with Collins in Birmingham, where he died on 2 May 1808. 


@@@@@


doc= 5947


Collins, (Edward James) Mortimer (1827-1876), novelist and journalist, was born on 29 June 1827 at Plymouth, Devon, the only child of Francis Collins, a solicitor and mathematician, and his wife, Maud Branscombe (died 1873) of Devon. Francis Collins published a volume called 'Spiritual Songs' (1824) and died in 1839. 
Collins was educated at private schools, and while still a schoolboy contributed to papers. He was eager to become a journalist, but his mother encouraged him to accept a teaching post at Queen Elizabeth College, Guernsey, where he taught mathematics from 1849 until 1856. On 9 May 1850 he married Susan Crump (1807/8-1867), daughter of John Hubbard and widow of the Revd J. H. Crump; they had one daughter, Mabel Collins. 
While at Guernsey, Collins started the 'Channel Islands Magazine' in 1853, which folded after three issues, and published his first collection of poetry, 'Idyls and Rhymes', in 1855. In 1856 he left Guernsey to concentrate on literature. He became a well-known journalist, at first working on the 'Leamington Mercury' from 1856, moving to the 'Plymouth Mail' three years later, and editing the 'Nottingham Guardian' in 1861. While he adopted a worldly pose and was known as the 'King of the Bohemians', in his early years he was essentially conservative and a lover of old fashions in books and in his principles. He had strong religious sentiments and an aversion to positivists and freethinkers. In 1862 he bought a cottage at Knowl Hill, Berkshire, which was to become his permanent home. He edited 'The Selected Works of Walter Scott' for the popular 'Moxon Miniature Poets' series in 1865. 
Collins published one of his better known novels, 'Who is the Heir?', in 1865, which ran to several editions and was reissued posthumously. He was appointed joint editor of the 'London Globe' in 1866, the paper with which he was to be especially associated, though he was to write for many journals, including 'Punch' and the 'British Quarterly', throughout his life. His wife, Susan, died on 5 August 1867, and on 4 May 1868 he married Frances Dunn Cotton (1841-1886); the couple settled at Knowl Hill. In 1869 he suffered a debilitating attack of rheumatic fever, which weakened his heart. Two years later he produced a second collection of poems, 'The Inn of Strange Meetings and other Poems', which the 'Saturday Review' described as 'full of rich and delicate humour' (Allibone, 'Dict.'). In 1871 he also published 'The Marquis and the Merchant', considered his best novel, and a collection of essays, 'The Secret of Long Life', first issued anonymously. These essays went through five editions and became his most successful work. 
Collins was a prolific writer, producing seventeen novels and several volumes of poetry as well as miscellaneous essays and articles during twenty years. His literary friendships included that of R. D. Blackmore, whose influence can be seen throughout his fiction, particularly in the melodramatic 'Sweet Anne Page' (1868). Collins's novels were light romances, showing, in the words of the 'Illustrated London News', 'a tendency to display the more attractive side of life, but not to delve beneath the surface' (26 Aug 1876). It was also noted that 'his plots construct themselves, and his heroes run away with him' ('The Academy', vol. 12, 182). His second wife, Frances, was not only his muse, as her brother gallantly suggests in his preface to the 'Selected Works of Mortimer Collins' (1877): 'Those who know Mrs Collins will understand why Mortimer Collins' poetical faculties developed during the last decade of his life' (Cotton, Preface). Frances was also co-author of the novels 'Frances' (1874), 'Sweet and Twenty' (1875), and 'The Village Comedy' (1876). Collins died of heart disease on 28 July 1876 at Nightingale Hall, Richmond, London, after a short illness. He was buried on 1 August at Petersham churchyard, Richmond. After his death his wife published several novels as well as a memoir of her husband. 
Collins's daughter, Mabel (1851-1927), married Keningale Cook in 1871, but they were separated about 1880 when he became mentally ill. She was also a novelist and wrote on women's suffrage, occultism, and antivivisection. Her autobiographical novel, 'In the Flower of her Youth' (1883), contains a description of her childhood and a portrait of her father in the figure of 'Brough Warrington, the King of Bohemia'. 


@@@@@


doc= 5948


Collins, Richard (d. 1732), portrait painter and topographical draughtsman, was the son of the Peterborough artist Richard Collins. He trained under the painter Michael Dahl. Based in Peterborough, he painted in and around Lincolnshire and Leicestershire. He made a number of portraits of the Pochin family of Barkby Hall, as well as an early conversation piece of a family taking tea, now in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London. The Lincolnshire antiquary William Stukeley recorded in a list of his portraits 'my profile, by Collins' (Sewter, 73) and a copy of a half-length portrait after Collins. 
Collins was a freemason and, together with another painter, de la Fountain, 'initiated Several persons of this [Spalding] & other Towns as members in Masonary' (Sewter, 72). On 10 August 1727 he was elected an honorary member of the Spalding Gentlemen's Society. He offered to draw for the society 'Such Things as they should judge worthy whenever he was in these parts into wh his busyness leads him' (ibid., 71). Collins attended a few of the society's meetings and presented them with several drawings and a large print of the west front of Peterborough Cathedral, engraved after him by Gerard van der Gught. His views of Croyland Abbey and the triangular bridge at Croyland were engraved by Samuel Buck and published in his Lincolnshire views. Collins died in 1732. 


@@@@@


doc= 5949


Collins, Richard (1755-1831), miniature painter, was born and baptized at Gosport, Hampshire, on 30 January 1755, the son of James and Sarah Collins of Gosport. He travelled to London in April 1776 and on 4 October that year entered the Royal Academy Schools; he was trained in the arts of miniature painting and enamelling by Jeremiah Meyer from 1777 to 1778. He may also have been instructed by Ozias Humphry, with whom he shared lodgings in 1780. He became established in practice in London, producing miniatures on ivory and enamel, the brushstrokes so smoothly rendered in both media that his work is characterized by a rather waxy appearance as well as by the fine quality of his draughtsmanship. One of his best works, the undated 'Portrait of a Lady' (Rijksmuseum, Amsterdam), shows him to have been capable of penetrating characterization and he was certainly superior in this respect to his master, Jeremiah Meyer. He tended, when working on ivory and enamel, to use rather warm and rich tones, which testify to 'an aspiration toward the glossy tones of oil painting' (Reynolds, 149). Collins rarely signed his work, only occasionally using the monogram R. C., or signing in full on the reverse, as on his miniature of Augustus, duke of Sussex (Victoria and Albert Museum, London): 'Rd Collins pinxit 1789, Portrait Painter in Enamel to His Majesty'. 
Collins was married to Sarah, 'nee' Sales (died 1788), the daughter of a London merchant, on 20 December 1783, with whom he had one daughter. He exhibited miniatures at the Royal Academy between 1777 and 1818. The royal family had already been introduced to Collins's work when the countess of Pembroke employed him to paint a copy of a picture of Queen Charlotte at Windsor in September 1783, and George III saw his miniatures again on a visit to the Royal Academy exhibition in 1787. Following Jeremiah Meyer's death in 1789 the post of enamel painter to the king fell vacant. Collins claimed to have been appointed to the post in preference to Robert Bowyer and Richard Crosse, who had already been assigned the position, at the personal discretion of the king, in sympathy for Collins's deep grief at the recent loss of his wife. Collins painted only members of the royal family between 1788 and 1791, turning to public practice again after that. Several examples of his miniatures of George III and Queen Charlotte copied after Gainsborough and Beechey remain in the Royal Collection. Having worked successfully in London from 23 Pall Mall and later from 39 Devonshire Street, Portland Place, Collins was able to retire on his earnings to Pershore in Worcestershire in 1811. He missed the cultural life of London, however, and returned to live in Islington for three years before his death in Dorset Place, London, on 5 August 1831. 


@@@@@


doc= 5950


Collins, Samuel (1576-1651), college head, was born at Eton College, Buckinghamshire, on 5 August 1576, the son of Baldwin Collins (1544-1616), vice-provost of Eton and formerly a fellow of King's College, Cambridge. His younger brother, Daniel, followed in their father's footsteps, first as a fellow of King's, then at Eton. Samuel Collins studied at Eton from 1583 to 1591. At his entrance interview for King's College the provost, Roger Goad, was so impressed with his translation of Horace as to acclaim 'This is my child, who if he lives shall be my heir and successor' (A. A. Leigh, 'King's College', 1899, 97). Collins entered the college on 26 August 1591, became a fellow in 1594, graduated BA in 1596, and proceeded MA in 1599 and BD in 1605. 
Collins was ordained deacon on 26 May 1605 and, against recent canon law, was made priest in the diocese of London a fortnight later, on 9 June. Chaplain to Archbishop Bancroft and, from 1610, to his successor, Abbot, he preached at Paul's Cross on All Saints' day 1607 as part of the debate over subscription. In his sermon, dedicated to Bancroft, he defended ceremonies as a moderate Calvinist, without making any case for their religious worth, while attacking Catholics for: 'sacrificing for sinnes of quicke and dead with a Wafer-Cake, treading down Kings, the deputies of God, from their throne of Maiestie to set up a foxie Intruder in their roome... taking away 'Bibles', mangling of Sacraments... selling pardons for sixe pence, soule ease for money, heaven at pleasure. (S. Collins, 'Sermon at Paules-Crosse', 1610, 53)' For Abbot he undertook to support Lancelot Andrewes in his dispute with Cardinal Bellarmine, publishing his 'Increpatio Andreae Eudaemono-Johannis Jesuitae' in 1612. 
Collins defended three questions for his doctorate of divinity at the Cambridge commencement of 3 March 1613 against John Williams, later bishop of Lincoln. His performance prompted the comment that '[N]o flood can be compared to the Spring-tide of his Language and Eloquence... these things will be living in the memory of the longest survivor that ever heard him' (Hacket, 24). His scholarship and Latinate wit, of which a few verses survive in print, brought him due reward. Rector of Fen Ditton in Cambridgeshire in 1614, held with the sinecure rectory of Milton until 1643, he was elected provost of King's College in April 1615. By 1617, when he produced his second substantial tome supporting Bishop Andrewes against the Jesuit Thomas Fitzherbert, 'Epphata to F. T.', he could include 'chapleine to His Majestie' among his titles. 
On 22 October 1617 Collins was elected regius professor of divinity at Cambridge, a chair he held until his death and for which he was able to draw a $40 stipend from the rectory of Somersham, which James VI and I had annexed to it. He was also collated to a prebend at Ely on 19 February 1618, which he held until at least 1646. By about 1621 he had married a Cambridge widow, Susan Robinson, with whom he had two sons, James and John, both later fellows of King's. By 1621 he was no longer a royal chaplain. In December 1622 unsuccessful attempts were made to have him surrender the provostship to Sir Henry Wootton's nephew Albertus (Albert) Morton, an unsuccessful suitor for the provostship of Eton the following year. Collins was denounced by the college fellows to their visitor, Bishop John Williams, in 1628, for bribery, simony, and partiality in appointing Eton fellows. Williams found in his favour, attributing the rancour within the fellowship to the provost's 'slings of wit' (Hacket, 24), but indignation continued. Further complaints were heard before the chancellor, the earl of Holland, and, in December 1633, before Archbishop Laud. Yet Collins was a popular university lecturer who 'constantly read his Lectures twice a week..., giving notice of the time to his Auditors in a ticket on the School-doores, wherein never any two alike; without some considerable difference in the critical language thereof' (Fuller, 'Worthies', 133). 
Collins undertook much work beautifying the chapel at King's College, in association with Thomas Weaver, whom he encouraged to provide the coats of arms for the unfinished stalls and for a raised wooden screen and reredos at the east end, and who certified in May 1629 that he had assigned $100 in his will for the unfinished work. Queen Henrietta Maria was able to view 'the wondrous and stately structure' of the work being undertaken in 1632 (Cooper, 3.250). The screen was completed by Lady day 1634. Collins paid towards a purple velvet communion cloth and for altar linen. By 1637 this open espousal of the beauty of holiness included the provision of altar candlesticks, tapers, and crucifixes. At much the same time Sir Henry Wootton warned Daniel Collins that his brother was subject to a court rumour that, 'either in a Sermon or in a Lecture or in some open place, with compagnie', Collins was traduced to have said that 'he was hartily gladd He had never spoken agaynst Transubstantiation in his whole lyfe hetherto And that he hoped to live till he might speake of it' (King's Cam., provosts' letters, IV, 10). Wootton seems to have been warning a friend of likely censure, and the two remained on good terms after Wootton had become provost at Eton, the latter sending Collins a portrait of the historian Paolo Sarpi as well as the Lambinus edition of Horace once owned by Pietro Bembo. A similar interest in anti-Calvinism is suggested by his support of his long-standing childhood friend Richard Mountague or Montagu, to whom he wrote warmly to congratulate him on his controversial elevation to the episcopate in 1628. 
By 1640 Collins had moved the college altar and placed it tablewise, removed some of the chapel furniture, and prohibited adoration to the east. Such alterations were, however, too little and came too late. He was removed from the rectory of Fen Ditton and on 19 March 1644 he was charged with thirteen articles by a dozen witnesses under the earl of Manchester's commission to 'regulate' the university and remove 'scandalous' clergy within the eastern association counties. Mostly the complaints concerned ceremonialism, including bowing three times before reading the second service and also after his sermons, his beautifying the chapel at King's as well as his alleged habit of supplying his absence in the parish with malignant clergy, of advocating Sunday games, and of entertaining parishioners so well after the Sunday morning service that they 'spewed most shamefully' at afternoon service ('Walker rev.', 78). 
In January 1645 Collins was deprived of the provostship at the parliamentary visitation. With his professorial stipend, augmented with a small discretionary grant from his successor, Benjamin Whichcote, he lived in a house in St Rhadegund's Lane, on the other side of Cambridge. Later prudence prevented his becoming the last Caroline bishop, Charles I having nominated him bishop of Bristol in 1646, and allowed him to live among his books until his death at home, aged seventy-five, on 16 September 1651. He was buried in the same grave as Provost Hacomblen, in King's College chapel. 


@@@@@


doc= 5951


Collins, Samuel (1619?-1670), physician, was the eldest son of Samuel Collins (died 1667), vicar of Braintree, Essex. From 1635 Collins was a pensioner at Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, which he left in 1637 without taking a degree. On 1 June 1639 he matriculated at Leiden University. He then travelled to Montpellier in the company of Thomas Bartholin. On 30 October 1641 Collins took his MD at Padua University; he incorporated it at Oxford in 1652. He travelled to Russia in 1660 as one of Tsar Alexis's physicians, after an invitation had been issued to him by John Hebdon, Alexis's agent abroad. However, on 12 March 1662 Collins petitioned to be allowed to return to England, to settle his affairs following the death of his brother. He returned to England with the embassy of Prince Prozorovsky, who had been sent to congratulate Charles II. 
In August 1663 Collins was back in Russia, and in the autumn resumed his duties as a royal physician, a position he shared with a German doctor, Andreas Engelhardt. Despite Collins's prolonged stay in Moscow, there is little information about his professional activities there. His main patient was Tsar Alexis, who suffered from extreme obesity; Collins therefore presented a number of notes about the need for a regular diet and moderation in eating and drinking. On 31 May 1664 Collins submitted a paper on phlebotomy which contained a brief general discourse and gave detailed information about the dates suitable for the operation. In June of that year, he submitted a paper about the properties of tea and coffee, and on 20 January 1665 he gave a discourse on obesity, its consequences, and possible remedies. In April 1665 Collins discoursed on the properties of valerian; and in 1666 he issued several prescriptions for a pregnant woman, paying special attention to the changing needs of her frail physique. 
During his time in Moscow, Collins, like all royal physicians, was treating large numbers of nobles, as well as the royal family and courtiers. Like every other physician at court, he had orders to write out his prescriptions for treatment; a considerable number of these have survived. Some are in Latin, although most survive (in the State Archive of Ancient Acts, Moscow) in contemporary Russian translations made by the interpreters of the apothecary chancery, the bureaucratic body that governed all aspects of life and work of every foreign medical practitioner in Russia. During most of Collins's time in Moscow, his personal interpreter was John Tewe, the son of Robert Tewe, an English apothecary in the tsar's employ. 
In the autumn of 1665 Collins was placed under house arrest and his pay was suspended. The matter appears to have been resolved by December, when the order to continue his pay as usual was issued. His salary was the same as that of Engelhardt and any other senior royal physician in Moscow from the 1620s to the 1680s: 1114 roubles a year. It consisted of two parts: a lump sum of 250 roubles and monthly payments of 72 roubles. In Moscow Collins lived consecutively in three houses, the last of which was slightly further away from the Kremlin, the royal residence, than the previous two. Before his final leave Collins was allowed to sell this house to the treasury and received sables worth 2800 roubles. 
On 3 June 1667 Collins petitioned for leave, explaining that his contract, renewed in 1664 after the negotiations with the English ambassador, the earl of Carlisle, was for only three years. As the contract had expired, Collins asked for transport to convey him to the border; he nevertheless offered to act as a procurer of royal medical supplies. Although the order releasing him from service was given on 1 July, the customary commendatory letter, a parting present, and the transport were provided only on 21 July 1667. 
Through family connections, and the patronage given to his father by the countess of Warwick, sister of Robert Boyle, Collins became acquainted with Boyle himself. Whether they had met before Collins's departure to Russia is uncertain, but they maintained a long correspondence in which they debated medical matters and exchanged information on diseases and their treatment. Collins also assisted Boyle in his research into the effects of extreme cold on elements and on humans. In 1669 Collins was in England and in a letter to Boyle complained of ill health. He had diagnosed himself as having a 'catthar' and scurvy, describing, among other symptoms, the weakening of the gums on his left side. Collins hoped that the warmer climate of France would improve his health and he soon left for Paris, where he died on 26 October 1670. In accordance with his will, a memorial plaque was inserted in Braintree church, Essex, where he was buried. 
Collins's only book, 'The present state of Russia, in a letter to a friend, written by an eminent person residing at the great tzar's court at Mosco for the space of nine years', was first published in London in 1671. It was published in French in 1679. This book provides an interesting and insightful account of Russian life, although it suffered in part from the improbable anecdotes inserted for the entertainment of the reader, probably by the editors of the book. It is illustrated with a number of copperplates. 


@@@@@


doc= 5952


Collins, Samuel (1617-1685), physician, was the son of Daniel Collins ('c'.1579-1648), vice-provost of Eton College and rector of Cowley, Middlesex. He was born at Tring, Hertfordshire, and educated at Eton. In 1634 he was elected to a scholarship at King's College, Cambridge, where his uncle Samuel Collins (1576-1651) was provost. He was elected a fellow in 1637, proceeded BA in 1638, and on 1 June 1639 was entered on the physic line at Leiden. He commenced MA at Cambridge in 1642, and was created MD in 1648. On 27 July 1649 he was admitted a candidate of the College of Physicians, London, and a fellow on 25 June 1651. He was married to Mary, daughter of Robert Brett. Collins was incorporated at Oxford in his doctor's degree in May 1650, and about that time was elected a fellow of New College, Oxford, by an ordinance of parliament. He settled in London; was appointed censor of the College of Physicians in 1659, 1669, and 1679; was Harveian orator in 1665, and again in 1682, Goulstonian lecturer in 1675, and registrar from 1682 to his death. He was buried at Cowley, Middlesex, on 11 June 1685. He should not be confused with Samuel Collins (1619-1670), the author of 'The Present State of Russia' (1671). 


@@@@@


doc= 5953


Collins, Samuel (bap. 1618, d. 1710), anatomist and physician, was the only son of John Collins, rector of Rotherfield, Sussex, who was descended from a family long established in Somerset and Devon. He received his education at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he was elected to a scholarship, and afterwards to a fellowship. Collins graduated BA in 1639 and MA in 1642. Then he travelled on the continent and visited many universities in France, Italy, and the Low Countries, but found none to compare with those of his native land. He was created MD at Padua on 25 August 1654, and incorporated in that degree at Oxford on 24 June 1659, and at Cambridge in 1673. He was admitted a candidate of the College of Physicians of London in 1656, and a fellow in 1668. About the latter date Collins was appointed physician-in-ordinary to Charles II. Between 1671 and 1707 he was frequently elected to the office of censor in the College of Physicians; he was anatomy reader in 1684, and on 10 September 1694 was appointed Lumleian lecturer, an office which he retained to his death. He was constituted an elect in 1689, was several times appointed consiliarius, and in 1695 was elected president of the college. 
Munk says that Collins, who is mentioned in Samuel Garth's 'Dispensary', was an accomplished anatomist, and stood foremost among his contemporaries, whether at home or abroad, in his knowledge of comparative anatomy. His most important work, which contains a full account of his investigations, is his 'A systeme of anatomy, treating of the body of man, beasts, birds, fish, insects, and plants. Illustrated with many schemes' (2 vols., 1685). It is often referred to by Boerhaave and Haller. 
Collins married, first, Ann, eldest daughter of John Bodenham, of Wiltshire, and second, Katherine, dowager countess of Carnwath in Scotland, daughter of John Abington, of Dowdeswell, Gloucestershire. Collins died on 11 April 1710 and was buried at St Martin-in-the-Fields. To his memory is inscribed the view of the interior of the nave of St Paul's in Sir William Dugdale's 'History' of that church. (The date of 1658 refers to the plate, and not to Collins's death.) 


@@@@@


doc= 5954


Collins, Samuel (1735-1768), miniature painter, was born in Bristol, the son of a clergyman. He first studied law before turning to miniature portraiture, and little is known about his artistic background or training. By the mid-1750s, however, he had a well-established miniature portrait practice in Bath. 
Collins painted portraits on enamel and on ivory. In scale his work is close to that of Luke Sullivan and Nathaniel Hone. Their work is usually grouped together, and as miniaturists they form a significant part of what Graham Reynolds has called a 'modest school' of miniaturists that worked in mainly provincial centres during the middle part of the eighteenth century (Reynolds, 'English Portrait Miniatures', 109). Collins's style in watercolour on ivory closely resembles the work of his contemporary Gervase Spencer; both shared an understanding of the qualities of the ivory base and the watercolour medium. Collins allowed a considerable amount of ivory to show through the watercolour, particularly in the painting of the face. The shaded areas are done in greyish-brown and pale blue hatched lines. He used the technique of scratching through or scraping away areas of the watercolour, especially in the painting of hair and shadows, thereby giving strength to a portrait which was always relatively small. An example of this technique may be seen in 'Portrait of a Young Girl' (Yale U. CBA). In developing the technique of painting in watercolour on ivory Collins had a lasting influence on his pupils, most importantly on Ozias Humphry and the next generation of miniaturists. His work is extremely fine and delicate and he enjoyed a very good reputation among his fashionable Bath clientele. He painted portraits of 'George III' (exh. South Kensington Museum Exhibition, 1865), 'Princess Amelia' (Pierpont Morgan collection, New York), and 'The Second Viscount Gage'. His own portrait was painted by Gainsborough, an indication of his status and popularity as an artist. He was described in 'Nollekens and his Times' as 'a man of gay and expensive habits' (Smith, 2.357). His extravagant behaviour led to financial difficulties and in 1762 he had to leave Bath and abandon his pupil Ozias Humphry, who took over his practice. 
Collins went to live in Ireland and continued to have a successful career in Dublin painting miniatures on ivory. A writer in 'Walker's Hibernian Magazine' referred to 'the celebrated Mr. Collins, few if any, excelled him in miniature painting; his drawing, colouring and touch were as perfect as in an oil portrait' (1, June 1771, 230). Usually critical of artists' work, Anthony Pasquin described him as 'one of the most perfect miniature painters that ever existed in the realm' (Pasquin, 28). Collins died of a fever at his home in Summer Hill, Dublin, in October 1768 and, according to the 'Dublin Mercury', was 'not only regretted by every artist and admirer of the arts, but by a numerous acquaintance' (27-9 Oct 1768). 
There is a certain amount of confusion in attributing work to Collins, as he had the same initials as Samuel Cotes (1734-1818). The only difference between the execution of the initials is that Collins's are made up of smooth brushstrokes and Cotes's initials are made up of several strokes. Miniatures by Collins are in the following collections: the National Gallery of Ireland, Dublin; Kenwood House (the Draper gift) and the Victoria and Albert Museum, London; the Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York; the New Orleans Museum of Art (the Latter-Schlesinger collection); and the Yale Center for British Art, New Haven, Connecticut. 


@@@@@


doc= 5955


Collins, Samuel (1802-1878), poet and radical, born on 1 December 1802 at Hollinwood, near Manchester, was the son of a hand-loom weaver. He began his working life while still very young and before he had any education beyond basic literacy. While still in his teens he became an ardent follower of Henry Hunt and Cobbett, and was present at the Peterloo massacre in 1819. During the 1830s and 1840s he was involved with the Chartist movement. He joined a local radical association, and deployed his pen and tongue on behalf of the reform movement. He suffered for a time some obloquy for his temerity in denouncing Feargus O'Connor's land scheme. 
Collins wrote homely verses, some of them in the Lancashire dialect, which were collected in 1859 in a small volume entitled 'Miscellaneous Poems and Songs', with a biographical notice by Benjamin Brierley. Collins, who worked at his loom almost to the last, died at Hale Moss, Chadderton, near Manchester, on 8 July 1878, leaving a son, Joseph Collins. 


@@@@@


doc= 5956


Collins, Thomas (fl. 1610-1615), poet, was the author of a religious poem entitled 'The penitent publican, his confession of mouth, contrition of heart, unfained repentance, and fervent prayer unto God for mercie and forgivenesses' (1610). The dedicatory epistle, dated 6 July 1610, is addressed 'To the Right Honourable, Grave and Vertuous Lady, the Lady Katherine Hastings, Countesse of Huntington' and is signed with the author's name. The poem is written in rhyme royal. In 1615 Collins published a pastoral poem, 'The teares of love, or, Cupid's progresse: together with the complaint of the sorrowfull shepheardesse; fayre (but unfortunate) Candida, deploring the death of her deare-lov'd Coravin... in a passionate pastorall elegie composed by Thomas Collins'. The poet Coravin, whose death Collins laments, has not been identified. The poem is full of conceits but at its close Sidney, Spenser, and Drayton are eulogized, and allusion is made to Lodge. 'Jo. B[eaumont?]' and Samuel Rowlands contributed prefatory verses. The former refers to a third poem by Collins entitled 'Newport's Bloudy Battell... with Yaxley's Death', which is not otherwise known. Nothing further is known of Collins's life. 


@@@@@


doc= 5957


Collins, William (1721-1759), poet, was born on 25 December 1721 at Chichester, Sussex, the third of three children of William Collins (1674-1733), a respectable vendor of hats and a haberdasher by trade who was twice mayor of Chichester, and Elizabeth Martin (1682-1744). Educated as a gentleman, he published two slim volumes of verse by the age of twenty-five and very few poems thereafter. It is remarkable that an author who published so little -- some twenty poems in all -- before his death at the age of thirty-seven should have early acquired (and still retain) the status of an important poet. Although little is known of his life, reports of his genius, his neglect, his poverty, and his madness have attracted readers since his own day. 
From the age of four until the age of twelve Collins was probably sent to the local prebendal school, and in 1734 (shortly after his father died) was admitted as a scholar at Winchester College, where he began lifelong friendships with Joseph Warton and with lesser writers James Hampton, John Mulso, and William Whitehead. A contemporary portrait shows a bewigged young gentleman with prominent wide-set eyes and nose and a delicate mouth. A precocious poet -- though no more precocious than many -- he published a little eight-line poem in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' in 1739 over the pseudonym Delicatulus, and while still at Winchester is said to have begun his 'Persian Eclogues'. 
In 1740 Collins left Winchester for Oxford. Though placed first on the list for a scholarship at New College, Collins was matriculated at Queen's College on 22 March, there being no vacancy at New College, and was on 29 July elected demy at Magdalen (where his cousin William Payne was a fellow). At Oxford he continued a friendship with Warton and Mulso, and developed one with Gilbert White of Selborne. Said by Langhorne to have been distinguished both 'for genius and indolence' ('Poetical Works', vi), Collins like many young Oxford gentlemen wrote poems and contracted debts. But his poems -- the revised 'Persian Eclogues' -- found a London publisher in January 1742. And he seems not wholly to have neglected his studies. Johnson, a serious scholar, thought Collins 'a man of extensive literature, and of vigorous faculties. He was acquainted not only with the learned tongues, but with the Italian, French, and Spanish languages' (Johnson, 337). Shortly after taking his BA on 18 November 1743 Collins published 'Verses Humbly Address'd to Sir Thomas Hanmer' (a statesman with literary tastes) 'by a Gentleman of Oxford' and by early 1744 had arrived in London where he was soon regarded as 'entirely an author' (Holt-White, 1.38), circulating a subscription, republishing his poem to Hanmer in May (this time with his name attached), and projecting a 'History of the revival of learning'. 
No penniless hack, Collins had a small income from freehold property inherited from a recently deceased uncle, and soon had an allowance from another uncle. After his mother's death (July 1744) and the settlement of her estate (August 1745) he had income from other inherited property. He dressed decently, and enjoyed the pleasures of the town, 'spending his time in all the dissipation of Ranelagh, Vauxhall, and the playhouses' (White, 11). In his London years he continued to see Mulso and Warton. He called on his cousin George Payne and apparently sought out John Hardham, a native of Chichester, now a London tobacconist and under-treasurer of Drury Lane Theatre. He made the acquaintance of writers (Samuel Johnson, John Gilbert Cooper, and John Armstrong) and actors (Garrick, Foote, Tom Davies, and James Quin). But a poet's income was uncertain: a 'literary adventurer' (Johnson, 335) puts himself in the hands of chance. Collins also managed his rental income imprudently, and was often in want and in debt to his landlady in King's Square Court, Soho. Despite his several ambitious literary projects (a translation of Aristotle's 'Poetics', verse tragedies, a new periodical to be called the 'Clarendon Review'), and humbler tasks such as engaging to write brief lives for the compiler of the 'Biographia Britannica', Collins had apparently not committed himself irrevocably to literature. Having been intended by his father for the church, and having successfully applied to the duke of Richmond in 1744, he was persuaded by Hardham to decline the offer of a curacy. But within a year he travelled to Flanders to seek advice and assistance from his uncle, Lieutenant-Colonel Edmund Martin, who was in a position (Collins hoped) to make him chaplain in a regiment. Martin found Collins 'too indolent, even for the army' (Hay, 527). 
Meanwhile, by early 1746 Collins had written perhaps three or four odes, including at least two on recent fatalities at Fontenoy and (perhaps) Falkirk. In May, at the Guildford races, he and fellow poet Joseph Warton discussed a joint publication. Collins's 'Ode, to a Lady, on the Death of Col. Charles Ross, in the Action at Fontenoy on 11 May 1745' was published in Dodsley's 'Museum' in June 1746. The collaboration was abandoned, but Collins continued to write through the summer and autumn, and on 20 December Andrew Millar published his collection of twelve 'Odes on Several Descriptive and Allegoric Subjects' (Warton's odes were published by Dodsley on 4 December). Warton's odes were successful enough to go into a second edition almost immediately; Collins's sold poorly. Deeply disappointed, he later bought up unsold copies and burnt them ('Poetical Works', xi). 
But Collins continued to write, though at a slower pace. By 1747 he had moved to Richmond, where he met James Thomson (Millar was his publisher, too) and John Ragsdale, and perhaps several other Scotsmen, including John Home, through their mutual friend Thomas Barrow, native of Chichester and in 1749 a resident of Winchester. When Thomson died in August 1747 Collins wrote an 'Ode Occasion'd by the Death of Mr. Thomson' (1749). When Home returned to Scotland, Collins wrote (January 1750?) an 'Ode on his Return &c', addressed to Home, published in 1788 as 'An ode on the popular superstitions of the highlands of Scotland, considered as the subject of poetry'. In February and March 1750 two London journals advertised that a new poem by Collins, 'An Epistle to the Editor of Fairfax his Translation of Tasso's Jerusalem', was soon to be published. (It probably never appeared; no MS survives.) In November 1750 he wrote to a friend about another new poem, 'An Ode on the Music of the Grecian Theatre'. It was perhaps never completed; only a fragment survives. He told friends he still intended to complete the 'History of the revival of learning' and to produce the 'Clarendon Review'. 
Although Collins had published little new work since 1746, his odes were beginning to reach a wider audience. The 'Ode to a Lady' appeared in the 'British Magazine' in July 1747. Dodsley included three of the 1746 odes in his 1748 'Collection'. (In his 1755 edition he would print the 'Epistle to Hanmer' and a 'Song from Shakespeare's 'Cymbeline''.) The 'Song from 'Cymbeline'' was reprinted in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' in October 1749. In June 1750 Collins's 'The Passions: an Ode for Music' (from the 1746 'Odes') was performed at encaenia at Oxford, and republished as a pamphlet. His financial circumstances improved when he received a substantial inheritance (perhaps as much as $2000) from his uncle Colonel Martin, who died on 19 April 1749. But by Easter 1751 Thomas Warton thought him very ill. The nature of the illness is not known, but it may already have affected both body and mind. By June he had apparently recovered, but over the next three years he travelled to Bath and to France in 'hopes his health might be restored' ('The Reaper', 484). When Johnson saw him in lodgings in Islington, on his return from France, Collins had 'withdrawn from study'. As he told Johnson, 'I have but one book [an English 'New Testament'] but that is the best' (Johnson, 339). 
What Johnson called 'depression of mind' (Johnson, 338) continued to afflict Collins intermittently, and he was for a time confined to McDonald's madhouse in Chelsea, from which his sister Anne removed him in 1754, to take him back to Chichester. His sister Elizabeth died there in June. The Wartons visited him in the cathedral cloisters, where he and his sister lived, in September 1754. There they saw the manuscript 'Ode to a Friend' and received from Collins a revised draft of the 'Persian Eclogues' and a number of poetic fragments. Preserved in Thomas Warton's papers at Trinity College, Oxford, and not published until 1956, all but one fragment appear to date from 1744-6. In November Collins travelled to Oxford for a change of scene and perhaps to relieve his depression. He took lodgings across from Christ Church, where Thomas Warton saw him 'labouring under the most deplorable langour of body and dejection of mind' (Boswell, 'Life', 276n.) and Gilbert White saw him 'under Merton wall,... struggling and conveyed by force, in the arms of two or three men, towards the parish of St. Clement, in which was a house that took in such unhappy objects' (White, 11). 
Of Collins's final years very little is known. He apparently remained at Chichester and may have continued revising his 'Eclogues'. A second edition was called for -- Joseph Warton reported that Collins was 'greatly mortified' that the 'Eclogues' 'found more readers and admirers than his Odes' ('Works of Alexander Pope', 1.115) -- and the retitled 'Oriental Eclogues' were published in 1757, perhaps under the supervision of Warton. Collins continued to speak to the Warton brothers of his unfinished 'History'. During his final illness, though 'accustomed to rave much' ('The Reaper', 479) he was calmed by listening to a servant read from the 'Bible'. Collins died in Chichester on 12 June 1759, and was buried on 15 June in St Andrew's Church in East Street. A tablet by Flaxman to his memory was erected in the cathedral in 1795. 
In stature Collins was 'somewhat above the middle size' with 'keen, expressive eyes, and a fixed, sedate aspect, which from intense thinking, had contracted an habitual frown' ('Poetical Works', xiv). He was 'very temperate in his eating and drinking', his grey eyes 'so weak at times as hardly to bear a candle in the room; and often raising within him apprehensions of blindness' (White, 11). He never married, though this is perhaps not remarkable; his two sisters remained unmarried until the ages of forty-six and fifty respectively. One contemporary reported that the 'Ode to a Lady' was addressed to Elizabeth Goddard of Harting, Sussex, with whom the poet had fallen in love (Wendorf and Ryskamp, 144). Langhorne thought it 'very remarkable' ('Poetical Works', p. xv) that the passion of love should be omitted from Collins's 'The Passions'. 
About the symptoms of Collins's nervous disorder contemporary observers agree in referring both to a 'langour' ('Works of Alexander Pope', 276n.) or 'depression of spirits' ('Poetical Works', xiii), 'general laxity and feebleness, a deficiency rather of his vital than intellectual powers' (Johnson, 340), and (in his last years) to occasional 'great moanings' ('The Reaper', 479). Its essential nature is impossible to identify, but this has not prevented biographers from attributing it variously to 'poetical disappointments' (D'Israeli, 200), poverty, the 'enthusiasm of poetry' itself ('Poetical Works', ii), or from linking it with Collins's 'indolence' at Oxford, 'want of steadiness', and 'dissipation' in London. A modern medical expert suggests 'depressive psychosis' (Ober, 153). It now seems clear that his madness did not appear until about 1751, that it recurred, that it left him lucid intervals, and that none of his poems was written under its influence. Contemporary references to his poverty are not inconsistent with modern findings that Collins squandered his legacies. Contemporary references from Goldsmith, John Gilbert Cooper, and James Grainger to his neglect support the view that his work was often reprinted and was admired by fellow writers: Collins's ambitions were high, and both he and his early admirers thought he deserved more attention. Wider fame dates from Langhorne's 1765 edition. 
Collins has long served literary historians as a representative of his mid-century poetic generation and an acute register of their sensibility. Critical accounts depend on how one views the age. Still regarded by some as a typical 'pre-Romantic' who reacted against the moralizing poetry of the 'Augustans', Collins took Pope for his own model in his early work. Said to have displayed acute anxiety about the overbearing influence of Milton, he displayed remarkable urbanity, originality, and lofty confidence in his abilities. Identified as a solipsistic bard of an age of graveyard poets, his back turned on the world of history, he is also the author of a set of patriotic odes that engage topics of contemporary war and peace, liberty, and mercy to the Jacobite rebels. 


@@@@@


doc= 5958


Collins, William (1721-1793), sculptor, served as a hand in the workshops of Henry and John Cheere until he was about thirty-eight years old. It is likely that he produced charming panels on light-hearted arcadian subjects for chimney-pieces. J. T. Smith recalled that he gained a reputation for carving 'pastoral scenes that were understood by the most common observer' (Gunnis, 111). About 1759-60 he opted to become independent of his main employer, Henry Cheere, who had begun to reduce the productivity of his Westminster workshops. Setting up a business in Channel Row, close to his master's former shop in St Margaret's Lane, Collins was immediately successful. By 1760 he had received a major commission to carve a series of relief medallions, allegories of Liberty, Britannia, Commerce, and Agriculture, for the adornment of Harewood House in Yorkshire. A year later he was working on medallions on the facade of Kedleston House, Derbyshire. 
With a number of other sculptors Collins was associated with the St Martin's Lane Academy and was a subscriber to James Paine's 'Plans, Elevations and Sections of Noblemen and Gentlemen's Houses' (1767-83). In this book Collins was fulsomely praised as 'the ingenious Mr William Collins' (1.14). Paine singled out for particular commendation the 'very fine alto relievo' carving on the pediment of Sandbeck Park, west Yorkshire ('c'.1763-1768), the country seat of the earl of Scarbrough (ibid.). It was at one of the architectural schemes where Paine was employed, the extension of Merly House, Dorset, where Collins executed his masterpiece, an ambitious cycle of stucco reliefs on themes including the history of the ancient religions of the world. This adorned the library, commissioned by Ralph Willett and built and decorated in the mid-1760s, but subsequently destroyed. An indication of the excellent design and workmanship of Collins's stucco panels is evident in a set of privately printed engravings commissioned by Willett. These include an image of an allegory of 'The Triumphs of Britannia' that contains a self-portrait of Collins. 
Collins was among the artists at the St Martin's Lane Academy who supported the scheme to set up the Incorporated Society of Artists of Great Britain. Together with Paine he devoted considerable energy to the establishment of the society, and he became one of its first directors. As a means to further his career, at the society's annual exhibitions between 1760 and 1768 he showed works of relief carving and modelling in a range of materials, including freestone, marble, and stucco. His first exhibits, such as 'A Clown and Country Girl' recorded in the catalogue of 1761, were of his early pastoral type. He abandoned the cheerful rocaille style of these reliefs when commissions demanded more gravitas. An example of his more sober style may be seen at Bath Abbey in the monument to Jacob Bousanquet (died 1767), which includes a signed relief of 'The Good Samaritan'. His fine plaster relief of 'The Resurrection' (completed before 1764) formerly above the altar of Magdalene College chapel, Cambridge, and now in the college library, similarly reveals a greater profundity of theme. Here, as in the altarpiece of St Mary's Church, Warwick, he invested the rocaille Gothic design of the architect, Timothy Lightoler, with a dignified solemnity. Collins also adapted himself to work in the restrained classical style that became fashionable in Britain during the early 1760s. His mastery in this milieu recommended him to Robert Adam, who employed him in 1767 to make chimney-pieces at Nostell Priory, Yorkshire. 
Like that of the Society of Artists, however, Collins's reputation did not long survive the foundation of the Royal Academy in 1768. He seems to have received no further large commissions after 1770 (when he was forty-nine), and the last twenty-three years of his life remain obscure. Collins died on 31 May 1793 at his home in Tothill Fields in the parish of St Margaret's, Westminster, where he had made his will on 23 May that year, and was buried in the old cemetery in King's Road, Chelsea. He left his freehold house to his only daughter, Elizabeth, and small sums of money to his four nieces, the daughters of his brother John. 


@@@@@


doc= 5959


Collins, William John Thomas (1788-1847), landscape and genre painter, was born on 18 September 1788 at Great Titchfield Street, London. He was one of three children; an elder sister died before his birth and his younger brother, Francis, predeceased him in 1833. His father, William Collins (died 1812), was Irish but had settled in England. He was a picture dealer and writer and the author of a memoir of the painter George Morland (1763-1804), who had allowed the young artist to observe him at work in his studio. Although in later years Collins denied that he had gleaned any useful training from Morland, a comparison between their work demonstrates that Collins emulated Morland's work, both in its style and subject matter. Collins's mother (died 1833) was from Edinburgh. Collins entered the Royal Academy Schools, London, in 1807 and thereafter began to exhibit small landscapes and genre subjects. He also produced a few portraits during these early years, presumably to supplement his income rather than from any real vocation in that direction. In 1813 he had his first popular success at the Royal Academy exhibition with 'The Sale of the Pet Lamb' (Guildhall Art Gallery, London). The composition, combining a narrative incident of touching pathos with a carefully observed landscape setting, became the model for future subjects. The popularity of such pictures ensured Collins's election as an associate of the Royal Academy in 1814. 'The Reluctant Departure' (1815; Birmingham City Art Gallery) was the first of many seashore compositions adopting a similar sentimental formula, as a mother takes leave of her child. It is typical of Collins's early highly finished and luminous style. Collins's choice of narrative genre subjects was not wholly original but formed part of a revival of interest in genre painting in Britain during the early decades of the nineteenth century. The taste for narrative scenes from everyday life was epitomized in the work of Sir David Wilkie (1785-1841), whose early popular success encouraged other artists, including Collins, William Mulready (1786-1863), and Thomas Webster (1800-1886), to experiment with similar themes. Collins and Wilkie became close friends and Wilkie's influence is clearly present in Collins's choice of subjects. Collins's most original contribution to genre painting was in the recurrent and popular theme of childhood and he was one of the most successful artists to deal consistently with this theme. His childhood genre subjects were predominately rural, set against a backdrop of a country cottage or village scene and focused on a trivial domestic incident, as in 'The Kitten Deceived' (1816; Guildhall Art Gallery, London). 
Following the death of his father in 1812, and subsequent financial concerns, Collins appears to have made a deliberate decision to widen the scope of his subject matter in the hope of increasing his commissions. In 1816 he made a prolonged stay at Hastings and thereafter began to paint coastal subjects which, however, still relied on the activities of shrimp boys and fishermen's children, working or playing by the seashore, for their main interest. A slight variation on the coastal subjects were those of children fishing or playing by rivers or woodland streams: 'Young Anglers' (1820; RA) was presented as his diploma picture following his election as a Royal Academician in 1820. In 1822 Collins married Harriet Geddes (1790-1868), a cousin of the painter Andrew Geddes ARA (1783-1844). 
Collins was somewhat unusual as a painter of genre in habitually using a rural landscape setting for his compositions, particularly since he was born and permanently resided in London. Throughout his career, however, he made almost annual trips to stay at the houses and country seats of important patrons, among whom were Sir Robert Peel, Sir Thomas Baring, and Lord Liverpool. In addition to his short residences with patrons and friends, he also embarked on sketching tours solely with the aim of gathering material for his paintings. His earliest trips took him to the coast of Norfolk in 1815, Hastings in 1816, and the Lake District in 1818, where he became acquainted with the poets Wordsworth, Coleridge, and Southey. During the course of his career he continued to travel widely in Britain and in the 1820s took up summer residences in Hampstead or Hendon, in the countryside north of London, so that he could sketch directly from nature. It is in his approach to naturalism that Collins's work can be related to the landscape paintings of his contemporaries although, unlike John Constable (1776-1837) and the painters of the Norwich school, he seems to have built up his compositions by sketching the components directly from the motif and combining them in his studio to form imaginary landscapes. His aim was not simply to capture the beauties of an actual scene but to create a suitably idealized backdrop for his narrative events. During the 1830s the narrative element of Collins's genre scenes, particularly those involving children, took on a more vigorous role. The comparatively uneventful scenes of his earlier works gave way to compositions with a more actively dramatic element, as in 'Rustic Civility' (1833; V&A), one of the artist's most original compositions. As his subjects became more lively, so did his brushwork, and he no longer painted with the high degree of finish that had made his earlier works so attractive. 
Collins's foreign travels were few; his first journey abroad, in 1817, was to Paris in the company of the painters Washington Allston (1779-1843) and Charles Robert Leslie (1794-1859). He visited Holland and Belgium in 1828, Boulogne in 1829, and Germany in 1840. The only prolonged foreign journey was to Italy, between 1836 and 1838. The trip had an important impact in providing material for a new range of Italian subjects, including landscapes and genre. Soon after his return from Italy he began to produce a range of figure subjects such as 'Poor Travellers at the Door of a Capuchin Convent, Near Vico, Bay of Naples' (1839; Sudley Art Gallery, Liverpool), as well as scenes illustrating events from biblical history. Collins continued to exhibit Italian and figure subjects until 1844 when, according to his son, his illness caused him to revert to more familiar subjects. However, his return to his more popular English landscapes may have been the result of the criticism which his new endeavours had received. His final works were mostly coastal views, which resulted from short trips to the Isle of Wight in 1844 and Devon in 1845. His last important work was 'Early Morning -- Cromer' (1846; Tate collection), which, prior to its exhibition that year, was praised by John Ruskin in his 'Modern Painters'. 
Collins was an established figure in his profession and throughout his life was closely involved with Royal Academy affairs, serving as librarian in 1840-42. He died at his home, 1 Devonport Street, Hyde Park Gardens, London, on 17 February 1847 and was buried at St Mary's, Paddington. He had two sons, William Wilkie Collins (1824-1889), the novelist, and Charles Allston Collins (1828-1873), the Pre-Raphaelite painter. 


@@@@@


doc= 5960


Collins, William Lucas (1815-1887), Church of England clergyman and author, was born at Oxwich, Glamorgan, where he was baptized on 23 May 1815, the only son of Revd John Collins (died 1854), rector of Ilston, Nicholaston, and Penrice, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Lucas. He was educated at Rugby School (1829-33), among the first generation of pupils under Thomas Arnold, and at Jesus College, Oxford, where he matriculated in 1833, gaining second-class honours in classics in 1838, and graduating BA in 1838 and MA in 1840. Ordained in 1840, he was presented in the same year to the crown living of Cheriton, Glamorgan, which he held until 1867. On 9 April 1840 he married Anna Frances, daughter of John Wood of Berth-lwyd, near Llandeilo, Carmarthenshire. Their eldest son, Clifton Wilbraham Collins, was born in 1844. 
Collins served as curate at Great Houghton, Northamptonshire (1853-62), where he lived at the rectory and became a diocesan inspector of education. In 1867 he was presented by Francis Jeune, the low-church bishop of Peterborough, to the living of Kilsby, Northamptonshire. He exchanged this for the rectory of Lowick, near Thrapston, Northamptonshire, in 1873, which from 1876 he held in combination with the vicarage of Slipton. From 1870 he held an honorary canonry at Peterborough Cathedral. 
As well as being a country parson Collins had a literary career, which began soon after his ordination when he became a regular contributor to 'Blackwood's Magazine'. His early articles were on university life, but he came to make a speciality of articles on the ancient public schools, his 'Etoniana' being published separately in 1865 followed by 'The Public Schools' (1867). The latter, a self-conscious attempt to record the traditions and history of the 'Clarendon' schools on the eve of changes in their government and character, is notable for its revisionist account of Arnold's influence at Rugby, Collins taking issue with Arnold's liberal eulogists, whom he thought had unfairly denigrated the latter's predecessors. He also assigned importance to the example of Spencer Thornton, an evangelical schoolboy contemporary. John Blackwood encouraged him to take up reviewing; his perceptive reviews of George Eliot's novels were his most significant work. He also edited for Blackwoods a successful series, 'Ancient Classics for English Readers', to which he contributed several volumes, including those on Homer's 'Iliad' (1870) and Thucydides (1878). Collins died at Lowick rectory on 24 March 1887 and was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 5961


Collins, (William) Wilkie (1824-1889), writer, was born on 8 January 1824 at 11 New Cavendish Street, St Marylebone, Middlesex, the elder of the two children of the painter William John Thomas Collins (1788-1847), and his wife, Harriet (1790-1868), daughter of Captain Alexander Geddes of Alderbury, near Salisbury. He was of mixed Irish, Scottish, and English descent but lived all his life in or near London, as an adult always in the Marylebone district. He was baptized William Wilkie, for his father and his godfather, the painter Sir David Wilkie, but dropped his first forename after childhood. His unconventional preference for being called Wilkie, rather than Collins or Mr Collins, by his friends -- women and children as well as men -- was typical of his dislike of formality. He was born with a prominent bulge on the right side of his forehead, and his head and shoulders were disproportionately large for his short body and very small hands and feet. He was short-sighted, clumsy, and unathletic, though otherwise healthy as a child, and he later wore glasses. Clean-shaven as a young man, he later grew a full beard and moustache. 
As a child Collins met the poets Coleridge and Wordsworth, as well as many of the painters of the day. His childhood was happy, though he rebelled against the evangelical Christianity imposed by his parents, particularly his father. He admired his father for his hard-working dedication to his art, a trait he shared, but Collins came to dislike his snobbishness and conventionality. He was devoted to his lively mother who, he claimed, first awoke his interest in literature, and he was protective of his less robust younger brother, the painter Charles Allston Collins (1828-1873). 
From 1826 to 1830 the family lived in Hampstead. In 1830 they moved to 30 Porchester Terrace, in Bayswater, where Collins remembered seeing, in 1832, the mass demonstrations in Hyde Park in favour of the first 'Reform Bill'. He was at first educated by his mother, who had worked as a governess before her marriage. From January 1835 to July 1836 he attended a day school, the Maida Hill Academy. His schooling was interrupted when William Collins took the entire family to France and Italy from September 1836 to August 1838. He later wrote that he had learned more in Italy 'among the scenery, the pictures, and the people, than I ever learned at school' (Morris L. Parrish collection, Princeton University Libraries). He also claimed, in conversations with Charles Dickens and others, to have fallen in love, aged twelve, with a married woman in Rome and to have seduced her. On the family's return to London they moved to 20 Avenue Road, in St John's Wood, and Collins attended a boarding-school at 39 Highbury Place, run by the Revd Henry Cole. Here he felt out of place and was often rebuked for laziness and inattention. But it was at this school that he first discovered his powers of story-telling, to appease the dormitory bully. 
Although Collins showed some aptitude for painting, and had a painting hung in the Royal Academy summer exhibition of 1849, his gift was less marked than his brother's, and he had no particular inclination for any profession. He was first found employment as a clerk in the Strand offices of a tea merchant, Edward Antrobus, where he remained from 1841 to 1846. Bored by his work, he scribbled compulsively in office hours. His first signed publication was a short story, 'The Last Stage Coachman' ('Illuminated Magazine', 1.209-11). He also wrote a lurid novel, 'Iolani', set in Tahiti before its discovery by Europeans; it was not published during his lifetime. In 1845 he began a historical novel, 'Antonina', set in ancient Rome. His father, impressed by his determination to write, allowed him to leave the firm of Antrobus and enrol as a student of Lincoln's Inn. Although he was called to the bar in 1851, Collins never practised law, but retained a fascination with legal processes that is reflected in his fiction. 
Early visits to France -- Paris was to remain one of his favourite cities -- confirmed Collins in his dislike of English bourgeois life. He developed a taste for French cooking and for flamboyant and unconventional clothes. His hatred of formality extended to evening dress, and he was known, in later life, to appear at evening engagements in a tweed suit, with a pink or blue striped shirt, and a red tie. 
When William Collins died in 1847, leaving his widow and sons in reasonable financial circumstances, Collins suspended work on 'Antonina' in order to write a life of his father, 'Memoirs of the Life of William Collins, Esq., RA' (2 vols., 1848), his first published book. At home there was a more relaxed atmosphere. Harriet Collins welcomed her sons' friends to the house and gave informal dinner parties at which smoking was allowed. Amateur performances of plays by Oliver Goldsmith and Richard Brinsley Sheridan were staged in the back drawing-room. Collins also translated a French play, 'A Court Duel', which was given a charity performance by the Collins brothers and their friends on 26 February 1850. Two days later 'Antonina' was published to excellent reviews. Its success was the deciding factor in Collins's determination to make a career as a writer, though he never wrote another historical novel. In the summer of 1850 he wrote a lively travel book, 'Rambles beyond Railways' (1851), based on a journey through Cornwall on foot with a friend, Henry Brandling, who supplied the illustrations. 
In 1851 Collins met Dickens, when he was recruited as an actor in one of Dickens's amateur productions; it was to prove one of the most important relationships of his life. Dickens took the younger writer under his wing, and from 1853 Collins became a regular contributor to Dickens's periodicals 'Household Words' and 'All the Year Round', in addition to working for other journals, in particular 'Bentley's Miscellany' and 'The Leader'. Collins and Dickens also became close personal friends, as Dickens found Collins's enjoyment of life and disregard for the conventions refreshing. The association was close enough to arouse the jealousy of Dickens's friend and biographer John Forster, and was of great benefit to Collins, especially in his early years as a professional writer, though Dickens was sometimes alarmed at Collins's refusal to conform, either in his life or his writing, to nineteenth-century British prudery. But Collins was not confined exclusively to the Dickens circle: he had many other friends. Through his work for 'The Leader' he knew G. H. Lewes and George Eliot; he was close to John Everett Millais, who illustrated his story 'Mr Wray's Cash Box' (1852), and to William Holman Hunt. Charles Reade was a friend in his later years. Nevertheless Dickens's advice and encouragement were vital. He was the first to recognize the originality of 'Basil' (1852), Collins's first novel of contemporary life, which drew hostile reviews for its outspoken depiction of sexual obsession. 
Collins's next novel, 'Hide and Seek' (1854), was dedicated to Dickens, and is the most Dickensian of his novels. In the early chapters he drew heavily on his own experiences as a child and young man. The novel has a deaf heroine, the first exploration in his work of the effects of physical handicap on perception and character. This, with the altered states of consciousness caused by mental disturbance, became a lifelong preoccupation, and a feature of his fiction. The novel was welcomed enthusiastically by reviewers, who found it more acceptable than 'Basil'. 
A bout of illness in the summer of 1853 was the first intimation of the serious ill health which was to dog Collins for the rest of his life. By October he was well enough to join Dickens and the painter Augustus Egg for an extensive journey to Switzerland and Italy, described in amusing detail in the letters of both Dickens and Collins. Dickens began to treat Collins less as a disciple and more as a collaborator. Much of their free time was spent together, wandering by night in the less respectable areas of London and Paris, looking for material for their novels and journalism. 
Collins's fascination with the stage, encouraged by his association with Dickens's amateur acting company, led him to write his first play, 'The Lighthouse' (1855), given several performances at Tavistock House, Dickens's home, and professionally produced, with great success, at the Olympic Theatre in 1857. Collins's next book, 'After Dark' (1856), a collection of his short stories with a framing and linking narrative, consolidated the success of 'Hide and Seek'. 
Collins spent six weeks in Paris in the spring of 1856, living next door to Dickens and his family. He was ill for most of his stay, with a serious attack of the rheumatic disorder described as 'rheumatic gout', which continued to afflict him for the rest of his life. Yet he managed to complete his novella 'A Rogue's Life' (1879), serialized in 'Household Words' in 1856, and work out the plot of his next novel, 'The Dead Secret' (1857). He also visited the theatres and music-halls with Dickens, and he discovered on a bookstall the volumes of records of French trials which provided the basis of the plot of 'The Woman in White'. 
On his return to London, Collins took lodgings near Fitzroy Square, since his mother was about to move house. He wrote a powerful article for 'Household Words' (13.517-23) on the unpleasantness of his landlady to her exploited maidservants. The plight of the disadvantaged and outcast, particularly if they were women, continued to be a theme of his writing. It was probably at this time that he met Caroline Elizabeth Graves, 'nee' Compton (1829-1895), with whom he was to live from January 1859. Mrs Graves (known as Carrie), a widow with a young daughter, Harriet, was keeping a shop in a nearby street. 
Caroline Graves was popularly considered to be the inspiration for the principal female character in 'The Woman in White', Collins's best-known novel. However, there is no foundation for the sensational story, told by John Guille Millais in his biography of his father (1899), that Collins, his brother, and Millais met a distraught woman in white whom Collins later rescued from a villain who had been holding her captive in a villa in St John's Wood. Caroline Graves's past was perfectly respectable, though she went to some lengths to conceal her humble origins. 
In September 1856 Collins became a member of the regular staff of 'Household Words' and the Christmas number was, for the first time, a collaboration between Dickens and Collins. 'The Dead Secret' was, at Collins's insistence, serialized under his own name in the magazine. When the volume edition appeared the critic Edmund Yates wrote an article on Collins's fiction, suggesting that it was exceeded only by that of Dickens, Thackeray, and Charlotte Bronte ('The Train', 3.352-7). 
Collins's ambition to succeed in the theatre was still strong and in 1857 he wrote 'The Frozen Deep' (privately printed, 1857), his best-known play; a production of it was staged that year by Dickens's amateur company to great acclaim. After the original London run, the play was given three performances in the Free Trade Hall in Manchester, where the women's parts were played by professional actresses. It was on this occasion that Dickens, playing the lead, met and fell in love with one of them, the eighteen-year-old Ellen Ternan. The play's success led Collins to experiment further with drama, and a melodrama, 'The Red Vial', was given a professional production in 1858. The audience found it absurd, and it was taken off after one night. Collins then returned to journalism, and his many contributions to 'Household Words' that year included 'The unknown public' (18, 1858, 217-22), a plea for better literature for the readers of penny dreadfuls. 
Collins's relationship with Dickens became more intermittent in 1858, as each was preoccupied with new personal entanglements. Dickens parted from his wife; Collins set up house with Caroline Graves, first at 124 Albany Street, and from the spring of 1859 at 2A New Cavendish Street. Although he never married her, they lived together, with one break of about two years, until Collins's death in 1889, and he treated her daughter Harriet as an adopted child for whom he took complete responsibility. However, although he made no secret of his domestic arrangements, he was still a man of his time. He never attempted to make Caroline Graves a part of his social life, and although she was introduced to his circle of male friends, she never met their wives or stayed in their houses, where Collins appeared as a bachelor. 
A further collection of short stories, 'The Queen of Hearts' (1859), was followed by Collins's greatest success, 'The Woman in White' (1860). It began serialization in 'All the Year Round' in November 1859, and by Christmas it was the talk of London. Collins thoroughly enjoyed the fame and fortune it brought him. He moved with Caroline Graves to rooms at 12 Harley Street, spending a considerable amount on redecoration and refurbishment, and employing two servants. He entertained generously, in a typically informal way, and indulged the appreciation of rich food and fine wines which was to contribute to the undermining of his health. His success was at its peak during the 1860s, when his four best-known novels, 'The Woman in White', 'No Name' (1862), 'Armadale' (1866), and 'The Moonstone' (1868), were published. The term 'sensation novel' was coined by reviewers to describe them, and Collins was seen as the originator of this highly popular genre. 
The marriage of his brother, Charles Collins, to Dickens's daughter Kate in 1860 increased the detachment of Dickens from Collins. Dickens disapproved of the marriage, and also of Collins's open liaison with Caroline Graves. Collins, now financially secure but increasingly unwell, resigned from the staff of 'All the Year Round' to concentrate on writing 'No Name'. As he was struggling to finish the novel he was alarmed by the development of new symptoms added to his now familiar 'rheumatic gout', caused by the laudanum prescribed by his doctor to ease the pain of his illness. Although he made several attempts to do without the drug he was to remain dependent on ever-increasing doses of laudanum for the rest of his life, eventually taking amounts large enough to kill anyone not habituated to opiates. 
Collins was given the considerable sum of $5000 for 'Armadale' by the publisher George Smith. However, the serialization in the 'Cornhill Magazine' had to be postponed because of the increasing severity of his illness. He travelled widely with Caroline Graves while planning the book, visiting the spa towns of Aix-la-Chapelle and Wildbad and spending the winter of 1863-4 in Rome, where he celebrated his fortieth birthday. Although physically ageing, he wrote to his mother that he still had 'no regular habits, no respectable prejudices... none of the melancholy sobrieties of sentiment... which are supposed to be proper to middle-age' (Pierpont Morgan Library, MA 3150 80). 
A sailing holiday in Norfolk in August 1864 seems to have proved his point, for it was probably then that Collins met Martha Rudd (1845-1919); a Norfolk shepherd's daughter then working as a servant in the Great Yarmouth area, she was to become the mother of his three children. However, there is no definite record of their relationship until 1868. In 1867 Collins and Caroline Graves moved to 90 Gloucester Place, where he lived for over twenty years. In the same year he became the temporary editor of 'All the Year Round' while Dickens was in the United States, and wrote, in collaboration with him, the play 'No Thoroughfare' (privately printed, 1867), which was his first commercial success in the theatre. 

'The Moonstone' has remained second only to 'The Woman in White' in popularity among Collins's novels. Although not the first detective story, it is a classic of the genre, with many features repeatedly borrowed by later writers such as Arthur Conan Doyle, Agatha Christie, and Dorothy L. Sayers. Collins's accomplishment was remarkable, for the novel was written while he was under great stress. His mother, ill from the beginning of 1868, died in March. Collins, suffering the worst attack of illness he had ever had to endure, called her death the bitterest affliction of his life. He was too ill to attend her funeral, and for the first time dictated a short section of his novel to Harriet Graves, later to become his regular amanuensis. His suffering, and the effects of the laudanum which relieved it, are reflected in the experiences of the character Ezra Jennings in 'The Moonstone'. 
Collins's personal life was also in turmoil. Probably in response to his affair with Martha Rudd, Caroline Graves married Joseph Clow, a vintner's son eleven years her junior, in October 1868. Dickens believed that the marriage was the result of her failed attempt to force marriage on Collins. Collins was present at the wedding, and Harriet Graves continued to live with him, taking over the running of his household. Martha Rudd, under the name of Mrs Martha Dawson, was now installed in lodgings within walking distance of Collins's house, Collins adopting the alias of William Dawson whenever he visited her or stayed with her in lodgings at Ramsgate, Kent. Their first child, Marian, was born on 4 July 1869, and their second, Constance Harriet, on 14 May 1871. Their only son, William Charles Collins Dawson, was born on Christmas day 1874. 
In spite of Collins's commitment to Martha, Caroline Graves abandoned her marriage to Clow and resumed her former name after about two years, returning to live with Collins. His failure to marry either woman was probably a reflection of his sense of responsibility to both. His will treated them equally, and Harriet Graves was given the same consideration as his own children. It is unlikely that Caroline and Martha ever met, but Martha's children often went to stay at Gloucester Place, and with Collins and Caroline Graves at Ramsgate. 
During the 1870s Collins's attempts to establish himself as a playwright met with increased success. A dramatization of 'The Woman in White' was staged in 1871, and he now planned a number of his novels with stage adaptation in mind from their inception. 'Man and Wife' (1870), in which he attacked the state of the marriage laws and the cult of athleticism, was first conceived as a play and staged very successfully in 1873. Although 'Poor Miss Finch' (1872) was not dramatized, 'The New Magdalen' (1873), a plea for sympathy for 'fallen women', was equally successful as a novel and a play. Dramatizations of 'Armadale' (entitled 'Miss Gwilt') and 'The Moonstone' followed in 1876 and 1877. Many of the friends he made in the last twenty years of his life were connected with the theatre. In part because of his interest in the stage, and in an attempt to keep the public's favour, driven by the need to make more money to support his two households, his later fiction became more melodramatic and didactic. Although his work remained popular, he never again matched his literary successes of the 1860s. 
In 1873 Collins made his only visit to America, taking up an invitation to tour the United States and Canada giving readings from his works. He enjoyed the appreciative audiences, and the less formal manners, and made several new friends. But his health was increasingly precarious, and he found the constant travelling exhausting. He cut short his visit, and made only about $2500 from the tour, considerably less than Dickens had made with his American public readings in 1867. 

'The Law and the Lady' (1875) was the first of Collins's novels to be published by Chatto and Windus, who thereafter became his main publishers and later issued collected editions of his novels. (Collins had always wanted his novels to be available to readers of all classes and incomes, and Chatto and Windus agreed to issue thirteen of his earlier titles in 6's'. and 2's'. editions. After his death Chatto and Windus editions in various formats continued to be issued, from a luxury 'Library' edition to a 6died edition in paper wrappers.) 'The Two Destinies' (1876) was followed by 'The Haunted Hotel' (1879), 'The Fallen Leaves' (1879), and 'Jezebel's Daughter' (1880), a fictional version of his failed melodrama, 'The Red Vial'. In 1881 Collins further relieved himself of the business side of authorship when he appointed A. P. Watt as his literary agent. His final play, 'Rank and Riches', produced in 1881, was a disastrous failure, and for the remaining eight years of his life he confined himself to writing novels and stories, producing 'The Black Robe' (1881), 'Heart and Science' (1883), 'I Say No' (1884), 'The Evil Genius' (1886), 'The Guilty River' (1886), 'Little Novels' (1887), a collection of short stories, and 'The Legacy of Cain' (1889). 
Collins's health continued to decline. In addition to his long-standing arthritis, he began to suffer from angina, which caused him intense pain. But he still felt deeply involved with his writing. The composition of the antivivisection novel 'Heart and Science' so excited him that he wrote week after week without a break. He also continued to fight for better conditions for authors. He had been a lifelong campaigner for improvements in international copyright, and was one of the founder members of the Society of Authors in 1884. 
In 1888 Collins moved to 82 Wimpole Street. He was by now an invalid, and although he continued to see his close friends he became something of a recluse, in contrast to his earlier conviviality, though he attended a dinner of the Society of Authors in July, 'dreadfully crippled', as his obituarist observed, 'but in fair spirits, and anxious for me to point out such celebrities as had risen since his time' ('The World', 25 Sept 1889, 12). Six months later he survived a carriage accident when he was thrown from a cab in a collision. In June 1889 he suffered a stroke and, fearing that he would not live to complete his last novel, 'Blind Love' (1890), arranged for Walter Besant to do so. An attack of bronchitis finally led to his death, on 23 September 1889, at his home in Wimpole Street. His funeral was attended by Caroline Graves but not by Martha Dawson or his children, and it is Caroline Graves who shares his grave in Kensal Green cemetery, London, where he was buried on 27 September. 
The popularity of Collins's writing, with the exception of his two best-known novels, 'The Woman in White' and 'The Moonstone', continued to fall after his death. However, this trend was halted in the last quarter of the twentieth century and has recently been reversed. At the end of the twentieth century all his fiction, with the exception of his first novel, 'Antonina', was in print, much of it in inexpensive editions. Television adaptations of the better-known novels, of varying quality, are being produced. As yet, his plays have not been reprinted or restaged. Collins's work is also being re-evaluated. Many of his novels have appeared in critical editions, and there has been a proliferation of studies of his work as the subject of serious critical enquiry. 


@@@@@


doc= 5962


Collinson, James (1825-1881), genre painter, was born in Mansfield, near Nottingham, on 9 May 1825, the youngest of the three children of Robert Collinson ('c'.1770- 'c'.1830), a prosperous bookseller, and his wife, Mary ('c'.1785- 'c'.1860). Little is known about Collinson's father, who died during his childhood, which was spent in Nottinghamshire. By the time James Collinson was twenty years old the bookselling business had long been taken over by his married elder brother, Charles; his sister, Mary, was living with their mother, then aged about sixty, in a small house at Pleasley Hill just outside Mansfield. James was more than ten years younger than either of his siblings. 
In the mid-1840s Collinson was a meek-mannered, fair-haired young man of diminutive stature and boyish appearance with a habit of falling asleep indiscriminately. Enrolled at the Royal Academy Schools in London, he met there the slightly younger Dante Gabriel Rossetti and William Holman Hunt. They admired their fellow student's art, although Holman Hunt found him dull company, writing of Collinson in 'Pre-Raphaelitism and the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood' (1905) that 'he could but rarely see the fun of anything, although he sometimes laughed in a lachrymose manner, and I fear our attempts to enliven him were but futile' (1.161-2). Drawn to the Oxford Movement which was reinvigorating high-church worship, Collinson was a devoted and pious worshipper at Christ Church, Albany Street. There he would have known, and been known by, if only by sight, Christina Rossetti and her mother, who attended the same church to listen to the fiery Puseyite sermons of the Revd William Dodsworth. 
Collinson's painting 'The Charity Boy's Debut' was exhibited in the Royal Academy exhibition in 1847 and much praised. A genre scene which showed a parish lad putting on his uniform, it was followed in 1848 by 'The Rivals', a sentimental depiction of a girl child with two boys. 'The New Curate' and 'The Noviciate to a Nunnery' followed: most of Collinson's early work, like these two paintings, was heavily devotional. At about the same time that Dante Gabriel Rossetti, his brother William Michael, and the four other founder members of the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood asked him to join them, Collinson took what must have seemed a logical step forward from Tractarianism and converted to Roman Catholicism. Although described by William Rossetti as 'hardly a writing man' (Rossetti, 20), in March 1850 Collinson contributed quite an imaginative, five-part narrative poem entitled 'The Child Jesus' to the second issue of 'The Germ', the short-lived Pre-Raphaelite journal. It was accompanied by an etching which showed a haloed, juvenile figure of Christ blessing other children; Collinson's reputation at the time was such that editor William Rossetti thought it worth flagging 'with an Etching by James Collinson' on the front cover of the issue. 
Collinson lodged in Somers Town and became a frequent visitor to the Rossetti family home at 50 Charlotte Street, where, in his hesitant way, he got to know Christina Rossetti better. He painted portraits of her and her sister Maria, presenting Christina as a prim nervous figure in stark contrast to the full-featured voluptuous portraits of her by Dante Gabriel Rossetti. In 1848 he proposed marriage to Christina but was refused on the grounds of his Roman Catholicism. He reconverted to Anglicanism and was accepted, although Christina was only seventeen years old and Collinson was still financially dependent on his family. At the same time Collinson was working on his major Pre-Raphaelite painting 'St Elizabeth of Hungary' (exh. 1851; Johannesburg Art Gallery, South Africa) which shows the saint entering a convent, rather than remarrying after the death of her devout husband. 
In 1850 Collinson finished, in time for exhibition at the Royal Academy that year, his oil painting 'Answering the Emigrant's Letter'. Now in the City of Manchester Art Galleries, it is a genre scene depicting a working man in shirt sleeves with his wife and children around a table in a dark kitchen. The three eldest children are poring over a letter to their absent elder brother. With 'The Emigration Scheme' which was exhibited at Liverpool Academy in 1852 (ex Sothebys, 15 March 1967) it demonstrates Collinson's interest in the topical subject of emigration during the early 1850s. 
Early in 1850 Collinson reverted to his Catholic faith and renounced the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood and his connection with 'The Germ'. He felt unable 'conscientiously as a Catholic to assist in parading the artistic opinions of those who are not' as he explained in his resignation letter to Dante Gabriel Rossetti (Thomas, 90). This left Christina with no choice but to release him from their engagement. A few months later he sold his painting materials and, in late 1852 or early 1853, entered the Jesuit community at Stonyhurst College at Clitheroe in Lancashire where he remained until some time before September 1854. By 1855 Collinson was once more exhibiting at the Royal Academy and two new pictures by him were shown at the British Institution in 1858, but he had no further contact with the Rossettis and their circle. On 9 February 1858 Collinson married Eliza Alvinia Henrietta Ann Wheeler at Brompton Oratory. She was a vigorous, plainly dressed Catholic aged forty, related by marriage to Collinson's friend J. R. Herbert. Collinson's only child, a son, Robert, was born in 1859. 
Collinson exhibited regularly at the Royal Academy, the British Institution, and the Society of British Artists -- of which he was a fellow -- from 1855 until 1870, after which he lived quietly in retirement. Much of his post-Stonyhurst work was artistically unremarkable and concentrated on saleable domestic or humorous subjects. It is difficult to get an overview of Collinson's work as so much of it has been dispersed or is lost. One surviving work, 'For Sale' (exh. RA, 1858), is now in the Tate collection: it depicts a girl opening her purse at a charity when the item really on sale is herself. It was a companion piece to a similar painting entitled 'To Let' which showed a young woman offering lodgings in her house. Collinson died on 24 January 1881 at his home, 16 Paulet Road, Camberwell. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 5963


Collinson, John (1757-1793), antiquary, the son of the Revd John Collinson of Bromham, Wiltshire, and his wife, Elizabeth, was born in Bromham on 19 July 1757. He matriculated at Brasenose College, Oxford, on 8 April 1775 but from July 1777 until June 1779 was intermittently resident at the Queen's College. He was made deacon by the bishop of Oxford on 21 November 1779 at the request of Thomas Meyler, to whom Collinson had offered his services. Meyler, who described him as 'an ingenious, sober and well-behaved youth' (Wilts. & Swindon HC, D1/14/17), employed Collinson as his curate at Preshute and Marlborough between January and August 1780. 
Collinson did not proceed to a degree but in 1779, before ordination, published his first book, 'The beauties of British antiquity: selected from the writings of esteemed antiquaries with notes and observations'. In June 1780 he issued proposals, never fulfilled, for a history of Wiltshire, for which he had been collecting material for three years. 
Probably late in 1780 Collinson moved to Cirencester where, on 25 March 1781, he married Mary Hill (died 1787). In the following December he was licensed as curate there, and was appointed vicar of Clanfield, Oxfordshire, in 1782. His antiquarian studies, probably undertaken in the library of the second Earl Bathurst at Cirencester Park, were evidently made in association with Samuel Rudder, the Gloucestershire historian, and with Joseph Kilner, collector of material on Cirencester. In June 1784 Collinson was admitted a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries of London with the support of Daines Barrington, William Boys, and Edward Hasted. 
In August 1781 Collinson issued a prospectus for a history of Somerset, but the project was apparently abandoned a year later because he found that the papers of John Strachey, an earlier historian of the county, were not available to him. New proposals were issued in October 1784 under which Collinson's historical material, to be collected from a variety of sources, was to be combined with a contemporary survey to be made by Edmund Rack, then secretary of the Agricultural and Philosophical societies of Bath. 
In August 1787 Collinson became vicar of Long Ashton and perpetual curate of Whitchurch, both on the Somerset side of Bristol. He moved to Long Ashton with his young son, John, some time after the death of his wife, Mary, in Cirencester in November 1787. 'The History and Antiquities of the County of Somerset', in three volumes, was published in 1791 and gave rise to much criticism. It was, however, based on much accurate unpublished work of earlier antiquaries, some now lost, though on only a limited use of Rack's survey, most of which survives, with evidence of Collinson's use, among the archives of the Smyth family of Long Ashton at Bristol Record Office. 
Collinson died after a 'lingering illness' ('Notes and Queries for Somerset and Dorset', 15, 1916, 84) at the Hotwells, Bristol, on 27 August 1793, and was buried at Long Ashton on 1 September. 


@@@@@


doc= 5964


Collinson, Peter (1694-1768), botanist, was born at the sign of the Red Lion, Gracechurch Street, London, on 28 January 1694, the son of Peter Collinson, cloth merchant, and his wife, Elizabeth Hall. He was raised in a Quaker family of cloth merchants and became a partner in the family business, which had extensive trade with America. Through this connection he became acquainted with Benjamin Franklin, to whose experiments with electricity he contributed information about similar work in Germany. Franklin also informed him of the discovery of mastodon bones on the banks of the Ohio River in 1767, a subject on which Collinson gave two accounts to the Royal Society ('PTRS', 57, 1767, 46-7). He also supported the foundation of a subscription library in Philadelphia and encouraged the colonists to experiment with a wider range of crops. 
As a small boy Collinson had lived with relatives in Peckham, then a separate hamlet south of London. From the garden there, which he later inherited, he acquired a love of plants which was to last for the rest of his life. Probably his greatest contribution to horticulture was through his friendship with John Bartram, the father of American botany. In the early 1730s, Bartram wrote to Collinson soliciting the post of king's botanist in North America, a position that Collinson was able to obtain for him only in 1765. In the meantime, however, Collinson established a scheme whereby Bartram supplied seeds and seedlings to British patrons in return for an annual subscription. 
This scheme eventually attracted at least sixty subscribers, including such eminent landscape planters as the dukes of Argyll, Bedford, and Richmond. Collinson cultivated a similar passion for planting in the duke of Newcastle's heir, Henry Fiennes Clinton, earl of Lincoln. Largely through botany, Collinson, who was a lifelong whig, knew at least two prime ministers -- Lord Lincoln's uncle, Henry Pelham, and Lord Bute, the effective founder of the botanical garden at Kew. His greatest protege and friend, however, was Lord Petre, who at his premature death in 1742 had planted 40,000 American trees on his estate at Thorndon in Essex. 
Collinson was a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries and of the Royal Society (elected 1728), to which he submitted reports on a wide variety of natural history topics. He was acquainted with a wide range of natural historians. Through his connection with the Royal Society, he became a close enough friend of Sir Hans Sloane to expect that he might have been made curator of Sloane's collection after his death, an expectation in which he was frustrated. He was also close to John Fothergill (who wrote his first biography), and numbered among his acquaintance such eminent botanists as John Ellis, Stephen Hales, and J. J. Dillenius. He also knew Linnaeus, having been introduced to him by Hermann Boerhaave in 1736. The connection later led Linnaeus both to encourage Collinson to catalogue his plants and to name horse balm ('Collinsonia canadensis') after him. 
Collinson was equally interested in more ordinary plantsmen. He lent Mark Catesby the money to publish his 'Natural History of Carolina', and he corresponded with the American botanists Alexander Garden and Cadwallader Colden. He also passed on many of his seeds to James Gordon, the nurseryman who had been gardener to Lord Petre. Collinson owned and heavily annotated several editions of the 'Gardeners Dictionary' by Philip Miller, the gardener of the Chelsea Physic Garden, who was another friend. He was fearful that such men would be excluded from botany by Linnaeus's new system of nomenclature and wrote to him in 1754 to object that only 'real professors' could now pretend to attain to the science. 
Collinson's famous garden was at Mill Hill, an estate which he inherited (in 1749) through his marriage to Mary Russell in 1724. They had four children, of whom Michael (1727-1795) was also a distinguished botanist. Among Collinson's garden's curiosities was a rare collection of magnolias, one of them ('Magnolia acuminata') introduced by him. One of his many contributions to the 'Gentleman's Magazine' is a paper in 1751 listing forty-three plants imported in that year. He was responsible for introducing into Britain the American alder, three species of azalea, black birch, hemlock, sugar maple, mountain laurel, and many medicinal herbs. In 1843 Lewis Dillwyn published 'Hortus Collinsonianus', a reconstructed list of all the plants in this garden. Collinson died at Mill Hill in August 1768, having been taken ill at Thorndon. He was buried at the Quaker burial-ground, Long Lane, Bermondsey. 


@@@@@


doc= 5965


Collinson, Sir Richard (1811-1883), naval officer and explorer, was born on 7 November 1811 at Gateshead, co. Durham, where his father, the Revd John Collinson ('c'.1791-1857), was rector. His mother was Amelia, 'nee' King ('b'. 1783), daughter of the philanthropist Frances Elizabeth King. He entered the navy in December 1823, and in 1828 served as a midshipman of the 'Chanticleer' (Captain Forster) in a surveying voyage round South America. In 1834 he was a mate of the 'Medea', one of the first steamers in the navy; he was promoted lieutenant on 23 March 1835 and appointed on 28 September to the surveying vessel 'Sulphur'. In June 1838 he was appointed to the 'President', the flagship of Rear-Admiral Ross in the Pacific; and in January 1840 to the 'Wellesley', on which Sir James John Gordon Bremer subsequently hoisted his broad pennant as senior officer in China. During the First Opium War Collinson was employed as surveyor and pilot, and to his skill and ability was largely due the success of the operations both in the Canton River and especially in the Yangtze (Yangzi) River. After commanding for some time the brig 'Bentinck' on this service, he was promoted commander on 19 February 1842, was advanced to post rank on 23 December 1842, and was nominated a CB the following day. However, he continued in command of the 'Bentinck', renamed the 'Plover', until 1846, during which time he was employed in the exact survey of the coast of China, from Chushan to Hong Kong, the results of which afterwards formed the basis of the navigational publication 'China Pilot'. 
In 1849 Collinson was appointed to command an expedition for the relief of Sir John Franklin, by way of the Bering Strait; he himself had command of the 'Enterprise', and with him was Commander Robert Le Mesurier McClure in the 'Investigator'. The two ships sailed together from Plymouth on 20 January 1850 but unfortunately separated in the neighbourhood of Cape Horn and did not meet again. The 'Enterprise' passed Point Barrow, Alaska, on 21 August, but the ice forced Collinson to return south and winter in Hong Kong. In 1851 he was again hampered by ice and in 1852 was frozen in at Cambridge Bay for the winter. In 1853 the 'Enterprise' was caught in the ice at Camden Bay, and there passed a third winter. She reached Point Barrow on 8 August 1854, after being shut up in the Arctic, entirely on her own resources, for upwards of three years. Of the many who had searched for Franklin, Collinson came closest to the place where the expedition had ended. Collinson's addition to geographical knowledge on this Arctic trip was very considerable, and would have been tantamount to the discovery of the north-west passage, had this not been already actually achieved by the men of the 'Investigator'. The Royal Geographical Society awarded him its gold medal in 1858, but he had expected some official reward and was mortified by the scanty acknowledgement his service received. He never again applied for employment under the Admiralty, though he acted on commissions on the naval defence of the Great Lakes, and of the United Kingdom generally. 
Collinson attained his flag in 1862; became a vice-admiral (retired) in 1869; and admiral (retired) in 1875, in which year he was also made a KCB. In 1857 he had settled at Ealing, Middlesex, and there, with his mother and sisters, spent the remainder of his life. In 1862 he was elected an elder brother of Trinity House, and in 1875 to be deputy master, an appointment rarely conferred on an officer of the Royal Navy. He was an active fellow of the Royal Geographical Society, serving for many years on its council and in 1871 assisting in editing the 'Hints to Travellers'. In 1862 he contributed 'Three weeks in Canada' to Francis Galton's 'Vacation Tourists' and edited for the Hakluyt Society 'The Three Voyages of Martin Frobisher in Search of a Passage to Cathaia' (1867). He was also active in local affairs, serving as churchwarden, on the local board, and in other offices of the parish and district. He died on 12 September 1883 at his home, The Haven, Ealing, Middlesex, and was buried at nearby Perivale, where a monument to his memory was erected by subscription. 


@@@@@


doc= 5966


Collinson, Septimus (1739-1827), college head, was born at Gotree, near Huntsonby, Cumberland, on 11 September 1739, the seventh son of Joseph and Agnes Collinson. He was brought up at Great Musgrave, Westmorland, where his parents had bought a small estate. He was educated at Appleby grammar school, and entered Queen's College, Oxford, in 1759; he graduated BA in 1763 and MA in 1767. In 1778 he became rector of Dowlish Wake and Dowlish West, near Ilminster, Somerset, a post he held until his death. He graduated BD in 1792 and DD in 1793. For some years he was one of the city lecturers at Oxford. In 1794 he received his college's living of Holwell, Dorset, but in 1796 was appointed provost of Queen's College. In 1798 he became Lady Margaret professor of divinity, which made him a prebendary of Worcester Cathedral. His lectures on the 'Thirty-Nine Articles', though admired at the time, were never printed. He was a frequent university preacher until an advanced age. His later sermons express alarm at moves towards Catholic emancipation. He died, unmarried, at Queen's College lodge on 24 January 1827 and was buried in the provost's vault. He was a generous benefactor, and left $1500 to found a school on the Madras or Bell system, which provided free schooling for children in the parish of Great Musgrave. 


@@@@@


doc= 5967


Collis, John Day (1816-1879), headmaster and educational writer, son of the Revd Robert Fitzgerald Collis (1790-1863), prebendary of Kilconnell, co. Galway, and his wife, Maria, daughter of Edward Bourke of Nun's Island, Galway, was born on 24 February 1816 at Rathcormack, co. Cork. He was educated at Rugby School from 1832 to 1834 under Thomas Arnold, and entered Merton College, Oxford, as a postmaster in 1834. In 1835 he became Eaton scholar of Worcester College, taking first-class honours in classics in 1838 and proceeding BA in 1838, MA in 1841, and BD and DD in 1860. He gained the Kennicott, and Pusey and Ellerton Hebrew scholarships (1839-41), and was a fellow of his college from 1839 to 1847. On 18 June 1846 he married Josephine Martha (died 16 Oct 1868), eldest daughter of John Chatfield Tyler, of Kingswood, Gloucestershire. 
In December 1842 Collis was nominated headmaster of Bromsgrove School. Through his tireless energy Bromsgrove became one of the leading schools in England; the number of pupils rose from 17 in 1843 to 100 in 1865. A new chapel was built in 1856, and new classrooms were added and the old buildings enlarged and improved at a cost of $5000. He was less effective as a preacher and was an uninspiring teacher; his applications for the headships of Durham (1853) and Rugby (1857) were unsuccessful. By turning Bromsgrove into predominantly a boarding-school, Collis incurred local unpopularity for excluding boys from the town, and some of his policies were strongly criticized in 1865 by James Bryce, one of the assistant commissioners to the schools inquiry commission. He resigned from the headmastership in October 1867 on his appointment to the vicarage of Stratford upon Avon. But his qualities as an educational entrepreneur were again shown by the prosperity of Trinity College School at Stratford, a private venture of which he was both founder (27 January 1872) and first warden. He had earlier married, on 11 October 1871, Elizabeth, daughter of Edward Castleman of Chettle, Dorsetshire, and widow of Rear-Admiral Douglas Curry of Shottery Hall, Stratford upon Avon. A well-known figure in educational circles, he was vice-president of the College of Preceptors and of the Association for the Registration of Schoolmasters. He was a prolific author of classical school textbooks. His 'Chief Tenses of Latin Irregular Verbs' (1854) and its Greek counterpart both went through thirty-four editions. 
Collis was nominated an honorary canon of Worcester Cathedral in 1854, and in 1856 was offered, but declined, the colonial bishopric of Grafton and Armidale. At Bromsgrove he was chairman of the local board and of the poor-law guardians, and took a leading part in local controversies, promoting the restoration of Bromsgrove parish church, which was carried out in 1859 by G. G. Scott. During his incumbency Stratford church was restored and improved, and he completed the formation of the water terrace in the churchyard. Past master and grand chaplain in the Middlesex province of freemasons, Collis was a freeman of the City of London. He died at Shottery Hall, Stratford upon Avon, on 1 April 1879, and was buried at Bromsgrove cemetery on 4 April 1879. 


@@@@@


doc= 5968


Collop, John (bap. 1625), poet, was baptized at Flitwick, Bedfordshire, on 4 July 1625, the son of John Collop, who was probably a mercer. Collop was educated at the Charterhouse and as an exhibitioner at Pembroke College, Cambridge, commencing studies in 1641 under the tutelage of William Quarles. Though it is difficult to be certain, it appears that Collop was licensed as a physician; at any rate he allowed himself the title of MD. Owing to the scarcity of marriage records during the Commonwealth period, it is difficult to establish when Collop's first marriage took place, though it can be said with greater certainty that he later moved to London, making a second marriage, to Anne Evington, about 1676. 
Collop was the author of 'Poesis rediviva, or, Poesie Reviv'd' (1656) (containing a lengthy dedication to Henry, marquess of Dorchester) and 'Itur satyricum in Loyall Stanzas' (1660), a poem on the Restoration. His massive debt to Donne is evident throughout the corpus, though the imitation of Donne's verbal precision and intentional probing of the reader's habits of thought and moral complacency is not a match for Donne's incandescent intelligence or natural skill with language. Quite frequently Collop begins with an arresting, if syntactically awkward, couplet, yet is unable to develop the theme or build on the opening. His conciliatory attitude to the political and religious controversies of the day is found throughout most of his occasional verse. Basically a moderate royalist (he did not approve of cavalier excess) he also attempted to reconcile himself to Cromwell's power. 
In religious matters Collop's conservatism was ill-matched to the 1650s and he took little pleasure in the sectarianism of the period, identifying the arguments of the rival parties as being based in attempts to gain temporal power and authority, unrelated to the divine. A popular tract, 'Medici Catholicon' (1656, reprinted as 'Charity Commended', 1658 and 1667) pursues Collop's belief in toleration in religion. The opening of 'Sectaries' neatly encapsulates his views on this subject and is also telling in terms of its strength and poetic allegiance: '
See of phanatique fowlers a fresh shole, 

With baits of Liberty who decoy the Soul, 


'Copernicism' these by their whimsies prove; 

Where all are giddy, how can the Earth not move? 

' However unlike most of Collop's occasional verse, the poem ends strongly: '
All 'gainst Idolatry cry; yet all approve, 

While they the idols of their Fancies love. 

' This illustrates the difference between the Herbert-inspired religious lyrics, written from personal conviction, and the more awkward occasional verse. 
Collop's range extended beyond the religious to include the less familiar genre of poems addressed to the physically hard-favoured mistress, including four poems to a yellow-skinned lady. 'On the Wearing of the Tag of her Blew Point' begins with the memorable couplet '
Though like a Liquorish stick you're thin, 

Yet all its sweetness is within. 

' Collop also wrote against quackery, including the common belief in the relation of the humours and elements to well-being, phlebotomy (bloodletting), purging, and the practising of non-licentiates: '
These like the Dogs in errors darker night, 

Bark at the Moon, but cannot reach the light. 

' 'Chymistrie' is also criticized, as is the use of the occult ('On Sigils'), alchemy, astrology, and mysticism of all kinds. Occasionally Collop provides a lively metaphor such as in 'Man a Microcosm' in which 'Our flesh is earth, our blood is as a Sea'. Yet it is poems such as 'On Truth' that portray Collop at his best, able to identify the folly of religious controversy, but frustrated by his lack of ability to change the temperament of the times in which he found himself, and cast adrift from the period when toleration was viable: '
See each Divine is but an advocate, 

As if Religion was a temporal state: 

They with illusion, forgeries, for it plead, 

And do't like Lawy'rs, onely to be fee'd. 

' 
'Itur satyricum' is an attempt to praise the Restoration, yet a combination of platitude and verbal awkwardness limits its effectiveness as poetry, if not as an apposite and well-timed welcome, written by a man who had argued that Charles I had bargained away his own life on the beheading of ''Wisdoms' Monopoly', the earl of Strafford. 


@@@@@


doc= 5969


Collyer, Joseph, the elder (1714/15-1776), translator and bookseller, was probably the son of Joseph Collyer (died 1724), a bookseller and treasurer of the Stationers' Company. He married Mary Mitchell ['see 'Collyer, Mary (1716/-1762)], who was also a translator and novelist; their son, Joseph Collyer the younger ['see under 'Boydell, John, engravers], became a well-known engraver. Collyer had a shop in Plough Court, London. Collyer the elder married a woman named Anne after the death of his first wife. 
Collyer's translations include selections from Voltaire (1754), Plutarch (1762), and J. J. Bodmer (1767); and shortly before his death he completed a translation from the German of Sophie von La Roche's work, as 'History of Lady Sophia Sternheim'. He also published 'The Parent's and Guardian's Directory' (1761); 'A History of England' (14 vols., 1774-5); and, with D. Fenning, 'A New System of Geography' (2 folio vols., 1765-6). 
According to a contemporary, Collyer was 'habituated to domestic life and studious retirement; he filled up the relations of husband and father with endearing affection; though an author by profession, he possessed no kind of petulance, self-sufficiency, or envy'. He suffered a 'lingering illness and want of employment', but 'his long course of severe application had afforded him no opportunity to make provision for the decline of life' ('New System', 1.4). Collyer died on 20 February 1776, probably at his home in Islington, at the age of sixty-one. He left a widow, Anne. 


@@@@@


doc= 5970


Joseph Collyer the younger (1748-1827), born on 14 September 1748, the son of Joseph Collyer the elder (1714/15-1776), a translator and writer, and his wife, Mary Collyer, nee Mitchell (1716/17-1762), also a writer. He was a pupil of Anthony Walker ('c'.1726-1765), an engraver who worked for Boydell in the early 1760s (notably on Woollett's 'Niobe' plate). On Walker's death, Collyer continued to study with the engraver's brother, William Walker. In 1761 he won a prize for drawing at the Society of Arts. Collyer enrolled as an engraver at the Royal Academy Schools on 14 March 1771, giving his age as '22 last Sept'. Having come to the notice of Boydell, he engraved for him a plate after Teniers, and subsequently reproduced works by contemporary artists, including Wheatley and Reynolds. He produced one large plate and two smaller prints for the 'Shakspeare Gallery' and also worked as a book illustrator. He exhibited engravings at the Society of Artists exhibitions of 1770, 1778, and 1780, and at the Free Society of Artists in 1779. Collyer was made an associate of the Royal Academy in 1786, and, with Earlom and James Fittler ['see below'], was proposed as a director of the charitable Society of Engravers vaunted, unsuccessfully, in 1788. He exhibited engravings at the Royal Academy in 1789 and 1791-2, and intermittently from 1797 to 1822, giving his address as 8 Constitution Row, Gray's Inn Road. He was appointed portrait engraver to Queen Charlotte, and was a member of the Stationers' Company, becoming master in 1815. He died at his home on Constitution Row on 24 December 1827. 


@@@@@


doc= 5971


Collyer, Mary (1716/17-1762), translator and novelist, is of unknown parentage, nor has her birthplace been identified. Although her work demonstrates a good knowledge of languages and literature, there is no record of her early life or education, with the exception of one comment by Elizabeth Carter, saying she had been 'a little acquainted with her before she was married' ('Letters', 1.151). She married Joseph Collyer the elder (1714/15-1776), a writer and bookseller who had a shop in Plough Court and a house in Islington; their son, Joseph Collyer the younger ['see under 'Boydell, John, engravers], born in 1748, engraved illustrations for one edition of her extremely popular 'Death of Abel' (1761), a translation from Salomon Gessner. In dedicating this work to the queen, Collyer states: 'It is in order to contribute to the support and education of my children, I have taken up the pen' (Gessner, sig. A2). There is evidence, however, for only the one child, Joseph. 
Collyer published 'The Virtuous Orphan', her translation and completion of Marivaux's 'La vie de Marianne', in instalments in the 'London Evening-Post' during 1742, and in a single volume in 1743. McBurney and Shugrue describe this as 'the most popular translation during the eighteenth century, the period of Marivaux's greatest influence upon the English novel' ('Virtuous Orphan', vi). 'Felicia to Charlotte' (2 vols., 1744-9), Collyer's original novel, in which she introduces a hero who is both a man of feeling and a man of reason, was also successful. 
Collyer also published 'Memoirs of the Countess de Bressol... from the French' (2 vols., 1743) and 'The Christmas Box' (1748-9). Her husband completed her final work, a translation of Klopstock's 'Messiah' (2 vols., 1763); and in a preface, he states that his wife's death followed 'a lingering illness occasion'd by the agitations of mind she suffer'd in writing' 'Death of Abel' and the first part of 'The Messiah'. She died on 31 December 1762 and was buried at St Mary's, Islington, on 5 January 1763. 


@@@@@


doc= 5972


Collyer, William Bengo' (1782-1854), Congregational minister and religious writer, was born in Deptford, Kent, on 14 April 1782, the only surviving child of a builder, Thomas Collyer, and his wife, Ann. After an education at the Leathersellers' Company School at Lewisham, he entered the Independent Homerton Academy as a scholar in 1798. In 1800 he began his ministry to a small congregation at Peckham, where he was ordained in December 1801. The congregation speedily increased, and, after the chapel had been enlarged several times, it was rebuilt in 1816 and reopened under the name of Hanover Chapel. His preaching attracted members of the nobility and gentry, and even, occasionally, royalty; at the suggestion of the duke of Sussex he was made a DD by Edinburgh University in 1808. In 1813 he was invited to succeed to the pulpit at Salters' Hall Chapel, which, with the agreement of his congregation at Peckham, he accepted in addition to his existing duties. On 20 October 1813 he married Mary (died 1828?), the only daughter and coheir of Thomas Hawkes of Lutterworth; they had one daughter. 
As well as being a popular evangelical preacher, attracting a fashionable congregation, Collyer was a prolific author. His works included many sermons and hymns, and a series of popular lectures on scriptural subjects, including 'Lectures on Scriptural Facts' (1807), 'Scripture Prophecy' (1809), and 'Scripture Duties' (1819). Several of his hymn compositions entered common use, including 'Great God, what do I see and hear', on the last judgment, first published in a Sheffield collection of 'Psalms and Hymns' (1802) and 'Return, O wanderer, return' (first published in the 'Evangelical Magazine' in May 1806). His 'Hymns Partly Collected and Partly Original' (1812) included fifty-seven of his own compositions intended for the use of his congregation. Most were 'short descriptive or didactic poems, religious or moral essays in verses' (Julian, 243), and others were composed to accompany his sermons. In 1823 he published, in seven volumes, 'Lectures on the Evidences of Divine Revelation'. With James Baldwin Brown and Thomas Raffles, he edited the 'Investigator', published from 1820 to 1824 to combat vice and irreligion, especially in high society. He was involved in missionary societies, including the conversionist London Society for Promoting Christianity amongst the Jews. In August 1823 he published a letter and evidence refuting damaging rumours arising from his practice of physically examining youths and young men applying for medical relief, especially for the treatment of hernias. He pointed to his serious study of anatomy at Borough Hospital, and the importance of establishing the extent of their physical symptoms before referring them to the relevant charities, such as the City of London Truss Society, as well as various factual inaccuracies in the allegations against him. A numerous congregation attended his first service after the circulation of his statement, to indicate their support for him, and he continued to preach at the Hanover Chapel until 11 December 1853. He died on 9 January 1854 at 5 Rye Lane, Peckham, and was buried at Nunhead on 16 January. 


@@@@@


doc= 5973


Colman mac Lenine (530-606), whose feast day is recorded as 24 November in 'Felire Oengusso' and the martyrology of Donegal. The genealogies make him a descendant of Ailill Aulomm through his father, Lenin, and thus a member of the Eoganachta. He is often associated with Ite and with Brendan, who is credited with converting Colman to the religious life. Believed to have been formerly a professional poet, Colman has been generally accepted as the author of 'Luin oc laib', a poem which praises Domnall mac Muirchertaig (died 566?), the king of Tara. There are also fragments of a poem on the death of the Ui Neill king Aed Slaine (died 604). It has been argued that Colman founded Cloyne upon receiving it as a grant from the Eoganacht king Cairpre Crom (died 580?). The monastery pursued a tradition of learning in keeping with its patron, being praised as a centre of legal studies in the 'Triads of Ireland'. Like other wealthy churches Cloyne survived early viking aggression, and in the twelfth century became the see of the diocese of the same name. Little survives of the medieval monastery, however, except for a round tower. 


@@@@@


doc= 5974


Colman Elo (d. 611), whose feast day was 26 September. He came from an Ulster people to which the founder of the church of Connor, Mac Nisse, also belonged. Colman himself was described in one of his lives as the second patron of Connor. In his 'Salmanticensis' life, however, although it is probably eighth-century, it is claimed that he belonged to the Ui Neill. No doubt this reflects the situation of Lynally within the lands of the Ui Neill, but it is also paralleled by the generalized reference in the life of Aed mac Bricc to his descent from Niall. Both churches, under the shadow of the Cland Cholmain kings of Meath, were tending to conceal other loyalties. Yet, in spite of the life, Colman's membership of Dal Sailni, attested in Adomnan's life of Columba, remained well-known: not only is there the reference in the life of Mac Nisse to his kinship with that saint, but his pedigree in the genealogies of the saints reveals his northern origins and his kinship both with Mac Nisse of Connor and with Senan of Lathrach Briuin, near Maynooth (both also attested by joint abbacies). The claim in the martyrology of Donegal that his mother was Mor, sister of Columba of Iona, is demonstrably late, since neither Colman nor Mor is mentioned in the account of Columba's sisters' sons written 'c'.700; presumably it reflects the proximity of Lynally to Durrow and the association with Columba revealed by Adomnan, from whose work the life of Colman Elo borrowed incidents. The same concerns governed the account of the foundation of Lynally. According to the life, the decision was taken at an assembly of the kings of the Ui Neill, including Aed Slane of Brega and Aed mac Ainmirech of Cenel Conaill, Columba's cousin. At this assembly were also present Columba, Cainnech of Aghaboe, and Colman Elo. Aed Slane's gift of land 'in the Wood of Ail ['Fid Elo']' on his southern frontier was dictated by Columba. Moreover, the site for the monastery was chosen jointly by Colman Elo himself and Columba's disciple Laisran, presumably the Laisren or Laisran ['see under 'Iona, abbots of] of whom Adomnan relates that he was the head of Durrow during Columba's lifetime and who was also third abbot of Iona. Otherwise the prevailing theme of the life is Colman Elo's friendship with neighbouring saints, notably Mo Lua moccu Oche ['see under 'Munster, saints of], the founder of Clonfertmulloe on the southern side of Slieve Bloom, and with Mo Chutu of Rahan, just over 2 miles to the west of Lynally (see further below). The concentration of major churches within a few miles of each other, with the supply of good land limited by surrounding bogs, determined the concerns of the life. 


@@@@@


doc= 5975


Colman (d. 676), bishop of Lindisfarne, was an Irish monk from Iona. He may conceivably be the 'Colmanus abbas' recorded by the seventeenth-century scholar Patrick Young as the addressee of a charter, now lost, from Wulfhere, king of the Mercians ('r'. 657-74), preserved in the archive of Worcester Cathedral ('AS chart.', S 1822). If so, he held ecclesiastical office in Mercia about the same time as the first two bishops of the Mercians, Diuma and Ceollach, both of whom were Irishmen. However, the charter reference is by no means reliable, and in any case Colman is one of the most common early medieval Irish names. 
On the death of Finan in 661, Colman succeeded him as abbot of Lindisfarne and bishop of the Northumbrians. His appointment coincided with, and may have exacerbated, intensifying disagreements in the Northumbrian church between those who followed the customs of Iona and its dependencies (generally labelled, inaccurately, as the 'Irish' tradition), and those who followed practices current in northern Italy and Merovingian Francia (usually equally inaccurately termed the 'Roman' tradition). The fullest coverage of the dispute is given by Bede, whose 'Historia ecclesiastica gentis Anglorum', completed in 731, pays most attention to the conflict over the method of calculating the date of Easter, the central festival in the Christian calendar. The practice characterized as Roman was based on a system first devised at Alexandria centuries earlier, which placed Easter on a Sunday between the end of the fourteenth and the twenty-first days of the lunar month after the vernal equinox, avoiding the Jewish passover festival on the fourteenth of that month. The 'Irish' system put Easter between the fourteenth and the twentieth days: thus the 'Irish' Easter Sunday would sometimes fall earlier than the 'Roman' one. Further dislocation was caused by the use of different cycles of years designed to reconcile the lunar calendar with the solar months of the Roman calendar: the Alexandrian system was based on a ninety-five-year cycle, the Irish on one of eighty-four years, derived from a treatise attributed (wrongly, as it turns out) to a third-century bishop. Another point of contention was the method of tonsuring monks: Roman practice left a circle of hair around a shaven crown (in imitation of the crown of thorns), while the Irish shaved the hair at the front, leaving it long at the back. 
Controversy between the two sides culminated at a synod convened at Streanaeshalch (Whitby) in 664. Bede's account of this event is likely to have been coloured by his own prejudices: adherence to the Roman practice, but also considerable respect for the asceticism of the monks of the Ionan tradition, and, perhaps, a dislike of the Roman side's spokesman Wilfrid. Bede includes a rose-tinted passage evoking the virtues of the Irish way of monasticism, its frugality and austerity, and the respect it elicited from the Northumbrians, both king and people, and implicitly contrasts it with the monasticism of his own time, which he saw as corrupted by secular influence. His report of the synod is animated by the distinction he draws between Colman's measured exposition of his case and Wilfrid's learned but high-handed, if not insulting, responses (at one point he called the Irish adherents 'stultus' -- 'stupid'). The synod began with the king of the Northumbrians, Oswiu, asking Colman to describe the origins of his customs. Colman said that 'all our fathers' had celebrated Easter in the way that he did, and he invoked the example of St John the Evangelist (Bede, 'Hist. eccl.', 3.25). Wilfrid explained that St John had followed Jewish law 'when the church was still Jewish in many respects' (ibid.), but that the example to be preferred was that of St Peter who, he wrongly claimed, had celebrated Easter at Rome on the Sunday following the fourteenth day of the lunar month. Colman posited the counter-examples of the third-century bishop Anatolius, whose calculations his tradition followed, and of Iona's founder, St Columba. Wilfrid stated that the Irish had misinterpreted Anatolius, and that Columba had acted through ignorance. He again invoked the example of St Peter, to whom Christ had given the keys to the kingdom of heaven, and King Oswiu asked Colman if there was anything to show that an equal authority had been granted to 'your Columba' (ibid.). When the bishop admitted that there was not, Oswiu declared that he intended to obey the commands of the door-keeper of heaven, and the matter was decided in favour of the 'Roman' usage. 
While Bede relates that all those present at the synod gave their assent to Oswiu's ruling, it is evident that Colman dissented, for he left Northumbria soon after. It is less clear that he rejected the decision 'for fear of his fellow-countrymen', as Wilfrid's biographer Stephen of Ripon asserts ('Life of Bishop Wilfrid', 23): the implication that only threats from others prevented Colman from accepting the rightness of Wilfrid's case looks like special pleading on the part of the hagiographer. Colman took with him all those who could not accept the decision, together with some of the relics of St Aedan. Before leaving he won from Oswiu -- who admired Colman's 'innate wisdom' (Bede, 'Hist. eccl.', 3.26) -- the favour that Abbot Eata of Melrose should be appointed the new leader of the Lindisfarne community. Colman's replacement as bishop of the Northumbrians was Tuda, a monk from the southern part of Ireland, where the Roman customs were followed. Tuda, however, lasted only a short time, and was succeeded as bishop by Eata. 
Colman travelled first to Iona, and thence to an island off the west coast of Ireland, Inishbofin ('the island of the white cow'), where he founded a new community of both Irish and English monks. Dissension soon arose, however: 'because the Irish, in summer time when the harvest had to be gathered in, left the monastery and wandered about, scattering into various places with which they were familiar; then when winter came, they returned and expected to have a share in the things which the English had provided. (Bede, 'Hist. eccl.', 4.4)' Colman therefore moved the English monks to a new foundation on the Irish mainland at Mayo. By Bede's time this community was flourishing, and he reports that the monks had 'adopted a better Rule' -- perhaps meaning that they had abandoned the Ionan method of Easter calculation and custom of tonsure, as well as that they were living more according to Benedictine precepts, under a canonically elected abbot. 
Entries in the annals of Ulster and other Irish annals (in which he is given the title bishop of Inishbofin) date Colman's death to 676. Irish martyrologies commemorate him on 8 August. 


@@@@@


doc= 5976


Colman, George, the elder (bap. 1732, d. 1794), playwright and theatre manager, was born in Florence and baptized there at the church of San Giovanni on 18 April 1732, the son of Francis Colman ('bap'. 1691, died 1733), envoy to the court of the grand duke of Tuscany, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Gumley (died 1767). His father, who is credited with the authorship of the 'Opera Register', adapted the libretto for Handel's 'Arianna in Creta' (1734) and helped the composer re-engage the leading castrato Senesino for London. After her husband's death at Pisa on 20 April 1733 Mary Colman returned with her son to London, where a house was provided for her in St James's Park in which she lived until her death. 
George Colman's education was overseen by his shrewd and wealthy guardian William Pulteney, earl of Bath, who was the husband of Mary Colman's sister. George was sent to Westminster School, where Pulteney's son William was also a pupil. There he made many friends, including Charles Churchill, Robert Lloyd, Bonnell Thornton, and William Cowper, and had a successful academic career, entering Christ Church, Oxford, in 1751 as first among the Westminster king's scholars. In September 1753 his essay on literary criticism, 'A vision', was published anonymously in 'The Adventurer' and January 1754 saw the first issue of 'The Connoisseur'. This weekly publication, consisting largely of polished, lively, pleasantly satirical essays, was produced jointly by Colman and Bonnell Thornton and ran to 140 issues before it closed in September 1756. The editors personalized themselves jointly as 'Mr Town', and wrote most of the articles, although there were contributions by William Cowper (with whom he formed the Nonsense Club), Robert Lloyd, and others. Colman and Thornton also collaborated on a two-volume edition of work by female poets, 'Poems by Eminent Ladies' (1755). Pulteney was determined that his nephew should distinguish himself in the law and in May 1755 Colman entered Lincoln's Inn. He was called to the bar in January 1757 and between 1758 and 1761 he worked on the Oxford circuit. His autobiographical poem 'The law student', written in 1757, depicts family pressures upon him, with his aunt insisting 'Turn Parson, Colman! That's the way to thrive' and his uncle crying 'stick close; close, Coley, to the Bar!'. However, 'the brisk heir to forty thousand pound' was disinclined to legal labours and attracted to the world of literature and the London theatre (Colman, 'Prose', 2.285-7). 
In May 1757 Colman published and sent to David Garrick a pamphlet in the actor's praise, ironically entitled 'A Letter of Abuse, to D -- d G -- k, Esq.' This led to his friendship with Garrick, who encouraged Colman and staged his comic afterpiece 'Polly Honeycombe' at Drury Lane on 5 December 1760. The piece, which makes fun of sentimental novels and their female readers, had a shaky first night but recovered to achieve fifteen performances during the season and frequent later revivals. It appeared anonymously and was generally attributed to Garrick himself until on 12 December, at a performance specially requested by the king, the actor-manager added lines to the prologue declaring it was by 'a young Beginner' not 'a batter'd sinner' (Danchin, 771). Colman's pamphlet 'Critical Reflections on the Old English Dramatick Writers', addressed to Garrick, appeared in January 1761. Garrick helped Colman to prune his comedy 'The Jealous Wife', which was premiered at Drury Lane on 12 February with the leading roles played by Hannah Pritchard, Kitty Clive, and Garrick himself. Hopkins, the company's prompter, noted that it 'met with greater applause than anything since the 'Suspicious Husband'' (Stone, 843) and the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (1st ser., 31, 1761, 54) found it a comedy with 'few equals, and no superior'. It held the stage for the rest of the century and beyond. 
Charles Churchill's satire 'The Rosciad' (March 1761), which praised Garrick, Colman, and Thornton while attacking many theatrical personalities of the day, gave rise to vicious attacks on Colman and his associates by the playwright Arthur Murphy and others. As a result 'much good writing and much wit and humour were thrown away in this very acrimonious and disgraceful controversy' (Baker, 1.136). In April 1761 Colman and Thornton, with the support of Garrick, began publication of the 'St James's Chronicle'. The paper appeared three times a week and contained literary and theatrical gossip, anecdotes, and entertaining articles. In addition to many smaller items, Colman contributed fifteen longer papers, signed 'Genius', between June 1761 and January 1762. The issue for 20 June consists of his 'Portrait of the author, and description of his person', a comic dissertation on his lack of height: 'As I walk along the street, I hear the men and women say to one another, 'there goes a little man!' -- In a word, it is my irreparable misfortune to be, without my shoes, little more than five feet in height. (Colman, 'Prose', 1.22-3)' Colman's comic afterpiece 'The Musical Lady' was premiered on 6 March 1762. It ridiculed the fashion for Italian music and Jane Pope played the affected heroine, as she had done so successfully in 'Polly Honeycombe'. 
Colman had now abandoned the law and his identification with the world of the theatre was strengthened by his liaison with Sarah Ford (died 1771), the mother of his son George Colman, who was born on 21 October 1762. Sarah had been seduced by the actor Henry Mossop, who deserted her and their daughter Harriet when he moved to Ireland in autumn 1759. Colman became her protector, treating Harriet as his own child. In September 1763 Garrick, who was exhausted by the strain of acting and managing the Drury Lane company and depressed by the theatre riots that January, left England for an extended continental holiday. He did not return to London until April 1765 and in his absence the theatre was managed by his brother George, James Lacy, and Colman. William Powell, who had been coached by Garrick, made a successful stage debut at Drury Lane in October 1763 in the title role of an adaptation by Colman of Beaumont's and Fletcher's 'Philaster'. A month later came the premiere of Colman's comic afterpiece 'The Deuce is in him', which was received with cries of bravo. A version of Shakespeare's 'A Midsummer Night's Dream' (23 November 1763), with the fifth act cut and many songs added, was Colman's first theatrical failure. Hopkins commented: 'The Performers first Sung the Audience to Sleep, & then went to Sleep themselves' (Stone, 1021). Colman, who had taken considerable trouble over the production, pruned it ruthlessly into an afterpiece, 'The Fairy Tale', which was performed only three nights later with considerable success. The fairies were played by children, with the nine-year-old Harriet Ford as Titania. 
Colman's cousin William, the only surviving child of the earl of Bath, died in February 1763 and it was generally expected that Colman, who had been treated as 'his second son' (Colman, 'Some Particulars', 5), would inherit the earl's fortune. However, when Bath died in July 1764 he provided Colman with an annuity of 900 guineas but left his estate to his childless brother, General Henry Pulteney. Colman wrote no new plays or adaptations for Drury Lane during the second season of Garrick's absence but continued to be active in the management. 'The Comedies of Terence', his translation of six plays into blank verse, with an introductory essay and commentaries, was published in 1765 to critical acclaim. 
Before Garrick's departure for the continent, he and Colman had begun writing a comedy together and work on this was resumed when Garrick returned to London in 1765. Letters and drafts of 'The Clandestine Marriage' show that there were joint discussions on all parts of the play and that it was very carefully designed for the acting skills and personalities of the Drury Lane company. The friends quarrelled when Garrick, who wished to withdraw from the creation of new roles, refused to play the part of the elderly fop Ogleby which had been designed for him, and there were then arguments about their respective shares in the work. However, they were on friendly terms again by Christmas 1765. In the first edition of the play text (1766) the work was jointly acknowledged, and the 'Advertisement' to the play in Colman's 'Dramatick Works' (1777) states: 'Some friends, and some enemies, have endeavoured to allot distinct portions of this play to each of the Authors. Each, however, considers himself as responsible for the whole' (1.152). 'The Clandestine Marriage' was premiered on 20 February 1766, with a superlative cast led by Thomas King as Ogleby and Kitty Clive as Mrs Heidelberg, and enjoyed an unbroken run of thirteen nights. The mixture of sentiment and satire, the humour of the situations, and the opportunities offered to its actors have kept the play in the theatrical repertory to the present day. It was soon translated into French and German and an operatic version, Cimarosa's 'Il matrimonio segreto', premiered in Vienna in 1792, has also enjoyed lasting success. Garrick wanted Colman to work with him on an adaptation of Wycherley's 'The Country Wife', but Colman was feeling unwell and went to Paris to recuperate, taking Sarah Ford and Harriet. Garrick wrote cheerfully to him about meetings with little George and the progress of Colman's villa, Bath House, which was being built at Richmond. A new piece by Colman, 'The English Merchant', a five-act comedy based on Voltaire's 'L'Ecossaise', was produced at Drury Lane in February 1767. More sentimental and moral than Colman's earlier plays, it enjoyed some success, largely because of the character of the plain-spoken, benevolent English merchant, Freeport, created by Richard Yates. 
While Garrick ruled at Drury Lane, London's other patent theatre, Covent Garden, was managed by John Rich until his death in 1761 and then by his son-in-law, the tenor John Beard. By 1767 Beard's increasing deafness made him wish to retire from the theatre and the patent was made available for purchase at $60,000. Two wealthy young businessmen, Thomas Harris and John Rutherford, invited the actor William Powell and Colman to join them in running the theatre. With the help of a legacy of $6000 from his mother, who died in May 1767, Colman raised $15,000 for his share of the patent. He still had hopes that he would finally inherit the Bath fortune, but when General Pulteney died in October 1767 he bequeathed the bulk of the estate to a distant relative and left Colman an annuity of $400. Although Colman later claimed that Pulteney had accepted his acquisition of the share in the patent, it is almost certain that it was his involvement with the theatre and his refusal to give up Sarah Ford which alienated the general. Colman married Sarah on 12 July 1768 at St John, Horsleydown, Bermondsey. 
The contract between the new Covent Garden patentees was carelessly drawn up, Colman's actions being subject to veto by Harris and Rutherford, who had no practical knowledge of the theatre. They soon had mistresses in the company and problems started when they demanded preferential treatment for their favourites. They accused Colman of assuming excessive powers, the quarrel became public, and a pamphlet war about the dispute was waged throughout 1768. Despite the disarray, Covent Garden had a successful and profitable first season under the new management, with the actors responding well to Colman's direction. Rutherford sold his share in the patent to Henry Dagge and James Leake in summer 1768, and they joined Harris in a lawsuit against Colman which reached chancery in July 1770, when judgment was given in Colman's favour. By this time passions were cooling, for Covent Garden under Colman was consistently profitable. In November 1771 the managers 'met together without the interposition of any other persons, shook hands, dined at Mr. Colman's, and put a final stop to all the proceedings at law' ('GM', 1st ser., 41, 1771, 520). Harris matured into a very competent manager who was to remain at Covent Garden until his death in 1820. 
The strength of Covent Garden under Rich and Beard had been in music and spectacle, so Colman set out to reinforce the acting company. He engaged Richard Yates and his wife, persuaded Charles Macklin to give his famous interpretation of Shylock, and gave William Powell six leading Shakespearian roles in the first season. He produced his own short farce 'The Oxonian in Town' in November 1767, while February 1768 saw his adaptation of 'King Lear', which was nearer to Shakespeare than the version generally in use but retained a happy ending and omitted the Fool. Powell's sudden death at Bristol in July 1769 was a serious blow. Colman wrote a prologue for the benefit performance for Powell's family at the Bristol Theatre and an epitaph for Powell's tomb in Bristol Cathedral. The actor's widow took over his share in the patent and was co-defendant with Colman in the case brought by the other patentees. Colman's contribution to the theatre as a dramatist in the 1769-70 season was his comedy 'Man and Wife, or, The Shakespeare Jubilee' (7 October 1769), which capitalized quickly on Garrick's rain-soaked celebrations at Stratford that September. The play incorporated a pageant of characters from seventeen of Shakespeare's plays, accompanied by appropriate music. 
The following season Colman wrote two successful afterpieces, the burletta 'The Portrait' (22 November 1770) and the pantomime 'Mother Shipton' (26 December 1770), both with music by Samuel Arnold. Thomas Augustine Arne became musical director in 1771 and provided music for Colman's masque 'The Fairy Prince' (12 November 1771), which was based on Ben Jonson's 'Oberon'. Colman made a two-act version of 'Comus' (17 October 1772) for which Arne had written music many years before and Arne provided new music for two other Colman adaptations, 'Elfrida' (21 November 1772), from a 'dramatic poem' by William Mason, and 'Achilles in Petticoats' (16 December 1773), from John Gay's ballad opera 'Achilles'. However, the most important theatrical event of these years for English theatre was the premiere of Goldsmith's 'She Stoops to Conquer' (15 March 1773), put on by Colman without any great hopes of success after Garrick had procrastinated over its production. 
Sarah Colman died suddenly on 29 March 1771 after taking the wrong medicine for an illness from which she was recovering. Fanny Burney wrote in her diary: 'In point of understanding she was infinitely inferiour to Mr Colman, but she possessed an uncommon sweetness of Temper, much sensibility, & a generous & restless desire of obliging, & of making her friends happy. So amiable a Character must, I am sure, endear her infinitely to Mr Colman, of whom she, with the greatest reason, was beyond expression attached to. He is one of the best Tempered, (though I believe very passionate) of men, lively, agreeable, open Hearted, & clever. ('Early Journals and Letters', 1.144)' Colman made the sixteen-year-old Harriet, whom Fanny Burney thought genteel and very well educated, the mistress of his household until she married in 1777. On 30 November 1771 Colman was 'suddenly seized with a fit' at the theatre ('London Chronicle', 30 Nov-3 Dec 1771) and was forced to rest for several weeks. Personal tragedy and the strain of managing Covent Garden were taking their toll. The 1773-4 season was full of problems, particularly with the elderly and cantankerous actor Charles Macklin. Colman's sentimental comedy 'The Man of Business' (29 January 1774) managed fourteen performances but was never revived. At the end of the season he sold his share in the patent to the actor Thomas Hull for $20,000. 
Colman spent six months recuperating in Bath before returning to London. In the summer of 1775 he took his twelve-year-old son on an extended holiday tour, showing him his future Oxford college and travelling north to Yorkshire and Durham. Colman was soon writing again. He contributed a prologue to Garrick's farce 'Bon Ton', began a translation of Horace's 'Ars poetica', which he published eight years later, and contributed six essays entitled 'The gentleman' to the 'London Packet', a paper in which he had a share. Garrick staged Colman's adaptation of Ben Jonson's 'Epicoene, or, The Silent Woman' in January 1776, and his satiric farce 'The Spleen, or, Islington Spa' that March, but neither proved a success. At the end of the season Garrick retired from the stage. He had hopes that Colman would purchase his share of the Drury Lane patent, but his friend was unwilling to venture again into management where he could not have sole control. Colman wrote 'New Brooms! An Occasional Prelude' for the first night under the new management, led by Richard Brinsley Sheridan, and the following May he wrote the epilogue for 'The School for Scandal' while Garrick provided the prologue. 
In 1776 Samuel Foote, the comic actor and dramatist who had run the Little Theatre in the Haymarket for fifteen years, wished to retire. Foote had been granted a patent to run summer seasons at his theatre, and Colman agreed to make him a guaranteed payment of $1600 a year for life in return for the theatre and the use of the patent. He also paid $500 for the rights to Foote's plays. When Foote died, in October 1777, after receiving only one half-year payment of $800, the patent became invalid and Colman had to apply annually for a licence for his summer season. It was at the Haymarket that Colman's abilities as a manager had the greatest effect on the capital's theatrical life. For the first time London had theatrical performances on almost every night between late May and mid-September. Colman brought forward talented actors and singers, promoted new dramatists, including Mrs Inchbald and other women writers, and attracted a wider and more discriminating audience than had previously attended the theatre during the unfashionable summer months. 
The new manager immediately extended the repertory at the Haymarket, strengthened the acting company, and improved production standards. He encouraged the comedian John Edwin, who had been in Foote's company for a year, and introduced the young Elizabeth Farren from Liverpool. John Henderson was brought from Bath to play Shylock, Hamlet, Falstaff, and Richard III in the first season. After a performance of 'She Stoops to Conquer' followed by the musical afterpiece 'Midas', the 'Morning Chronicle' (10 June 1777) noted 'All the business of the stage perfect, all the little parts smoothly given, and the whole rather superior than inferior to a performance at either of the Winter Theatres!' 1777 also saw the premiere of John Gay's ballad opera 'Polly', banned by the lord chamberlain in December 1728, and of 'The Spanish Barber', Colman's very popular adaptation of Beaumarchais's 'Le barbier de Seville'. Samuel Arnold became the Haymarket's musical director and continued to work for the Colmans, father and son, until his death in 1802. Colman wrote two original plays for later seasons, an interesting satiric comedy, 'The Suicide' (1778), for which Garrick provided the epilogue, and a comedy of modern manners, 'The Separate Maintenance' (1779). In 1778 Colman brought out a ten-volume edition of the dramatic works of Beaumont and Fletcher with critical and explanatory notes and that summer he staged his adaptation of Fletcher's 'Bonduca', using Henry Purcell's music. Colman's adaptation of George Lillo's tragedy 'The Fatal Curiosity' was surprisingly popular in 1782 and the following year he revived 'The Fox', his version of Jonson's 'Volpone' made for Covent Garden in 1771. 
Colman's lighter pieces included 'The Manager in Distress' (30 May 1780), a short theatrical satire where he portrayed himself as the playhouse manager 'little Dapperwit'. In 'The Election of the Managers' (2 June 1784), another one-act piece designed to open the evening's entertainment, the Haymarket's manager was 'little Bayes', but its amusing parallels with the recent Westminster election, where the duchess of Devonshire reputedly bought votes with kisses, led to trouble with the censor and a section of the audience. Colman's 'The Genius of Nonsense' was advertised as 'An Original, Whimsical, Operatical, Pantomimical, Farcical, Electrical, Naval, Military, Temporary, Local Extravaganza. The Overture and new Musick by Dr. Arnold' ('Public Advertiser', 4 Sept 1780). This expose of the quack doctor James Graham and his Temple of Health starred the lovely and notorious Ann Cargill as the Goddess of Health and Genius of Nonsense. The following season she played the highwayman Macheath in Colman's travesty production, 'The Beggar's Opera Reversed', with Edwin as Lucy and Charles Bannister singing in his natural bass voice as an incomparable Polly. Colman framed it with 'A Preludio' and 'Medea and Jason', satirizing Italian opera and the opera ballet. Charles Bannister was one of the Haymarket's most popular performers and Colman nurtured the careers of Bannister's son John and of the sopranos Elizabeth Harper and Georgina George. Colman's pantomime 'Harlequin Teague, or, The Giant's Causeway', written jointly with John O'Keeffe, was premiered in 1782. He commissioned a number of comic operas from O'Keeffe and Arnold including 'The Son-in-Law' (1779), 'The Agreeable Surprise' (1781), and 'Peeping Tom' (1784), which filled the theatre season after season. 
In December 1784 Colman went to Bath to take the waters as a cure for his gout. The following September he chose Margate and sea-bathing after the exertions of the summer, but he had a stroke there in early October which left him partially paralysed. He recovered to some extent, but was increasingly prone to epileptic attacks. Nevertheless he continued with the Haymarket seasons supported by his son, who tried to 'assist him, without appearing to do so, -- for he was extremely jealous of the least interference in his concerns' ('Random Records', 2.304). 'Tit for Tat', Colman's adaptation of Joseph Atkinson's comedy 'The Mutual Deception', was produced in 1786. The next season saw the premiere of George Colman the younger's popular success 'Inkle and Yarico' and his father's farce 'The Village Lawyer', based on De Brueys's 'L'avocat patelin' and written for Edwin's benefit. In the same year Colman published 'Prose on Several Occasions, Accompanied with some Pieces in Verse', a three-volume collected edition of his essays, criticism, occasional verse, and theatrical prologues and epilogues. He also prepared the pamphlet 'Some Particulars of the Life of the Late George Colman, Esq.' which he left for publication after his death, giving proof that he was not the illegitimate son of the earl of Bath, a rumour which had dogged him throughout his life, and denying that he had knowingly forfeited the Bath inheritance by purchasing a share in the Covent Garden patent. 
Colman made a new will in April 1789, ignoring the fact that he was seriously in debt. He left his theatre and literary property to his son but made very generous provision for Sophia Croker, the wife of an army officer, whom the younger George described as 'a kept Mistress or Common Prostitute' (Vincent, 39). By 1784 she was living with Colman at his house in Gower Street and in 1788 she persuaded him to give her the house and its furnishings. Colman's final stage work, 'Ut pictura poesis!', an afterpiece based on Hogarth's 'The Enraged Musician', opened the 1789 season, but by then he was incapable of the proper management of the theatre or his own finances. On 18 June he suffered a fit which left him mentally deranged and in November he was declared lunatic. His son arranged for him to be well cared for in the house of Mrs Ann Clarkson in 'a healthful and airy situation' in Paddington, and paid the wages of a keeper, a manservant, and a maid to look after him (Vincent, 47). Colman experienced some comparatively lucid intervals but 'his mind... was, in the last stages of his malady, fill'd, like a cabalistick book, with delusions, and crowded with the wildest flights of morbid fancy' ('Random Records', 2.287). He died at Paddington on 14 August 1794, and was buried at St Mary Abbots, Kensington, ten days later. 
George Colman the elder is chiefly remembered today as co-author of 'The Clandestine Marriage'. His lesser dramatic works gave much pleasure in their day and frequently served a genuine satiric purpose. Despite his poor health he was a man of considerable energy, and the range and quality of his essays, journalism, translations, and criticism remain impressive. A member of the Beefsteak Club and Dr Johnson's Club, he enjoyed the friendship of the leading writers, artists, and wits of his day. Above all, he was one of the finest theatre managers of the century, the great little manager. 


@@@@@


doc= 5977


Colman, George, the younger (1762-1836), playwright and theatre manager, was born in London on 21 October 1762, the son of George Colman the elder (bap. 1732, d. 1794), playwright and theatre manager, and his mistress, later his wife, Sarah Ford (died 1771). Little is known of his very early years, but Colman had all the advantages available to the son of a successful and well-connected father. 
Until the age of eight Colman lived at his father's house in London and his country estate, Bath House, in Richmond, at which time he was enrolled in Marylebone Seminary, which was intended to provide the boy with the foundation for admittance to an elite public school. He had only a few months in school, however, before his mother died on 29 March 1771 from accidentally taking the wrong medication, and he was brought home. On 30 June 1772 Colman was admitted to Westminster School, which his father had attended. Colman records in his memoirs that during this period he first came to know many of the distinguished men of the age, including David Garrick, Edward Gibbon, and Samuel Johnson. 
Colman was intended by his father for a career in law and was duly sent to Christ Church, Oxford, on 28 January 1780 on completing his studies at Westminster. By this time his father, already a prominent playwright and theatre manager, had purchased from Samuel Foote in 1777 the ownership of the summer company at the Little Theatre in the Haymarket, an event which had an enormous impact on the young man's life. Attracted by the glamour and excitement, Colman spent much time at the theatre to the detriment of his studies. Taking more extreme action, the father in autumn 1781 sent his over-stimulated son to King's College, Aberdeen, where he remained until he was called home early in 1784. 
During this period Colman wrote his first play, 'The Female Dramatist', which was performed for the single night of 16 August 1782 at his father's theatre. In this conventional farce Mrs Metaphor, a widow whose life is dedicated to drama, is nearly tricked into marriage by a fortune-hunter, when at the last moment Beverly, a suitor for the hand of Mrs Metaphor's daughter, exposes the scam. While still at King's, Colman completed his second play, 'Two to One', late in 1783. It reached the boards at the Little Haymarket on 21 June 1784 and achieved a respectable run of nineteen evenings. This musical comedy anticipated many salient features of Colman's later successes, including witty dialogue, catchy songs, and broad-humoured stage action. Thus by the age of twenty-two Colman had joined an elite circle including Congreve, Fielding, and his contemporary Sheridan, all of whom had achieved success on the London stage by their early twenties. 
After a short trip to Paris, at his father's insistence Colman was admitted to Lincoln's Inn on 9 August 1784, but he never seriously considered a career in law. While his father was away on holiday, he eloped to Gretna Green and on 3 October 1784 married Catharine Morris (died 'c'.1820), a young actress at the Little Haymarket, initiating a long and unhappy relationship which was kept secret from Colman the elder for several years. How they lived is a mystery, as details of the early years of the marriage were completely suppressed by Colman and in the many reminiscences and biographies of his gossipy contemporaries such as Thomas Dibdin, Charles Matthews, and Joseph Munden. Summer 1785, in addition to seeing the premiere on 9 July of his third play, 'Turk and No Turk', had, however, more serious implications. Colman the elder, while on holiday at Margate, suffered a serious illness which left him greatly weakened and which began a long period of decline in his health. The result was that the younger Colman began helping to run the theatrical company, a challenge for which he showed great capability. He was soon to excel in writing, as well. On 4 August 1787 Colman mounted his first great success, 'Inkle and Yarico', based on a tale from 'The Spectator' (issue 11). Inkle's repentance and marriage to Yarico in the play's heavily sentimentalized finale, which completely reverses Steele's conclusion, no doubt was the deciding factor in the play's enormous initial and continuing popularity. This play convincingly demonstrated to the London theatrical community that the younger Colman had much in him of his father's dramatic abilities. 
Hit after hit followed in subsequent summers until 1794, bringing much glory and financial gain to the family concern. 'Ways and Means' (1788), a farce, did not fare well in its first season, but went on to become one of Colman's most enduring plays. With 'The Battle of Hexham' (1789) Colman created a new genre, the historical musical drama, which audiences found original and intriguing. He continued in this genre with the highly successful 'The Surrender of Calais' (1791) and 'The Mountaineers' (1793). His father's health, however, steadily declined, with death coming at last on 14 August 1794, but the elder Colman's financial condition had also suffered an irreversible disaster. Though he had amassed a considerable fortune during the previous thirty years through his playwriting achievements and his managerial acumen both at Covent Garden and the Little Haymarket, he learned to his horror in 1787 (as legal documents unknown to previous biographers reveal) that nearly his entire savings had been embezzled from him by his banker. In short, the elder Colman died in debt. The upshot was that Colman the younger, on coming into his estate in 1795, inherited and chose to honour those debts, which were substantial, requiring him to place a heavy mortgage on the theatre's income and facilities. This indenture burdened the son for the next two decades, ultimately driving him into debtors' prison and forcing him out of the theatre business. Thus the received wisdom regarding the activities of Colman the younger, namely that after the death of his father he ruined the business through improvidence, turns out to be incorrect. 
During the years 1795 to 1805 Colman carried on as sole owner and manager of the theatre, but he was forced in 1795 to mortgage the business to repay his father's creditors. This arrangement remained in force until 1800, by which time the theatre's profits were falling. A new and, for Colman, even more financially restrictive arrangement was negotiated, but these terms could not be met. By 1805 the situation had eroded to the point where Colman had no choice but to sell off half the business for $7000 to David Morris (his brother-in-law), Peter Tahourdin, and James Winston in order to raise most of the rather large sums demanded by the mortgagees. Thus while Colman certainly was not averse to the pleasures of gracious living, and later achieved some reputation for excessive drinking, he never had the resources after 1795 to waste on any but a modest scale. 
A related misconception casts Colman as reckless in regard to the operations of the Haymarket Theatre and prone to disputes and litigation. Colman did spend large sums of money during 1803 and 1804 to finance two extravagant musical productions which never recovered their initial costs, and he certainly erred in thinking that this sort of play would be profitable. His wise choices of plays, however, greatly outnumbered his losers; had his fling with expensive musicals come ten years earlier, he would simply have moved on after licking his wounds. Unfortunately the timing was crucial, and the production debts were a factor forcing the sale of the shares in 1805. 
As for the claim that Colman was unduly litigious, detractors note that he was involved in a protracted chancery dispute from 1809 to 1816 with his business partner and brother-in-law David Morris. The fault, however, was with Morris, not Colman. The extensive chancery records and newspaper accounts reveal that Morris, who had purchased Tahourdin's share in 1808, was a headstrong, uncompromising, quarrelsome, and often irrational partner, who in April 1809 sued not only Colman, but also an additional Haymarket partner, James Winston, who was himself aligned with Colman. This protracted and expensive litigation involved managerial control of the company and was so disputatious that the theatre was forced to remain closed during the summer of 1813. The court eventually found on behalf of the defendants, Colman and Winston, on every point, and Morris was ordered to pay all costs and to abide by the partnership guidelines set down by an arbitrator. 
The sale of half the business in 1805 satisfied some of Colman's debtors, but S. J. Arnold, the son of Dr Samuel Arnold, the well-known composer, from whom Colman had borrowed significant sums, was not among them. After the elder Arnold's death, the son and widow had Colman arrested as of 28 February 1806. He was committed to the king's bench prison, but, as befitted those debtors with some assets, he was not required to remain within the prison proper but was restricted to residence within the rules until his discharge on 27 September 1817 resulting from the passage of an insolvency act by parliament. His first verified residence was on Lambeth Road as of August 1807, but he moved by March 1809 to 4 Melina Place on Westminster Road and then to 5 Melina Place by April 1816. From these locations he ran the Haymarket Theatre as best he could for over eleven years, wrote plays mainly for other theatres, and dealt with the legal challenges of his brother-in-law. 
Between 1795 and 1810 Colman wrote the lion's share of the plays on which his reputation is founded. The dozen or more hits include 'The Iron Chest' (Drury Lane, 1795), 'The Heir at Law' (Haymarket, 1797), 'Bluebeard' (Drury Lane, 1798), 'Feudal Times' (Drury Lane, 1799), 'The Castle of Sorrento' (Haymarket, 1799), 'The Review' (Haymarket, 1800), 'The Poor Gentleman' (Covent Garden, 1801), 'Love Laughs at Locksmiths' (Haymarket, 1803), 'Who Wants a Guinea?' (Covent Garden, 1805), 'We Fly by Night' (Covent Garden, 1806), 'Forty Thieves' (Drury Lane, 1806), 'The Africans' (Haymarket, 1809), 'X.Y.Z.' (Covent Garden, 1810), 'The Quadrapeds of Quedlinburgh' (Haymarket, 1811), 'Doctor Hocus Pocus' (Haymarket, 1814), and 'The Actor of All Work' (Haymarket, 1817). His greatest commercial success, 'John Bull' (Drury Lane, 1803), earned him at least $1200 and achieved the singular reputation of being the play receiving the largest author's fee ever paid to that time. In 'John Bull''s heavily charged scenes of sentimentality, dogged honesty, and patriotism Colman gauged precisely the audience's interests and needs in the midst of the darkest years of the Napoleonic wars. By 1809, therefore, although he was living in the rules of the prison, his reputation was at its peak when he was asked to write the prologue spoken by J. P. Kemble which opened the new Covent Garden Theatre on 18 September 1809, and some years later, though by then past his zenith, he also wrote the address for the opening of the newly rebuilt Drury Lane Theatre on 16 October 1822. 
At long last in 1817 the financial and legal difficulties began to diminish. Soon after his release from debtors' prison, he negotiated the sale of the remainder of his interest in the Little Haymarket company. Cleared from his debts but now a considerably older and more subdued man, he thereafter wrote plays for the Covent Garden and Drury Lane theatres from time to time, but he never again matched his earlier successes. These later works include 'The Gnome-King' (Covent Garden, 1819), 'A Figure of Fun' (Covent Garden, 1821), 'The Law of Java' (Covent Garden, 1822), 'Stella and Leatherlungs' (Drury Lane, 1823), and 'Five Minutes too Late' (Drury Lane, 1825). 
On his ascent to the throne in 1821 Colman's old friend the prince regent did not forget him, and granted him the position of lieutenant of the yeomen of the guard, a sinecure which Colman kept for several years. An elegant watercolour portrait in the Victoria and Albert Museum depicts Colman in full regalia for the coronation. The royal appointment, however pleasing, was not lucrative, and Colman continued to live in the familiar confines of Melina Place until 1824, when he moved to the newly built Brompton Square. This relocation to the stylish Brompton area was made possible by yet another patronage appointment from the king in January 1824 to the position of examiner of plays, which Colman held until his death. He took the job seriously and performed his duties as examiner in a systematic and timely fashion, but his actions generated controversy, as his contemporaries claimed that he was censorious far beyond the range of his predecessors and hypocritically moralistic in his standards, since he now censored the very sort of material that appeared in his own successful plays. When questioned on these contradictions by the select committee on dramatic literature in 1832, Colman replied that he was careless in his younger days and that the examiner then ought to have required him to revise. Further, he asserted that he was earlier an author and was now an examiner, and sought to bring merit to the position. 
In addition to plays, Colman also wrote several volumes of poetry, an autobiography, and songs, as well as prologues and epilogues for other playwrights. 'My Nightgown and Slippers, or, Tales in Verse' appeared in 1797 and went through many editions, as did the ostensible sequel 'Broad Grins' (1802). His 'Poetical Vagaries' was published in 1813, no doubt necessitated by the financial problems due to the law proceedings then at their most strident point, and was followed three years later by 'Eccentricities for Edinburgh' (1816). Late in life he brought forward a two-volume set of memoirs entitled 'Random Records' (1830) which, sadly, covers only his childhood and very early adulthood. The decision to publish that segment only of his life suggests that he intended a continuation if sales were encouraging, but the project remained unfinished at his death. In addition Colman contributed extensively to the plays of his fellow dramatists. No complete census has been established, but scattered through the productions of the first thirty years of the nineteenth century one often may find his hand, as he contributed to the works of many dramatists, such as W. R. Rhodes's 'Bombastes furioso' (August 1810) and Robert Jameson's 'Love and Gout' (August 1814). His assistance was required so often that he complained to his partner James Winston in an unpublished letter that he was 'sickened by the ungrateful task of tinkering for Authors' (Burling, 297, n. 68). 
Surprisingly little is known of Colman's personal life during his adult years. His autobiography ends with his early twenties, he did not keep a journal, and his surviving correspondence deals mainly with his professional activities. Such evidence as exists reveals that his marriage to Catharine Morris had completely collapsed by 1801, and she was provided with an income for life in the terms of the 1805 sales agreement. By 1801 Colman and Maria Gibbs (1770?-1844), an actress of some repute, had established a felicitous relationship which lasted for the duration of Colman's life. After some years of simple cohabitation, they apparently married in the early 1820s following the death of Colman's estranged first wife, though no record of their betrothal has been found. 
Colman fathered two sons, of whom the first, George, was born to Catharine Morris. The date of birth is not known but is usually assigned to 1785. George, the son, entered the army and achieved the rank of captain, but further details are elusive because two captains bearing the name of George Colman flourished during the same period. Thus without further evidence it is impossible to differentiate their careers. Somewhat more is known concerning the second son. Edmund Craven Colman apparently was born in June 1802 to Maria Gibbs, and his relationship with his parents was close for many years. Through his father's influence he entered royal service in 1824, his career lasting at least until 1833 and possibly until 1840. 
Though Colman lived to seventy-four he was in poor health for much of the last thirty years of his life from the ravages of gout, as his surviving correspondence reveals. At the time of his death at 22 Brompton Square on 26 October 1836, he had left instructions for a quiet burial in the family vault in Kensington church, where he was duly interred with the remains of his father and grandfather. On 3 November a small party, which included Mrs Colman, Thomas Harris (the son of Henry Harris, the manager of Covent Garden Theatre), Dr Chinnock (his physician), General Phipps, and, presumably, his son Edmund, laid him to rest. Mrs Colman apparently inherited some of his property and immediately retired to Brighton, where she lived until her death in 1844. 
Colman was much beloved among the members of the theatrical community for his good humour and generosity, many times providing assistance for performers and other friends in need. He achieved a considerable reputation as a dramatist, being termed in the press of the 1790s as second only to Sheridan, and when the illustrious creator of 'The School for Scandal' died in 1814, Colman then became recognized as the foremost playwright of his era. Many of his plays remained repertory standards well into the nineteenth century, throughout the British empire and the United States, though in the early twenty-first century they are virtually unknown except to specialists. 


@@@@@


doc= 5978


Coleman, Walter (1600-1645), Franciscan friar, missionary, and writer, was born in 1600 in Cannock, Staffordshire, the son of Walter Coleman (died 'c'.1620) and his second wife, Elizabeth (died 1618), daughter of Humphrey Whitgreave; his mother's family later sheltered Charles II at Mosley Hall near Wolverhampton in 1651. He had a brother named John and a sister, Dorothy. In September 1616 he was sent to the English College at Douai, where he was known as Walter Whitgreave; it seems that the boys there often used their mothers' names. A companion of his was Christopher Davenport, who joined the Franciscans the following year, and would later welcome Walter into the order. In 1617 Walter was said to have been sent to Louvain to escape the plague. He returned to England, but was later back on the continent to continue his education, and after the deaths of his parents he became a Franciscan at Douai in 1625, taking the name Christopher. 
After his religious profession, probably in 1626, and his ordination to the priesthood he was sent back to England about 1630. On landing he was stopped and searched. His unusual clothing aroused suspicion, and his refusal to take the oath of allegiance got him thrown into prison; but he was bailed out by friends and was able to proceed to London. During his ministry there he took up again the writing of verse and, completing a work he had already begun, he published about 1632 'La dance machabre, or, Death's Duel', which he dedicated to Queen Henrietta Maria. In it he was concerned with the need to prepare well for death and descanted on vices and virtues, as St Francis had told his friars to do. He prefixed the poem with the commendations of James Shirley and others. 
After labouring as a missioner for some years Coleman returned to Douai for rest and recollection, and while there he prepared for the press a book in verse on the religious controversies of the time and also translated into English a life of St Angela; however, copies of these works were not found by Richard Mason, his contemporary biographer. Having spent some more years at Douai, Coleman went back to England about 1640 in disguise. An affable man, he mingled easily with others. However, he was eventually picked up by the priest hunters, and on 8 December 1641, on trial with six other priests, he was condemned on the testimony of one Wadsworth to be hanged, drawn, and quartered on 13 December. The French ambassador intervened on their behalf, and King Charles I asked parliament to pardon them; parliament wanted them condemned, but the king put the responsibility for this on parliament's shoulders, and nothing was done. One of the priests died that December. The civil war was disastrous for the others in prison. Coleman remained in Newgate, where he died in 1645. 


