@@@@@


doc= 47635


Kennaway, Sir John Henry, third baronet (1837-1919), politician, was born at Park Crescent, London, on 6 June 1837, eldest son and heir of Sir John Kennaway, second baronet (1797-1873), and his wife, Emily Frances (died 1858), second daughter of Thomas Kingscote. He was educated at Harrow School and Balliol College, Oxford, where he took first-class honours in the law and modern history school (1860). He was called to the bar by the Inner Temple (1864) and for a time practised on the western circuit. He travelled widely, in Greece, the Crimea, Palestine, and the United States. His American travels after the civil war led him to write 'On Sherman's Track', an account of the southern states published in 1866. He married on 27 November 1866 Frances (died 1922), daughter of Archibald Francis Arbuthnot and granddaughter of Field Marshal Viscount Gough. 
Kennaway succeeded to the baronetcy and the family seat, Escot, near Honiton, Devon, in 1873, having become Conservative MP for East Devon at an unopposed by-election in 1870. He sat continuously until 1910, representing the Honiton division of Devon after 1884. When he was opposed by a Liberal candidate at general elections in 1880, 1885, and 1892, he won by large majorities, but in the last election in which he stood, in 1906, his majority over his Liberal opponent was considerably reduced. From 1908 to 1910 he was father of the House of Commons. 
Kennaway held strong low-church views and his parliamentary activities were primarily devoted to upholding them. The subjects on which he spoke included education, church discipline, temperance, and missionary work. He was president of the Church Missionary Society and the London Society for Promoting Christianity amongst the Jews. He was also linked with the Church Association, an organization dedicated to opposing Romanizing tendencies in Anglican services. Although his interventions in the house were neither frequent nor extensive, his length of service and loyalty to his party gave him authority. His evangelical views never made him intolerant towards high-churchmen in his own party nor to the nonconformists on the benches opposite. Speaking on the controversial 'Public Worship Regulation Bill' of 1874, he rejoiced that nonconformists were able to attend Anglican services, but thought it unfair that they should be able to start litigation against Anglican clergymen. He had little sympathy with strident attempts to control ritualism by legislation: thus on a 'Church Discipline Bill' moved from the Liberal benches in 1899 he supported the government position of continuing to maintain the bishops' veto on the initiation of judicial proceedings. 
On education Kennaway was a strong upholder of denominationalism and defender of the Church of England's work in establishing schools. When in 1906 he offered measured and defensive opposition to the Liberal government's 'Education Bill' he was able to remind the house of his experience, reaching back to Forster's act of 1870. When in one of his last speeches, in 1909, he defended the Anglican establishment in Wales he recalled to his audience that he had entered the house immediately after the disestablishment of the Irish church, but that Gladstone had then refused to adopt the same policy for Wales. Among his work for temperance there was an attempt in 1877 to move, jointly with Joseph Chamberlain, a resolution enabling borough councils compulsorily to acquire retail liquor licences, a proposal similar to the well-known Goteborg system. He asked frequent questions on missionary work, especially in Uganda. He had erected, in Escot church, a monument to Lieutenant Shergold Smith, sent to Uganda in 1876 in response to Stanley and killed there. 
Kennaway's position as a loyal back-bencher with distinct views but no obvious ministerial ambitions was well appreciated by Salisbury, who offered him a peerage. He preferred to remain in the Commons, however, and was sworn of the privy council in 1897. He was made a Companion in the Order of the Bath in 1902. He was a man of commanding presence and outspoken views, well known in his county of Devon, where he owned over 4000 acres. He was an officer in the Devonshire regiment of volunteers for forty-two years and commanded his battalion from 1896 to 1902. Kennaway died at Escot on 6 September 1919 and was buried five days later. He was survived by his wife, their son, who succeeded to the baronetcy, and two daughters, the second of whom, Joyce Christabel, married Sir Philip Wilbraham Baker-Wilbraham. 


@@@@@


doc= 47636


Lee, Peter (1864-1935), trade unionist, was born on 20 July 1864 in a house in Duff Heap Row, Fivehouses, Trimdon Grange, in the Durham coalfield. His father, Thomas Lee, was also a miner but his mother, Hannah ('nee' Simpson), was an educated woman, whose grandfather had been a schoolmaster and whose father had worked as a mill foreman in Lancashire. The Lee family moved frequently between Lancashire and Durham during Lee's early years, which may have accounted for a restlessness which seemed to be a part of the character of the young man. It certainly prevented regular attendance at school. 
By the age of nine Lee was working as a piecer in a cotton mill and had a succession of jobs in the brickyards after this before going down the pit as a pony driver at Littletown colliery, Sherburn Hill, back in Durham. He was only ten. At thirteen he was putting, bringing the tubs back and forth from face to shaft, and by sixteen and a half had joined his father and older brother as a hewer of the coal. This hard and dangerous work was often reflected in the lifestyles of the men who did it, rough, drinking, gambling, and fighting men, whose social life centred on the pub. Even union meetings were held there when they were held at all. Lee built a reputation for hardness and had occasional confrontations with the police. His life remained nomadic as he moved around the northern coalfields looking for better places and better pay. He later calculated that he had worked in fifteen different pits between 1879 and 1886, some more than once. 
In 1885 Lee thought to go to Australia, where silver had been discovered, but could not arrange an assisted passage. Instead, at the beginning of 1886 he went to the coal mines of Pennsylvania where an uncle was already working. He stayed about a year and also worked underground in Indiana and Kentucky. A mixture of homesickness and disillusionment propelled him back to Durham in 1887. 
The experience, however, boosted Lee's confidence. He had occasionally acted as spokesman for the men in disputes with the management, and back in Durham at Wingate colliery he went to union meetings and was elected delegate to the council of the Durham Miners' Association (DMA). Neither his reading nor his writing were good, but in other respects he was a noticeable figure. In a world of small workmen he was 6 feet 11/2 inches tall, with long black hair and grey eyes. He spoke clearly without an accent, probably through the influence of his mother who had read to her young family on winter evenings. 
Lee also returned from America to marry Alice Thompson, a young dressmaker, whom he had known since they were children. She was religious and the marriage was celebrated at the Wesleyan church in Haswell on 29 February 1888. As Lee himself said much later, 'she took a great risk when she first threw in her lot with me. You should have seen me then -- a man in the rough, with no education and a drunkard' ('The Times'). They lived with her parents for the first six weeks as Lee had been sacked, circumstances that emphasize the insecurity of working-class life. They had a son and three daughters. 
Marriage brought some physical as well as temperamental stability, but after nearly four years as checkweighman at Wingate, Lee left his wife and young family in 1896 to work in the goldmines of South Africa. He returned after eighteen months, resuming work in the Durham pits and becoming checkweighman at Wheatley Hill in 1902. In many respects he was a changed man. He had improved his education during the nineties and his love of books later led to the conversion of one room in his home into a library. He gave up drinking and smoking and became a Methodist preacher. He was active in the union, though apart from two short spells on the executive it was 1919 before he was elected an agent of the miners. He soon became financial secretary of the DMA and in 1924 the executive and joint committee secretary. After the sudden death of W. P. Richardson he was appointed general secretary of the DMA in 1930, at the age of sixty-six. He was vice-president of the Miners' Federation of Great Britain and president the following year. 
Lee came to trade union leadership late in life. In 1914, aged fifty, he was little known in the industrial and political world of Durham, but had already begun his work as a reformer in local government, notably in the fields of housing, roads, sanitation, and water supplies; and it was in those areas that he did most to improve the living standards of Durham people. He was chairman of Wheatley Hill parish council in 1903 and elected to Easington rural district council in 1907, later becoming chairman there too. His biographer noted the great attention to detail which buttressed his success. He kept a notebook for the parish council, the rural district council, and the Co-op, and one each for the young men's classes he taught, his public speaking, and preaching. In 1909 he was elected to the Durham county council, one of fewer than a dozen workers' representatives, and he was the obvious chairman when Labour won its first ever majority on a county council there in 1919. He sat continuously until 1932, serving two terms as chairman. In spite of the depressed state of the coal trade in inter-war Britain, Lee presided over improvements in the health of Durham people including falling infant mortality and death rates. Two most appropriate memorials to his work were the Burnhope Reservoir and the new town of Peterlee, which was named after him in 1954. 
Lee died at his home, Bede Rest, in the city of Durham, on 16 June 1935 after a long illness. He was survived by his wife and children. He was buried in the cemetery at Wheatley Hill, which his own efforts had done much to provide. 


@@@@@


doc= 47637


Pond, Sir Desmond Arthur (1919-1986), psychiatrist and physician, was born on 2 September 1919 in Catford, London, the only child of Thomas Arthur Pond, electrical engineer and company director, and his wife, Ada Celia Clutten. He was educated at John Lyon School in Harrow, at St Olave's in south-east London, and at Clare College, Cambridge. At Cambridge he obtained a first class in both part one of the natural sciences tripos (1940) and part two of the moral sciences tripos (1941). He gained a Rockefeller studentship to Duke University, North Carolina (1942-4), and followed this with clinical studies at University College Hospital medical school, London, and thus qualified in medicine in both the United States and Britain (MB BChir, 1945; diploma in psychological medicine, 1947). He proceeded to a Cambridge MD in 1951 and to fellowship of the Royal College of Physicians of London in 1960. By then he had trained in psychiatry at the Maudsley Hospital, specializing, though not exclusively, in child psychiatry. 
British psychiatry, guided by Aubrey Lewis, flourished during the post-war years. Psychiatrists began to occupy important positions in medical affairs and councils. Others besides Pond contributed to this, but his personal effectiveness and standing placed him at the forefront. Psychiatrists respected him as a leading psychiatrist, and physicians recognized him as a physician. He was helped by his particular speciality of epilepsy in children and its cerebral, psychiatric, and psychological causes and sequelae. In the eyes of the medical profession epilepsy was 'real medicine'. In 1961 he gave the Goulstonian lecture to the Royal College of Physicians of London, a rare honour for a psychiatrist, on the psychiatric aspects of epileptic and brain-damaged children. His comprehensive approach to the epilepsies of childhood carefully balanced the respective importance of social, clinical, epidemiological, and electroencephalographic findings. Psychiatry was securing a larger place in medical education, and as a consultant at University College Hospital from 1952 to 1966, and later when occupying the foundation chair of psychiatry at the London Hospital medical college (1966-82), Pond raised both the clinical and academic status of the subject. 
From 1978 to 1981 Pond was president of the Royal College of Psychiatrists, of which he had become a founder fellow in 1971. Previously he had served on its important committees and particularly furthered training in psychiatry for general practitioners. During his presidency he was chosen by fellow medical presidents to chair the Conference of Royal Medical Colleges, the first psychiatrist to do so. He thus became the spokesman on general matters for all the colleges. He was a member of the Medical Research Council (1968-72 and 1982-5) and from 1982 to 1985 chief scientist at the Department of Health, where he helped to develop the relationship between the department and the Medical Research Council to the benefit of medical science generally. 
A deeply religious man, more humanitarian than pietistic, he was a founder member of the Institute of Religion and Medicine in 1964. He served on the archbishop of Canterbury's group on divorce law reform from 1964 to 1966, which published 'Putting Asunder', and he helped set up the Richmond Fellowship, which provided residential homes with a marked but skilfully concealed spiritual background for psychiatric patients, wherein a long period of caring stability assisted in rehabilitating mentally disturbed young people. 
Pond was a visiting professor to the Australian and New Zealand College of Psychiatrists in 1968 and at Western Reserve Institute, Pittsburgh, in 1971. He served on a number of committees concerned with epilepsy, including the welfare and rehabilitation of epileptic subjects. These included committees of the World Health Organization, which adopted his classification of childhood epilepsies. He lectured widely and published upon his own subject and own research, and upon medical matters generally. 'Counselling in Religion and Psychiatry' (1973) was based on his Riddell memorial lecture delivered in Newcastle upon Tyne in 1971. He was made an honorary fellow of the British Psychological Society in 1980 and of the Royal College of General Practitioners in 1981. He was knighted in 1981. 
His build was slight. Personable, popular, and kind, with his ideas always well organized, Pond never seemed in a hurry but there was an underlying firmness which ensured that others usually agreed with his proposals. He chiefly acted by encouragement, especially as a teacher. With colleagues, juniors, and students his emphasis was always on bringing out rather than stuffing in: 'I don't mind spoon-feeding students but I draw the line at moving their jaws up and down as well'. He had a great love of music and was a gifted pianist. In 1945 he married (Margaret) Helen, herself a physician, daughter of Louis Arnold Jordan, research scientist. It was a long and happy marriage, and they had three daughters, two of whom became professional musicians. He and his wife retired to the Teign valley in Devon. Pond died from cancer, after a long and painful illness, on 29 June 1986 in Torquay Hospital. 
Neil Kessel', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 47638


Cockayne, Dame Elizabeth (1894-1988), nursing administrator and teacher, was born on 29 October 1894 in Burton upon Trent, the youngest in the family of two daughters and three sons of William Cockayne, brewer's traveller and licensed victualler, and his wife, Alice Bailey. One of her brothers was killed in the First World War, the second died of tuberculosis, and the third died in 1943. Her father died when she was five. These distressing experiences sharpened Elizabeth Cockayne's deep commitment to Christianity and sense of duty to others. She went to Guild Street Girls' School in Burton upon Trent. After contracting smallpox as a child, she contemplated a career in nursing. In 1912 she embarked upon a two-year training in fever nursing at the Borough Hospital, Plymouth. Although asked by the matron to stay on the staff after her training was completed, she decided to leave Plymouth in 1915. 
Cockayne had four years' training at Sheffield Royal Infirmary, which gave her a dual qualification. She was rapidly promoted to the post of ward sister in 1919 and then night sister, a post in which she oversaw the administration of the 500-bed hospital. While she was on night duty she undertook a course in hygiene and sanitary science offered by the local education authority. Much against the wishes of her employers, she left Sheffield to undertake midwifery training at Birmingham Maternity Hospital (1920-21). She impressed her supervisors with her intelligence and judgement, and took charge of caring for premature babies. Her mother died at this time. She left Birmingham to become a peripatetic nurse-tutor, travelling between the Gloucester and Cheltenham general hospitals. As her headmistress had noted earlier, she had a natural flair for teaching. Throughout her life she maintained a keen commitment to her own education as well as that of others. Although happy in Gloucester, she moved to London to be near her sister, a schoolmistress, who had fallen ill. She joined the West London Hospital as one of the first nurses to occupy a combined post as assistant matron and sister tutor. She excelled in her new position, and by the age of twenty-nine was appointed to a matron's post first at the West London, then at the St Charles, and finally at the Royal Free Hospital. She was at the Royal Free from 1936 to 1948, having succeeded the formidable Rachael Cox-Davies as matron. She displayed calmness and courage after the outbreak of the Second World War, when the hospital was bombed and she was buried in the rubble. At the same time she was invited by the matron-in-chief of the London county council to act as an examiner to training schools, and to review the policy on the length of the working week for nurses and domestics. She inspected work in training schools and factories, supervising the health of munitions workers during the Second World War. She had a continued interest in the effects of fatigue and strain on nurses' health and performance. She was honorary secretary of the Association of Hospital Matrons between 1937 and 1948, occupying one of the premier positions in nursing policy and politics. As a founding member of the sister-tutor section of the Royal College of Nursing, she recognized the prejudice faced by tutors, who were regarded as superfluous and a luxury in training schools. 
In 1945 Elizabeth Cockayne was appointed a member of the working party (chaired by Sir Robert Wood) on the recruitment and training of nurses, which reported in 1947. It aimed to improve the intellectual calibre of nurse training by reducing the repetitive and routine nature of practical nursing experience and stripping the nursing role of its domestic functions. It reported (HMSO, 1947) that this could only be achieved by radically reducing the jurisdiction of the matron-dominated General Nursing Council over nurse training and substituting it with regional nursing boards. These recommendations made Elizabeth Cockayne unpopular with her fellow matrons. In 1948 she was appointed the first chief nursing officer in the National Health Service, where she remained until her retirement in 1958. 
Elizabeth Cockayne was of slender build, with striking features, a kindly face, and keen intelligent eyes. An enlightened, energetic, and progressive leader, she had charisma, charm, a generous nature, humanitarian values, and an understanding of the various groups whose differences often clashed in the sectarian politics of health care. A shrewd but subtle strategist, she determined that the nursing voice should be heard at the highest levels of policy-making. She was gifted with the rare capacity to influence without alienating, and to assume multiple roles without undermining her integrity. She was committed to nurses' welfare and high standards of patient care. After her retirement she was a member of the South-West Metropolitan Regional Hospital Board (1959-65), and an adviser to the World Health Organization during the 1950s. In later life she cared for many old people near her home in Cobham, Surrey, some of whom were younger than herself. She lived alone in her cottage after the death of her sister in 1982. She received the jubilee medal (1935), the Coronation Medal (1953), and the Florence Nightingale medal of the International Red Cross committee in Geneva. She was appointed DBE in 1955. She was unmarried, and died on 4 July 1988 at her home, Rushett Cottage, Little Heath Lane, Cobham, Surrey. 
Anne Marie Rafferty', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 47639


Litton, Edward Arthur (1813-1897), writer on theology, was born at 14 Holles Street, Dublin, on 12 August 1813 and was baptized privately by his uncle, the Revd John Letablere. He was the eldest of the eight children of Edward Litton (1787-1870) of Altmore, and his wife, Sophia ('nee' Stewart); his father was master of the Irish court of chancery (1843-70) and MP for Coleraine. Educated at Winchester College (1830-31) and expected to study for the bar, he was enrolled as a student of Gray's Inn in 1829; ten years later he transferred his membership to Lincoln's Inn, although by then his career had moved away from jurisprudence. He matriculated in April 1832 from Balliol College, Oxford, and in 1835 graduated BA with a double first. Noted for his exemplary conduct and for his Calvinistic views which were said, in a testimonial from Frederick Oakeley, his tutor at Balliol, to have undergone a change, he was in 1836 elected a fellow of Oriel College, Oxford. Having proceeded MA in 1840, he was granted the same degree at Durham in the following year. Ordained as a priest, he served until 1843 as a curate of St Ebbe's in Oxford. He then was dean of Oriel until the end of 1844, when he relinquished his fellowship because of his marriage a year earlier on 28 December 1843. His wife Anne (died 1901) was the youngest daughter of the Revd William Carus Wilson of Casterton Hall, Westmorland, whose school at Cowan Bridge was attended by the Bronte sisters, and who is unfairly portrayed as Brocklehurst in 'Jane Eyre'. In April 1844 Litton's sister Mary was married to his brother-in-law, William Carus Wilson junior. In 1850 Litton was described as the incumbent of Wilderspool, near Warrington, a living he had held since 1845. 
Although, when a fellow of Oriel in 1842, Litton was described by A. H. Clough as 'exceedingly grave, silent and almost bashful' ('Correspondence', 1.117), he had been aware of at least some of the developments in John Henry Newman's theological thinking. His rejection of the Tractarian emphasis on apostolic succession in his 'The Church of Christ in its Idea, Attitudes and Ministry' (1851) marked Litton out as an evangelical leader at Oxford. It may also have contributed to his being chosen to succeed the evangelical John Hill as vice-principal of St Edmund Hall, Oxford, in 1851, but the Tractarian John Barrow was appointed principal in 1853 and Litton resigned in the following year. 
With the institution in 1850 of a royal commission to investigate the state of the university at Oxford, Litton published a letter to Lord John Russell on university reform in 1851. When the subsequent 'Oxford University Act' (1854) abolished the imposition of religious tests for members of the university and encouraged the establishment of private halls, licensed by the vice-chancellor, Litton was associated with the creation in 1855 of an evangelical hall at Oxford of which he was the master. However, Litton Hall never attracted many students and he closed it in 1860. The growing influence of liberalism in the university meant that his opposition to Tractarianism was something of an asset, and Litton was one of three evangelicals nominated during the 1850s to deliver the Bampton lectures, his subject being 'The Mosaic Dispensation Considered as Introductory to Christianity' (1856). In the same year he was appointed an examining chaplain to the bishop of Durham -- a position which he retained under successive bishops until 1870. 
From 1858 to early 1861 Litton was rector of St Clement's in Oxford, Newman's old parish church, but in 1861 he left Oxford on his appointment as rector of Naunton in Gloucestershire. It was there that he wrote his 'Introduction to Dogmatic Theology' (2 vols., 1882, 1892), a magisterial work, more Lutheran than Calvinist and greatly valued by twentieth-century evangelical Anglicans, who have republished it several times. Litton died on 27 August 1897 at Kingstown, near Dublin. 


@@@@@


doc= 47640


Dreyer, Rosalie (1895-1987), nurse, was born on 3 September 1895 in Bern, Switzerland, the eldest child in the family of four daughters and one son of Johann Dreyer, manager of a dairy co-operative, and his wife, Elisabeth Neuenschwander. Her father's work necessitated travel in the Lausanne area, and the two eldest daughters of this Lutheran family received their education from Roman Catholic nuns. The young Rosa was encouraged to travel by a cosmopolitan aunt. She went to England in 1914 as an au pair girl to the Saltzburgers, a Swiss family settled there; for many years afterwards she kept links with her young charges. 
In May 1918 Rosalie Dreyer began to train as a nurse at Guy's Hospital, London. Despite a bout of glandular fever, she gained her state registration certificate in March 1922, excelling in practical nursing and sick-room cookery. After a year's private nursing she went back to Switzerland to work in the Rollier Clinic, a tuberculosis sanatorium in Leysin, canton Vaud. 
In 1924 Rosalie Dreyer returned to the staff of Guy's. She gained her midwifery qualification in 1926 and rose through the nursing hierarchy to become assistant matron in 1931. In 1934 she secured the post of matron at the Bethnal Green Hospital, which since the 1929 'Local Government Act' was under the control of the London county council (LCC). The next fifteen years of her career were spent in the service of the LCC, as principal matron (1935-40), principal matron in charge (1940-48), and chief nursing officer (1948-50). The move to the LCC was to a world vastly different from Guy's and the voluntary sector. The LCC nursing service had been built up from over 120 different institutions, employing approximately 8000 female nursing staff. It offered a comprehensive training, uniformity of conditions of employment, and probably the most integrated service in existence prior to the inception of the National Health Service. In the course of her work Rosalie Dreyer frequently met Herbert Morrison, leader of the LCC from 1934 to 1940. She was well aware of her uniquely powerful position, seeing herself as a policy maker and using her opportunities to promote nursing and to professionalize the former workhouse infirmary staff. Younger women at London matrons' meetings and her own ward sisters were in awe of her. Her charm and sense of humour were also much appreciated. 
During the Second World War Rosalie Dreyer's organizational abilities were fully utilized. She had to deal with the immense challenges presented by the urgent need to evacuate and disperse hospitals into the surrounding countryside. Personnel and equipment had to be relocated and both had eventually to return together. Her memos give eloquent testimony to her managerial skills as patients (many of them chronically sick), staff, student nurses, their teachers, equipment, anatomical charts, and life-sized manikins were moved about London and the home counties in what was logistically the most difficult task to face a nurse manager so far in the twentieth century. With a car and a driver at her disposal, she visited bombed and evacuated hospitals to assess the extent of the damage and the morale of her staff. Her opinion was esteemed by her LCC colleagues, for she had an acute grasp of the realities of the situation. In negotiations with the Ministry of Health on the production of a nursing recruitment film to be shown in cinemas, she stressed the need for the filming to be undertaken in a hospital where the uniform was up to date and visually appealing to potential new nurses. 
Rosalie Dreyer had become a British citizen in 1934, shortly before her appointment to Bethnal Green Hospital. Her wartime experience was marred by the xenophobic agitation of Ethel Bedford Fenwick, who described her appointment as matron-in-chief as unpatriotic. Rosalie Dreyer received messages of support from the Royal College of Nursing and was publicly defended by the LCC leader, Charles Latham. After the war she supervised the assimilation of the LCC nursing service into separate new National Health Service units which had their own hospital management committees. She became chief nursing officer, in charge of domiciliary nursing services, but she disliked this work, which was in no way comparable with her previous post, and in 1950 she moved to the World Health Organization (WHO) as nursing adviser, touring the war-torn countries of Europe and advising on nursing reconstruction, until her retirement in 1953. Despite her significant contribution to the health provision for Londoners, she received no civic or public honours. 
Rosalie Dreyer was a life member of the Royal College of Nursing, president of one of its London branches (South East Metropolitan), and a member of the Royal College of Nursing committee on the assistant nurse, chaired by the first Baron Horder. She believed in the formal recognition of the second-level nurse, and was chosen as first president of the National Association of State Enrolled Nurses. Within the National Health Service she served on three hospital management committees (South West Middlesex from 1950 to 1958, Stepney from 1952 to 1964, and Lewisham from 1955 to 1964) and was a governor and honorary secretary to the friends of the Royal National Throat, Nose and Ear Hospital on the Whitley Council. 
Rosalie Dreyer was birdlike, tall, and slim (until she worked for the WHO), with dark hair which she complained was squashed by nurses' caps. While at Guy's she was an avid theatregoer, with a wide circle of friends. She regarded her nurses as her family. Her retirement was an active one, sustained by her love of sewing, cooking, and travelling. She travelled to Australia in her sixties, partly by mail boat. She kept up her lifelong links with nursing friends such as Dame Elizabeth Cockayne. During her last illness she was nursed by one of her sisters and district nurses, some of whom knew her background. She died, unmarried, at her flat, 5 Kingsthorpe Court, Raymond Road, Wimbledon, London, on 21 May 1987 from the effects of a cerebral tumour. 
Stephanie Kirby', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 47641


Love, Joseph (1796-1875), colliery owner, was born in co. Durham, but little else is known about his early life. Born into a poor family, he started work as a pit boy at the age of eight, and at fourteen he was supporting his parents. He subsequently moved from the pit to become an itinerant packman, selling soft goods around the colliery villages, and at the age of twenty-five he used his savings to open a shop. In 1825 he married Sarah, the daughter of Isaac Pearson, a prosperous timber merchant of North Shields. Love then became a speculative builder, winning profitable contracts for colliery housing before being ruined by a bank failure. He continued in the timber trade, selling pit props, and in 1840 he purchased Brancepeth colliery, his first pit. At that time the iron and steel industry, shipbuilding, and the railways were beginning a period of expansion in the north-east of England which created an immense demand for coal and the means to export it to London and beyond. Because of his entry into the coal industry in this period of highly profitable expansion, Love came to own or part-own six pits in mid-west Durham. 
Love was prominent in the Methodist New Connexion. In 1819 he was on the plan as a preacher, and throughout his life he lived with discipline and frugality. Love funded chapels and chapel-related activities throughout the country, but especially in Durham. The neo-classical Bethel Chapel in Durham North Road was the most architecturally distinguished monument to his generosity. He also supported overseas missions in Canada and Australia. Towards the end of his life Love was plagued by frequent requests to clear the debts of New Connexion chapels that he considered ill managed, notably the Chelsea Chapel. In 1873 he wrote that he felt like advertising that 'I have washed my hands of the New Connexion, being fairly pressed out' (William Cooke Collection, John Rylands Library). By this time he was suffering from the wasting disease that was to lead to his death. He does not seem to have acted on his threat by the time of his death, though the relative absence of published obituaries and eulogies, especially in the Methodist press, suggests some distancing of Love from his previous commitments. None the less, Dr Cooke, the president of the Methodist New Connexion, preached at Love's memorial service and a chapel was dedicated to his memory shortly afterwards. 
Methodist accounts of Love record a life of piety and good works. But a different Love appears in the records of the labour and trade union movement, leading one historian to conclude that 'Mr Love's business actions were in sharp contrast to the piety of his private life... He belonged to a school which had learned well the lesson, to hide from the right hand what its left hand did' (Welbourne, 121). Love gave key managerial posts in his enterprises to his relatives, and it was a cause of complaint that others could not gain promotion. He victimized men who supported trade unionism and was instrumental in breaking the third union of the Durham and Northumberland miners in 1863 through the 'rocking' strike in his pits (1863-4). The men working in low seams were unable to fill their tubs sufficiently to prevent the coal settling below the rim during the journey to the surface. The men claimed they were paid nothing for each such tub. When they went on strike Love evicted the miners and their families from their homes, in severe winter weather, and he cut their credit through his role as the shopkeepers' landlord. His actions earned the hostility of both the Durham newspapers and 'The Times', in whose letter columns Love sought to defend his actions. 
Joseph Love was important in the history of British entrepreneurialism. Like many other businessmen he was able to reconcile his Methodism with running a business empire in harshly competitive conditions. He also represented a phase of British capitalism in which labour and capital met face to face. Later employers were able to acquire anonymity, protecting their interests behind the names of joint-stock companies, while their private lives became increasingly remote from those of their employees. Unlike these corporate owners of modern firms Love was in close contact with his enterprises and the daily life of his workforce. He was unable, therefore, to avoid facing the conflict between his own economic interests and the welfare of his workers. Nevertheless, Love was very successful: he was one of a small group of nineteenth-century figures to rise from a working-class background to riches through hard work, frugality, and enterprise -- an exemplar of Samuel Smiles's 'self-help'. He died on 21 February 1875 at his house, Mount Beulah, Durham, and left an estate worth about $1 million to his wife, making her one of the richest women in Britain. Their one child, Isaac Pearson Love, predeceased Joseph. 


@@@@@


doc= 47642


Macfarlane, Jessie (1843-1871), preacher, was born on 20 January 1843 in Edinburgh, the daughter of Archibald McFarlane, a clothier, and his wife, Mary Maxwell, 'nee' Turner. Her parents were presbyterians and her early religious experience was influenced by an uncle who, it appears, was a minister. In 1859 she heard Brownlow North (1810-1875), the aristocratic lay preacher, in Edinburgh, and this began an intense period of conviction of sin. Further attendance at revival meetings brought her to an evangelical conversion towards the end of 1860 during the singing of Charlotte Elliott's hymn 'Just as I am'. In January 1861, shortly after the death of a younger sister who had implored her to be religiously active, she spontaneously began extemporary preaching at a meeting for women, proving highly effective. She started preaching regularly to other women and throughout 1861 spoke at revivalist missions elsewhere in Scotland, among them one in and around Kelso, where her meetings were arranged by Horatius Bonar (1808-1889), the Free Church of Scotland minister and hymn writer, and while she was there an evangelical awakening took place. During a mission in 1862 at Gullane, East Lothian, so many men crowded around the place she was preaching that she began to admit them to her meetings. 
Jessie Macfarlane's active lay ministry was controversial. The man whom she was to marry broke off their engagement because of her public preaching to mixed-gender audiences. She began the religious instruction of new converts in various places, an even more contentious issue than preaching to those deemed unconverted. She was promoted to a larger audience in Glasgow and Edinburgh by Gordon Forlong (1819-1908), an upper-class revivalist who had become convinced of the legitimacy of female preachers on eschatological grounds. In 1864 she published a pamphlet 'Scriptural Warrant for Women to Preach the Gospel' (1864), in which -- repeating the arguments commonly used by contemporary supporters of women preachers -- she claimed that the role of prophetess had not been abolished in the church, and that seemingly negative 'New Testament' strictures on a public role for women were the result of either mistranslation or misinterpretation. 
In 1862 Jessie Macfarlane had undergone believer's baptism in an Edinburgh Baptist church, and although she remained non-denominational her views accorded with those of the (Plymouth) Brethren, whose millenarian opinions she shared. She was dependent on free-will offerings for her financial support. Her preaching, often deeply emotional, was enhanced by her 'rich full voice' ('In Memoriam', 23). One contemporary report noted that her 'demeanour is exceedingly ladylike' (ibid., 47). Her activities were paralleled by women such as Geraldine Hooper (1841-1872), whom she met. The emergence of women preachers was made possible by the revivalist enthusiasm for converts and the egalitarian impulse often implicit within such movements. It has been argued that their activities were important at a popular level in making expanded roles for women possible in the later nineteenth century. 
From 1866 onwards Jessie Macfarlane preached in many places in England, including Ipswich, Manchester, and London. On 31 October 1869 she married David Brodie, a physician from Liberton, Edinburgh. Although it had been her intention to continue preaching, she was increasingly troubled by ill health. She died childless on 18 August 1871 at Columbia Lodge, Liberton, survived by her husband. She was buried in Grange cemetery, Edinburgh. 


@@@@@


doc= 47643


McLaren, Priscilla Bright (1815-1906), campaigner for women's rights, was born on 8 September 1815 at Greenbank, Rochdale, Lancashire, the fifth of the eleven children of Jacob Bright (1775-1851), bookkeeper and owner of a cotton spinning business, and his second wife, Martha, 'nee' Wood (1788/9-1830). The politicians John Bright and Jacob Bright were her brothers. She was educated at Hannah Wilson's school, South Parade, York, and at Hannah Johnson's school in Liverpool. As a girl she visited Newgate prison with her fellow Quaker Elizabeth Fry, 'and her upbringing gave her a keen and active interest in politics which she never lost until the end of her life' ('Englishwoman's Review', 59). 
After John Bright's first wife, Elizabeth, died in September 1841, leaving an eleven-year-old daughter, Priscilla Bright moved into her brother's Rochdale home, One Ash, until he remarried in June 1847. As well as assisting Bright with fund-raising and canvassing, she ran his household and brought up his daughter, to whom she remained very close and with whom -- as Helen P. Bright Clark -- she worked closely in campaigning activities. In 1842 Priscilla met the recently widowed Scottish Presbyterian Duncan McLaren (1800-1886) while he was on a visit to her brother at One Ash. Freed from her domestic responsibilities on Bright's remarriage, she and McLaren were themselves married on 6 July 1848; they had one daughter and two sons, Charles Benjamin Bright McLaren, first Baron Aberconway, and Walter Stowe Bright McLaren ['see under 'McLaren, Eva Maria]. She also took on responsibility for five stepchildren, the eldest of whom was seventeen. They shared the same broad political interests: for both of them, their Liberal convictions veered strongly towards radicalism. Alike in party politics and single-issue agitation, Priscilla McLaren and her husband were equal partners, though they disagreed from time to time on matters of tactics and policy. 
McLaren inherited from her father a disciplined exactness in the use of words, and from her mother an abiding love of poetry. She had perhaps a lighter touch than her husband and a broader range of cultural interests: a stepson described her as 'a powerful influence... in strengthening and refining the character of my father' ('Annual Monitor', 115). 
When in 1870 Josephine Butler began her social purity and women's equality campaign against the 'Contagious Diseases Acts' of 1864 and 1866, the McLarens were her vigorous supporters. On 30 March 1871 Duncan McLaren presented to parliament a petition from 250,000 women calling for repeal of the acts. John Bright was cautious in the matter but his extended family included active repealers, including (in parliament) his brother Jacob, as well as Duncan McLaren and later his sons, while the Ladies' National Association had the support of Bright's sister Margaret Bright Lucas and his first wife's sisters Margaret Tanner, Anna Maria Priestman, and Mary Priestman, who were among Josephine Butler's close friends. Helen Bright Clark and her husband, William Stephens Clark, were similarly active in this, as in other campaigns for women's rights in the political sphere and over access to higher education. Between 1869 and 1872 the McLarens were both active in the campaign to admit women medical students to the University of Edinburgh. 
Priscilla McLaren became disillusioned at what she regarded as the complacency of many men in her political circle over the 'Contagious Diseases Acts', and became an advocate of women-only meetings within the association: 'women meeting women -- I mean 'ladies' -- at which we can speak freely of the false idea of morality in which our 'gentlemen' are educated and in which they live'. She wanted meetings for working-class women also, but believed that it was incumbent upon the middle classes to take the lead: 'we require [that] the ladies of the country [be] plainly told how their male friends live and what they believe' (Holton, 33). 
McLaren found her instinctive pragmatism sorely tested on other issues of women's rights. She told a conference of the Married Women's Property Committee in 1880 that their struggle was 'a question of power. They could not bear that the wife should have power' (Holton, 54). On women's suffrage too she was radicalized by running into a brick wall of male indifference. Both she and her husband supported John Stuart Mill's amendment to the 1867 'Reform Act' in favour of female suffrage, and she became the first president of the Edinburgh Society for Women's Suffrage in 1870, her stepdaughter Agnes being joint secretary with Eliza Wigham. She gave full support to her brother Jacob Bright, who took on the leadership of the suffragists in parliament following Mill's failure to gain re-election in 1868. But John Bright was out of sympathy with his sister's suffrage activities ('She, dear creature, is almost too passionate and enthusiastic to reason on such a question'). Her view, given in a letter written to Helen Bright Clark after his death, was that 'he could never 'bear' women to assert themselves' (Robbins, 219, 233). Nor was her brother the only object of McLaren's ire on this score; later, when the Liberal Party leadership came out against women's suffrage early in 1881, she complained bitterly of 'how badly the men are behaving', and after 'a most insulting' speech on the subject by Gladstone, she wrote that her husband 'looks very sorrowful for us. But every man's mouth is shut' (Holton, 66). Later she broke with Gladstone over home rule and became a Liberal Unionist. Like her husband she advocated an imperial parliament with representation for the colonies. Not long before she died, she signalled her acceptance of a place for suffragette militancy by signing a letter of sympathy for the activists imprisoned in October 1906. 
Activity in the anti-slavery movement brought Priscilla McLaren into touch with the Garrisonian Elizabeth Pease Nichol, who had moved to Glasgow on her marriage in 1853. Later she often reminded her great-niece Alice Clark that she had been born on the anniversary of the emancipation of slaves. Both Priscilla and Duncan McLaren were also active in temperance work, and in both campaigns she worked alongside Eliza Wigham. 
At the time of her marriage to Duncan McLaren, Quaker marriage was restricted to members and she had scruples about 'hireling priests'; they were perforce married before the superintendent registrar. For this she was disowned by Marsden monthly meeting, a step she regarded as so unjust that she never reapplied for membership. She consented, however, to her membership being restored to her in 1887 at the monthly meeting's initiative. Ten years later she was rejoicing that Friends were getting to grips with biblical criticism and the social implications of the gospel. 
Priscilla McLaren was an indefatigable and (certainly within the family where, to Helen Clark and her children, she was their beloved Aunt Tilla) an entertaining letter-writer. Unlike some campaigners she had a great feeling for individuals and was a good listener. Her judgements were sometimes impatient, but she 'could look with a smile upon her own strong convictions and impulses' ('British Friend', 310). She died from pneumonia at home at Newington House, Blacket Avenue, Edinburgh, on 5 November 1906, and was buried beside her husband (who had died on 26 April 1886) in St Cuthbert's churchyard, Edinburgh on 9 November. 


@@@@@


doc= 47645


Lewis, Jessie Elizabeth Penn- (1861-1927), missioner and revivalist, was born on 28 February 1861 in Victoria Terrace, Neath, Glamorgan, the eldest of the eight surviving children of Elias Jones (died 1877), a civil engineer, and his wife, Heziah Hopkins. A sickly child, she was kept from school until the age of twelve out of fear that education would excite her overactive brain. Her home life was highly religious. In 1873 she was elected a member of the local Good Templar lodge and quickly went on to establish and organize the junior division of this temperance organization. 
On 15 September 1880, at Neath parish church, Jessie married William Penn-Lewis (1859-1925), the auditor's clerk for Sussex county council; he was the son of William Lewis, a painter. She moved with him to Brighton where, blighted by ill health (the marriage was childless), she embarked upon a period of intense self-scrutiny and interior prayer. In August 1883 William Penn-Lewis was appointed accountant to Richmond borough council and the couple moved to Surrey. Jessie Penn-Lewis soon became involved in the religious life of her new community. She joined the Holy Trinity Church in Richmond and in 1886 helped establish a local branch of the YWCA. Despite her intense involvement in local mission and rescue work, Penn-Lewis remained convinced of her spiritual unworthiness and need for self-sanctification. On 18 March 1892 her long-prayed-for spiritual breakthrough arrived. At breakfast that day she was confronted by a vision of a fistful of dirty rags, which she interpreted as a sign of the emptiness of her previous life. Later that evening, in a railway carriage just outside Wimbledon, she finally experienced a sense of complete consecration. 
Following her spiritual awakening, Penn-Lewis moved with her husband, who had become city treasurer for Leicester, to Great Glen, Leicester. There she developed her personal theology which stressed a life of continual self-denial in imitation of the self-sacrifice of the crucified Christ. Attendance at the annual Keswick conventions from 1892 similarly served to deepen her conviction that personal holiness could be achieved only through an ongoing process of self-renunciation. Her theology was clearly articulated in her essay 'The Pathway to Life in God' (1895), the first of over fifty self-published pamphlets that issued from her home in Leicester. 
In June 1896 Penn-Lewis travelled to Goteborg, Sweden, to attend the first Scandinavian conference of the YWCA. At this meeting she won the friendship of a group of Russian and Finnish aristocrats including Prince Oscar Bernardotte, who invited her to carry out mission work among the Russian nobility. She visited St Petersburg annually from 1897 to 1903, holding praise meetings and organizing experimental prayer groups. This experience confirmed her sense of spiritual guidance and established her international reputation as a missioner. In August 1900 she lectured in Canada and the USA as the guest of the Moody Bible Institute, and in January 1903 she embarked on a revivalist mission to India. 
While in India, Penn-Lewis wrote and published her most popular work, 'The Word of the Cross' (1903). This work, according to her biographer Mary Garrard, sold over a million copies and was translated into over 100 languages. Its charismatic message of spirit obedience and self-renunciation was echoed internationally in the theology of the emergent Pentecostal groups and most notably in the Welsh religious revival of 1904-5. Although Penn-Lewis probably overestimated her own contribution to the Welsh awakening, the revival did cement her friendship with the young evangelist Evan Roberts (1878-1951), who retired to her Leicester home after his spiritual breakdown in 1905. 
Together with Roberts, Penn-Lewis devoted her later years to the development of a 'saving theology' which would allow believers to combat demonic interference and satanic deception. In 1907 she set up a monthly paper, 'The Overcomer', which hosted a 'spiritual clinic' dealing with cases of suspected possession. In 1912 she published 'War on the Saints' (co-written with Roberts), a sort of spiritual combat manual containing tactics for vanquishing both Satan and the individual self. These tactics were further refined in a series of monthly meetings at Eccleston Hall in London and annual congresses in Derbyshire at Matlock (1912-14) and Swanwick (1919). Despite her growing ill health Penn-Lewis persisted in her evangelical activities until her death from pneumonia on 15 August 1927 at 4 Eccleston Place, Westminster, London, where she had lived following her husband's death. She was buried on 18 August alongside her husband in the Quaker burial-ground, Reigate, Surrey. 


@@@@@


doc= 47646


Whiston, Robert (1808-1895), headmaster and reformer of cathedral charities, was born in Derby on 20 November 1808, one of eleven children of William Whiston, solicitor, and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Hopkinson. Educated at Repton School, he matriculated from Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1827, where he was elected a scholar in 1830. He graduated BA in 1831, having been ranked among the senior optimes in the mathematical tripos and top of the second class in the classical tripos. He proceeded MA in 1834. In 1833 he was elected a fellow of Trinity, but did not reside in the college, instead becoming the headmaster and proprietor of the Rochester and Chatham classical and mathematical school, a private establishment which flourished under his leadership. He was ordained deacon in 1840 and priest in 1841. 
As a successful local schoolmaster in holy orders, and a fellow of a Cambridge college, Whiston was the obvious candidate to fill the vacant post of headmaster of the Rochester Cathedral Grammar School (or King's School), to which the dean and chapter of Rochester appointed him in December 1842. Under his predecessor, the Revd Daniel Francis Warner, the school had emptied of pupils, despite the requirement under the cathedral's sixteenth-century statutes to educate twenty poor boys. Whiston soon restored a full complement of scholars, as well as bringing in pupils as boarders, who lodged in a house, the Old Palace, which he fitted up at a personal cost of $4000. At his insistence, the dean and chapter of the cathedral built a new school house, which opened in 1844. 
Whiston came into conflict with the dean and chapter when he made allegations of financial mismanagement on their part, and especially of their failure to carry out the intention of Henry VIII's founding charters. In February 1848 he requested them to raise the value of the four exhibitions tenable by former pupils of the school while studying at Oxford and Cambridge universities: these stipends had remained unchanged since the 1540s, whereas the emoluments of the dean and canons had increased some thirtyfold over the same period. Rebuffed, in August 1848 Whiston laid before the chapter further instances of their neglect of statutory obligations, including a failure to provide sufficient maintenance for the twenty boys entitled to free education. Ignored by the chapter and fortified by legal advice from Sir John Romilly and W. D. Lewis, he appealed to the cathedral's visitor, George Murray, bishop of Rochester, who declined to act, seeking instead to divert the question into the court of chancery, with its inevitable delays and costs. Whiston's retort was to publish in May 1849 'Cathedral Trusts and their Fulfilment'. Based on manuscript researches in Lambeth Palace library and elsewhere, Whiston's pamphlet sought to expose the extent to which cathedral chapters founded by Henry VIII deviated from the instructions of their founder, while enriching themselves from the surplus revenues of the foundations. Members of the Rochester chapter were singled out for personal attack, along with 'the late dean of Worcester' (George Murray), for perpetuating corruptions. The pamphlet went through five printings. 
On 29 June 1849 Whiston was summoned to the chapter house at Rochester and dismissed from the headmastership, on the ground that his publication 'cast odium on the dean and chapter', and contained 'many scandalous and libellous passages', which rendered him 'utterly unfit and unworthy' to be entrusted with the instruction of the boys ('The Times', 3 Aug 1849). Whiston's refusal to accept his removal led to three years of litigation and public controversy. He brought an action for reinstatement in the court of chancery, which held (August 1849) that jurisdiction lay with the cathedral visitor, though adding that the chapter had acted wrongly in not allowing him to speak in his defence. In September 1849 the chapter issued a fresh deed of removal, Whiston being permitted to read out a long statement in defence of his action, published as 'Protest or Demurrer' (1849). A month later the chapter confirmed his ejectment, and appointed a replacement, the Revd Henry Meeres, chaplain of Buckinghamshire county gaol. Whiston refused to give up the occupation of the school and playground, and continued to teach the majority of the boys, only a few of whom attended the premises run by Meeres, as the two schools ran in competition within the cathedral precincts. 
In November 1849 Whiston took his case to the court of queen's bench, gaining an order to restore him to the headship. The dean and chapter challenged the decision and after a delay of fourteen months gained their point when the court held (April 1851) that the matter was one for the visitor, Murray. This decision proved a turning point in Whiston's campaign, as public opinion mobilized in his favour. A leading article in 'The Times' (6 May 1851, 5) pointed out that while the dean and chapter may have prevailed on a procedural technicality, the substance of Whiston's allegations remained unanswered. Although himself a Conservative in politics, Whiston gained the support of radicals and anti-clericals. Public subscriptions were raised to meet his costs, and MPs -- notably Benjamin Hall -- took up his case and the wider issue of cathedral finances. By June 1851 Meeres's school had only one pupil while Whiston, who was translated to a senior fellowship by his Cambridge college in October 1851, continued to attract pupils. 
Finally Whiston took his case to the cathedral's visitor, who sat with two lawyers, Sir James Parke and Stephen Lushington. Whiston represented himself at the well-attended hearings at Doctors' Commons, in April and June 1852. The bishop of Rochester's judgment, delivered on 20 October 1852, concluded that Whiston's pamphlet had libelled the dean and chapter, but that this did not amount to an offence of sufficient gravity to warrant his dismissal. He was to be reinstated on 1 January 1853, though without retrospective payment of any stipend for the period since his dismissal and with a caution against repeating the allegations. 'The Times' (22 Oct 1852, 4), which had backed Whiston's stand, thought the judgment shabby, and maintained that the chapter had acted unfairly towards Whiston, whose attacks upon cathedral abuses the paper found entirely justifiable. He did not return quietly, and under the threat of further controversy the dean and chapter raised the stipends of grammar school boys, university exhibitioners, and minor cathedral office holders specified in the school's founding statutes. 
Whiston remained headmaster of the Rochester Cathedral school until 1877. He relinquished his college fellowship following his marriage, on 5 July 1855, to Ellen (1833-1879), daughter of Richard Wedd, surgeon. They had three sons and a daughter. He continued to tussle with the chapter over its failure adequately to support the grammar school, which, however, continued to thrive. He insisted on competitive entry and upheld high academic standards. Himself a classical scholar, he produced an edition of Demosthenes (2 vols., 1859-68) in the series 'Bibliotheca Classica', and characteristically published a pamphlet (1859) in reply to a reviewer who had criticized his editing. He also contributed to William Smith's dictionaries of Greek and Roman antiquities and Greek and Roman biography and mythology. In 1869, concerned to preserve the classical status of his school, he sent a petition to the endowed schools commissioners and was successful in ensuring that they classified it as a first-grade school, teaching Latin and Greek and preparing boys for university entry. The new scheme laid down by the commissioners in 1877 provided for Whiston to receive a pension, enabling him to retire. 
Whiston continued his public activities as a justice of the peace in Kent and was one of the first elected members of Kent county council. He died at his home, the Old Palace, Rochester, Kent, on 3 August 1895. In 1929 a memorial was erected in Rochester Cathedral at the direction of his eldest son, commemorating Whiston and his litigation ('The Times', 11 July 1929, 13). 
Physically large, bewhiskered, and energetic, Whiston was an effective headmaster, though his cantankerousness seems to have hindered his career. He was an example of the 'almost professional exposer of 'jobs' and abuses' who frequented the mid-Victorian public scene (Burn, 233). His activities were part of a wider reform movement which prompted the appointment in November 1852 of a royal commission to inquire into cathedral churches in England and Wales and the creation in 1853 of a permanent commission to scrutinize charities. Whiston is now perhaps best remembered for having supplied some of the inspiration for Anthony Trollope's Barsetshire novels, the first instalment of which ('The Warden', 1855) made topical reference to him. 


@@@@@


doc= 47647


Badley, John Haden (1865-1967), headmaster, was born on 21 February 1865 in Tower Street, Dudley, Worcestershire, the only son of James Payton Badley, surgeon, and his wife, Laura Elizabeth Best. He had three older sisters to whom he was always very close. The home atmosphere was restricted in some ways but very supportive and affectionate, and he enjoyed a happy childhood. Dr Badley seems to have been a rather remote figure to the children, but he gave his son every possible opportunity, and the money he accumulated -- for he was a good man of business as well as a much respected doctor -- provided the essential backing for his son's later schemes. Badley went to Rugby School at the age of fifteen and was head of his house for three years. He enjoyed his time there and won an exhibition as the best classic of his year, but he felt later that the Rugby training, with its heavy concentration on the classics, had been very narrow and bookish. 
From Rugby, Badley went on in 1884 to Trinity College, Cambridge, where he gained a first class in part one of the classical tripos in 1887, and was elected to a college scholarship, staying on for a fourth year without taking any examination but reading widely. He wrote later that his Cambridge years, during which he was exposed to the ideas of Edward Carpenter and William Morris, had exerted a major influence on his later life. He met Amy Garrett (died 1956), the sister of one of his Cambridge friends, whom he married in 1892. They had one son. He felt very uncertain about his future career until a friend, Goldsworthy Lowes Dickinson of King's College, put him in touch with Cecil Reddie. He joined Reddie's staff when the New School at Abbotsholme, Derbyshire, opened in October 1889, and was a master there until 1892. That short period determined the whole course of his professional life, for it was Reddie who helped him to discover what he wanted to do in education. He spoke later of having been apprenticed to a master craftsman. 
Yet Badley's stay at Abbotsholme was to be brief. He disliked Reddie's autocratic system of management. He was anxious to marry, and he knew that there would be no role for his wife at Abbotsholme. In January 1893 he opened his own school at Bedales, near Haywards Heath in Sussex. Growth at first was slow, though the school soon became known in other countries through the writings of the French social theorist Edmond Demolins, who sent his own son to Bedales School. In 1898 a few girls were admitted, so that Badley could claim later that Bedales was the first boarding-school in the country to which boys and girls were admitted on a fully equal basis. The change would probably have occurred anyway since Badley himself was sympathetic and his wife was a supporter of the women's movement. Yet it happened in a curiously informal way when a mother who wished to send her daughters to the school offered to open a house for them. The number of boys and girls did not reach parity until the end of the First World War. 
By 1900 the accommodation at old Bedales had become too small, and Badley bought a site and built a new school at Steep, near Petersfield in Hampshire. From then until his retirement in 1935 progress was steady. The school remained small; in 1935 there were 136 pupils, a decline from a high point of 194 in 1922. Badley believed in and practised democratic management, but there was no doubt that he was the leader -- a quiet, rather withdrawn figure to many people, though not to the children. After the First World War a school council was set up, although its role was entirely advisory. Towards the end of his life he defined his objectives as three-fold: a healthy environment, a wide range of work with considerable emphasis on the arts and on manual training, and a community structured on family lines. Academic work was taken seriously, and Bedalians had a good record at the universities. There were experiments in the curriculum. During the 1920s there were extensive trials of the Dalton plan of assignment work, and the Montessori method was followed in the junior house. In 1920 the Bedales School Company had been set up to control the school. 
Badley had abandoned traditional religious beliefs while he was at Cambridge, but he was deeply interested in the moral aspects of Christianity. He talked and wrote on religious subjects, and he published an edition of the 'Bible', re-arranged in historical sequence, 'The Bible as Seen Today' (3 vols., 1965). His other major works include 'Bedales: a Pioneer School' (1923), 'A Schoolmaster's Testament' (1937), and an autobiography, 'Memories and Reflections' (1955). Badley lived over thirty years after his retirement, dying on 6 March 1967 at the age of 102, at Fairhaven, Steep, Petersfield, Hampshire, a cottage on the school estate where he lived after his wife's death. He was cremated at Woking on 10 March 1967. He was the prophet of a new kind of school life, many of whose ideas have passed into the mainstream of English educational thinking. 


@@@@@


doc= 47648


Pollard, Samuel (1864-1915), missionary, was born on 20 April 1864 at Camelford, Cornwall, the eldest son of Samuel Pollard, a minister of the Bible Christian Methodist church, and his wife, Ellen DeBoyne. From the age of twelve he was educated in the denominational school at Shebbear, north Devon. In 1881 he was placed high in the civil service examination and began work in the post office at Clapham. 
While in London, Pollard offered for the ministry and for service with the Bible Christian church's newly opened mission in China. 'Vanstone and Thorne have left for China, and I shall be the next' (Grist, 10), he wrote to his parents. At the time Pollard volunteered for China another Shebbear boy, Frank Dymond, also offered for work in that land. The two were accepted, and in January 1887 sailed for China, thus beginning a friendship which would last for the rest of Pollard's life. 
After language study in Shanghai the two friends set out for Yunnan. They had a narrow escape from drowning when their boat capsized on the River Yangtze (Yangzi), but finally arrived in the city of Chaotung (Zhaotong) to join Samuel Thorne. Within days the newcomers found themselves in charge of the mission when Thorne left to get married in Chongqing, and the days passed quickly with preaching and study. They had a small supply of simple medicines and gained a reputation for the treatment of commonplace diseases such as the infected eyes of children, and the treatment of worms and malaria. Pollard also became known for his success in saving opium attempted suicide cases, and this aided the preaching of the gospel. The friendship of the two missionaries was deepened when Samuel nursed Frank Dymond through a severe bout of smallpox. 
On Thorne's return Sam Pollard left Chaotung to join Thomas Vanstone in Kunming. The years 1890-91 were a discouraging period for the small missionary band. Samuel Thorne died, and illness struck the Vanstone family. One light in those dark days was Sam's meeting with Emma Hainge of the China Inland Mission. They fell in love and were married in Chongqing in December 1891. On their return to Chaotung the couple threw themselves with renewed zeal into the work and during a desperate famine helped many stricken families. At the end of 1894 they left China for a much needed furlough, and on his return Samuel was appointed to take charge of the work in north Yunnan. 
The anti-foreign Boxer uprising at the turn of the century brought disruption and danger to missionaries. In April 1899 Pollard escaped an assassination attempt, and the family fled to Hong Kong. Foreign intervention crushed the rebellion and in 1901 Sam, now back in Chaotung, organized a number of preaching tours, during which his contacts with Nosu tribesmen kindled the desire to reach the non-Chinese aboriginal people with the gospel. The Nosu were largely independent of Chinese rule, and in November 1903 Pollard visited their territory. His book 'In Unknown China' (1920) recorded this journey. While planning to revisit Nosuland an event took place which changed the whole course of his future ministry. On the morning of 12 July 1904 four Miao came to the mission compound. The Miao were very different from the Nosu. They were landless, had no written language or schools, and were often exploited by Chinese and Nosu landlords. The four Miao had heard fragments of the Jesus story and came to make further enquiries about Christianity. During the following year some 4000 Miao enquirers passed through Pollard's home, and in 1905 it was decided that Sam should concentrate on evangelizing them. He was given land by a Nosu chief at a place called Stonegateway, and it became the centre of the Miao mission. Life was often hazardous, and in April 1907 Pollard was beaten by a mob and left more dead than alive. During a long period of convalescence he reflected on work already achieved and in May 1907 recorded there were now five chapels, three schools, ten evangelists in training, and more than 3000 Miao church members. 
The Miao had no written language, and an entry in Pollard's diary on 12 October 1904 expressed his concern. 'Today I made an experiment in getting out a written language for the Miao -- making my own consonants and vowels to match their sounds. So far so good, but how can I manage to distinguish tones?' ('Eyes of the Earth', 82) In his book 'The Story of the Miao' he tells how he created what became known as the Pollard script: 'The Miao language is monosyllabic and in nearly all cases the vowels end the words. By adapting the system used in shorthand of putting the vowel marks in different positions by the side of the consonant signs, we found we could solve the problem. The signs for the consonants are larger than the vowel signs, and the position of the latter by the side of the former, gives the tone or musical note required. (Pollard, 'The Story of the Miao', 142-3)' Pollard set about translating the 'New Testament', which he completed shortly before his death. 
In June 1915 a missionary colleague, William Hudspeth, contracted typhoid. Pollard nursed him at Stonegateway and as Hudspeth began to recover Pollard himself was struck down with the disease. Years of self-giving service had drained his energy. He slowly deteriorated, and on 15 September sank into a coma and died. He was buried among his beloved Miao on a hill overlooking Stonegateway. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 47654


Stock, Eugene (1836-1928), missionary society administrator and journal editor, was born on 26 February 1836 in Duke Street, Westminster, London, the first of three children of 'a gentleman of position and wealth' (Stock, 43-4) named on Stock's second marriage certificate as Edward Bell. Little is known of his father and mother, but he had two sisters, Sarah Geraldina and Caroline. Family circumstances were strained by loss of the family fortune to speculation, so that his mother had to support the family alone from 1846: Stock attended day schools in London and Brighton and Arnold House, Lowestoft (1851-3), but was forced largely to educate himself and was soon employed as a clerk in a London mercantile office. In 1862 he married Eliza Mann (died 1882), daughter of Commander Adrian Mann RN. Stock's evangelical Anglicanism led to Sunday school work in Islington and service from 1867 to 1875 as editor to the Church of England Sunday School Institute. In 1871 he became editor of the penny-weekly newspaper 'Church Bells'; when his employer went bankrupt in 1873, he was invited to work as an editor (assisted by his sister Sarah) at the Church Missionary Society (CMS), the largest of the British foreign missionary societies. He was successful in popularizing the publications of the society: by the 1890s the 'Church Missionary Gleaner' had attained a monthly circulation of 80,000 and the annual total production of books, magazines, and pamphlets approached 7 million. 
Stock quickly rose in influence at the CMS owing to his diligence, wide knowledge, and clarity of thought. His sympathy to evangelical revivalism drew him successively into the confidence of two CMS chief secretaries, Henry Wright (1872-81) and Frederick Wigram (1881-95), which gave him influence in the evangelical subculture at Cambridge University, and also provided him with the inspiration to create popular lay organizations in Britain such as the CMS Gleaners' Union, which achieved a membership of 80,000 by 1895. Between 1881 and 1906 Stock helped to engineer an unprecedented increase in missionaries at the CMS from 260 to 1000, due largely to strong home organization and the work of single women. Stock and Wigram also emphasized the use of English university graduates to lead overseas missions, sometimes at the expense of removing indigenous church leaders; this new practice at the CMS increased metropolitan authority, although the ultimate goal of independent 'native' churches was not abandoned. 
Despite his strong evangelical principles, Stock remained a loyal churchman who helped to lead the CMS away from radical forms of protestantism. He was a member of many church organizations, including the London diocesan conference, the house of laymen, and the national church assembly but championed missionary ecumenism with the high-church party and nonconformists. He was also an important supporter of the efforts of university students to increase missionary co-operation that led to the Pan-Anglican Conference of 1908 and the Edinburgh World Missionary Conference of 1910. His most visible achievement was the production of a history of the CMS (4 vols., 1899-1916), which is unique among Victorian missionary histories in its attention to politics, religious parties, and ecclesiastical developments. This work sealed his reputation as 'a sort of lay incarnation of the CMS' ('The Times', 8 Sept 1928). 
A breakdown in health led to Stock's resignation as editorial secretary in 1902. He remained a CMS secretary without portfolio until his retirement in 1906, whereupon he was appointed a vice-president to the society, regularly attending the general committee for twelve more years. In his retirement he remained one of the most influential and visible advocates of foreign missions. On 20 August 1902, aged sixty-six, at St Saviour's Church, South Hampstead, London, Stock married the Hon. Isabella Emily Fiennes, the daughter of Charles Francis Gregg, herself fifty-six and a widow. In 1908 he was awarded an honorary degree of DCL by the University of Durham. Following an accident in which he was knocked down by a motor car he died at his home, Melita, 21 Poole Road, Bournemouth, on 7 September 1928 and was buried in Bournemouth cemetery. 
In addition to numerous articles appearing in CMS publications and the religious press, Stock published many tracts, pamphlets, and books, including (besides the 'History of the Church Missionary Society') 'My Recollections' (1909); a widely used Sunday school guide, 'Lessons on the Life of Our Lord' (1871); several works on missions; and a number of commentaries on the 'Bible'. 


@@@@@


doc= 47655


Ditchfield, John Edwin Watts- (1861-1923), bishop of Chelmsford, was born on 17 September 1861 at Green Lane, Patricroft, Manchester, the fifth child and only surviving son of John Ditchfield ('b'. 1814) and his wife, Mary Ann Watts ('b'. 'c'.1823). His father had started work in a cotton mill at the age of eight, but had risen to become headmaster of Patricroft higher grade school. 
The family was strongly Methodist and concerned with social questions and temperance. From an early age the younger John Ditchfield was taken on pastoral visits by his father, and during adolescence had a profound religious experience which left him determined to enter the ministry. He preached his first sermon in 1877, and gradually worked through the Wesleyan hierarchy until in 1887 he was accepted for the ministry and entered Headingley College, Leeds. But the Methodist ministry was overcrowded and Ditchfield was advised that he could not make it his profession, either in Britain or overseas. He converted and in 1888 was confirmed in the Church of England at Manchester Cathedral. About the same time he changed his name to Watts-Ditchfield. He studied at St John's Hall in Highbury (north London), was ordained in 1891, and became curate at St Peter's, Upper Holloway. On 3 September 1892 he made a happy and successful marriage to Jane Wardell ('b'. 1864/5), daughter of Thomas Lax Wardell of Bow, a commercial clerk. A daughter was born in 1895. 
Many churchmen of the time saw the Sunday school as the chief means of evangelism, on the assumption that the child, once captured, would remain in the church. Watts-Ditchfield disagreed: he believed that the church was seen as something fit only for women and children, and argued that if the church got the man, it got the whole family. He instituted a men's service at St Peter's, and, by adroit publicity, eye-catching and provocative titles for his sermons, and careful attention to pastoral work, built up a regular attendance of several hundred. He also instituted several thrift and benefit societies, besides clubs for ramblers and sportsmen, and a reading-room. 
In 1897 Watts-Ditchfield was offered the living of St James-the-Less, Bethnal Green, a parish of some 11,000 people. The several parishes in the borough presented the churches with a recognized challenge. The area was poor; its housing was dilapidated, insanitary, and overcrowded; there was little provision for any recreation, and the population was largely employed in low-paid and insecure casual labour or in 'sweated' industries. These cumulative distresses found their outlet in heavy drinking, domestic violence, and attitudes to the church which ranged from contemptuous dismissal to a cringing hope of charity. If the church could succeed in evangelizing Bethnal Green, it could succeed anywhere. 
Watts-Ditchfield applied the same methods as at Upper Holloway: the institution of separate men's and women's services, active evangelism, and the provision of facilities for recreation. As vicar he showed a remarkable talent for fund-raising, and so was able to provide his parishioners with a parish centre, a recreation ground, hostels for single working men, and a medical service. He insisted that if people would not come to church, the church must go to them, and held open-air services in Green Street Market and Victoria Park, besides instituting a brass band which toured the area on Sunday afternoons. Watts-Ditchfield was also active on the side of social justice: in 1902 and 1904 he held exhibitions of goods produced by 'sweated' labour, and these activities led to the 'Daily News' exhibition of 1906 and eventually to the 'Trades Boards Act' of 1909. 
Bethnal Green was a make-or-break job, and it made Watts-Ditchfield. There were twenty-six Easter communicants in 1897, but 597 in 1903, and 915 in 1914. According to the 'Daily News' religious census of 1903, 1699 people attended at St James-the-Less, more than double the number at any other Anglican church in the borough. The diocese of Chelmsford was created out of that of St Albans in 1914, and as it was to include the large suburban area of 'London over the border', Watts-Ditchfield was an excellent if surprising choice as its first bishop. He had the urban mission experience, but the bench was full of men from Anglican families, educated at public schools and the ancient universities. Watts-Ditchfield was a convert; he was not a graduate, and his experience had been in parish work rather than administration. He was consecrated on 24 February and enthroned on 23 April 1914. 
Almost immediately Watts-Ditchfield had to face the challenges presented by the First World War. His was not an unthinking patriotism and he continued to insist on social justice and on Christian conduct, not only on Britain's part but on that of its allies, particularly Belgium and Russia. Perhaps for this reason, he was an enthusiastic supporter of the 'national mission of repentance and hope' of 1916. After the war Watts-Ditchfield's main difficulties were clerical discipline and organization. Perhaps because he was a convert to Anglicanism, he appeared to have an exaggerated view of his episcopal powers and the degree of conformity he could expect from his clergy, and some of his subordinates resented the rigid and even menacing tone of his doctrinal pronouncements. A particular thorn in Watts-Ditchfield's side was Conrad Noel, vicar of Thaxted, who combined extreme Anglo-Catholicism with revolutionary socialism. The problems of diocesan organization included an underpaid workforce and inadequate buildings. In Chelmsford itself, the parish church had been chosen as the cathedral without any provision being made for its new function. 
A favourite saying of Watts-Ditchfield's father was that it was 'better to wear out than to rust out'. His son lived and died by that precept. Watts-Ditchfield added to his burdens without thought for his health, and he was exhausted when obliged to have an operation for appendicitis. He never recovered from the anaesthetic, and died on 14 July 1923 at 41 Beaumont Street, St Marylebone, London. He was buried in the churchyard of Chelmsford Cathedral five days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 47656


Osterberg, Martina Sofia Helena Bergman (1849-1915), feminist and promoter of women's physical education, was born on 7 October 1849 in Hammarlunda, a village near Malmo in the south of Sweden, one of the six children of Karl Bergman, a prosperous farmer, and his wife, Betty Lundgen. Even as a girl, it seems, she felt impatient of the restrictions imposed on women, and her family encouraged her independence. She was privately educated, and worked as a governess and as a librarian before enrolling in 1879 at the Royal Central Gymnastics Institute, founded in Stockholm in 1814 by the much-venerated pioneer of remedial gymnastics, Per Hendrick Ling. In an era when formal exercise was very largely military drill, Ling had explored its therapeutic potential. When he died, his exercise system -- with its strong physiological base -- remained the core of the institute's training of both men and women gymnastic teachers. Women needed health as well as men, Ling had stated, and Martina Bergman was to make it a tool of their emancipation. 
Ling's system was virtually unknown in Britain before 1879, when the London school board set out to improve the poor physique of girls in its elementary schools by engaging a Swedish woman to introduce Ling's free exercises. As they required no apparatus, these could be performed in the classroom, if the teacher had a rudimentary training. The massive task of training teachers began, and was continued with great success by Martina Bergman when she took over the school board post in 1881. She also succeeded strikingly in her aim of publicizing the Swedish system by open practices and demonstrations (including one before royalty). 
Called to give evidence in 1887 to the Cross commission on elementary schooling, Madame Bergman Osterberg (as she was known from her marriage in 1886 to Edvin Per Wilhelm Osterberg, a Stockholm schoolmaster) said that where Ling's system had been introduced children held themselves better and were more alert. Privately, though, she had already decided that her ideal of a healthy womanhood could not be realized among the poor. Their physique, she told a friend, was so impaired by neglect, bad food, and bad living conditions that, unless these circumstances could be changed, no radical improvement could be effected. In 1885 she had launched her own college, the Hampstead Physical Training College, to prepare students from more privileged classes to teach in the new girls' secondary schools. In 1887 she left school board work, and in 1895 moved away from London to Dartford Heath in Kent, where she bought a property, Kingsfield, Oakfield Lane, with room for facilities such as playing fields and tennis courts for a physical training college. Students of the Bergman Osterberg college took a rigorous 'Swedish' course of gymnastics, anatomy, and physiology, as well as English team games -- an addition prompted by the fact that hockey, lacrosse, and cricket were growing popular with English schoolgirls. 
Such a college was intensely novel. Visitors were dazzled by student displays, but also by the crusading zeal of the handsome, well-built, imperious woman who accounted for its success by saying that Ling's system was too good to fail. Madame Bergman Osterberg herself took care to see that it did not; not only, as she later said, training the teachers but creating a demand for them. Amid the apprehensions of national decline which prevailed around the turn of the century, she convinced the heads of countless high schools for girls that the gymnastics and games mistress -- the specialist in health -- had become essential. By 1905 five other colleges like hers existed to meet the demand, two of them having been launched by her own former students. In 1909 the Board of Education based its physical education syllabus for elementary schools on the work of Ling. His system was introduced in the navy and in some boys' public schools, and remained standard in girls' schools throughout Britain and the colonies. 
Madame Bergman Osterberg died of cancer at her home, Kingsfield, in Dartford Heath, Kent, on 30 July 1915, struggling at the last to complete the formalities of leaving her college in trust to the nation. Sir George Newman, who had known her since his days as first medical director at the Board of Education, was to describe her, looking back, as 'the morning star' of that reformation in health which he had tried to promote by such means as school medical inspections. It must be said, though, that in later life she had been wrapped up in her college and at some remove from the kind of problems she encountered in her school board days. 
Madame Bergman Osterberg's feminism, too, had its narrow streak. She did, indeed, endow a scheme in Sweden to educate women for enfranchisement, and she and her husband in 1914 donated their house in Bostad, south Sweden, to be made into a women's horticultural college. But in England, as the suffrage battle raged in the period up to the First World War, it was not she but one of her former students who launched the Gymnastic Teachers' Suffrage Society. The increasingly desperate fight for the vote evidently impinged on Madame Bergman Osterberg less than the fact that she herself had created for women a new profession that was to advance their economic and social freedom. 
It was a profession that went with the grain of leadership culture in the last days of empire, invoking a sense of moral purpose and discipline which looked beyond the physical benefits of gym. The gym mistress, confident of what she was doing and with an authority which gave her poise, was central to the running of many girls' schools until the latter part of the twentieth century. Out of Madame Bergman Osterberg's new profession there also came a newer one: physiotherapy. 


@@@@@


doc= 47662


Hill, Sir Enoch (1865-1942), building society manager, was born on 10 September 1865 at Ball Haye Green, Leek, Staffordshire, the eldest of the four sons and three daughters of Henry Hill and his wife, Elizabeth Taylor, both of whom were manual workers in the silk-spinning industry. Hill joined that industry himself as a 'half-timer', aged eight, working full time when his schooling finished at the age of thirteen; he tried a number of jobs before settling as a printer. He subsequently acquired a stationery shop and became publisher of the 'Leek Post'. 
Hill was a devout Anglican, and his vicar helped him to remedy his lack of good schooling. In 1887 he became a lay reader in the Lichfield diocese, and married Esther Hayes (died 1904) of Leek. They had two sons. His wife's uncle was secretary of the Leek United Building Society and Hill helped him part time, later becoming assistant secretary. In 1896 he was appointed secretary of the society, and in consequence handed the printing business on to his brothers. At this time he became an associate of the Chartered Secretaries' Institute, of which he was later a fellow, then treasurer, and (in 1935) president. The Leek United Building Society was in decline when Hill joined it, but by 1903 it had recovered ground, doubling its assets to over $103,000. 
In 1903 the post of secretary at the Halifax Building Society became vacant; the Halifax was then Britain's fourth largest society, with assets of $1,400,000. Hill was appointed, and in that role proved a very able publicist, not least in his ability to turn public occasions to his society's advantage; in 1905 he was already setting money aside to celebrate the diamond jubilee of the Halifax in 1913. In 1906, two years after the death of his first wife, Hill married Bertha Henrietta Byrom Gee, the daughter of a musician, Samuel Gee of Leek. They lived at Willow Hall, Halifax. 
From the start of his career at the Halifax, Hill strongly advocated owner occupation, then an unimportant category for large societies. In 1903 only 15% of the Halifax's mortgages were for less than $500 and 38% were for more than $5000. By 1911 these figures were reversed to 39% and 11% respectively. In the post-1918 world of rent restriction acts, with owner occupation becoming the norm, the Halifax had both the experience and the reputation to take full advantage of this change. For owner-occupiers, Hill lent a higher percentage of a house's value. Large savers were attracted by higher interest rates and a banking department. A 'penny savings' department and home safes recruited small savers. Increased staff, enlarged offices, and a rapidly increasing branch network ensured continuing good service. By 1913 the Halifax had become Britain's largest society, and a merger in 1927 with the Halifax Equitable ensured continued dominance. 
Hill joined the society's board as managing director in 1916, becoming successively vice-president (1927) and president (1928). He was knighted in 1928. He served on the Yorkshire board of both Alliance Assurance and Barclays Bank. Active in the affairs of the National Association of Building Societies, he was elected to its council in 1913, and served as chairman (1921-33), deputy chairman (1933-6), and finally vice-president. He was president of the International Congress of Building Societies in 1933. When Hill retired in 1938 the Halifax had more than 16% of all building society funds, compared with 2% when he was appointed. The assets of the society had increased from $1,400,000 to $123 million. 
Hill was president of the Conservative Association, successively at Leek and Halifax, and was the unsuccessful Conservative parliamentary candidate at Leek in 1922 and 1923, and also at Huddersfield in 1924 and 1929. Appointed a JP in 1913, he later chaired the lord chancellor's advisory committee for Halifax. Hill was a freemason, and his interests included golf and motoring. Hill died of heart failure at his home, Willow Hall, Halifax, on 13 May 1942. His second wife died in April 1951. 


@@@@@


doc= 47663


Biddulph, Francis (bap. 1734, d. 1800), banker, was baptized at Ledbury, Herefordshire, on 3 March 1734, the last of eight children of Robert Biddulph (1682-1772) and his wife, Anne, daughter of Benjamin Joliffe of Cofton Hall, Worcester. He had five brothers and two sisters, though two brothers and both sisters had died before Biddulph was born. Biddulph never married and had no children. His eldest brother, Michael Biddulph (1724-1800), became his next of kin following the death of his father in 1772; his mother died in 1760. 
Biddulph's involvement in metropolitan financial circles dates from the early 1750s when he was active in the City of London, probably as a goldsmith. Like many others of this trade before him, Biddulph soon made the transition to bona fide banker and by about 1755 was in business in St Paul's Churchyard. In 1757 he decided to establish a new and independent banking house and asked an old Herefordshire neighbour, Sir Charles Cocks of Eastnor, near Ledbury, to send someone to London to assist the new enterprise. Thus it was that James and Thomas Sommers Cocks, sons of Sir Charles, joined Biddulph to form the house of Cocks, Biddulph & Co., in St Paul's Churchyard. In 1759 the firm moved to 43 Charing Cross, in the City of Westminster. 
The nature and conduct of the banking business at Charing Cross were shaped in part by Biddulph's character and provincial origins. Cocks, Biddulph & Co. were considered exceptionally discreet, even among the somewhat closed world of the aristocratic West End banks. Such discretion attracted some notable customers, including the dukes of Gloucester and Northumberland, the bishop of London, the Oxford colleges of Exeter and Brasenose, and the dean and chapter of Lincoln Cathedral. The bank also acted as agent in the capital for a number of country banks in Wales and the west, and for Hereford and St David's cathedrals. Thus Biddulph combined the provision of personal banking services to the aristocracy and gentry with interests in the church and provincial trade and industry. He moved not only between London and the provinces, but also among the many distinct social worlds of the eighteenth century. 
Biddulph lived for much of his life in the banking house in Charing Cross, within the parish of St Martin-in-the-Fields. He died, intestate, in Brighton on 25 October 1800. On the death of his brother Michael in December 1800, a large part of his considerable fortune went to Michael's son Robert Biddulph, MP for Hereford. 


@@@@@


doc= 47666


Lidbury, Sir Charles (1880-1978), banker, was born on 30 June 1880 at the School House, Middlewich, Cheshire, the elder son of Frank Albert Lidbury and his wife, Emily Harding, who were both schoolteachers. He left school when he was thirteen, and in October 1893 applied in Winsford, Cheshire, to Parr's Banking Company, which was growing rapidly in industrial areas by amalgamations. For the rest of his working life Lidbury was employed by Parr's and the London County and Westminster Bank, into which Parr's itself was merged in 1918. The bank was called the Westminster from 1923, and it and the National Provincial joined in 1970 to form the National Westminster Bank. 
Lidbury's whole career was characterized by concentrated energy, speed of work, and attention to detail -- virtues which he strongly recommended to young bank staff in later years. He progressed through junior posts in Winsford and Sandbach, accompanied by studies at night school, to a major branch in Leicester. He became involved in Parr's amalgamations, and in 1908 his shrewd assessment of figures led to his being in charge of an investigation of the Whitehaven Joint Stock Bank before it was absorbed by Parr's. 
His studies completed, Lidbury spent some leisure time in the local yeomanry (he rose to lance-sergeant), but in 1909 ended membership on his marriage to Mary Moreton, the daughter of George Moreton of Kinderton Hall, Middlewich. They had two daughters, and Lidbury from then on had few interests outside the world of finance, his family, and their home, Winter Field, Melbury Abbas, Shaftesbury, Dorset, where he described himself as a part-time farmer and developed some enthusiasm for agriculture. After a spell on the inspection staff, at the age of thirty-four he was made joint branch manager of the bank's Iron Gate branch, Derby, becoming one of Parr's youngest branch managers. Its later merger with Westminster took Lidbury to London, where his shrewdness and skills were valued. 
The Westminster in 1913 had created the Westminster Foreign Bank (WFB) and opened branches in Europe, which were loosely controlled through officers of its main bank. Lidbury was made inspector of foreign branches (1919), and in that capacity came to realize that WFB was an ill-devised scheme, embarked upon without real information or intelligent foresight. He restored some unwise lendings, but also curbed future activities. In 1923 he was made superintendent of foreign branches, and in 1924 general manager of WFB -- a post he held until 1947. In Westminster Bank itself, after instituting a then novel costing exercise, he became joint general manager in 1927. He helped wind up the Banco Italo-Britannic in 1929, uncovering unsavoury dealings in the process, and in 1930 rescued the ailing Anglo-South-American Bank (he was made a knight commander of the order of Al Morito of Chile) and also became Westminster's chief general manager. 
Lidbury had grown up in an industrial district, and was critical of speculative investment in industry. He was not convinced of the long-term wisdom of bank-financed rescue of ailing firms and industries as the 1929-32 depression took its toll, and believed that ideally British commercial banks should be providers of short-term finance only. However, he conceded that in the depression it was necessary to prolong temporarily unrepayable advances, if only because there was little demand for new lendings. He was chairman of the chief executive officers' committee of the Committee of London Clearing Bankers from 1936 to 1947 (after his tenure the chairmanship rotated): during the Second World War he saw the necessity of financial regulation, and was instrumental in keeping it to a minimum. He served as president of the Institute of Bankers (1939-45) and was awarded a knighthood (1941). Lidbury's wife died in 1939. After his London flat was bombed in 1941, he took up residence in the basement strongroom of the Westminster Bank head office for the duration of the war. 
By 1943 all the 'big five' clearing banks, acutely aware of mounting criticism of their policies, had begun to consider initiatives for post-war finance for small firms. Despite his later opposition to the Industrial and Commercial Finance Corporation (ICFC), Lidbury himself, at a Liberal Party dinner held in February 1943, surprisingly and influentially called for the creation of an industrial bank to help finance the small businessman. However, he and others were unhappy with the idea that smaller, inherently more risky firms in special areas should get preferential interest rates on loans as the government suggested. Government-sponsored schemes would, it was argued, have banks lending to 'the incompetent, the thriftless and the indolent' (Coopey and Clarke, 21). 
A committee of senior managers from the clearing banks was set up, under the auspices of the Bank of England, to draft a blueprint for what later became the ICFC. Lidbury, who was described by a Bank of England official as 'the boss-cat of the clearing bank managers' (Coopey and Clarke, 22), played a dominant role in its proceedings. Despite his opposition, he conceded that 'the present political ferments' (ibid.) called for some response, while attacking what he believed to be an 'indirect levy on the resources of the commercial banks for the subsidising of commercial and industrial 'adventures' in the interests of the 'full employment' campaign' (ibid.). Lidbury wanted a committee of clearing bankers to vet all applications and ensure that interest rates were not below those offered to their own customers. 
In May 1944 Lord Catto replaced Montagu Norman as governor of the Bank of England. Catto stated that he 'should like the great ideal to be attempted' (Coopey and Clarke, 23). After he managed to reassure the chief executives of the banks about their commercial anxieties 'there was a cordial exchange of letters with Lidbury' (Fforde, 721), and detailed discussions about the final shape of the new finance corporation got under way. Later known as 3i, it proved to be Britain's most successful venture-capital entity. 
Lidbury was a Liberal supporter, averse neither to Keynesian-style public works in times of failing demand nor to social reform within limits set by the ability to pay. His entirely realistic appraisal of Britain's post-war indebtedness and need for exports, set out in his delayed inaugural address to the Institute of Bankers in October 1945 ('The economic consequences of the war'), was reprinted in a number of journals. He was, however, opposed to any form of bank nationalization, or, mindful of the 1930s, to public disclosure of banks' true profits and reserves, and maintained that banks did not control the economy: they reflected it. At once genial and intolerant, he schooled three men who were to become successively chief general managers of his bank. Unusually, while still Westminster's chief general manager, he was made a board member, but was trenchant in defence of the separation of policy making from execution by its managers. The bank was his to run, and run it he did until his retirement as chief general manager in 1947. He continued as a director until 1962, and hoped to live to be a hundred. He died following an accident at the Harnham Croft Nursing Home, Salisbury, on 25 July 1978. Aged ninety-eight, he had been looked after by his two daughters, who never married. 


@@@@@


doc= 47667


Ahmad Khan, Sir Saiyid (1817-1898), Muslim leader in India, was born on 17 October 1817 in Khwaja Farid's 'haveli' (mansion) near the Tiraha Bahram Khan in Delhi, the youngest of the three children (two boys and one girl) of Saiyid Muttaqi (died 1838), a Mughal noble, and his wife Aziz-un-Nisa Begam, daughter of Khwaja Fariduddin Ahmad (1747-1828), envoy of the East India Company to Persia and Burma and prime minister of the Mughal emperor, Akbar II. His father's family were Husaini Saiyids, who had migrated to India from Herat in the time of Akbar; his mother's family, who claimed descent from the Sufi saint Sheikh Yusuf Hamadani (died 1140), had in the early eighteenth century settled in Delhi as traders from Kashmir. 
Saiyid Ahmad was educated in Persian and Arabic but when young was noted neither for ability nor for self-discipline. After his father's death, and against his family's wishes, he began to work in the judicial branch of the East India Company's administration, serving in Agra, Mainpuri, Fatehpur Sikri, and, from 1846, in Delhi. In 1855 he was promoted to assistant magistrate of Bijnor, where in the mutiny of 1857 he rescued the British population of the district. From 1858 he was magistrate in Moradabad, Ghazipur, and Aligarh, and then in 1867 was promoted to judge of the small-cause court in Benares, which he served until his retirement in 1876. From 1878 to 1882 he was on the central legislative council. He gave evidence to the education commission of 1882 and served on the public service commission of 1887. In 1888 he was made KCSI. 
There were three transforming experiences in Saiyid Ahmad's life, the cumulative impact of which made him the outstanding Indian Muslim leader of his day. The first was the death of his elder brother in 1845. Up to this time he had pursued carnal and aesthetic pleasures; thenceforward he devoted himself to serious matters, growing a beard and attending Delhi's Madrasa Rahimiya to repair gaps in his education. The second formative experience was the mutiny uprising of 1857. It was a personal tragedy -- many of his relatives and friends were killed -- and a great human and cultural tragedy, in which tens of thousands died or were displaced, and Delhi was destroyed as a focus of Muslim culture. For a moment Saiyid Ahmad considered leaving India for good, but decided to stay and devote himself to his people. His third transforming experience was his seventeen-month visit to Britain in 1869 and 1870: it was here that he studied the sources of European ascendancy, and his ideas for Indian education crystallized. 
After the mutiny it was evident to Saiyid Ahmad that education was essential to building a bridge between the north Indian elites and the government. His ideas about how to achieve this evolved gradually. One was the importance of using the medium of Indian languages: to this end he founded at Ghazipur the Scientific Society, the major activity of which was the translation into Urdu of European texts, on subjects ranging from mechanics and modern farming to mathematics and history. Another objective was the establishment of sympathetic educational environments for Indians, such as the schools he founded in Moradabad and Ghazipur in 1858 and 1864. These ideas came together in Saiyid Ahmad's unsuccessful proposal to the government in 1867 to found a vernacular university. It was only after visiting Britain and consulting fellow Muslims that he produced a plan that succeeded: it was to establish a college which was independent of government, adopted the residential model of Oxford and Cambridge, and taught English literature, oriental languages, and European science through the medium of Urdu. In 1877 the Muhammadan Anglo-Oriental College was founded at Aligarh (though market forces soon forced it to teach through the medium of English alone). In 1886 Saiyid Ahmad established the Muhammadan Educational Conference to take the message of Aligarh to the rest of India. Two points should be noted about his achievement: although the college would not have been founded without his energetic fund-raising efforts, it did benefit from government patronage; and although Saiyid Ahmad's early endeavours were for both Hindus and Muslims, and Hindu students were welcome at Aligarh, he came increasingly to work for Muslims alone after Hindus tried to replace the Persian script with the Devanagari, and Urdu with Hindi, as the government language in the late 1860s. 
Successful educational reform required attention to custom and belief. One concern was countering the perceived threat of Christian missionaries. Saiyid Ahmad strove to alleviate fears through his commentary on the 'Bible' (1862-87), which aimed to remove the suspicions of Christians about Islam, to refute the arguments of Muslims that the text of the 'Bible' was corrupt, and to demonstrate how Muslims and Christians held beliefs in common. When necessary he went on the attack, publishing his 'Khutbat-i-Ahmadiya' (1870) to refute the derogatory picture of the prophet in the 'Life of Mahomet' by William Muir, the lieutenant-governor of his province. A second concern was to overcome Muslim religious prejudices which hampered progress. This was answered by the foundation in December 1870 of a new periodical, the 'Mohammedan Social Reformer', in which he and his supporters attacked injurious customs and beliefs. (The only chinks in his liberal credentials were his opposition to English education for women and his support for purdah.) A third concern was to foster an understanding of Islam which would not be troubled by European science. In order to answer this concern, Saiyid Ahmad developed a new Islamic theology, which he set out in his 'Koran' commentary published over the years 1880 to 1904. Echoing the Christian natural theologians, whose work he knew, he began from the position that the work of God (nature) and the word of God (Koranic revelation) must be in harmony. He distinguished between the essence of the 'Koran' and what belonged to the time in which it was revealed, and showed that this essence could flourish in the modern world without fear of scientific discoveries or social change. Many found Saiyid Ahmad's views too advanced, and he was bitterly attacked; he succeeded, however, in laying the foundations of Islamic modernism. 
Saiyid Ahmad was a keen historian; his first notable work was 'Asar-i-Sanadid' (1847), in which he recorded the inscriptions and buildings of Delhi and the lives of notable inhabitants. For this research he received an honorary fellowship of the Royal Asiatic Society; the book was also translated into French. Subsequently, he edited Barani's 'Tarikh-i-Firoz Shahi' (1862), Abu'l-Fazl's 'A'in-i-Akbari', and the 'Tuzuk-i-Jahangiri' (1864), and wrote a history of Bijnor (lost in the mutiny) and a 'History of the Revolt in Bijnor' (1858). A strong historical understanding underpinned his Islamic modernism. 
Saiyid Ahmad had considerable influence over the style and content of Urdu literature. He championed the development of a simple and clear prose style over the florid forms of the day, aiming to fashion the language into an effective medium for serious ideas. He also encouraged Urdu poets to adopt the 'natural poetry' of the Victorian British, paving the way for verse to convey social, moral, and political messages. Thus he gave direction to the work of Hali, Shibli, Nazir Ahmad, and many others, who came to form the 'Aligarh school' in Urdu literature. 
Such a man was bound to play a major political role. In 1858 Saiyid Ahmad launched himself in public life by publishing 'The Causes of the Indian Revolt', in which he demonstrated that the mutiny was not the outcome of a conspiracy, as many British thought, but of a breakdown of trust between society and government; what was needed, he felt, was education for Indians, and their representation on the central legislative council. Two years later, in order to demonstrate Muslim support for the British, he started his journal, the 'Loyal Muhammadans of India'. In 1866 he founded the British Indian Association to improve the efficacy of British Indian government. He was a noted speaker in the central legislative council, and was the first Indian to propose a bill (for smallpox vaccination) of his own. Most significant was his opposition to the Indian National Congress: he objected in particular to its demand for elections to the legislative council, on the grounds that Muslims and the Hindu landed gentry of northern India were not ready for it. Saiyid Ahmad's opposition led to a generation of Muslims not joining the Indian nationalist movement. 
Little is known of Saiyid Ahmad's wife, whom he married about 1835 and who died in 1861, leaving him a daughter and two sons, the younger of whom, Saiyid Mahmood, was to gain great distinction as a lawyer. On 27 March 1898 Sir Saiyid Ahmad Khan died in Aligarh from the effects of a stricture of the urethra; he was buried next to the mosque at his college in Aligarh. Physically, he was most impressive: 'a herculean frame, with broad and pensive forehead, compassionate but thoughtful eyes, leonine jaw and a white flowing beard, when he walked his majestic gait gave the impression of a 'ship in motion'' (Nizami, 156). Indian and Briton acknowledged him as a natural leader -- sincere, magnanimous, persevering, and courageous, as well as unusually energetic, buoyant, and humorous; his was a noble but, in his later years, somewhat autocratic temperament. Although he believed that Hindus and Muslims in India should form one nation, he laid the foundations of institutions and understandings which were to underpin the growth of Muslim separatism. 


@@@@@


doc= 47668


Mehta, Sir Pherozeshah Merwanjee (1845-1915), politician and Indian nationalist, was born on 4 August 1845 in Bombay, the son of Merwanjee Mehta, a successful Parsi merchant. He attended Ayrton's School and, from 1855, Branch School in Bombay. A brilliant student at Elphinstone College of the University of Bombay, Pherozeshah graduated BA in 1864 and won a Dakshina scholarship for an MA which he was permitted to complete in six months, becoming the first Parsi MA and one of the first MAs of the university. He accepted a Rustomjee Jamsetjee Jeejeebhoy scholarship to keep terms at Lincoln's Inn in London from 1865 and was called to the bar in 1868. In London he established contact with expatriate Indians, some later to be leading nationalists, including Dadabhai Naoroji, in whose East India Association Mehta became involved. When he returned to India in 1868 Mehta maintained a similar involvement in its Bombay branch as well as in the reformist Bombay Association following its revival in 1867. 
On his return to India Mehta won quick success on the appellate side of the Bombay bar and earned rich rewards from representing Indian princes from Gujarat. His lucrative practice supported an aristocratic lifestyle and funded his lifelong commitment to politics. In his chambers opposite the University of Bombay he held regular evening court to discuss current events and devise campaign strategies. In attendance were the cream of the city's established lawyers and politicians, and the most talented younger men, notable among whom in the first decade of the twentieth century was M. A. Jinnah, then a rising lawyer and Congress politician. In private life he had five sons and one daughter from his marriage with Dinbai Behramji Marzban, a granddaughter of Fardoonji Marzban, who started Bombay's first Gujarati newspaper. Immediately after her death in 1907 he married a long-time friend, Aimai Shroff, who survived him by many decades, serving as patron of various Parsi and other charities. 
It was in the field of municipal reform that Mehta first made his public mark, when he joined in the agitation for representative municipal government, which led to a new municipal constitution in 1872. He was elected to the Bombay corporation in 1873 and served on it until his death, acting as president or chairman in 1884-6 and 1905-6. His role in municipal politics was such that he was sometimes called the 'Uncrowned King of Bombay', while his brilliant rhetoric and his pugnacious debating style earned him the nickname Pherozeshah the Ferocious. Although he was a significant figure in Bombay life he was on occasion in conflict with the orthodox or more conservative members of his own Parsi community. His attempts to build bridges included his membership of the Parsi masonic lodge, the Lodge Rising Star of Western India, Bombay, and his establishing of the Ripon Club in 1884 as a social link between various sections of the community. 
In 1883 Mehta became involved in co-ordinating Indian support for the 'Ilbert Bill' (which enabled Indian judges in the countryside to try cases against Europeans), countering vigorous British opposition throughout India. With two other Bombay luminaries, K. T. Telang and Badruddin Tyabji, he founded the Bombay Presidency Association in 1885. His dominance both of the association and of municipal politics ensured him a voice in Indian political arenas outside the city, in the presidency and elsewhere in India. He was among those instrumental in organizing the first session of the Indian National Congress in Bombay in 1885 and was its president in 1890. Thereafter he dominated Congress politics until the early twentieth century, when political challenges from a new party, popularly known as the extremists, led by B. G. Tilak and others, split Congress in 1907. Mehta's group, the moderates, which included G. K. Gokhale, retained control of the organization until the early years of the First World War, when new political forces moved towards unifying the factions. Mehta died of a heart attack on 5 November 1915 in Bombay before the unification he opposed took place. His political support in the municipality had also been challenged in 1907-8 by a so-called 'caucus' led by expatriate Englishmen who objected to his predominance and supported the Bombay municipal commissioner, a European nominee of the government. Mehta survived the challenge in the municipal elections in 1907, as he survived the challenge in Congress, but his power base was weakened. The major political act of his final years was the founding in 1913 of an English-language daily newspaper, the 'Bombay Chronicle', to promote a Congress -- and Indian -- viewpoint. 
Though one of India's leading nationalists, Mehta served on the Bombay legislative council from 1886 until his death and on the central legislative council from 1894 to 1896. He was potent as a kind of unofficial opposition in the councils and represented causes other than those of his immediate power bases. Made a CIE in 1895 he was promoted KCIE in 1904. He favoured the constitutional changes initiated by Lord Morley, the secretary of state for India, from 1905 and influenced the negotiations. Mehta's activities have been somewhat overshadowed by later nationalist struggles, but his was a powerful voice which could vigorously oppose British policies and actions and equally energetically lead his fellow Indians in the direction of anti-communal and constitutional politics. He influenced a subsequent generation of politicians and gave strong support in the last decade of his life to M. K. Gandhi and his South African campaigns. He also ensured the successful working of municipal self-government and its impact upon the quality of urban life. 


@@@@@


doc= 47669


Banerjea, Sir Surendranath (1848-1925), politician, the second child of Dr Durgacharan Banerjea, was born in Taltala, Calcutta, on 10 November 1848. Durgacharan, a disciple of David Hare, the philanthropist who helped him to get his medical education, was one of the most successful doctors in the city and a friend of the reformer Vidyasagar, whom he introduced to English education. The tension between the very orthodox Brahmanical family traditions and his father's modernist outlook was an important influence in the development of Surendranath's intellectual and social concerns. Educated at the Parental Academic Institution of Calcutta and Doveton College, Calcutta, after graduation he left for England in the company of R. C. Dutt and Bihari Lal Gupta to sit for the Indian Civil Service examination in 1869. All three were successful in the competition, but Banerjea's appointment was held up as there was doubt regarding his age; his appeal to court on this issue was successful and he was admitted to the service ['see 'competition wallahs]. He was appointed assistant magistrate in Sylhet in 1871, but he was suspended and dismissed in 1873 on grounds of negligence. His 'crime' was that he had signed an official document which listed a closed case as adjourned. The belief persisted that he was the victim of racism, having incurred the wrath of the local European officials by claiming equality of social status for himself and his wife, Chandidevi, a view indirectly supported by two lieutenant-governors of Bengal. Banerjea went to England to appeal against the decision but was unsuccessful. He joined the Middle Temple to seek qualification as a barrister, but the benchers refused to call him to the bar in view of his dismissal. He returned to Calcutta a disgraced official and was virtually ostracized by local society. Vidyasagar offered him a lectureship in English in Metropolitan College, which he accepted in 1876. This was the beginning of a teaching career which was to last for thirty-seven years, in the course of which he also taught at Free Church College (later renamed Scottish Church College) and at City College (founded by the leaders of the Brahmo Samaj). He established a new college in 1882 which was later named Ripon College. 
The first forum of Banerjea's political activity was the Calcutta Students' Association. Ananadamohan Basu, who was inspired by the activities of the Bombay students, was the co-founder of the organization. Banerjea's great fame as a speaker who could electrify his audiences began with his speeches to this association, on subjects such as 'The life of Mazzini', 'The rise of the Sikh power', 'Chaitanya', and 'Indian unity'. His purpose was to create a political consciousness and patriotic concern among the students. He held up as his ideal the self-dedication of the Italian nationalists Mazzini and Garibaldi, though he pleaded for constitutional agitation as practised in Britain rather than active, especially armed, resistance. He also underlined the message of radical social change in Chaitanya's teaching which indirectly challenged the caste system, the patriotic fervour of the Sikhs who had defeated the British, and the underlying unity of Indian society. His younger contemporaries bore witness to the consciousness-raising impact of Banerjea's speeches. His purpose, in his own words, was to create among the young men of his country 'a genuine, sober and rational interest in public affairs'. The effect of his propaganda went far beyond this restrained objective. 
Banerjea felt the need for an institutional base for sustained constitutional agitation. The Indian Association established in 1876 was the product of this concern. Leaders of the Brahmo Samaj were among the enthusiastic sponsors of this organization: the individualistic ideal they upheld in their programme of social and religious reform had a political counterpart in this new initiative. As Bipin Pal, the extremist leader, pointed out, there had really been no serious effort to propagate democratic ideals in India until then. The older British Indian Association was a body restricted to and speaking for the landowners, and the more democratic Indian League enjoyed very little support. The Indian Association thus proved to be the first democratic forum for middle-class Indians. The Brahmoists' insistence on freedom of individual action had created conflicts within Indian society. Those who were attracted by their ideology but were hesitant to face conflict within the family circle could now express their love of freedom through actions which were risk-free. Banerjea's tours of the districts attracted large audiences of up to 30,000 people, and he concentrated on issues such as reduction of the salt tax, the need for trial by jury, freedom of the press, and the end to racial discrimination in the judicial system. 
One of the first activities of the Indian Association was its campaign against the British decision to reduce further the age of entrance into the Indian Civil Service, which would have undermined the chances of Indians entering the service. Banerjea's lecture tours in this connection to many parts of India made him aware that there was already a homogeneous class of Indians educated in the same Western system and sharing the same aspirations. The possibility and need for an all-India political organization now became evident to him, as to many others. The 'Arms Act' and the 'Vernacular Press Act' passed by the viceroy, Lord Lytton, which took away the Indians' right to carry arms and restricted severely the freedom of the press, led to further agitations that cemented this new awareness. Meanwhile Banerjea had acquired a new instrument for his campaign, the ownership of a weekly paper, 'The Bengalee', which he started editing in 1879; it became a daily in 1900. An editorial he wrote criticizing a judge of the Calcutta high court whose action had offended Hindus led to a prosecution for contempt of court and a sentence of imprisonment in 1883, an incident which provoked great resentment throughout the country. 
Now more keenly aware than ever of the need for sustained propaganda and agitation both in India and in England, Banerjea took the initiative in setting up a National Fund. His oratorical skills proved of great value in this effort while the British agitation against the 'Ilbert Bill' (which was designed to bring Europeans in India under the jurisdiction of Indian magistrates) sharpened the sense of political bondage. The old British Indian Association and the more middle-class Indian Association now forgot their differences and merged into the National Conference, which paved the way for the founding of the Indian National Congress in 1885. Though he missed the first meeting of the new national organization Banerjea was involved in its activities from the very start, and was twice elected its president (in 1895 and in 1902). He also participated to great effect in the representative institutions of the period, as municipal chairman from 1885 onwards and as a member of the Bengal legislative council for eight years from 1893. In 1890 he went to England as a member of the mission sent by the Congress to plead for an increased measure of representation in the decision-making bodies. He visited England on two more occasions, to give evidence before the Welby commission in 1897 and as a representative of the Indian press at the imperial press conference in 1909. 
Banerjea assumed a more confrontational role in the campaign against the partition of Bengal in 1905. He was arrested and fined on charges of leading a banned procession during a conference in the district town of Barisal. Yet as the tension between the moderates and the extremists within the Indian National Congress grew sharper Banerjea found himself firmly on the side of the moderates. On the passing of the Montagu-Chelmsford reforms of 1919 and Gandhi's decision to launch the non-co-operation movement the following year, he was among the leaders who left the Congress organization and co-operated with the reforms. He accepted a knighthood from the British in 1919 and joined the Bengal cabinet as minister for local self-government in 1921. His credibility as a nationalist leader suffered a serious blow through these actions, and he was defeated in the provincial election of 1923 by a young doctor sponsored by C. R. Das, Dr B. C. Roy. For a man who had once been hailed as the uncrowned king of Bengal and the father of national consciousness this was an intolerable humiliation. He died, a broken man, in Calcutta on 6 August 1925. 
Despite the rejection he suffered in his last days, when the political situation had undergone a sea change, leaving men of his persuasion entirely isolated, Banerjea's great contribution to the growth of nationalist consciousness in India is universally recognized. His autobiography, 'A Nation in Making' (1925), is a remarkable account of the emergence of that consciousness. 


@@@@@


doc= 47670


Vivekananda (1863-1902), Hindu religious leader, was born on 12 January 1863 in Calcutta and named Narendranath Datta. His family were Kayasthas, a writer caste traditionally employed in government service. His father, Vishwanath Datta (died 1884), a successful lawyer, and his mother, Bhuvaneshwari, ensured that their son received the education necessary for a professional career in British-ruled India. At the age of fifteen he attended a mission school and in 1880 he entered Presidency College, Calcutta. In 1884 he graduated BA, in the second division, and went on to study law at the Metropolitan Institution, completing his studies there in 1886. He also attended the Scottish Church College in Calcutta. However, his life was not to follow the path for which his education had been intended to prepare him. 
Like many educated young Indian men at this time he joined the Brahmo Samaj, a rationalist organization that sought to reform Hinduism, and in 1881 he met, for the first time, the Hindu ascetic Ramakrishna Paramahansa. Initially he showed little interest in the swami, but gradually grew closer to him and to his teachings. Throughout his time at college his interest in religion grew and he became a freemason in 1884. His ties with Swami Ramakrishna strengthened, especially after the death of Narendranath's father on 25 February 1884. He became a regular attender at the Dakshineshwar Temple where Ramakrishna taught, and he lost interest in institutional education and a professional career, although he completed his courses. The swami had attracted a group of young men who had for the most part been educated in English-speaking schools, and when he fell ill in October 1885 this group of disciples, including Narendranath, brought him to Calcutta where they nursed him until his death on 16 August 1886. The following month the group dispersed. 
In December 1886 Narendranath located a dilapidated house at Baranagar, near the River Ganges, which became a crude monastery dedicated to Ramakrishna's teachings, for himself and four others, until November 1891 when with the financial support of some Hindu princes they moved to a superior lodging at Alambazar. The following year, while visiting sacred sites on the western coast, he met the raja of Khetri, who urged him to take the name Swami Vivekananda, a name suitable for a Hindu ascetic. He accepted the suggestion, and it is by this name that he is best-known. 
From this time he became one of the most influential Hindu thinkers and publicists at a time of religious ferment and reconstruction in India, presenting Hinduism in India and abroad as a highly significant world religion, equal to other religious traditions such as Christianity or Islam. He argued, in the face of Western condemnation of India and of Hindu tradition, that India was a deeply spiritual land, in contrast to the materialistic West; and that Hinduism was a noble and ancient religion. Compared with the great historical diversity of religious traditions in Hindu society, he preached Vedanta as the core or gospel of Hinduism as a world faith; and he also broke new ground by arguing the centrality of social service in the truly spiritual Hindu life. Both these aspects of his teaching made him a compelling figure at home and abroad. 
Vivekananda sailed from Bombay in May 1893 to attend the World Parliament of Religions in Chicago. He addressed the conference at the Chicago Art Institute on its opening day, 11 September, and eight days later read a paper on Hinduism. A forceful speaker and a striking figure, he made a dramatic impression on the audience and provoked considerable comment in the American press, including a piece in the 'New York Herald' which commented how foolish it was to send Christian missionaries to the home of Hinduism. After the conference Vivekananda toured the United States, lecturing and writing extensively. He focused on four themes: bhakti yoga (the path of devotion), jnana yoga (the path of knowledge), raja yoga (the path of action), and the question of class. He gained many devotees, who would form the North American core of his religious movement. Two early disciples, initiated through the traditional rituals of 'sanyas' and given Hindu names, were Marie Ibusie (Swami Abhayananda) and Leon Landsberge (Swami Kripananda). 
He remained in the United States until September 1895, when he was invited to London by the theosophists Henrietta Muller and E. T. Sturdy. In London he followed another intense schedule of lecturing and teaching, which met with similar success to his American tour; on 22 October 1895 he gave a public lecture at Prince's Hall, Piccadilly. In December he returned to the United States, where in January 1896 he established the Vedanta Society of New York, under the presidency of one of his disciples, Francis H. Legget. Another disciple, Miss Waldo, took the name Swami Haridasi, and taught raja yoga. Vivekananda returned to lecturing, and attempted to formalize the rituals and organization of the monastery in India through his extensive correspondence with the monks there. Back in London in April, he sent his fellow monks a letter containing a constitution for the monastery. 
In January 1897 Vivekananda returned to Calcutta, where he pushed for greater organization and a higher degree of discipline among his followers. On 1 May he established the Ramakrishna mission, for both monks and laity, an organization which was to be devoted to social service. He sought a direct application of the spiritual life to the problems of the world; his legacy to Hinduism was the addition of social action to spiritual experience. Shortly afterwards he instituted a famine relief fund, and in the same year the mission opened a Ramakrishna ashrama at Sagachhi, and founded an orphanage. In 1898 a 7 acre tract of land along the Ganges to the north of Calcutta was purchased, and became the site of the Belur Math (monastery). Vivekananda encouraged the publication of a Bengali-language fortnightly paper, 'Ubodhan', as the voice of the movement; its first issue was published on 14 January 1899. Having brought a degree of order to the evolving organization, he turned his attention once more to the West. 
In June 1899 Vivekananda departed once more for the United States, via London. He spent four months in 1900 in California, where he established the Shanti Ashrama on 160 acres of land in Santa Clara donated by a supporter, Minnie Block. He visited San Francisco, and sent Swami Turyananda with twelve disciples to direct the work of inaugurating the ashrama. When he returned to New York his programme was curtailed by ill health. In August he attended the Congress of Religion in Paris, after which he embarked on a tour of Europe, visited Cairo, and finally returned to Belur Math on 9 December 1900. This proved to be his last overseas journey. 
Vivekananda devoted himself to placing the math and the mission on a firm legal and organizational footing, transferring the management of all land and buildings owned by the math and mission to a president and board of trustees. He then resigned the presidency; in February 1901 the board of trustees elected Swami Brahmananda president, leaving Vivekananda free of organizational responsibilities. He set off on a pilgrimage through East Bengal and Assam, but poor health forced him to settle at the Belur Math, where he died on 4 July 1902. 
Vivekananda left behind a vigorous and growing movement both in India and in the West. In the West it emphasized doctrine and worship based on his interpretation of Ramakrishna's teaching. In India there were two interrelated goals: religious devotion and social service. Both within and beyond this religious milieu Vivekananda left a heroic and popular image of an Indian who had affirmed the spiritual superiority of Hinduism at the very source of material power, and amid persistent condemnation of Hinduism by Western missionaries and writers. He initiated the long and continuing succession of swamis, gurus, and maharishis who have sought to offer their own interpretations of Hinduism as a cure for the ills of wealthy but materialistic Western societies. 


@@@@@


doc= 47671


Ramakrishna Paramahansa (1836-1886), Hindu religious leader, was born Gadadhar Chatterji on 18 February 1836, in the village of Kamarpukur, located in the Hooghly district of Bengal. His father, Kshudiram, and mother, Chandramani, were orthodox Brahmans, probably Vaishnavite sectarians. His father died in 1843, when Gadadhar was still a young child. At the age of nine Gadadhar received the sacred thread that denoted his place as a member of the Brahman caste and in 1852 he attended his elder brother Ramkumar's school in Calcutta. Here it is presumed he learned the necessary information and skills needed to conduct the rituals demanded by his inherited occupation as a Hindu priest. Upon completion of his education, he found employment at the newly established Dakshineshwar Temple 5 miles north of Calcutta. There he served as a pujari (priest), and conducted daily worship of Kali, the mother goddess of life and death. During his youth he demonstrated both a restlessness for and a fascination with mystical religion. The young Gadadhar neglected his ritual duties, and instead devoted increasing amounts of time to the search for spiritual enlightenment. He would sink into states of apparent unconsciousness and occasionally burst forth into extreme religious ecstasy. Such activity resulted in his dismissal from his position as a temple priest. In 1859 his family attempted to divert him from his preoccupation with personal religion by arranging his marriage to Sarada Devi. At the time of her marriage Sarada Devi was six years old and Gadadhar twenty-five. Following Hindu custom she returned home to live with her parents. In the intervening years Gadadhar was not to be dissuaded from continuing his search for a direct, mystical union with God. 
During the 1860s Gadadhar studied with a series of ascetics, seeking their guidance in his search for ultimate truth, which, if found, would give him eternal freedom from the cycle of rebirth. His first guide was a Bhairavi Brahmani, a wandering female ascetic from East Bengal, who instructed him in the tantric texts and rituals that provided a path to spiritual power through magical and erotic rituals. Next he was instructed by Jatadhari, a Vaishnavite mystic from north India, and finally by Tota Puri, a devotee of Shankaracharya, the ninth-century religious thinker who created the philosophic foundation of orthodox Hinduism. Tota Puri initiated him into sanyas, the formal stage of a renunciant, and gave him the name Ramakrishna Paramahansa. 
After his initiation as a sanyasi, Ramakrishna immersed himself in an exploration of Hinduism and other religions. He studied Sufism (Islamic mysticism), and even adopted Muslim dress, prayers, and religious behaviour. Using similar techniques, he explored Christianity, with the result that he received visions of both Christ and the Madonna. He also acted out other roles such as that of Radha, the wife of the Hindu deity Lord Krishna, for which he dressed and behaved as a Hindu woman. By 1871 he appears to have achieved a degree of inner peace. In 1872, when Sarada Devi reached the age of eighteen, she joined Ramakrishna, who still resided at the Dakshineshwar Temple but not as a practising priest. He proclaimed his wife to be the embodiment of the divine mother, thus transforming their marriage into a spiritual partnership. The attempt to draw the young Ramakrishna away from his preoccupation with a personal search for the divine had failed completely. 
By the early 1870s Ramakrishna had attracted a small group of disciples who found in him an accessible, non-judgemental, and nurturing teacher. His new disciples came mostly from the growing number of young men who were educated in schools that taught a British curriculum through the English language. In addition, their urban experiences in Calcutta generated in them a sense of distance from their traditional culture. They questioned Hindu beliefs and customs, with which they were no longer comfortable. These disciples gathered, Ramakrishna talked, and occasionally they raised questions or spoke of their own doubts and needs. For them Ramakrishna was a guru, a spiritual guide to whom they gave increasing loyalty. Three interlinked themes ran through their discussions: the first was the universality of religions -- all were true, for each followed its own road to the ultimate source of all being; a corresponding conclusion was that the doctrines and rituals of Hinduism should be preserved unchanged; and finally, since all religions were true there could be no justification for criticism of one religion by another or for conversion from one to another. 
In 1882 one disciple, Mahendranath Gupta, began to record Swami Ramakrishna's conversations, thus producing the only written account of his doctrines. In October 1885, when Ramakrishna fell ill, his disciples embarked on the task of nursing their guru. In October they moved him to 55 Shyampur Street in Calcutta and in December transferred him to 90 Cossimpore Road. When he lay near death, he charged the young Narendra Nath to 'teach my boys' and 'keep them together'. On 16 August 1886 Ramakrishna Paramahansa died, leaving behind him a small group of disciples and no writings except for those recorded by Mahendranath Gupta. 
Well before his death Ramakrishna's ideas were spread beyond the world of his disciples. After 1875 his message was popularized by Keshab Chandra Sen, who met Ramakrishna in 1872 and accepted the concept of the universality of all religions. Sen was a Brahmo Samaj leader who broke with that reform society and established his own branch of this religious movement. Following Ramakrishna's death Sarada Devi became widely respected as a spiritual leader among those who followed her husband's doctrines and the wider public. The most famous of Ramakrishna's disciples, however, was Narendranath Datta, later known as Swami Vivekananda, who transmitted and transformed Ramakrishna's ideas and created the Ramakrishna Math and Mission, an international movement of religious action and social service. At a time when the impact of both Christian missions and imperial rule was causing questioning and turbulence in all of India's main religious traditions, Ramakrishna Paramahansa was among the most important leaders of the Hindu tradition. 


@@@@@


doc= 47672


Sen, Keshub Chunder (1838-1884), religious reformer, second son of Pyarimohan (died 1848/9) and Saradasundari ('nee' Das) Sen, was born in Calcutta on 19 November 1838. His grandfather, Ramkamal Sen, 'diwan' of both the Bengal Bank and the mint at Calcutta, was among the luminaries of the nineteenth-century Bengal renaissance. Pyarimohan, his second son, succeeded him at the mint. Keshub's father died when the boy was ten, but the family was prosperous and he grew up in the lap of luxury. An early influence which shaped his spiritual development was the deep devotionalism of his family environment. 
He was educated at the Hindoo College as well as at the Metropolitan College. When the former was reorganized as Hindu School and Presidency College, Keshub went to Presidency College, where he studied until 1858. There he was the chief organizer of the British India Society, a very influential discussion group where he learned his first lessons in oratory for which he was later to become famous. The young men of the Sen family also set up in 1856 the Colootola Branch School, where children from less fortunate homes were provided with regular instruction free of charge. Also in 1856 he married Jaganmohini, the nine-year-old daughter of Chandranath Majumdar. He entered the married state in a puritanical mood, committed to self-restraint. His spiritual aspirations were first expressed in the founding of the Goodwill Fraternity, in which a few friends got together to discuss matters of the spirit. This led to the next step, in which he lost faith in the idolatrous rituals of his ancestral faith, and joined the theistic Brahmo Samaj, revived and reorganized by Debendranath Tagore. He left the family home with his wife and they went to live with the Tagores for some time in 1859. Debendranath set up the Calcutta Brahmo Samaj on an independent footing and Sen became one of its secretaries. He gave up his job at the Bank of Bengal in 1861 to devote himself to the work of the Samaj on a full-time basis. 
Welfare activities became a new plank in the Samaj's programme under his leadership. Relief work during the malaria epidemic of 1861-2, finance to the famine stricken in north-western India, propaganda in favour of women's education, and the founding of a model educational institution, the Calcutta College, were among his major initiatives at this time. He also became the managing editor and in 1865 the proprietor of the Brahmo mouthpiece, the 'Indian Mirror'. He started going out on tours of religious propaganda from 1861 onwards. In 1864 he went to Madras and Bombay, where he met Dadabhai Naoroji. The Maharashtrian leader M. G. Ranade helped to found the Prarthana Samaj ('prayer society') inspired by Sen's preaching. Sen's tours were inspired by a pan-Indian ideology and he paved the way for political initiatives inspired by the same ideal. 
His reformist zeal, especially his attempt to establish an association of Brahmo representatives from all parts of India, Pratinidhi-Sabha, to run the society on a democratic basis, created tensions with Tagore. Eventually Sen and his friends left the organization and set up the Brahmo Samaj of India (Bharatvarshiya Brahmosamaj) in 1866. This emphasis on a pan-Indian identity became a hallmark of all his activities. He went on a propaganda tour of northern India in 1867 and on his return talked of the need to institute a system of active co-operation among educated Indians of all presidencies and provinces, nearly twenty years before the founding of the Indian National Congress. The Bharatvarshiya Brahmomandir ('Brahmo temple of India') was established in 1869 and it recognized the equal rights of men and women. Sen's efforts to legalize inter-caste marriage and the Brahmo marriage ritual, which avoided idolatrous elements, led to the 'Marriage Act' of 1872. 
Sen went to England in 1870 with five of his brethren in faith. There he established extensive contacts with scholars, religious leaders, and politicians, including W. E. Gladstone. He was also received by Queen Victoria, and returned to India full of enthusiasm for British rule in India and an emotional loyalty towards the queen. He was also keen to secure for India some of the benefits of the modern civilization he had witnessed in England, and set up the Indian Reform Association with this end in view. It had a five-fold agenda which emphasized education for women, craft schools, the education of the working classes, cheap periodicals for the poor, and agitation to fight the widespread evil of alcohol, and also raised funds to assist people in need. People from all communities assisted in the effort. Mary Carpenter, who went to India in 1866, and Annette Ackroyd (later Mrs Beveridge) helped in the attempt to spread education. The Bengal Social Science Association, partly inspired by Ackroyd, became a forum for propaganda in favour of women's rights. A journal for women, 'Bamabodhini Patrika', was one of the products of Sen's efforts. His loyalist concerns led to the foundation of the Albert Institute and Albert Hall on College Street, Calcutta, in 1876: its object was to counteract the growing animosity between the ruler and the ruled. 
In 1872 he met Swami Dayananda Saraswati, the revivalist preacher, and his friendship with the mystic Ramakrishna Paramahansa from 1875 onwards profoundly influenced his spiritual development. His growing inclination towards an eclectic faith was partly induced by these encounters. But his conservatism and somewhat dictatorial ways led to tensions with his younger followers like Sibnath Shastri, who wanted to run the Samaj on truly democratic lines, and who had views on women's freedom more advanced than those of Sen. The crunch came when Sen agreed to give the elder of his two daughters, then aged thirteen, in marriage to the prince of Cooch Behar, in violation of the Samaj's principles. A section of his followers seceded and formed a new sect, Sadharan Brahmo Samaj. Sen moved more and more in the direction of an eclectic and emotional mysticism, eventually founding a new movement called Nababidhan ('new dispensation'). 
His public speeches had for many years been an important influence on the youth of Calcutta, but towards the closing years of his life he lost much of his appeal, in part because his credibility had been damaged by the Cooch Behar marriage. But there were more important reasons. His emphasis on loyalty to the British was ceasing to provide an acceptable ideology for the educated young, who were moving towards a more radical outlook and the ideal of independence. Keshub Chunder Sen died in Calcutta on 8 January 1884, by which time he had few followers left. 


@@@@@


doc= 47673


Roy, Rammohun (1772?-1833), political and religious thinker, was born in Radhanagar, Burdwan district, Bengal, the youngest of three children of Ramkanta Roy (died 1803), a 'zamindar' (landholder), and his second wife, Tarini Devi. He had an elder sister, an elder brother, Jagmohan, and a younger half-brother, Ramlochan (by his father's third wife, Rammani Devi). His date of birth is uncertain. Some authorities prefer 1774, the date given by his first biographer, Lant Carpenter, in 1833, and inscribed on his tomb in 1872; and some contemporary sources give later dates. The family was of the Rarhi Brahman caste, and worshipped Vishnu. Their hereditary title was Banerji (Sanskrit form Bandyopadhyay); the princely title Roy had been conferred on Rammohun's great-grandfather by the nawab of Bengal. Rammohun himself was apparently married three times in childhood; among Rarhi Brahmans polygyny and child marriage were common and respected practices, which he later censured. Little is known of his wives, and they did not share in his social and public life. The first died young, but the third survived him; with the second, who died in 1824, Rammohun had two sons, Radhaprasad ('b'. 1800) and Ramaprasad ('b'. 1812). He also had an adopted son, Rajaram, who accompanied him to England. (Carpenter's memoir refers to him throughout as Rammohun's son, but Carpenter was later informed that he was a foundling.) 
The information from contemporary sources on Rammohun Roy's early life and education is scanty and conflicting. He is said to have been sent to Patna to study Persian and Arabic, and to Calcutta or Benares for Sanskrit; what is certain is that by 1815 he was proficient in all these languages, and in English. We also know that the family moved in 1792 to Langulpara, that in 1796 he was managing his father's estates, and that later in the same year Ramkanta divided his property among his three sons, contrary to the statement of some early biographers that Rammohun was disinherited. During the next few years Rammohun was still managing his father's property, but was also in business in Calcutta, dealing in the East India Company's stock, lending money, and investing in land; he lent large sums to some of the company's British employees. His wealth grew, while his father and his elder brother fell into debt; his father died in 1803, owing rent both to the company and to the maharaja of Burdwan. Meanwhile, Rammohun's British contacts led to employment as 'munshi' (translator and language teacher) and as 'diwan' (business manager); he was also intermittently employed by the company from 1803 to 1815, this employment taking him to various parts of Bengal and making him familiar with the English language and European ideas. In 1815 he and another Bengali, Krishnakant Basu, were sent to Bhutan by David Scott (1786-1831), who was becoming the company's expert on north-east frontier affairs. This mission is probably the foundation of the story, first recounted by Carpenter and much embroidered by later writers, of Rammohun's travels in Tibet -- of which Bhutan was sometimes regarded as a part. 
In 1815 Rammohun settled in Calcutta, where he published the bulk of his works. Most of these are in English and Bengali, and a few are in Sanskrit; they deal with religious, political, and legal matters, and also include his 'Bengalee Grammar in English Language' (1826). In this period his European acquaintances were independent traders, journalists, and missionaries, rather than officials; he was a liberal in politics, opposed to the East India Company's monopoly but favouring independent European settlement in India. He corresponded with leading thinkers in Britain and the United States, and became known to British readers from reports in missionary journals, while his works were reviewed in British and French periodicals. He was among the pioneers of Indian journalism, founding the 'Sambad Kaumudi' ('Moonlight of News') in Bengali and the 'Mir'at al-Akhbar' ('Mirror of News') in Persian, both in 1822, and petitioning the government against the press regulations of 1823. In 1818-20 he contributed to the campaign against suttee (the practice whereby a wife, in principle voluntarily, burns herself with the body of her deceased husband) which culminated in a regulation forbidding the practice in 1829. Rammohun's main contribution consists of two dialogues in which he shows that suttee is not required by Sanskrit texts, as argued by its supporters, besides condemning it on humanitarian grounds. He thus joined his voice with those who rejected a feature of the Hindu tradition, while at the same time appearing as a defender of that tradition against a false interpretation. The same position can be seen in his writings against Hindu polytheism and image worship. 
Some reports represented Rammohun as almost, if not quite, a Christian, others as a deist or a rationalist, but such labels do not adequately describe his religious thought. His earliest work on religion is the 'Tuhfat al-muwahhidin' ('Gift to monotheists'), in Persian with an Arabic preface, published at Murshidabad in 1803-4. Here he argues that all religious traditions are true in that they teach belief in God as revealed in the design of the universe, but that they are all false in that they add unnecessary and conflicting beliefs to this common core. His later writings build on this foundation, but show a more accommodating attitude to religious traditions, particularly Hinduism and Christianity. In Hinduism (he was probably the first Indian writer to use this word) he accepted the Vedantic tradition founded on the 'Upanishads', but rejected image worship as contrary to a rational view of God. In Christianity he rejected the incarnation and the Trinity, thus allying himself with the Unitarians. During his residence in Calcutta he led a group which was variously known as the Atmiya Sabha ('friendly society'), Brahmos (in Bengali, 'brahmya' or 'brahma', 'belonging to God', often translated as 'theist' or 'theistic'), or Hindu unitarians. After collaborating with the former Baptist missionary William Adam to form the short-lived Calcutta Unitarian Committee in 1821, he reorganized his own group as the Brahmo Sabha or Brahmo Samaj (both meaning 'theistic society') in 1828; under the latter name it became the most influential socio-religious modernizing movement of nineteenth-century Bengal, and inspired similar movements in other parts of India. 
To support his view that 'the doctrines of the unity of God are real Hinduism', Rammohun translated selected Sanskrit texts into Bengali and English. He also compiled a selection from the gospels, 'The Precepts of Jesus' (1820), followed by three tracts defending it against the criticism of the Baptist missionary Joshua Marshman. In a satirical series of letters published in 1823 under the pseudonym Ram Doss he proposes that trinitarian Christians and Hindu polytheists should join forces against 'this deluded sect of Unitarianism'. 
In 1830 he sailed to England as ambassador of the Mughal emperor Akbar II, who conferred on him the title of raja; the East India Company refused to recognize this title, or his diplomatic status. When in Calcutta Rammohun had agreed to relinquish the title of ambassador, but he was received as such by William IV at his coronation in 1831. The purpose of the embassy was to appeal to the king for an increase in the income allowed to the emperor by the company. The actual negotiations in which Rammohun engaged were with the court of directors of the East India Company and the Board of Control (the body through which the British government controlled the company); they were partially successful. While in London Rammohun also took an active interest in Indian and British politics. He followed up his campaign against suttee by attending the meeting of the privy council on 11 July 1833, at which an appeal against the regulation of 1829 was defeated. He contributed to the discussion surrounding the renewal of the charter of the East India Company, which was completed in 1833; his submissions on this subject to the Board of Control were published in 1832 as 'Exposition of the Practical Operation of the Judicial and Revenue Systems of India'. He watched the passage of the 1832 'Reform Act' with enthusiasm, and considered standing for parliament himself. 
He was a striking figure, tall and richly dressed in Mughal style, with curly hair which remained black throughout his life. His last three weeks were spent in Bristol, among Unitarian friends. He died on 27 September 1833 of a fever accompanied by inflammation of the brain, as attested by J. B. Estlin, the physician who attended him and performed a post-mortem examination. His wealth at the time of his death was greatly reduced, partly through the collapse of his Calcutta agents. He was buried in the grounds of Stapleton Grove, the house in which he died. In 1843 his remains were reinterred in Arnos Vale cemetery, Bristol, and in 1844 this new grave was marked with a monument in the style of a north Indian temple, as directed by his wealthy Calcutta friend Dwarkanath Tagore (grandfather of Rabindranath Tagore), who lived in England from 1842 until his death in 1846. 
Rammohun Roy's reputation has suffered from the exaggerated claims of Christians and Brahmos who saw him as a prophet of light surrounded by darkness, and later of those who saw him as 'the father of modern India'. Some of his Christian contemporaries, notably Bishop T. F. Middleton, as well as secularists of his own time and later, condemned him for providing a half-way house between traditional Hinduism and their respective creeds, while Indian nationalists have deplored his enthusiasm for the British. He still occupies a unique place between India and the West, and between ancient and modern India. 


@@@@@


doc= 47674


Vidyasagar, Iswarchandra (1820-1891), social reformer and Sanskrit scholar, the eldest son of Thakurdas Bandyopadhyay and Bhagavati Devi, was born on 26 September 1820 in the village of Birsimha, Midnapore district, Bengal. The name Vidyasagar is actually an academic title, conferred on him in 1839 when he passed the examination in Hindu law from Sanskrit College, Calcutta. 
His ancestors on both sides were Sanskrit scholars, but his father was penurious at the time of Iswarchandra's birth. Father and son walked to Calcutta in 1828. The latter was admitted to Sanskrit College in 1829, where he proved to be a student of extraordinary merit and mastered several branches of Sanskritic learning over a period of twelve years, during which time he married Dinamayi Bhattacharya. He left the college in 1841 and was appointed head pandit at Fort William College, Calcutta, in the same year. There he also studied English and Sanskrit. He was appointed assistant secretary of Sanskrit College in 1846, but resigned the following year when his proposals for reform were turned down. He accepted the chair of Sanskrit at the same college in 1851, and became its principal in the next year. As principal he carried out extensive reforms, especially in the curriculum, which now emphasized a knowledge of English as well as Western logic and mathematics. Convinced that the traditional Sanskritic systems of 'darsana' (systems of thought and speculation described inaccurately as Indian philosophy) were erroneous, he wanted to create a body of scholars trained in Sanskritic as well as Western learning, who would interpret Western thought to the Indian literati. 
Iswarchandra is counted among the creators of modern Bengali prose. As an educationist, he wrote a number of books in Bengali, including the Bengali primer, 'Barnaparichay', which is still used to introduce Bengali children to their mother tongue. His other works intended for children include 'Bodhoday', 'Kathamala', and 'Charitabhali'. The last of these, based on Webster's 'Biographies', contains improving tales of high achievement drawn from the life stories of eminent Europeans. His prose works include several adaptations from the Sanskrit classics: 'Betalpanchavimsati' (a collection of twenty-five tales), 'Sakuntala', and 'Sitar banabas' (1874). While he drew extensively upon Sanskrit for his vocabulary, his style marked a distinct break with the older tradition of highly florid Sanskritic diction. In addition he edited a number of Sanskrit texts, including Kalidasa's 'Raghuvamsam', 'Meghadutam', and 'Kumarasambhavam', Bhavabhuti's 'Uttararamacharita', and the philosophical compendium 'Sarvadarsanasamgraha'. 
Iswarchandra played a courageous role, and one for which he is remembered, in the movement for social reform, especially the agitation in favour of permitting the remarriage of widows among caste Hindus. He published his first tract arguing that such remarriage was sanctioned by the Hindu scriptures in 1854, he impoverished himself by sponsoring such marriages, and he got his own son, Narayanchandra, to marry a widow, defying orthodox convention. He established the Hindu Family Annuity Fund to help Hindus in distress. His other attempt at social reform, demanding the prohibition of polygamy, was not successful. His tracts on the subject, written in a popular style, were among the finest satirical writings of the period. 
He was also among the pioneers of women's education in Bengal, and, as a government-appointed special inspector of schools, he established twenty model schools in a period of six months, as well as a normal school for the training of teachers. By 1858 there were 1300 students in the girls' schools he had established. He also took over the Calcutta Training School in 1864: renamed Hindu Metropolitan Institution, the college was entirely run by Indian teachers and administrators. 
Iswarchandra is best remembered in his own country as a man of unbending moral courage and for his fabled generosity. People who benefited from his secret charity were probably thousands in number. Among these beneficiaries was the wayward poet Michael Madhusudan Dutt. Embittered by the ingratitude of those he had helped and the hostility of the orthodox, Iswarchandra spent his latter years among the aboriginal Santals. He died in Calcutta on 29 July 1891. 


@@@@@


doc= 47675


Ranade, Mahadev Govind (1842-1901), judge and Indian nationalist, was born in Niphad in the Bombay presidency on 18 January 1842, the first of two surviving children of Govindrao Amrita Ranade (died 1877), head clerk in a district office in the Nasik district of the Bombay presidency, and later administrative officer in Kolhapur state, and his first wife, Gopikabai (died 1853). He had two surviving half-brothers from his father's second marriage. 
Although an apparently indifferent scholar at the Kolhapur English school (1851-6) he performed brilliantly at the Elphinstone Institution in Bombay (1857) and the Elphinstone College (1858-62) of the new University of Bombay. He graduated BA in 1862 and won a gold medal in history and economics, and became the university's first MA in 1864. He passed his LLB with first-class honours in 1866 and his advocates' examination in 1871. From 1860 to 1863 he had been junior fellow in the college, and senior fellow and assistant professor of history and English from 1868 to 1871. He entered the Bombay government's education department as acting Marathi translator in 1866 while obtaining his advocate's qualifications, and began his judicial career in 1871 as third presidency judge in Bombay. After a variety of positions he became first-class judge in Poona in 1873 until he was transferred under a political cloud to Nasik (1878) and Dhulia (1879). He became additional presidential magistrate in Bombay in 1881, judge of the small cases court in Poona (1884), special judge under the 'Deccan Ryots' Relief Act' (1887), and was judge of the Bombay high court from 1893 until his death in 1901. He served on the Bombay legislative council (1885-6, 1890-01, and 1893-4) and was a member of the finance commission from 1886 to 1887, for which he was created CIE. 
Ranade profoundly shaped the intellectual and political discourses of the day. He edited the English columns of a Bombay Anglo-Marathi daily, the 'Indu Prakash' (1864-71), and from 1878 guided and wrote much of the 'Quarterly Journal of the Poona Sarvajanik Sabha', a Poona-based association which he was instrumental in founding in 1870. Through a reinterpretation of Maratha history, 'Rise of the Maratha Power' (1900), and numerous essays, many initially presented as public addresses, he argued for a social, political, economic, and moral regeneration of the Indian people, achievable through a rethinking of Indian values, much as he saw the protestant Reformation as having transformed Europe. In the contours of his thought he prefigured a Weberian view of the interrelationship between value systems and societal development. 
Ranade also fought for change. He participated in a reform movement to permit Hindu widows to remarry, which culminated in a debate in 1870 between reformers and religious conservatives, resulting in the reformers' defeat. His reinterpretation of Hinduism on theist lines was expressed through the Prarthana Samaj ('prayer society'), founded in 1867. Ranade and the Samaj tried to influence Hindu society from within, rather than moving outside it as a marginalized reform sect. He promoted the development of Indian industries and the use of Indian-made goods through his writings and the convening of industrial conferences in the 1890s. He was most influential politically during the 1870s in the Poona Sarvajanik Sabha's campaigns to educate Indian opinion and organize opposition against government measures, such as its land revenue policies and its inept handling of the disastrous Deccan famine crisis of the late 1870s. Suspected by the government of complicity in the rural and political unrest in the late 1870s, he was transferred from Poona to lessen his influence. Of necessity as a judge he worked from behind the scenes. He played a critical role in the founding of the Indian National Congress in 1885 and in guiding its subsequent deliberations, though he did not participate in its public sessions. In 1887 he established the Indian National Social Conference to promote social reform but, since the meetings were held immediately after the Congress and in its tent, the conference also enabled his attendance at Congress sessions. In 1895 conservative Hindus, led by B. G. Tilak, opposed the reformers and broke the link between Congress and conference. The following year Ranade lost control of the Poona Sarvajanik Sabha and formed the Deccan Sabha to maintain his political approach. 
Ranade's indirect tactics derived partly from judicial exigencies but may have been equally the product of his physical persona: he was large and ungainly, socially inept and diffident. His stand on social reform had been compromised after the death of his first wife, Sakubai Dandekar, whom he had married in 1854. Within a month of her death in 1873 he bowed to pressure from his father and remarried. His new wife, Ramabai Kurlekar (died 1924), was then eleven years old. His allies on the issue of the remarriage of widows were annoyed that he had not married a widow, and his ability to influence social reform debates was thereby reduced. He taught Ramabai to read and write English, and after his death, from a heart attack, on 16 January 1901 in Bombay, she became an important social reformer and public figure in her own right. There were no children from either marriage. Ranade was cremated and his ashes were spread at the Triveni at Allahabad. 


@@@@@


doc= 47676


Isabella Fane (1804-1886), went with him to India in 1835 as his hostess, and stayed there until 1838. After her father's death in 1840 the family home at Fulbeck was taken over by her brother Henry and his wife, Christine, with whom she found it difficult to live harmoniously. Isabella lived in reduced circumstances largely on the continent, partly at Boulogne and Aix-la-Chapelle. She died, unmarried, at Pau, France, in 1886. While in India she wrote letters to her aunt Caroline Chaplin, and kept a journal. Extracts from these, edited by John Pemble, were published as 'Miss Fane in India' (1985). Her letters vividly criticized the British she met: she described Julia Margaret Pattle (later Julia Margaret Cameron, the photographer) as 'a little, ugly, underbred-looking thing' ('Miss Fane in India', 61), and wrote of the Misses Eden, 'both ugly, and both s -- k like polecats!' (ibid., 63). Her letters, according to their editor, show her 'derisive, indignant, ironic, and more than a little vulnerable behind her uncouth sense of fun' (ibid., 6). 


@@@@@


doc= 47677


Nugent, Maria, Lady Nugent (1770/71-1834), diarist, was probably born in the American colony of New Jersey. She was the fifth of seven daughters in the family of twelve of Cortlandt Skinner (1727-1799) and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Kearny (1731-1810). Her father, advocate-general of New Jersey, remained a loyalist during the American War of Independence, and came to England with his family on the declaration of peace. In 1797 she married George Nugent (1757-1849), an army officer and MP for Buckingham. In 1801 he was appointed lieutenant-governor and commander-in-chief of Jamaica, where he remained until 1806; rewarded with a baronetcy, he resumed his military and political career in England before being appointed in 1811 commander-in-chief in India. His wife, who accompanied him abroad, recorded her experiences in Jamaica and India in journals which were privately printed in 1839. 
Maria Nugent was an attractive person, described by a contemporary in 1800 as 'very pretty... she has the smallest head that can be, very thin and little. She is an amazing dresser, never appears twice in the same gown' (Fremantle, 3.26). She sketched and wrote poetry, and, with her vivacity, sense of humour, religious feeling, and concern for individuals, was a perceptive observer of society wherever she went. However, her changing domestic circumstances and the differing British involvement in Jamaica and India were reflected in the tone of the two journals. The Nugents had no children when they arrived in Jamaica. Avoiding comment on political issues, her journal at first concentrates on Jamaican society and planter life. Slavery concerned her, not only in its effect on the black population, but also in the sexual exploitation by European men which it encouraged at all social levels. Turbulence and uprisings in the Caribbean among the slaves soon transformed her vision of them as essentially happy, childish creatures; in common with Jamaican planter society, she learned to distrust and fear the slaves, whom she came to perceive as dangerous, wild savages. The birth of a son in 1802, and a daughter within eleven months, provided a different focus of interest, and concern for their health encouraged her early return to England in 1805. 
Two other surviving children were born in England, and the necessity of leaving her family behind on her departure for India in 1811 -- a son had been born just six weeks before -- in many ways determined Maria Nugent's experience of the country. She was grief-stricken at the separation, constantly ill, and isolated in her misery. Her accustomed spirits only revived when she left Calcutta to accompany her husband on a year's tour (1812-13) of the areas round Delhi, recently settled by the British following the end of the Second Anglo-Maratha War. She gives a perceptive picture of British society and its relations with the Indian ruling classes at a period when British hegemony was not fully assured. In an as yet uncertain balance, many Indian rulers were courted as equals, and customs and habits were shared and exchanged. Nevertheless, the pattern of subsequent British social life was beginning to emerge, underpinned by British women who, though very few in number, were often present in even the remotest areas. The old-established cultures and religions of India provoked in Lady Nugent a different response from the planter society of Jamaica. While she deplored the beliefs of Hindus, she genuinely admired their piety, and accepted the limited possibility for conversion. Relations with Indian women were also of a different order; marriage or formal unions with Indians or Eurasians were common, and their offspring were accepted socially at an official level in a manner unthinkable in Jamaica. Yet, as in Jamaica, Lady Nugent was constantly concerned at young men's involvement in liaisons with non-Europeans, revealing her disquiet at racial mixing. 
The private nature of the journals enabled Maria Nugent to explore such topics in a way that is enlightening for the later reader, and they are an invaluable record for historians. Her frankness about individuals and situations reveals much about British colonial society and attitudes. Equally, her record of her own feelings illustrates the reality of women's experience, particularly in India. In sketchy note form when she is depressed and ill, expansive when her interest is engaged, her writing reflects the intense pressures imposed by separation from family, loneliness, illness, and extreme heat. Sir George Nugent gave up his role as governor-general in 1814 and left India the following year. The family moved to Westhorpe House, Little Marlow, Buckinghamshire, where Lady Nugent spent the remainder of her life, involving herself in charitable work until her death there on 24 October 1834. She was buried on 1 November at Little Marlow parish church. 


@@@@@


doc= 47679


Emily Anne Theophila Bayley, Lady Bayley (1830-1911), Metcalfe's eldest daughter, was born in Meerut. She was sent at the age of five to be brought up by relatives in England, where, with her sister Georgiana, she lived with various members of the family and at a boarding house in Suffolk under the care of a governess. In 1848 Emily returned to India, where she lived with her widowed father in Delhi for two years. On 6 March 1850 she married Sir Edward Clive Bayley (1821-1884), then under-secretary of the foreign department of the government of India. During their twenty-eight years together in India she bore her husband thirteen children, two of whom died in infancy. One of the family's periodic home leaves coincided with the outbreak of the Indian mutiny in May 1857, when Metcalfe House was sacked by rebel sepoys. After Sir Edward's retirement in 1878, Emily returned to England, where her husband died in 1884. She died at her home, The Wilderness, Ascot, Berkshire, on 6 March 1911. Her book of reminiscences, written in retirement and published in 1980 as 'The Golden Calm', provides a nostalgic account of her family life and personal experiences both in England and in India. 


@@@@@


doc= 47680


Lawrence, Honoria, Lady Lawrence (1808-1854), writer, was born on 25 December 1808 at Cardonagh, Donegal, the twelfth of fifteen children of the Revd George Marshall and his wife, Elizabeth. She was brought up by her uncle Admiral Heath, who lived nearby, and was educated in a devoutly protestant environment; her literary tastes and love of nature were both encouraged. She first met her future husband, Henry Montgomery Lawrence (1806-1857), who was a cousin, on his return from India in 1827. Despite their mutual attraction, he was deterred from proposing by his lack of prospects; they finally married in Calcutta on 21 August 1837. She bore four children, of whom two sons and one daughter survived. She was slight and lithe, with fair hair and blue eyes, but her attraction lay in more than her looks: 'She was not beautiful in the ordinary sense of the term; but harmony, fervour and intelligence breathed in her expression, emanating from a loving heart and cultured mind' (Diver, 78). 
Honoria Lawrence's maturity, independence, flexibility, and sense of humour helped her face the demands of her husband's career as a soldier-administrator. She was always on the move in north-western India, and was the first European woman to live in several areas, including Kashmir and the independent state of Nepal. The difficulties of life in these remote areas were considerable, particularly with regard to the birth and upbringing of children. She recorded her life with perception and enthusiasm in voluminous letters and journals, including those written for her two young sons at school in England, selections from which were subsequently published. In these she also reflects her ever-deepening appreciation and love of India. 
However, while Honoria Lawrence later became known as a writer, contemporaries singled out her invaluable role in supporting her husband in his career and other activities. Her view of marriage and of the role of women marked her life in India. She was deeply romantic, quoting Coleridge's view that an individual found his or her completion only in another being. Nevertheless, as she wrote in an article in the 'Calcutta Review' in 1845, she believed that a husband played the dominant role: 'a wife is useful and happy just in proportion as she can... identify herself with her husband... He has a profession as well as a family; her profession is that of being a wife' (Lawrence, 'English women in Hindustan', 100-01). She carried out her precepts with dedication and enthusiasm. In the early months of their marriage she revelled in Henry Lawrence's camp life as a surveyor, and assisted in his work. When he was placed in civil charge of Ferozepore, she spent long hours helping run the post office, while in 1849-50 she threw herself wholeheartedly into the professional demands of his life in Lahore, where he was president of the board of administration for the Punjab. The Lawrences shared a deep commitment to philanthropy, and Mrs Lawrence played a valuable part in helping establish near Simla the Lawrence Asylum for the children of soldiers, to provide a boarding education in a healthy hill climate. 
Writing became an important medium for the expression of Henry Lawrence's views on Indian affairs, and here, too, Honoria Lawrence played an essential collaborative role. She edited many of his articles on military and political matters for the 'Delhi Gazette', which paper also published in instalments 'The Adventurer in the Punjaub', a novel which she helped write, composing some of the romantic sections, including poetry. More influential were the articles Henry Lawrence contributed from 1844 to the newly formed 'Calcutta Review'; these his wife edited, and in some cases co-authored. Though she published little independently, several of her own articles dealing with the female 'profession' of marriage and motherhood appeared anonymously in the 'Calcutta Review' and the 'Friend of India'. She was sceptical about the performance of British women in India, and was critical of their lack of concern for Indians and the wives and children of British soldiers. Her success in fulfilling her own role was attested by many. Her friend Lady Login commented: 'I have never met a woman quite like Honoria, never a wife who more entirely shared in, and helped, her husband in his work, yet without in any way bringing that fact to the knowledge of the world at large. (Login, 63)' She became Lady Lawrence when her husband was knighted in 1848, following the First Anglo-Sikh War. She died at Mount Abu in Rajputana on 15 January 1854, and was buried there two days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 47683


Bland, Hubert (1855-1914), journalist and politician, was born on 3 January 1855 at 22 Wood Street, Woolwich, where his paternal grandfather had been a plumber and his maternal grandfather kept a public house. Hubert was the youngest of the four children of Henry Bland, a successful commercial clerk, and his wife Mary Anne. He was educated at various local schools, and from an early age showed a strong interest in the political ideas raised at social protest meetings, some of which were held locally. At the same time, growing up in Woolwich, with the strong military presence of the arsenal, barracks, and the Royal Military Academy, with its dashing gentleman cadets, he wanted to become an army officer, but after his father's death there was not enough money, and he was obliged to take a job as a bank clerk. Bland was tall, dark, and handsome -- his friend George Bernard Shaw drew a vivid pen portrait of him as 'a man of fierce Norman exterior and huge physical strength... never seen without an irreproachable frock coat, tall hat, and a single eyeglass which infuriated everybody. He was pugnacious, powerful, a skilled pugilist, and had a shrill, thin voice reportedly like the scream of an eagle. Nobody dared be uncivil to him. (Shaw to Archibald Henderson, 3 Jan 1905, 'Collected Letters', ed. D. H. Laurence, 1972, 494)' Hubert wrote of himself, 'All who knew him liked him except those who hated him' (Briggs, 77). In later life he claimed to be descended from Yorkshire gentry, and he certainly looked the part. 
At the bank Bland first met the young Edith Nesbit (1858-1924), then engaged to one of his colleagues. They fell in love, though he failed to tell her that he had promised to marry his widowed mother's paid companion, Margaret (Maggie) Doran, with whom he already had an illegitimate son. Bland, giving a false address, married Edith Nesbit at the City of London register office on 22 April 1880, two months before the birth of their own son Paul. Bland did not tell his mother or Maggie that he was married, and continued to live half the week at home with them (in the 1881 census he described himself as unmarried); it was only when he fell ill with smallpox in the summer of 1880 that Edith eventually found out about Maggie, though she quickly made friends with her. The small brush-making business he had begun collapsed when his partner absconded, and he took a job as secretary to a hydraulics company, but his real passion was for politics. 
Bland had read widely, was an admirer of Browning and William Morris, and attended various 'advanced' societies devoted to arts, crafts, literature, and politics. In 1883 he became a member of Thomas Davidson's utopian Fellowship of the New Life, and on 4 January 1884 he chaired the meeting at which a number of members seceded, to regroup themselves as the (middle-class, socialist) Fabian Society. From its foundation until 1911 he was its honorary treasurer, and in May 1884 he recruited George Bernard Shaw. Bland attributed his own conversion to socialism to the influence of Henry George, William Morris, and especially to Henry Hyndman. In 1885 he belonged to the Social Democratic Federation, but later found its programme too inflammatory, though arguably he remained under the influence of Marxism. He also rejected republicanism. 
Bland was an atypical Fabian, since he combined socialism with strongly conservative opinions that reflected his social background and his military sympathies. Shaw described him as a 'regular Blackheath Tory'. Bland was inclined to dismiss democracy as 'bumptious, unidealistic, disloyal... anti-national and vulgar' ('Essays', 213). He was strongly imperialist, and thought the empire essential to British working men and the survival of the 'English race'. He was also strongly opposed to women's suffrage. At the same time he advocated collectivist socialism, wrote Fabian tracts, and lectured extensively on socialism. He consistently supported an independent socialist party and opposed the Webbs' policy of 'permeating' the Liberal Party. In 1886-7 he and his wife jointly edited the socialist periodical 'To-Day', and from 1887 until its demise in 1889 he was sole editor. In 1888 he helped Annie Besant organize the Bryant and May match girls' strike, and that same year he stood for the London school board for Finsbury, apparently being sharply disappointed when he was defeated; this was the only occasion on which he stood for a public office. In 1889 he contributed to the 'Fabian Essays' (1889). In the 1890s he supported the Independent Labour Party on the one hand and the South African War on the other, writing in December 1899 that defeat in Africa would mean 'starvation in every city of Great Britain', while war would 'overcome national 'flabbiness' and restore the 'manhood' of the British people' (Wolfe, 95). No wonder some socialists saw him as reactionary. 
Bland 'hated the Pharisees, the Prigs, the Puritans' ('Essays', 284). He smoked, and claimed to be 'adventurous' with drugs, having taken 'opium in all its forms' (ibid., 206) as well as other drugs. Although in some respects conventional, he could not resist making love to women who attracted him, and was, in Shaw's phrase, 'an exceedingly unfaithful husband' (Briggs, xiv). Sexually vain, or perhaps just susceptible, he conducted a number of extramarital affairs, the most lasting of these being with Edith's friend Alice ('Mouse') Hoatson. When Alice became pregnant by him, she joined the Bland menage as housekeeper, and Edith passed off Alice's daughter Rosamund, born in November 1886, as her own. Bland had three children with Edith: Paul, Iris ('b'. 1881), and Fabian (1885); and Alice had a son, John, born in 1899. Rosamund was said to be his favourite. His marriage to Edith was inevitably stormy at times -- 'scenes as usual', Shaw wrote after a visit (MacKenzie and MacKenzie, 100). But it was also a learning process for them both. At first Edith kept the household going by publishing poems and stories. During the 1880s she and Bland wrote two novels together, both on political themes, 'The Prophet's Mantle' (1885) and 'Something Wrong' (1886), which was serialized in the radical London newspaper the 'Weekly Dispatch'. It was through her example and with her support that Bland became a journalist. As 'Hubert' he contributed a weekly column to the Manchester 'Sunday Chronicle' from 1892 to his death, writing in a dry, man-of-the-world tone, and discussing a wide range of topics, from Hegel's theories of the state to the use of the powder-puff, from Kipling's fiction to the art of flirtation. He was an amusing, sharp-eyed, and pithy commentator on his times. 
By 1899 Edith was on the brink of establishing her career as a famous writer for children, and Bland had become a well-known journalist. The family moved to Well Hall, Eltham, where their usual round of parties was tragically interrupted by the unexpected death of Fabian, following a minor operation at home, in October 1900. About the same time Bland became a Roman Catholic convert. He published selections of his essays and articles in 'With the Eyes of a Man' (1905), 'The Happy Moralist' (1907), and 'Letters to a Daughter' (1907). By now he was a member of the 'old gang', the inner circle who controlled the Fabian Society. He sometimes disagreed with others in the group, and over the years he had been repeatedly outmanoeuvred and overruled by Shaw, Sidney Webb, and their supporters. In December 1906, doubtful about H. G. Wells's character and good intentions, he acted with other members of the 'old gang' to defeat Wells's attempt to take over and change the Fabian Society. In 1908 and 1910 he acted as a Fabian delegate at Labour Party conferences. 
Wells remained Bland's personal friend despite the Fabian conflict until 1908, when he made a bid for Bland's daughter, the plump, attractive Rosamund, one of the 'Fabian nursery'. Apparently she and Wells tried to run away together, but Bland caught up with them at Paddington Station, punched Wells, and took Rosamund home. Both men were enraged. Bland referred to Wells as 'the little cad' (Briggs, 311) while Wells caricatured the Blands in 'The New Machiavelli' (1911), where they appear as the Booles, parasitic imitators of the Baileys (the Webbs) and vindictive scandal-mongers. In his 'Experiment in Autobiography', Wells created another hostile, though recognizable, portrait of the Blands, and in the postscript to his autobiography, unpublished in his lifetime, he gave his own version of the Rosamund episode, claiming that Bland's attitude to Rosamund was 'unfatherly', even incestuous, while he himself had been motivated by 'a great disapproval of incest'. 
For some years Bland had suffered from heart trouble, and in November 1910 he had a massive heart attack. In 1911 his sight, always poor, finally failed him. He gave up public lecturing and his post as treasurer of the Fabian Society, but continued reviewing and writing his weekly column, with Alice Hoatson as his amanuensis. As he was dictating to her at Well Hall, on the afternoon of 14 April 1914, he suddenly said that he felt giddy, lowered himself to the floor, and died of a heart attack in her arms a few minutes later. He was buried with Catholic rites on 18 April in the family plot at Woolwich cemetery. His wife survived him, remarried in 1917, and died in 1924. 
The achievements of great journalists can be difficult to appreciate in retrospect: some of his contemporaries considered Bland the most powerful and influential columnist of his day. According to his friend Cecil Chesterton his articles represented 'almost the high-water mark of English journalism' ('Essays', vii). Yet his writings are now forgotten, except by a few historians, whereas his wife's stories for children continue to be read and loved. 


@@@@@


doc= 47684


Bonner, Hypatia Bradlaugh (1858-1935), freethinker and radical, was born in London on 30 March 1858 at 3 Hedger's Terrace, Hackney, the second child of Charles Bradlaugh (1833-1891), politician and freethinker, and Susannah Lamb Hooper (died 1877). Her elder sister, 
After Susannah Bradlaugh's death in 1877 the girls moved back to London to keep house for their father at 20 Circus Road, St John's Wood. He and Annie Besant were involved in the 'Knowlton pamphlet' obscenity trial, and the daughters were kept fully occupied in his support, though they resented Mrs Besant's presumptuous attitude towards their father. During the early 1880s their principal contribution to secularism was at the Old Street Hall of Science, where Edward Aveling ran the secularists' school. Alice studied chemistry and animal physiology, and subsequently taught French and botany; Hypatia taught chemistry and mathematics, four of her lectures being published in 1882 as 'Chemistry of Home'. In 1881 both sisters were recognized as teachers by the Department of Science and Art, and Hypatia subsequently passed the matriculation examinations for London University. Educational progress, though, was halted by prejudice. In 1877 the sisters had attended J. H. Levy's political economy classes at the City of London College, only for the college to close its doors to female students, and in 1883 Alice, along with Annie Besant, was refused admittance to botany classes at University College. 
Among Hypatia's pupils at the Hall of Science was Arthur Bonner (1861-1939), the son of a radical nonconformist minister. Following their engagement in January 1884 he was employed as Bradlaugh's printer, and they married at Marylebone register office on 18 June 1885. Shortly afterwards they took rooms with Annie Besant at 19 Avenue Road, Regent's Park, where Hypatia met many of the leading radical intellectuals of the day. A son, Kenneth, was born on 3 April 1886 but died on 22 September. Both Alice and Hypatia were active as freethought lecturers and contributors to the 'National Reformer', and in 1883 were elected vice-presidents of the National Secular Society. Hypatia also wrote for Annie Besant's 'Our Corner' (1883-8), some of her children's stories there being published separately in 1886. Alice's only published lecture was 'Mind Considered as a Bodily Function' (1884), though she left several manuscripts of lectures. She died of meningitis and typhoid on 2 December 1888 at her sister's home and was buried at Brookwood necropolis, Woking, on 5 December. 
Hypatia moved back to 20 Circus Road where a second son, Charles, was born on 28 April 1890. She acted as her father's secretary until his death in 1891 and then moved to 30 Victoria Road, Clapham Common, and again, in 1894 or 1895, to 23 Streathbourne Road, which was to be their final home. The months immediately after her father's death were spent arranging his papers, defending his reputation, and writing her two-volume 'Charles Bradlaugh: a Record of his Life and Work' (1894). Arthur Bonner continued to manage the printing and publishing business in partnership with Hypatia, who inherited the plant and titles, including the 'National Reformer', to which she contributed regularly until declining circulation forced its closure in 1893. 
Politically Hypatia was an advanced Liberal, advocating women's suffrage but later opposing the violence of the suffragettes. From March 1897 she edited her own monthly paper, 'The Reformer', but falling circulation during the South African War forced its closure in 1904. She lectured widely and served on the executives of the Women's National Liberal Federation, the International Arbitration and Peace League, and the Humanitarian League, for which she wrote an attack on the death penalty in 1905. She was, however, increasingly dissatisfied with G. W. Foote at the National Secular Society and in 1905 became a Rationalist Press Association lecturer, joining the board in 1916. In 1910 she was founder chair of the Rationalist Peace Society and also campaigned against the blasphemy laws, of which she wrote a history, 'Penalties upon Opinion', in 1912. 
Hypatia remained a popular lecturer in Liberal and rationalist circles until 1924, when her voice failed. Despite the fact that she had suffered ill health since she was a child, she showed remarkable vigour through a long public career and remained active into old age, continuing to write and serving as a London magistrate from 1921 until 1934. She died at 23 Streathbourne Road, London, after an abdominal operation for cancer, on 25 August 1935 and was cremated at Golders Green on 28 August. Her ashes were then buried in her father's grave at Brookwood. She was a daughter worthy of her formidable father, whose reputation she tenaciously defended. Her own role in public affairs has been underestimated, not least because she expressed her radicalism and belief in equal status for women from within Liberalism rather than through the more publicized suffragette movement. 


@@@@@


doc= 47685


Cohen, Chapman (1868-1954), freethought writer and lecturer, was born in Leicester on 1 September 1868, the elder son of Enoch Cohen, a Jewish confectioner, and his wife, Deborah Barnett. His upbringing was more noted for the absence of Christianity than for any positive Jewish features. He attended a local elementary school but was otherwise self-educated. Although an avid reader, versed in Spinoza, Locke, Hume, Berkeley, and Plato by the time he was eighteen, he was scarcely aware of the freethought movement in which he was to spend his life when he moved to London in 1889. A chance encounter with a Christian Evidence lecturer in Victoria Park in 1890 led him to respond to the speaker, and this brought an invitation to lecture from the local Secular Society. Some months later he joined the National Secular Society and was soon in demand as a lecturer, delivering over 200 lectures a year. He was elected a vice-president in 1895. The following year he was appointed temporary editor of the Bradford 'Truthseeker' and in 1898 became assistant editor of G. W. Foote's 'Freethinker'. He was clearly Foote's ablest young lieutenant, and in 1915 on Foote's death he was appointed both editor of the 'Freethinker' and president of the National Secular Society. 
Cohen was a witty, courteous, and effective public speaker and debater, and a prolific writer with over fifty titles to his credit. Typical of his writings are 'A Grammar of Freethought' (1921), 'Theism or Atheism' (1921), 'Materialism Restated' (1927), and four series of 'Essays in Freethinking' (1923-38), culled from occasional pieces in the 'Freethinker'. His achievement was to transform Victorian freethought from an emphasis on anti-biblical argument to the positive advocacy of materialism, and his views were put before a wider public when he debated 'Materialism: has it been exploded?' with C. E. M. Joad at the Caxton Hall, Westminster, in 1928. In 1940 he published 'Almost an Autobiography', which provides a charming insight into his character and ideas but is frustratingly thin on biographical fact. As an organizer Cohen did much to build up the resources of secularism in the inter-war years, but by 1949, when he was persuaded to resign as president, many members felt he had stayed on too long. He remained editor of the 'Freethinker' until 1951. 
Cohen was married on 31 August 1897 to Cecilia Alice (1874-1966), the daughter of Walter James Holyfield, a customs officer. They had two children, Raymond Chapman ('b'. 1908), who survived his father, and Daisy, who died shortly after her marriage in 1928 or 1929, aged twenty-nine. Cohen himself died on 4 February 1954 at Warley Hospital in Brentwood. He was cremated at Golders Green on 11 February. 


@@@@@


doc= 47686


Conway, Moncure Daniel (1832-1907), social reformer and ethical preacher, was born on 17 March 1832 at Middleton plantation, Stafford county, Virginia, the second of the six children of Walker Peyton Conway (1805-1884), a slave-owning planter, attorney, and judge, and his wife, Margaret (1807-1891), self-taught homoeopathic doctor, daughter of John Moncure Daniel, a United States army surgeon, and his wife, Margaret. His pious Methodist parents were both Virginia born, from distinguished Chesapeake families of English and (on his mother's side) French Huguenot descent. As a youth Conway knew he was expected to emulate his politically and socially prominent male relatives. He took seriously their values -- responsibility, honour, leadership, attention to duty -- and always admired these Virginians even after breaking with them decisively. The only home he had built for himself, in London's Bedford Park, he named Inglewood, after the Virginia home of his earliest memories. 
Nevertheless, Conway early displayed unusual predilections, more compatible with those of his female relatives. He loved music and literature, incurring a flogging by his Fredericksburg Academy instructor for absconding at midday to glimpse Charles Dickens during a brief visit in 1842. Compassionate, emotionally open, and convinced of the value of conciliation, he was more comfortable witnessing his mother soothe the sick than his father chastise criminals. His mother's vocal criticisms of slavery -- shared by other influential female relatives -- affected him profoundly. 
After attending the Fredericksburg classical and mathematical academy (1841-7) and receiving a BA in 1849 from Dickinson College in Carlisle, Pennsylvania, Conway briefly studied law, but abandoned it for the Methodist ministry, which he entered on his nineteenth birthday. This career proved short-lived. Disturbed by what he saw as a dogmatic repression of free thought, he resigned late in 1852; the following February, forfeiting his paternal inheritance, he entered Harvard Divinity School to train for the Unitarian ministry. While in Massachusetts he began a friendship with Ralph Waldo Emerson, whose writing had inspired him to assert his individuality and break with Methodism. At an anti-slavery rally near Boston on 4 July 1854 Conway's distance from his roots lengthened, as he declared himself an abolitionist and denounced Virginia's entanglement with slavery. 
Soon after receiving his BD in July 1854 Conway gained the Unitarian pulpit in Washington, DC. He was dismissed in October 1856 for anti-slavery sermons, but immediately hired by Unitarians in Cincinnati, Ohio. When in 1858 he debunked 'New Testament' miracles, one-third of his congregation defected. Conway compensated by attracting newcomers intrigued by his growing religious eclecticism and legitimation of spiritual uncertainty. In Cincinnati Conway began seriously studying Asian religions, and became known nationally as a vigorous exponent of liberal religion. His personal life became more settled after his marriage to Ellen Dana (1833-1897), daughter of a Cincinnati businessman, on 1 June 1858. They would have three sons and one daughter. 
Conway's ministerial career was interrupted by the American Civil War, which found his pro-Union mother and sister in the north, his father in the south, and his brothers in the Southern army. Conway supported the South's subjugation, but only if union were synonymous with emancipation: President Lincoln's slowness in effecting full emancipation depressed him, as did Virginia's ongoing ordeal. He coped by writing two anti-slavery books, 'The Rejected Stone' (1861) and 'The Golden Hour' (1862), and by co-editing a Boston anti-slavery newspaper, 'The Commonwealth', launched in September 1862. He was buoyed up temporarily by his August 1862 move from Cincinnati to Concord, Massachusetts, where he lived near Emerson and other congenial friends, and by his service that summer to thirty-three of his father's escaped slaves, whom he resettled in Ohio. But the war always tormented him. Finally, in April 1863 he escaped through expatriation, his pretext being an anti-slavery speaking tour in England. Shortly after arrival he sent for his family, never really expecting to return. 
Conway had no plan when he began his European exile, but a remarkable stroke of timing rewarded his gamble. His first speech in England (6 May 1863) was at South Place Chapel, London's noted free-religious institution, at that moment reeling internally because of the unexpected orthodoxy of its minister. In August South Place hired Conway. It was a perfect match: the congregation applauded Conway's intellectual boldness, encouraging his attacks on sabbatarianism, sexual prudery, blasphemy laws, patriarchy, monarchy, and other apparent restraints on liberty, conscience, and expression. Led by Conway, South Place exceeded even its level of prestige during the long (1817-53) ministry of W. J. Fox. 
With full congregational support Conway substituted 'meditations' for prayers in 1869 and ordinary seats for pews in 1872. He ceased to call himself minister; sermons became 'discourses'. Beginning in 1873 he read from his own 'Sacred Anthology', a pioneering compilation of excerpts from the sacred books of the world's religions. In essence, Conway intellectually became agnostic, though he shunned the term, maintaining an emotional reverence for religious feeling, for the individual's critically minded but devoted quest for spiritual meaning and truth. Berated by the orthodox, Conway was credited by many spiritually restless individuals with salvaging their waning faith in religion's relevance. This ability to connect with thoughtful individuals, combined with his logic, learning, and graceful phraseology, compensated for his oratorical limitations and kept audiences entranced. A journalist who visited one Sunday in 1880 described Conway as 'the least orthodox preacher in London', whose words bore 'an oracular impress' (Davidson, 241-2). 
Conway published not only many South Place discourses but also a torrent of articles for both British and American periodicals: breezy travel pieces, gossipy accounts of celebrities, weighty ruminations on politics and religion. In 1870 he was a war correspondent in France for the New York 'World' and the London 'Daily News'. He was English agent for American writers, including Louisa May Alcott, Mark Twain, and Walt Whitman, writing a highly influential article on Whitman for the 'Fortnightly' (15 October 1866). He developed as a scholar, though his scholarship remained partly polemical. Particularly noteworthy was 'Demonology and Devil-Lore' (1879), a work of comparative mythology probing the origins of beliefs in demons and devils, now largely superseded but full of insight and lively speculation. 
Conway's interest in comparative religion led him to India in 1883-4, after speaking in Australia. He was disillusioned: he had known Hindu and Muslim intellectuals in London, but displays of popular religious fervour and uncritical 'superstition' frightened and repelled him. He sailed to England with enthusiasm for his work shaken. This influenced his decision to return to America, as did his father's death in 1884 and his realization that his two younger children, born in London, had no attachment to the United States. Conway's affection for his native country had persisted along with his American accent. In 1885 the Conways settled in New York. Several books followed: two horrible novels, several works of history, and biography of widely varying quality. The best was an enduring two-volume biography of Thomas Paine (1892), followed by a skilfully edited four-volume collection of Paine's writings. Paine had fascinated Conway for forty years; life in London had cemented a sense of kinship with this earlier transatlantic radical. 
After pleas to return Conway served again at South Place from 1893 to 1897, making his final mark on an institution that would survive through the twentieth century as the South Place Ethical Society, with headquarters after 1929 at Conway Hall (named after him), Red Lion Square. His wife's terminal illness prompted a final resignation; she died in New York on Christmas day 1897. Early in 1898 the Spanish-American War deepened Conway's darkening mood. He denounced this conflict and America's ensuing imperialist adventures. That summer, for the second time, war caused expatriation. He settled in Paris and began work on his memoirs. His 'Autobiography, Memories and Experiences' (2 vols., 1904) was followed by 'My Pilgrimage to the Wise Men of the East' (1906), a mellowed account of his Indian sojourn coupled with additional reminiscence. Both were moving, humane reflections by a septuagenarian who had lived a stunningly varied and engaged life. Both reflected Conway's rejection of his long-standing faith in progress, and evidenced his renewed belief in the independent reality of evil. His autobiography stands as an enduring account of the nineteenth century, as well as an apt foreshadowing of the darker attitudes of the twentieth. Conway died at 5 rue Villedo, Paris, of natural causes on 15 November 1907, and was cremated in Pere Lachaise cemetery. 
Conway was tall and robust, idiosyncratically handsome when younger, resembling a weathered, white-bearded Jehovah in later life. His dread of intellectual submissiveness, born of boyhood pressures, manifested itself in a confrontational style that alienated some people, especially before and after his London years. But he was at bottom a warm, sociable man, who loved the theatre, good food and wine, billiards, cigars, and company, both male and female. An enthusiastic and knowledgeable art collector, he developed close and enduring friendships with key Pre-Raphaelites, becoming perhaps the closest thing to a spiritual adviser many in that Bohemian group would know. An ardent feminist, he was eulogist at the 1902 funeral of his friend the American woman's rights pioneer Elizabeth Cady Stanton. He also admired feminine beauty, unselfconsciously patronizing Parisian dance halls and revelling in the allure of Isadora Duncan. For much of his life he attracted young enthusiasts of both sexes, including the distinguished American photographer Edward Steichen, a fellow Paris expatriate who supervised Conway's cremation (his ashes were laid in Kensico cemetery in Valhalla, New York). But Conway encouraged not disciples but independent individuals who followed the motto inscribed on a wall at South Place: 'To Thine Own Self Be True'. They were, as he often told them, and repeated in his memoirs, 'Those who think at all think freely' (Conway, 'Autobiography', 2.445). 


@@@@@


doc= 47688


Marks, Geoffrey (1864-1938), actuary and insurance company manager, was born on 15 November 1864 at Beddington, near Mitcham, Surrey, the third of five sons of John George Marks, sherry shipper of Croydon, and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Walker. He was educated at Whitgift Grammar School, Croydon, where he was head boy and captain of rugby and cricket. His love of sport continued throughout his life: he became captain and scrum-half of Croydon rugby club, and was an amateur boxer and a golfer with a handicap of one. He kept wicket for Middlesex in 1894-5, which probably accounted for his curiously gnarled hands. 
Marks left school in 1882 and joined Scottish Amicable Life. In 1885 he moved to Mutual Life, and he became a fellow of the Institute of Actuaries in 1890. In 1893, aged only twenty-nine, he was appointed by Mutual Life as actuary and manager. In 1896, on the merger of his office with National Life, he was appointed actuary and manager of the new company, the National Mutual Life Assurance Society, a position he held for the next thirty-six years. He was a member of the board of directors between 1925 and 1935, though he retired as general manager in 1932. 
Marks stamped his authority on National Mutual Life. He reduced costs, expanded business cautiously, and paid particular attention to fund management so that the company paid higher bonuses than any other life office before the First World War. Between 1918 and 1921 Marks secured the election of a number of economists as directors. These included O. T. Falk, John Maynard Keynes (elected chairman in 1922), and Walter Layton, who were to change radically the face of British life-assurance investments. Following Keynes's emphasis on a positive investment policy, assets were rapidly moved out of traditional fixed interest securities into the volatile but expanding field of industrial equities. Most other assurance offices only belatedly followed suit. As a result National Mutual achieved record profits at a time when life assurance was generally stagnating. Marks supervised this innovative investment strategy, and proved a strong enough personality to exercise some control over the charismatic Keynes. 
Marks's talents were much in demand outside the company, so that he became one of the best-known of insurance men. He was chairman of the Life Offices' Association (1914-16), president of the Institute of Actuaries (1918-20), chairman of the British Insurance Association (1926-8), and chairman of the Joint Board on Unemployment Insurance (1921-37). He served on two royal commissions, on decimal coinage (1918-19) and on income tax (1919-20), and held a wide range of other positions, including finance officer to the metropolitan special constabulary (1914-16), member of the Insurance Offices' advisory committee on the mobilization of dollar securities, chairman of Miss Holman's Home and Club for Disabled Officers, council member of the Royal Patriotic Fund Corporation (1918-20), governor of the Prince of Wales General Hospital, Tottenham, and, in his later years, governor of Whitgift School. For his wartime services, particularly as personal assistant to the controller of the navy and army canteen board (1917-19), he was made a CBE in 1920. 
Marks was a rather formidable character -- stern, impatient, quick-tempered. He was forceful in debate and valued precision in language. He was generous in friendship and to those in whom he had confidence. He married Alys Mary Bridges, who died in 1930; and, lacking children of his own, he took a keen interest in the careers of his junior staff. An omnivorous reader, and something of an aesthete and epicure, he was a connoisseur of wine and his dinner parties were perfect exercises in gastronomy. He had a satirical sense of humour and was a flamboyant, colourful dresser. 
Marks died on 25 August 1938 at his home, Nately Lodge, Newnham Road, Nately Scures, near Basingstoke, of exhaustion, a duodenal ulcer, and cerebral thrombosis. He was cremated on 29 August 1938 at Golders Green crematorium, Middlesex. 


@@@@@


doc= 47689


Micklem, Charles (1882-1955), stockbroker, was born on 17 January 1882 at The Lodge, Herne Hill, London, the fifth of eight sons of Leonard Micklem and his wife, Dora Emily, 'nee' Weguelin. Leonard Micklem appears to have been a country gentleman of leisure until the 1880s, when (probably because of the demands of his large family) he went into the City as a company secretary. Dora Micklem's father had been governor of the Bank of England. Charles Micklem was educated at Wellington College, and at Hertford College, Oxford. He entered the stock exchange in 1904 as an unauthorized clerk to the brokers Billett, Campbell, and Grenfell. He became a member of the stock exchange in 1909, and by 1912, with much ability but with little capital, he had moved to Cazenove and Akroyds on a half-commission basis. He was made a salaried partner there in 1913 and in the inter-war years he worked closely with another important City stockbroker, Claud Serocold. The two were responsible for the promotion of Cazenoves 'from somewhere in the middle of the first division of stockbrokers to a position at or near the top of the league' (Kynaston, 99). Serocold, shrewd and able, created introductions and opportunities, while Micklem, detailed and able, realized them. He was 'the outstanding stockbroker of the inter war Stock Exchange' (ibid., 104). 
Micklem's parents had originally intended him to follow a military career but medical reasons had made this impossible. Active service in the First World War offered him the opportunity to fulfil that ambition. He served, reaching the rank of major, with the Royal Marine Artillery, howitzer brigade, in Gallipoli and in France; he was twice mentioned in dispatches, and in January 1919 he was awarded the DSO. He also studied, successfully, for a law degree during his military service. 
At the end of the war Micklem returned to Cazenove and Akroyds. On 10 November 1920 he married Diana Gertrude May Loyd ('b'. 1889/90), daughter of Graham Loyd JP. There were two sons and four daughters of the marriage; and from 1930 Micklem and his family lived at Long Cross House, near Chertsey, Surrey. Micklem had the house built and its estate offered him the opportunity to put into practice his interest in farming and agricultural affairs. 
Micklem built Cazenove's success on corporate work. Early on he realized the opportunities which lay in the promotion of investment trusts, which enjoyed a revival and greater stability in the 1920s. But he was especially good at building relationships with industrialists and with issuing houses, and in the 1930s he won for his firm its paramount role in company finance. 
Micklem had a dry sense of humour and great charm, often hidden under a reserve of severity. It won him many friends in the City, including such influential men as Alfred Wagg, and his contacts extended far beyond his own family, who were also not without sway in the City: two of his brothers were on the board of the mining company Selection Trust, and one of them was much involved in the establishment of Cull & Co., which became a significant finance house; another brother, Robert, became chairman of Vickers-Armstrongs in 1946. As a young man Charles Micklem was a keen athlete, and his charm was best described by his obituarist who noted that he had such a way of defeating his opponents at squash, tennis, or golf that he left them with the impression that they had after all won the game! 
Micklem's personal austerity was well known in the firm, and he set high standards of professional and personal conduct for himself and for Cazenove and Akroyds; he made it clear that no member of the firm should do business with any person or institution attached to any taint, however slight, of dubiety. Outside the City he was, again, a much respected figure; a strong sense of duty led him to serve as a JP and as high sheriff of Surrey in 1938. He took a keen interest in Guildford Cathedral and was a generous contributor to charitable causes. He was the largest individual subscriber to the Wellington College centenary fund. 
At Cazenoves Micklem took the strain of keeping the firm going during the Second World War, and he saw it through the difficult immediate post-war years. He became senior partner in name as well as in practice in 1947 when Claud Serocold retired. However, by the early 1950s Micklem himself was frail and increasingly remote from his other, younger partners. Micklem retired in August 1954 and died from diabetes at St Peter's Hospital, Chertsey, on 26 January 1955, survived by his wife. A memorial service was held for him at St Michael's Church, Cornhill, with an impressive City gathering. 


@@@@@


doc= 47692


Mountain, Sir Edward Mortimer, first baronet (1872-1948), underwriter and insurance company manager, was born on 24 November 1872, the second son of Stanford Henry Mountain, a Southwark hop merchant, and his wife, Louisa, daughter of George Eve. Mountain was educated at Dulwich College, then joined a Lloyd's insurance broker's office. His father died in 1890, leaving an estate of $18,653. In 1897 Mountain married Evelyn Ellen Regina (died 1950), daughter of August Siegle, a bookseller. Together with others, including his elder brother Henry, Mountain soon established his own broking firm, Hawley Mountain & Co., which in 1902 merged to form Gardner Mountain, specializing in Scandinavian hull risks. In 1904, when the firm took over the marine account of British Dominions to form British Dominions Marine Insurance Company, Mountain became its first managing director. This provided him with the base from which to launch a brilliant career as a manager and underwriter. By 1913 British Dominions had become one of Britain's largest marine insurance companies. Famed for being the one prominent underwriter who had declined the 'Titanic', Mountain also played a leading role in reducing competition in the market. In 1910 he became the first chairman of the Joint-Hull Committee, which brought together Lloyd's and the company underwriters to negotiate marine rates and policy terms. In 1920, when he retired from the committee, he was honoured as the first company underwriter to be elected a member of Lloyd's. 
From an early date Mountain diversified, transforming his company into one of Britain's greatest general insurers. Fire and motor underwriting were begun in 1911. The profitability of wartime marine insurance and the rising equity values allowed Mountain to purchase three life-assurance offices -- Eagle, Sceptre, and Star -- within ten months in 1916-17. The combined company was renamed Eagle, Star and British Dominions. In 1921 the old connection was severed when Mountain sold his interest in Gardner Mountain. Diversification offset the post-war decline in marine insurance, and was also a way of attracting talented managers. In 1916 a new 'all-in' policy was successfully launched, the first to offer householders comprehensive cover against almost all domestic hazards for one premium with the minimum of conditions. This required innovative advertising and extensive marketing, both of which became hallmarks of Eagle Star. 
Between the wars Mountain also established connections with several finance houses, notably Philip Hill & Partners, of which he became chairman after the death of Philip Hill in 1944. Several major schemes financed property and industrial companies, including the Odeon cinema chain and the development of the Covent Garden area of London in 1933. Through these associations Mountain also joined the boards of a large number of companies, notably United Drapery Stores and Mosul Oilfields. 
Mountain combined the skills of a broker and underwriter with the managerial ability of a company chief executive. At his regular morning meetings, he expected his senior staff to be fully briefed to answer his questions. He was a small man with great authority and exuberance, which extended to a range of outside interests. He appreciated paintings and built up a fine collection of old masters and modern works. He owned properties in Somerset, Perthshire, the Isle of Wight, Surrey, and London, and his country gardens and conservatories produced some of the finest orchid shows in England. From his youth he bred homing pigeons. He owned several yachts, enjoyed golf and shooting, and was a keen angler on stretches of the Tay which he owned near his home at Dunkeld. In his later years, despite being confined by illness to a wheelchair, he continued to go salmon fishing until the day before his death. In 1934 he organized a watch for the Loch Ness monster. He was knighted in 1918 and created a baronet in 1922. He died on 22 June 1948 at Dunkeld House, Perthshire, and was cremated in a private ceremony; his ashes were buried at Stoke Poges in Buckinghamshire. He was survived by his wife and their son, Brian Edward Stanley (1899-1977), who became general manager of Eagle Star in 1947. 


@@@@@


doc= 47693


Gott, John William (1866-1922), freethought propagandist, was born at Cowling, Yorkshire, on 17 January 1866, the son of John Gott ('b'. 1841/2), farm labourer, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Peel ('b'. 1842/3), house servant, both of Cowling. Little is known of his childhood. By 1891 he was a self-employed tailor and draper in Bradford where, through aggressive advertising in freethought and socialist periodicals, he built a successful mail-order business, employing as local agents men whose participation in unpopular movements had resulted in their dismissal from regular work. On 3 January that year he married Ada Dyson (1869-1912), weaver. There was one child of the marriage, Alice ('b'. 1893). 
Gott had joined the National Secular Society under the presidency of George William Foote in 1887, and in March 1891 he became secretary of the revived Bradford branch of the society. In May 1894 he was business manager of the 'Truth Seeker', a local penny monthly freethought periodical. By 1900 he was editor, publisher, and proprietor of what was now a strongly anti-Christian paper that appeared intermittently until at least 1915. The attempt to revive secularism in Bradford in the 1890s was unsuccessful as new organizations were succeeded by others equally short-lived. Gott was central to most of them as secretary or treasurer. In 1903 he was summonsed five times and convicted once for selling freethought and other radical literature on a Sunday on Woodhouse Moor, Leeds, contrary to local by-laws, and was charged with blasphemy for a cartoon reprinted in the 'Truth Seeker' for October, but the stipendiary magistrate dismissed this case on a technicality. This was the beginning of a propagandist war of attrition by a group of militant freethinkers which was to lead during the next few years to several blasphemy prosecutions. Gott's role was primarily as publisher, through his Freethought Socialist League, an organization formed about 1909 to combat the Liberal tendencies of G. W. Foote's secularism and the Christian tendencies of Keir Hardie's socialism. In 1911 he was prosecuted for blasphemy for publishing a pamphlet of crude anti-Christian questions entitled 'Rib Ticklers, or, Questions for Parsons', and was sentenced to four months in Armley gaol, Leeds. On 16 February 1912 his wife, Ada, suffered a stroke and died. The home secretary immediately ordered his release, but the circumstances of Ada's death added a personal edge to Gott's campaign. 
In 1913 Gott was funding an anti-Christian lecture campaign, in November 1916 he was sentenced to two weeks' hard labour at Birkenhead police court for selling a profane book, and in July 1917 he was sentenced at the Birmingham assizes to six weeks' hard labour for blasphemous libel, again in the 'Rib Ticklers'. On this occasion, the unsuccessful defence was led by Norman Birkett. In July 1918 Gott appeared before the Westminster police court charged under the 'Defence of the Realm Act' with exhibiting a poster, for which he was fined $25 or two months' imprisonment, and in 1921 he was sentenced at the Birmingham assizes to six months' hard labour for blasphemous libel for publishing and sending through the post an obscene book, 'How to Prevent Pregnancy', and also again the 'Rib Ticklers'. Shortly after release he was summoned before West Ham police court on a charge of obstruction, later changed to blasphemy, for selling the 'Rib Ticklers' and similar publications. The case was heard at the Old Bailey in December 1921 where, after a retrial, he was found guilty and received nine months with hard labour. An appeal in January 1922 confirmed the sentence. This was the last time that anyone in Britain was imprisoned for blasphemy. Gott emerged in broken health and died at Victoria Hospital, Blackpool, of cancer of the pancreas, stomach, and liver, on 4 November 1922, survived by his daughter, Alice. He was buried on 8 November 1922 in Bradford. 
Gott was a provocative agitator, yet he aroused considerable support among MPs, academics, and writers for a liberalization of the law in England and Wales, leading to unsuccessful campaigns to abolish the blasphemy laws. The works for which he was imprisoned seemed harmless a century later. 


@@@@@


doc= 47695


Holyoake, Austin (1826-1874), freethought printer and publisher, was born on 27 October 1826 in Birmingham into an artisan household, the seventh child and fifth son of George Holyoake (1790-1853), a printer, and Catherine Groves (1792-1867), a horn-button maker. Influenced by his older brother George Jacob Holyoake he became an Owenite, and from 1842 worked as a printer on radical papers in Birmingham and then London. In October 1847 he took charge of the printing of G. J. Holyoake's weekly periodical, 'The Reasoner', at 54 Exmouth Street, Clerkenwell. Two years later the brothers went into partnership, operating from James Watson's premises at 3 Queen's Head Passage until 1853, when they acquired their own premises at 147 Fleet Street. Here, with Austin responsible for the printing and, from 1858, the publishing, they attempted to give leadership to the freethought movement. In 1862 the venture failed but two years later Austin revived the business, trading as Austin & Co. at 17 Johnson's Court, Fleet Street. He was also active in radicalism during these years, with a reputation for fairmindedness and much in demand as a chairman of meetings. He was a member of the Association for the Repeal of the Taxes on Knowledge and the last printer in England to be prosecuted under the 'Newspaper Stamp Act', repealed in 1855. He was also on the recruiting committee for the Garibaldi Legion (1860) and a member of the Reform League (1866). From 1866 until his death he was sub-editor of Bradlaugh's 'National Reformer' and a vice-president and first treasurer of the National Secular Society, founded in 1866. From the mid-1850s he was a convinced atheist and published over a dozen tracts and lectures, including 'Thoughts on Atheism, or, Can Man by Searching Find out God?' (1870) and a neo-Malthusean pamphlet, 'Large or Small Families? On which Side Lies the Balance of Comfort?' (1870). He edited with Charles Watts 'The Secularist's Manual of Songs and Ceremonies' (1871), to which he contributed secular marriage and burial services. In 1871 he presided over the formation of a republican committee in London, and two years later published his lecture 'Would a Republican Form of Government be Suitable to England?'

Austin Holyoake married twice. His first wife, whom he met at the Owenite John Street Institute, was Lucy, daughter of Robert Pettigrew, a tailor. They were married on 5 August 1851, but she died in childbirth on 23 September 1855, aged twenty-seven years. His second wife, Jane, the daughter of James Baker, a coach-maker, was a professional singer, performing as Alice Austin. They were married on 20 November 1858, and had one son, Percy ('b'. 1861), and one daughter. After Holyoake's death, his widow married Theodore Wright and became a well-known London actress. 
Austin Holyoake's importance in radical freethought has been overshadowed by that of his elder brother, George Jacob, but he was an easier personality than the latter and his hard work behind the scenes did much both to launch the secularist movement and to smooth the difficult relations between his brother and Charles Bradlaugh. By 1872 his health was failing and consumption was diagnosed. He died on 10 April 1874 at 17 Johnson's Court, Fleet Street, and was buried a week later in Highgate cemetery, with Charles Watts reading Austin's own burial service over the grave. 


@@@@@


doc= 47696


Law, Harriet Teresa (1831-1897), secularist, was born in Ongar, Essex, on 5 November 1831, the daughter of Henry Frost, a butcher, farmer, and contractor. She was reared as a Strict Baptist in the severe Calvinist tradition. When her family moved to London she taught in a Sunday school and started her own school to assist the family's finances. In east London she came in contact with secularists, initially speaking against them but gradually being won over to their point of view. 
On 11 January 1855 Harriet married Edward Law, a dealer in property and the son of William Law of Newton Abbot; they had a son and three daughters. Law was a Christian undergoing a crisis of faith similar to her own. They soon both became secularists, and their house at 38 Boyson Road, Walworth, London, became a centre for secularist social occasions, especially from the mid-1870s. From 1860 Harriet Law was established as the leading female secularist platform speaker, working in the mould of Emma Martin. Edward Royle notes of her: 'as a young woman she was remembered as having a low, pleasant voice, but her later efforts in large halls and out-of-doors gave her a harsher tone' (Royle, 5.135). She took the view that women were the equals of men, and had a hostility towards doctors. Though associated with Charles Bradlaugh she did not join the National Secular Society; in 1869 she was president of the Freethought League and was one of the founders in 1877 of the British Secular Union (both organizations being independent of Bradlaugh). In 1876 she took over the 'Secular Chronicle' and edited it for three years, losing heavily on it while promoting secularism, republicanism, and the emancipation of women. She also published 'An Hour with Harriet Martineau' (1877). 
Harriet Law was a rough advocate of secularist views which, though the obverse of her earlier Calvinism, she advanced with the same uncompromising dogmatism. She lacked the social graces of Annie Besant, who eclipsed her in her later years. In 1867 she was elected a member of the general council of the First International. On 7 July 1878 she wrote a biographical article on Karl Marx in her 'Secular Chronicle' and on 4 August that year published his reply to George Howell. Her socialist opinions made her much more cautious than most secularists about associating with the Liberal Party. Ill with bronchitis, she retired from public life and died from a heart attack at 24 Somerville Road, Peckham, London, on 19 July 1897, being buried at Forest Hill cemetery on 23 July. Her husband survived her. 


@@@@@


doc= 47699


Watts, Charles (1836-1906), secularist and journalist, was born in Bristol on 27 February 1836, the son of George Watts, a bootmaker. His parents were strict Wesleyan Methodists, his father being a local preacher. Having made his lecturing debut on the temperance platform when he was fourteen, Watts was converted to freethought by the lectures of G. J. Holyoake. At the age of sixteen he left home for London, where he associated with the freethinkers in south London. He was joined by his older brother John (1834-1866), a printer who worked for the Holyoake brothers at 147 Fleet Street and then set up his own business in 1858. When John became editor of Charles Bradlaugh's 'National Reformer' in 1864, Charles was appointed sub-editor. At the same time he became a full-time lecturer in the secularist movement, and in 1866 was made first secretary of the National Secular Society, a post he held until 1871 and again from 1873 to 1875. 
When Austin Holyoake died in 1874, his printing and publishing business at 17 Johnson's Court was purchased by the freethought movement from the widow and presented to Watts. He was at this date second only to Bradlaugh in the secularist movement, but in 1877 the two quarrelled bitterly over Watts's refusal to defend an action brought against him as nominal publisher of Charles Knowlton's birth-control work 'The Fruits of Philosophy'. He resigned from the National Secular Society and, with other secularists opposed to Bradlaugh, founded the British Secular Union as a short-lived rival to the National Secular Society, and acquired G. J. Holyoake's weekly periodical the 'Secular Review' as its organ. He edited this until 1882, when he made the first of three visits to North America, leaving his son Charles Albert Watts (1858-1946) in charge of his printing and publishing business, and W. S. Ross as editor of the 'Secular Review'. On his third visit, in 1884, he settled in Toronto, where in 1887 he published a weekly periodical, 'Secular Thought'. Having resettled in England after Bradlaugh's death in 1891, he resumed lecturing for the National Secular Society until 1902, when he again resigned following accusations by G. W. Foote that he had diverted donations from the National Secular Society to the Rationalist Press Association, which had been founded by his son Charles Albert in 1899. He devoted the rest of his life to supporting this latter organization. 
Charles Watts was an amiable man, and a popular lecturer and debater. Through the misfortune of falling foul of both Charles Bradlaugh and G. W. Foote his contribution to the National Secular Society and radical freethought in over forty years of public life has been underestimated. He published nearly fifty books and pamphlets on controversial political and religious topics, some of which were gathered together in 'The Meaning of Rationalism and other Essays' (1905), but his writings lacked style and originality and are now seldom read. All his entries in the 'British Library Catalogue of Printed Books' are mistakenly attributed to his son Charles Albert Watts. 
Watts was married twice. His first wife, Mary Ann Tomkins, whom he had married on 12 June 1856, died of consumption in 1870, aged thirty-three. His children by this first marriage were Clara Agnes (1857-1921), Charles Albert, Frank (1862/3-1913), William (1863/4-1872), Annie (1866/7-1913), and Wallace George (1867/8-1870). His second marriage (on 19 November 1870) was to Eunice Kate Nowlan (1847/8-1924), the daughter of William Nowlan, a bootmaker and fellow freethinker; he had met her while staying at her father's house in Nottingham on a provincial lecture tour. She was an active secularist who also acted on the London stage under the name of Kate Carlyon. They had one daughter, Kate Eunice, born on 20 May 1875. Watts died on 16 February 1906 at 13 Carminia Road, Balham, and was cremated at Golders Green on 21 February; his ashes were buried in Highgate cemetery the following day. 


@@@@@


doc= 47701


Alice Bradlaugh (1856-1888), who was born on 30 April 1856 at 4 West Street, Bethnal Green, shared many of her early experiences and interests. They received a basic education at private schools in London, but learnt French from political refugees and in 1872 attended school briefly in Paris. However, after their parents' separation in 1870 most of their time was spent at their grandparents' home in Midhurst, Sussex, with their mother who suffered from alcoholism. 


@@@@@


doc= 47702


Pease, John William Beaumont, first Baron Wardington (1869-1950), banker, was born at Pendower, West Road, Newcastle upon Tyne, on 4 July 1869, the second son of the banker John William Pease (1836-1901) and his wife, Helen Mary Fox (1838-1928), both Quakers. He was educated at Marlborough School (1878-83) and then at New College, Oxford. A gifted sportsman, he was awarded a blue for both golf and lawn tennis. 
Pease was a member of the leading business dynasty in the north-east of England responsible for the projection and management of the pioneering Stockton and Darlington Railway and the foundation of interlocking industrial interests embracing woollen textiles, coalmining, engineering, and metallurgical products. The Peases were related by marriage to other Quaker families with commercial interests, principally the Backhouses, Gurneys, and Foxes, and in that connection had founded a private banking partnership in the late eighteenth century which acted as the clearing house for the Peases' own concerns and also as a vehicle for the raising of capital. In this latter context the history of the Pease family is a testament to the strength of the Quaker credit network in mobilizing capital resources for industrial ventures. 
Pease's father was a partner in the family bank in Darlington, but in 1859 he moved to Newcastle upon Tyne to become a partner in the banking firm of Hodgkin, Barnett, Pease, Spence & Co. This firm was founded in the wake of the collapse of the Northumberland and Durham District Bank in 1857, an event which precipitated the bankruptcy of the heavily indebted Derwent Iron Company located at Consett. As a major traffic-sender on the Stockton and Darlington Railway, there can be little doubt that Pease's father was propelled northwards to participate in the management of a new banking concern which was expected to play a leading role in the reconstruction of the iron company. This was achieved in 1864 with the foundation of the Consett Iron Company. 
Pease himself became a partner in Hodgkin Barnett Pease Spence in the early 1890s, and as senior partner he was to play the leading role in negotiating a merger with Lloyds Bank in 1902. As a prosperous local bank possessing an extensive branch network in the north-east of England, Hodgkin Barnett Pease Spence had some claim to preferment within Lloyds' managerial structure and, after the formal amalgamation in 1903, Pease was elected to the London board of Lloyds. By 1910 he had risen to the position of deputy chairman and in 1922, following the death of Sir Richard Vassar-Smith, he succeeded to the chairmanship. He remained in office until December 1945, a period of service equalling the combined total of his three successors. 
In the inter-war period Pease was perhaps better known as a talented amateur golfer than as a banker; he was invariably in contention for the UK amateur championship, and served latterly as chairman of the championship committee. On 6 April 1923 he married Dorothy Charlotte (died 1993), the daughter of Lord Forster, governor-general of Australia, and the widow of the Hon. Harold Lubbock. They had two sons, Christopher Henry Beaumont ('b'. 1924) and William Simon ('b'. 1925). The elder son became a partner in the leading stockbroking firm of Hoare Govett. 
Pease was notable for his conservative and orthodox policies while chairman of Lloyds, and during his tenure of office the bank developed a reputation for over-caution. Indeed, between the wars Lloyds' share of deposits and advances declined in relation to those of the other large clearing banks, indicating some loss of competitiveness. Presiding over the board with authority and dignity, Pease nevertheless discouraged discussion, so that board meetings tended to be rubber-stamp affairs. However, as a leading banker he owed his considerable reputation to his qualities of impeccable integrity and honesty. He was appointed chairman of the Committee of London Clearing Bankers and also served as president of the British Bankers' Association. In 1936 his services to banking were recognized in his elevation to the peerage as Baron Wardington, of Alnmouth, Northumberland. He died at Wardington Manor, Wardington, near Banbury, on 7 August 1950, and was cremated in Oxford on 14 August. 


@@@@@


doc= 47704


O'Hagan, Henry Osborne (1853-1930), company promoter, was born on 18 March 1853 at Blackburn, Lancashire, one of at least two sons of Henry O'Hagan, a civil engineer of Ulster origins, who had married at Chatham in 1846 Emily, daughter of Charles Buchanan, bootmaker. He was educated at Rochester grammar school and privately at Streatham. At the age of fifteen Osborne O'Hagan (as he was usually known) began his City career as a clerk at a weekly salary of 10's'. in a firm promoting private acts of parliament for railways and other public works. In 1874, when just twenty-one, he was prosecuted with J. S. Muir on a charge of obtaining $30,000 by false pretences by attempting to sell a colliery in Cumberland for $90,000 when the asking price was $60,000. He claimed that there were other intermediaries in the deal, to whom $30,000 was to be paid. 'The Times' reported on 9 June: 'The Foreman of the Jury, addressing the Bench, said they could not say the prisoners were not guilty. The Recorder said there was no evidence to prove their guilt, the jury had no option but to acquit them.' 
Afterwards O'Hagan became a company promoter specializing in tramways, collieries, and breweries. He does not seem to have gulled investors flagrantly: he converted mainly worthwhile concerns into public companies and tried to ensure a capital structure which would not wreck the prospects of each business by imposing a burden of long-term indebtedness on profits. His reputation for shrewd even-handedness was such that he was employed as an arbitrator in financial disputes involving such major figures as Weetman Pearson (later Lord Cowdray). For his part in the flotation of International Tea Stores in 1895 for H. E. Kearley, later Viscount Devonport, he typically received commission of $40,000. 
In 1882 O'Hagan founded the City of London Contract Corporation, which was henceforth the main vehicle for his promotions. Although O'Hagan was chairman, most of the company's shares were held by discerning ordinary investors, as the company paid annual dividends varying from 15 to 60 per cent. Having become interested in various American businesses, particularly railroads, stockyards, cold storage, and meat wholesaling, O'Hagan formed the London and Chicago Contract Corporation in 1890. A convivial man, with a taste for music and theatricals of the cheerier sort, in 1889 he took a shareholding in Ronaschers, which controlled a Viennese hotel, restaurant, cafe, ballroom, and concert hall. This was one of many of his investments which suffered during the First World War. 
O'Hagan's most important contribution to financial history was his popularization of underwriting for home industrial issues. This meant that he and his corporation acted as an issuing house in the public flotation of companies. Adapting the system prevalent in the foreign loan market since the 1860s, the capital to be underwritten in each promotion was put out by O'Hagan on a commission basis to brokers. As a result, the vendor was safeguarded from losses if the public failed to take up the issue of shares. With the removal of this risk for the vendor, many companies were encouraged to seek capital from the investing public. O'Hagan's system was important because until 1900 legislation precluded companies from issuing shares at a discount or paying commission to anyone taking up their shares. 
In 1900 O'Hagan attempted what was to be a final master stroke before retirement, the amalgamation of all Britain's cement companies. By mischance the flotation of Associated Portland Cement Manufacturers coincided with a market crash on receiving the news of the Boxer uprising in China. As a result, $2.2 million of the shares were not subscribed, and O'Hagan himself claimed to have been left responsible for $1.25 million. He took five months to cover this amount: friends took $400,000 of debentures and preference shares and he took $840,000 in ordinary shares. Although he had hitherto usually refused the distraction of outside directorships, he became vice-chairman of Associated Portland Cement and a managing director of British Portland Cement. These companies took most of his attention for twenty years, but he severed his links after vainly opposing a bold post-war expansion. 
O'Hagan married in 1878 Elizabeth, daughter of John Philpot Jones, architect. He had one son, Henry Osborne O'Hagan (1882-1938), and an adopted daughter, Gladys; but his liking for the company of actresses, and interest in rescuing prostitutes, suggest a loud and restless bonhomie little suited to domestic happiness. It can be presumed that in later years he was estranged from his wife. For many years O'Hagan kept apartments at The Albany, and a villa, 'Riverhome', near Hampton Court, where he stored his collection of ancient coins, snuff boxes, and medals. Until 1919 he was president of the Thames Angling Preservation Society. He retired in 1924 to a villa at Roquebrune Cap Martin on the French riviera, where he indulged his taste for yachting. John Lane published two volumes of O'Hagan's memoirs entitled 'Leaves from my Life' in 1929. They were written from memory, and may contain inaccuracies, but they constitute a rich, vivid source on a crucial epoch of British financial history: his feel for people and events was astute, even when self-serving. O'Hagan died suddenly after a long illness on 3 May 1930 at his French villa, Casa del Mare, Roquebrune Cap Martin, Alpes Maritimes. 
Osborne O'Hagan was an energetic, domineering, obese, vainglorious man who enjoyed his luxuries and was a hearty trencherman. He was a wily and tenacious litigant, and could be an implacable enemy, but there are many signs of sly good nature in his memoirs. He was full of little jokes, often premeditated, to jolly along his business dealings, and had few illusions about his fellow men. 


@@@@@


doc= 47705


Peat, Sir William Barclay (1852-1936), accountant, was born in Forebank St Cyrus, Kincardine, Scotland, on 15 February 1852, second son of James Peat, a farmer, and Margaret, 'nee' Barclay. Following his education at Montrose Academy, he became an indentured apprentice to a solicitor in Montrose. For reasons unknown, he abandoned the study of Scottish law and in 1870 moved to London where he was employed as a junior clerk by Robert Fletcher, a distinguished public accountant who had connections with railways, insurance companies, and also industrial undertakings, particularly in the iron industry. On 29 December 1873 Peat married Edith (died 1929), daughter of Henry Roberts, a solicitor of Usk in Monmouthshire; they had six children. In 1876 Peat moved to the Middlesbrough office of Robert Fletcher & Co., and was admitted a partner of the firm in the following year. On Fletcher's death in 1883, the firm's name became R. Mackay & Co. In 1891 Roderick Mackay died in Monte Carlo, leaving behind substantial private debts. Peat immediately returned to London to take charge of the office there and to make sure that Mackay's debts were settled. The name of the partnership, comprising four members, was changed to W. B. Peat & Co. Three of Peat's children, Sir Harry, Roderick, and Charles, later became partners in the firm. 
Under Peat's leadership the firm flourished, particularly through audit work. Peat or his firm acted as auditors for many banks and railway companies, and especially iron and steel organizations in the north of England. He was also appointed the auditor of the private accounts of the sovereign. In 1911, Peat met James Marwick, a Scottish chartered accountant practising in North America, while travelling to New York on the 'Berengaria'. By the voyage's end, the two had agreed to a merger, the formal agreement for which was signed on 1 October 1911. The merged firm became Marwick, Mitchell, Peat & Co. in the USA, Canada, and France, while the UK firm remained as W. B. Peat & Co. until 1925 when the name Peat, Marwick, Mitchell & Co. was adopted for the UK, continental Europe, and North America. Peat retired in 1923 after thirty-two years as senior partner. During his active professional life, he engaged in insolvency work and also advised on many amalgamations in the iron and steel industry. He also served the industry as secretary of the National Federation of Iron and Steel Manufacturers during 1918-25. 
Peat was a pioneer of the organized accountancy profession in Britain, and an important figure in its development. He joined the Institute of Accountants in 1879 as an associate. The following year he became a foundation member of the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales (ICAEW), joined its council in 1894, and served as president during 1906-8 in a total of thirty-seven years' service as a councillor. He was a most generous donor to the Chartered Accountants Benevolent Association, over which he presided for twenty years, and also gave generously in prizes awarded for ICAEW examinations. 
Peat's public activities were many, including engagements on various government departmental committees. He was chairman of the royal commission on agriculture, 1919-20, sat on the royal commission on food prices, served as chairman of the subcommittee on night baking, and was a member of the Voluntary Hospitals Committee. He received a number of honours, including chevalier of the Legion d'honneur. He was knighted in 1912, and created CVO in 1921. 
Sir William Barclay Peat died at his residence, Wykeham Rise, Totteridge, Hertfordshire, on 24 January 1936, and was buried at Totteridge church three days later. His obituary in 'The Times' stated that Peat 'owed his success to a robust constitution, indefatigable energy, and a capacity to form shrewd and penetrating judgements'. The firm which Peat led continued to expand through internal growth and merger. 


@@@@@


doc= 47707


Roger, Sir Alexander Forbes Proctor (1878-1961), businessman and public servant, was born on 30 January 1878, at Rhynie, Aberdeenshire, the posthumous third son of James Paterson Roger (who to his family's eternal shame had committed suicide) and his second wife, Margaret, daughter of James Munro of Dingwall. There was a half-sister from his father's earlier marriage. He was educated at Robert Gordon's College, Aberdeen, and at the age of eighteen he went to work at the City of London office of the Law, Guarantee, Trust, and Accident Society. In 1908 he married Helen Stuart (1884-1976), youngest daughter of James Campbell Clark. They had three sons, including the couturier Neil Munro Roger. At about the time of his marriage Roger became a junior partner of John Philipps, afterwards Viscount St Davids, who controlled several investment trusts interested in electrical supply, engineering, and transport. 
From early in the First World War until July 1915 Roger directed the British Red Cross Society's motor ambulances on the western front. He was then recruited to the Ministry of Munitions as director-general of trench warfare supplies, charged with reorganizing the production of mortars, grenades, and similar weapons. He was knighted in 1916. When the Ministry of Reconstruction was formed in 1917 Roger was appointed to its council with responsibility for financial policy. 
After the armistice Roger resumed his business career, though he had temporary charge of the London docks during the general strike of 1926. He became a director in 1918 of British Insulated Cables (BIC) and chairman in 1930. During the 1920s Roger had particular responsibility for BIC's telephonic interests, and was involved in the Constantinople, Portuguese, and other telephone concessions. He travelled widely, became an adept at business diplomacy, and was a director of the Associated Telephone and Telegraph Company, the front for an Anglo-American global marketing arrangement. Following the amalgamation of BIC with Callenders in 1945, he was chairman of British Insulated Callender's Cables until 1954, thereafter serving as president. 
Roger withdrew from the St Davids group in 1920, owing to difficult relations with Lord St Davids, and joined the boards of several financial institutions, most notably the Midland Bank, which he served from 1932 until 1958 (latterly as deputy chairman). It was through this connection that he became chairman of the troubled Birmingham Small Arms Company (BSA; 1932-40). At BSA he was involved in various aspects of rearmament, and visited Moscow and Prague on the company's behalf in 1938; but he found his fellow directors uncongenial, and was relieved to leave BSA to become chairman of the Tank Board in May 1940. In the same year he headed a Ministry of Supply mission to South Africa, Asia, and Australasia. Roger led the British delegation at the Delhi conference in 1940 and was created KCIE in 1941. 
Roger was shy when young, but his confidence grew with success. He was an affectionate and even confiding father, and his concern for children generally led to his chairing the appeals council of the Great Ormond Street Hospital for more than a decade (1934-47). In his prime he was slim, alert, and vigorous-looking; a good dancer, he played tennis, squash, and golf into his sixties, and was a keen stalker in the highlands. In business he had few equals at dissecting balance sheets and analysing accounts. He was hard to fool, and a good delegator, though his liking for fellow Scots (especially Aberdonians) sometimes led him astray. Despite his fidelity to Scotland, his tastes were metropolitan, and as an older man he relished the hours spent talking to cronies at the Carlton Club. In overseas business he saw much chicanery, but was neither cynical nor corrupt. He thrived on challenges and enjoyed his business prestige, but he disdained power and money for their own sakes, and, despite opportunities to do so, chose not to accumulate millions: his estate was valued for probate at $221,644 gross. 
He died of heart failure on 4 April 1961 at his residence, Binfield Lodge, Binfield, Berkshire, and was cremated at Woking. 


@@@@@


doc= 47708


Seccombe, Lawrence Henry (1877-1954), banker and bill broker, was born on 1 June 1877 at Terrington Lodge, Terrington St Clement, Norfolk, the second son of Dr John Thomas Seccombe (1834-1895), a country doctor, and his second wife, Ellen (1848-1943), daughter of Henry Bates, a Terrington farmer. He was descended from an ancient Devon family. Lawrence was educated at St Edmund's School, Hunstanton, until he was thirteen and then at King Edward VI's School, Birmingham, to the age of eighteen. In 1895 he went straight from school to join Lyon and Tucker, a small firm of bill dealers in the City. By 1917, when he left for war service, Seccombe was a salaried partner in the discount house of Ryder & Co. He served as a second lieutenant (and acting captain from 30 April 1918), initially in the technical stores branch of the Royal Flying Corps and, subsequently, in the RAF and at the Air Ministry. 
After returning to the City of London in the spring of 1919, Seccombe set up on his own account, taking into partnership S. R. Marshall and C. A. G. Campion. Money was borrowed from banks with surplus funds and invested in bills and bonds. Part of the starting capital came through a family connection of S. R. Marshall, and for this reason the new firm traded under the auspices of M. W. Marshall & Son. Montagu Norman, the governor of the Bank of England, was at this time keen to exercise a closer supervision of the money market. Needing to replace the bank's agent or 'special buyer' in the bill market, Norman turned to Lawrence Seccombe, who had in a short space of time developed a thriving bill business at Marshalls. 
Seccombe's appointment in April 1922 had nothing officially to do with the company, but it necessitated a reorganization of his activities. The discount side of the firm in consequence became independent of M. W. Marshall & Son and henceforth it traded as Seccombe, Marshall, and Campion, with Seccombe as senior partner. Nevertheless, in keeping with Norman's obsession with secrecy, Seccombe received no official appointment as special buyer, merely a verbal agreement. Official dealings were, moreover, to be done confidentially and it was entirely appropriate that operations designed to restore market liquidity should come to be known as 'doing good by stealth' and the special buyer himself referred to as 'the Hidden Hand'. 
The firm's bill-broking business, which had been growing rapidly, was now swollen by transactions on behalf of the Bank of England -- mainly purchases and sales of Treasury bills designed to regulate financial conditions in line with national economic policy. The success or otherwise of these operations depended critically on the skill and tact of the special buyer, who was expected both to assess market conditions as the basis for official intervention and to secure the willing compliance of the discount houses with the bank's requirements. Seccombe also supervised the purchases of sample commercial bills in order to assess the quality of the transactions. In 1947 the firm became a private company with Seccombe as chairman, but it remained the smallest house in the market. Because of its unique role Seccombes escaped the process of amalgamation that occurred in the market generally in the 1930s and 1940s. 
Seccombe was an outstanding figure among his contemporaries in the City of London. The complete man of business, he was always immaculately dressed, courteous, and gracious. Inclined to be hasty and impulsive, his judgement was amazingly good and his integrity never questioned. Above all, perhaps, Seccombe possessed a quality that Norman himself greatly admired and cultivated to an extraordinary degree: that of discretion, and of appearing inscrutable when necessary -- so much so that Kenneth Peppiatt, the Bank of England's market expert, with whom Seccombe fished for several weeks annually on the Scottish Dee, would find it impossible to guess, when meeting him in the money market, what scale of business he was seeking to transact. Discretion also proved a sure defence. When, on one occasion, Seccombe was absent and the partner deputed to act failed to satisfy the bank, Norman recommended the latter's dismissal. Seccombe, however, played his strongest card: he said nothing; and did nothing. 
Seccombe held the office of special buyer for thirty-two years. His tenure paralleled closely that of Montagu Norman as governor of the Bank of England, and the two worked closely together to maintain stability in the money market in years of great monetary crisis and upheaval. Such was the importance ascribed to the role of Seccombe's firm that, on the outbreak of the Second World War, the firm was moved into the secure basement of the Bank of England. 
Seccombe married on 11 February 1915 Norah (1885/6-1959), daughter of Thomas Wood, a mine owner and mining engineer, and his wife, Ellen. They had two sons. Seccombe served as an urban district councillor for Weybridge in the 1920s and for Chertsey in the 1930s. In 1946 he was appointed high sheriff of the county of Surrey, and in 1952 he was appointed CBE for services to the City. He was very good with young people and devoted much time to youth schemes, including, during the war years, the sea cadets and the Air Training Corps. Most outdoor pursuits appealed to him, but he also enjoyed antiques and, latterly, foreign travel. 
Seccombe died from a brain tumour at University College Hospital, London, on 28 November 1954. He was cremated on 2 December, and his funeral was held the same day at Pyrford church, Surrey, his ashes being later buried in the church walls. He was survived by his wife, and his second son, Hugh, succeeded him as chairman of the company. 


@@@@@


doc= 47710


Tait, Andrew Wilson (1876-1930), accountant and industrialist, was born in Edinburgh on 16 January 1876, one of at least two sons of William Tait, a grocer and spirit dealer, and his wife, Eliza Wilson. He was educated at Daniel Stewart's College and at Edinburgh University and then became articled to the chartered accountant Alexander Thomas Niven, who had two decades earlier been principal to the chartered accountant George Alexander Touche. Tait was admitted a member of the Edinburgh Society of Accountants on 20 July 1899 and then moved to London, where he joined the recently formed firm of G. A. Touche. In 1910 he married Isabel May ('b'. 1882), the daughter of George White Allinson, a brewer of Greenbanks, Ellesmere, Shropshire, and his wife, Phoebe Sophia; they had a son and a daughter. 
Tait was regarded by Touche as one of the outstanding accountants of his time. Like Touche himself, he was someone who 'thought big', with ambition, imagination, and drive. He is described in the firm's history as 'physically strong and a keen boxer' (Richards, 'Touche Ross', 16). Both partners had interests which extended far beyond their accounting firm. They were entrepreneurial in their outlook, and their fees, which were not treated as income of the firm, were thought to have been at least equal to their share of partnership profits. Andrew's brother James also joined the staff of G. A. Touche in 1911 and was admitted to partnership in 1917. James was regarded as a capable and steady worker but not of the same calibre as Andrew. 
One of Tait's major achievements was the reconstruction of Ferranti. When the electronics firm neared bankruptcy in 1903, its bankers called in two accountants as receiver-managers. One of these, Arthur Whittaker, was from a local Manchester firm; the other was Tait, who became chairman. Following reconstruction, Sebastian Ziani de Ferranti, the firm's founder, was reduced to a relatively insignificant position within the company. Indeed, it appears that Tait ensured Ferranti was virtually excluded from the works after 1905 because of his alleged obstructive influence. According to the company's historian: 'Ferranti stands out as an excellent example of the growing importance of professionally trained businessmen, and especially accountants, in the management of manufacturing companies in the two decades preceding the First World War' (Wilson, 81). 
Tait was active in the affairs of the British Electrical and Allied Manufacturers' Association. In this capacity he took a leading part in the formation of the Federation of British Industries (1916), and was appointed a member of its first executive council. In his role with the association he strove hard to organize the merger of British electrical manufacturers in order to help them compete with their German and American counterparts. He was severely critical of excessive individualism among British industrialists, and while giving evidence to a committee on electrical industries in 1916 he argued that the government's failure to provide support for British industry 'twenty to twenty-five years ago' was the reason why it lagged behind the Germans, who 'used every effort, diplomatic and otherwise, to assist industry' ('DBB'). In 1918 Tait was appointed CBE for his work during the war on this and other committees. 
Tait seemed destined to become one of the country's leading businessmen, and during the first two decades of the twentieth century he was heavily involved in the creation and management of investment trusts. He met with considerable successes, but the connection was to be the source of major set-backs, as well as managing to tarnish his professional reputation. He was director of the Edinburgh-based Electrical Securities Trust, formed in 1907, which failed, with the result that the ordinary shareholders lost all their capital. Much worse was to come as the result of Tait's work at Cedar Investment Trust, which he founded in 1918. He was the receiver and liquidator of the Magadi Soda Company, where plans were made for the sale of its assets to Brunner Mond. This led to a court case at the Chancery Division in February 1925, which proved extremely damaging to Tait. The case, brought by one of Magadi Soda's shareholders, revealed that Tait and his associates had made public statements designed to depress the value of the company's debentures, which were then purchased by the Cedar Investment Trust with the intention of resale to Brunner Mond at a substantial profit. Mr Justice Eve described Tait's part in this unsavoury adventure as discreditable and a breach of trust. Tait was subsequently removed from the boards of a number of companies, although he remained a partner in Touche and on the boards of many other companies right up to the date of his death. 
Tait died after a long and wasting illness on 21 April 1930 at his home at 10 Holland Park, Notting Hill, London. The cause of death was chronic meningo-encephalitis, and it is thought that the disease may have been the explanation for his misconduct in the Magadi Soda affair. According to his obituary notice in 'The Times': 'Mr Tait had one of the shrewdest and sanest minds on financial matters which the City has known, and until his illness his advice was almost universally sought' ('The Times', 22 April 1930). 


@@@@@


doc= 47713


Taylor, James Frater (1873-1960), business manager, was born on 23 March 1873 at South College Street, Aberdeen, one of the six children of Alexander Taylor (died 1887), a ship's mate, and his wife, Mary Lowe, 'nee' Frater. He attended Aberdeen grammar school (1886-8) and by 1891 was an apprentice clerk in Aberdeen. In 1897 he married Frances Alice, the daughter of Joseph Hill of West Hartlepool; they had one son and two daughters. 
In 1891 Taylor went out to India as assistant general manager of Madras Electric Tramways, a British company in difficulties. He returned home later that year, and then worked for Samuel Allsopp & Sons Ltd, the brewing giants of Burton upon Trent, also in acute difficulties. Taylor rapidly rose through its ranks; by 1907 he was general manager and director, but in December 1908 he resigned. He was then recruited by a fellow Scot, Robert Fleming, to represent his interest in the Lake Superior Corporation of Canada, owners, 'inter alia', of Algoma Steel. Taylor, who became Algoma's president, reconstructed the company and made it a sector leader. In 1918 he moved on to manage businesses in which the Bank of Montreal was a large creditor, and eventually set up in Montreal as an independent financial agent. 
During the 1920s many very large British industrial concerns faced collapse, with grave implications for the manufacturing economy, employment, and the stability of the banking system. The Bank of England's preferred policy was one of industrial rationalization, and Montagu Norman, the governor of the bank, sought a manager to reorganize Sir W. G. Armstrong Whitworth & Co. Ltd, one of the largest engineering businesses at risk. Sir Frederick Williams-Taylor of the Bank of Montreal recommended Taylor for the job, describing him as 'unimportant in appearance with a clear, keen, sparkling eye, not much given to talking but always very much to the point'. Although not noted for his diplomacy, 'he would probably get along with people who are simple, direct and straightforward as himself'. Above all, 'he gets to the bottom of things. Having decided that a certain course is in the interest of those he has undertaken to serve, he would not easily be moved by opposition nor influenced by considerations of what he proposes would be popular or unpopular. (Barings archives, PF 39, f.108)' In July 1925 Taylor became a member of Armstrong Whitworth's board at an annual retainer of $5000 from the Bank of England; he remained a director until 1929. He dismembered the business, eventually converting it into a holding company, merged some parts with competitors, wound up others, and wrote down capital. In 1929 this was described as the 'greatest achievement of financial salvage ever attempted' ('The Economist', 16 Feb 1929), and Taylor emerged as a leading architect of rationalization. 
Taylor's success at Armstrong Whitworth underlined his ruthlessness and facility for correcting the business mistakes of others. When in 1926 he joined the Pressed Steel Co. Ltd as a director, he outlined his management methods learned in North America. These involved the production of half-yearly budgets, monthly sales and costs forecasts, monthly balance sheets, and profit and loss accounts; the installation of largely executive boards and local management committees; the appointment of commercially minded engineers; the creation of local cost and profit centres, if need be through the conversion of departments into subsidiary companies; and 'a firm grip on the purse strings' ('DBB'). By the late 1920s he had a deserved reputation at the Bank of England as an excellent manager of big manufacturing business, and he was a natural choice in 1929 as first managing director of Securities Management Trust, a Bank of England vehicle to promote rationalization. In the same year Montagu Norman also arranged for his appointment to the Macmillan committee on finance and industry. Another important appointment in 1929 was as chairman of William Beardmore & Co. Ltd, one of Armstrong Whitworth's tottering competitors. Taylor refused initially, but 'reluctantly agreed' after Norman 'earnestly begged' him to do so, such was Taylor's standing and Norman's need (Barings archives, PF 407, f.55). Suffering from recurrent ill health due to overwork, Taylor resigned in December. 
After his recovery in 1931, Taylor was appointed chairman of Pease & Partners Ltd, the important Darlington firm with iron and coal interests, which was in grave difficulties. As management expert and Bank of England nominee, Taylor played a key role in industrial reorganization in Britain during the difficult inter-war years. He continued to care for certain Bank of England interests in Newfoundland, and early in 1940 he departed to live in Canada, where he became a self-appointed 'general purposes man' for the bank and undertook other commissions for his old contacts. He died at 508 Hycroft Tower, Vancouver, on 23 February 1960. 


@@@@@


doc= 47715


Meyer, Sir Carl Ferdinand, first baronet (1851-1922), financier, was born at Hamburg, Germany, on 23 December 1851, the second son of Siegmund Meyer (1815-1882) and his wife, Elise Rosa (died 1855), daughter of Reuben Hahn. He was educated abroad and went to London in 1872 to work as a clerk at Rothschilds' merchant bank. On 14 March 1883 he married Adele Meyer (1862/3-1930), daughter of Julius Levis, merchant, of London; they had a son and daughter. 
At Rothschilds, Meyer's promotion to senior clerk was rapid and he carried a partner's workload. Particular concerns were Rothschilds' extensive yet unlikely finance of southern African diamond and gold mining and the 1886 formation of the pioneering and immensely successful Exploration Company. He handled Rothschilds' relationship from 1887 with Cecil Rhodes, which began his lifelong association with De Beers Consolidated Mines Ltd. As a De Beers director from shortly after its formation, he experienced headlong conflict with Rhodes and his South African cronies in seeking to impose good business practice. Meyer became a major figure in mining finance, acting as director of several southern African companies. He served as deputy chairman of De Beers from 1888 to 1921. 
At Rothschilds Meyer grew close to another of their allies, Sir Ernest Cassel, and the two worked on bond issues for foreign governments. But in the mid-1890s, when Cassel failed to persuade Rothschilds to back his Egyptian projects, such as the Aswan Dam, he drifted away from them, and in 1896 took Meyer with him. They remained lifelong friends and collaborators. Meyer, whom Rothschilds kept out of their partnership and were happy to see sit in their general office until at least 1890, was pleased to go, but he did so on good terms and continued as their representative on several boards. However, in allowing his departure, Rothschilds deprived themselves of vital leadership for a generation. He worked with Cassel on the successful Egyptian projects and in 1898 was appointed a director to watch over Cassel's substantial interest in his newly promoted National Bank of Egypt. Henceforth Meyer operated from the bank's London head office and remained a director until his death. 
Meyer's interests also extended to China, then a battlefield on which the imperial powers fought for economic influence. He was chairman of the Pekin Syndicate Ltd, formed in 1897 to operate concessions for railways and mines, and regarded as a major instrument of British influence. This led to Meyer's 1899 appointment to the London committee of the Hongkong and Shanghai Bank and, in 1904, to his directorship of Central China Railways Ltd. However, the Pekin Syndicate made slow progress, and in 1910 Meyer fell victim to the machinations of French shareholders who forced his resignation, although he held on to his railway company directorship until 1914. 
Away from business, Meyer's interests included music, shooting, and racehorse-owning, while in London his connections included the National Hospital and the Shakespeare Memorial National Theatre (which eventually opened in 1963 as the National Theatre). His promotion of the latter in 1909 with the first contribution, of $70,000, to a $500,000 building fund was rewarded with a baronetcy a year later. About 1905 he acquired a country estate, Shortgrove, at Newport, Essex, and he became a county figure, sitting on the bench, and supporting Newport grammar school and Saffron Walden Hospital. His wife -- 'a society beauty fashionably interested in movements and causes' (Kynaston, 2.331) -- was active in local affairs and, further afield, was a well-informed chair of the St Pancras School for Mothers. With his wife he was an enthusiastic patron of opera and a discriminating collector of pictures. He had a neat, dapper appearance. 
Despite being a naturalized British subject since 1877 and having his son on active service, Meyer suffered great prejudice during the First World War. Following the torpedoing of the 'Lusitania' in 1915, he led hundreds of former German citizens in declaring in 'The Times' loyalty to the crown and detestation of German methods of warfare, but to little effect. Depressed by ostracism, his health broke down in 1916, when the Hongkong Bank was quick to encourage his resignation. In 1918 his fellow magistrates gave him the benefit of the doubt over the hoarding of 56 lbs of tea. 
Meyer died at his London home, 12 Park Crescent, Portland Place, on 18 December 1922. He was survived by his wife. Although born into a Jewish family, he received a Christian burial at St Marylebone cemetery, East Finchley, on 22 December, and his death went uncommented upon by the Jewish press. His son, Frank, succeeded him in the baronetcy. 


@@@@@


doc= 47717


Cazenove, Philip (1798-1880), stockbroker, was born on 23 November 1798 at Walthamstow, Essex, the fourth son of James Cazenove (1744-1827), merchant, and his wife, Marie-Anne Sophie Houssemayne Du Boulay. Of Huguenot descent James Cazenove was born in Geneva and emigrated to England where he established his own business. He became a naturalized Englishman in 1778 and three years later married Marie-Anne, daughter of the pastor of the French church in Threadneedle Street, London. Four sons, one of whom was John Cazenove, and five daughters made up their family. Philip Cazenove, like his three older brothers, was educated at Charterhouse School (from 1813 to 1815). As a young man he developed scholarly and literary tastes and a love of the classics which stayed with him throughout his life; 'many playful Latin epigrams issued from his pen on passing events in his family or in the world' (Kynaston, 14). No record survives of what he did in the three years between 1816 and 1819, but his three older brothers had all joined their father's business and it may well be that he gained some experience of the City by doing so. 
However, in 1819 Cazenove was introduced to the stock exchange as clerk to John Francis Menet, a man then in his forties and a stockbroker of only two years' standing. Menet was also of Huguenot descent and was Philip Cazenove's brother-in-law, married since 1805 to his elder sister, Louisa. In 1822 Philip married Emma (died 1860), daughter of Edward Knapp, a banker. There was already a connection between the families, for Emma's sister Susan had married Philip's brother James two years earlier. Philip and Emma Cazenove had at least three sons. 
On 19 March 1823 Cazenove became a member of the stock exchange and, shortly afterwards, Menet's partner. A considerable and prosperous business resulted from this partnership, which lasted until Menet's death in September 1835, and instrumental from its earliest days was a steady flow of work from N. M. Rothschild, then the most influential financier in the City. In 1836, following Menet's death, Cazenove formed a new partnership with two established stockbrokers, Joseph Laurence and Charles Pearce. Four years later Laurence's son, Sydney, joined the partnership along with Cazenove's elder brother, Henry, who had taken up stockbroking after the collapse of the Cazenove family business in 1831. By the 1840s the firm, with its five partners, was one of the largest on the stock exchange, and it seems that its business expanded commensurately. Henry Cazenove retired in 1852 and, probably because the next generation of all three families were looking for partnerships, the Laurence, Cazenove, and Pearce partnership was dissolved in 1854. 
Next to be formed was Philip Cazenove & Co., with Cazenove taking as partners his nephew Edward (son of his brother James), and his own son, Henry. In the 1850s the firm's business, already large with a number of merchant banks as clients and a comfortable connection in money broking with Barings, widened as legislation made incorporation with limited liability easily accessible. Cazenove & Co. acted as broker to new issues and flotations of new joint-stock companies on the stock exchange, a business in which it continued to be significant for the rest of the century and indeed into the twentieth century. 
After the death of his wife in 1860 Cazenove remained the titular head of the firm but now devoted more of his time and energy to good works and charitable activities. He acted as treasurer, and was himself a generous contributor, to a number of church charities, including the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel, the Society for the Propagation of Christian Knowledge, the National Society, and the Additional Curates' Society. He was an active member of the governing bodies of several hospitals (including Guy's Hospital, London, and St Luke's Hospital for the Insane) and philanthropic institutions. In 1872 Cazenove was elected a member of an influential if little-known association, the Club of Nobody's Friends. It comprised clerics and significant figures from the City of London, including the financier Henry Hucks Gibbs. 
In 1873 Cazenove formally retired from the firm, leaving it in the hands of his son Henry; his nephew, Edward Cazenove, had died in 1857. Philip Cazenove continued to work for the Council of Foreign Bondholders, of which he had become a member in 1869, until his death in Clapham, London, where he had lived, on 20 January 1880. St Michael's Church, Clapham, which was consecrated in 1881, was built partly in memory of him. 
Cazenove's sound business brain and sober working habits, combined with a degree of personal frugality, amassed for him a considerable fortune, enabling him to be 'one of the great Christian philanthropists of the age' (Kynaston, 14). The firm which he played such a large part in creating, known since 1954 as Cazenove & Co., continued to be a considerable force in the City of London. Cazenove was buried in the family vault in Hornsey churchyard, Middlesex. 


@@@@@


doc= 47718


Cooper family (per. 1854-1994), accountants, came to prominence as the result of the achievements of four of the sons of Emanuel Cooper (1794/5-1851), who was one of the founders of the London and County Bank, its deputy chairman from 1841, and a well-known advocate of the abolition of slavery. He was also a staunch Quaker, but was dismissed by the bank in 1848 having advanced himself some $16,000 which he was unable to repay. The bank's records contain a pitiful letter from his widow requesting money to keep her from penury. The request was dismissed, but is consistent with complaints made by Francis and Ernest in later life that they did not have enough to eat in their childhood days. 
Emanuel and his wife, Elizabeth ('nee' Ranson), had thirteen children. The four sons who were to found and for many years dominate their accountancy practice were: his eldest son, 


@@@@@


doc= 47721


Ames, Jeremiah (1706-1776), banker and merchant, was born on 20 July 1706 at Evercreech, near Shepton Mallet, Somerset, one of eight children of Levi Ames (died 1726), grocer, and his first wife, Hannah (died 1711), daughter of John Watts of Doulting, Somerset. Ames was one of four brothers; he also had four sisters. Until his father's death in 1726, he worked as his apprentice in the grocery trade, acquiring the basic commercial skills which were to stand him in such good stead in later years. He was married to Phoebe Collins, the seventh of ten children of Robert Collins of Horton, near Ilminster, Somerset, probably around 1730. Together they had four sons and three daughters. From the 1730s onwards Ames was increasingly involved with the commercial, civic, and religious life of the city of Bristol, where he lived for many years at 17 Lower Maudlin Lane. 
Ames was chiefly known as one of the six founding partners of the Harford Bank, the fourth oldest private banking house in Bristol, established in 1769. However, his interest in banking developed relatively late in life and no doubt stemmed directly from his long-standing commercial interests in Bristol and its hinterland. Indeed his business activities closely mirrored the diverse economy of the expanding metropolis of the west. Ames was active in sugar baking and refining, the manufacture of snuff and tobacco, gunpowder making, and dealing in iron goods; he also had extensive interests in shipping. He was a co-founder of the Bristol Fire Office, which underwrote fire insurance for domestic and commercial property and goods. Ames himself had extensive property interests, including mills, warehouses, and a considerable number of properties for private rental in Bristol. Together with his brother Samuel, he inherited land and property in and around Shepton Mallet. 
Ames spent a lifetime serving the city of Bristol in a variety of civic capacities. For many years an alderman, he was elected sheriff of the city on 29 September 1742 and on 15 September 1759 was chosen as mayor. The high regard for the probity of his business dealings and the execution of his official duties no doubt stemmed, in part, from his involvement in nonconformist religious society, notably the Unitarian church. 
Ames died in Bristol on 3 April 1776, aged sixty-nine, and was survived by his wife. An obituary notice in 'Felix Farley's Bristol Journal' (6 April 1776) noted: 'Wednesday morning died Jeremiah Ames, Esq; Alderman of this city. His inviolable integrity in his commercial and judicial capacity rendered him a valuable member of society. And his domestic virtues endearing him to his relatives, oblige them to lament their loss, and to venerate his memory.' He was buried shortly afterwards in the dissenting burial-ground, Brunswick Square, Bristol. The chief beneficiary of his complex legacy was his eldest surviving son, 


@@@@@


doc= 47724


Campbell, John (c.1703-1777), banker and businessman, was held by contemporaries to be an illegitimate son of Colin Campbell of Ardmaddy, younger son of the first earl of Breadalbane (1634-1717). Later testimonies suggest that Colin Campbell married Grizel Douglas against the earl's wishes, and that all evidence of this legal marriage was later destroyed, and with it, the claim of John Campbell's descendants to the earldom. After his father's death, John was raised in the Breadalbane household at Finlarig in the Perthshire highlands. In 1718 he was apprenticed to Colin Kirk, writer to the signet, for three years. 
In 1727, through the influence of John, second earl of Breadalbane, Campbell joined the newly established Royal Bank of Scotland in Edinburgh, where he began in the accountant's office. He was appointed assistant secretary in 1732 and second cashier in 1734, succeeding to the post of chief cashier in July 1745, the office he was to hold throughout his banking career. On the approach of Charles Edward Stuart's highland army in September 1745, the bank, under its deputy governor, Lord Milton, a pillar of the Hanoverian establishment in Scotland, sent its reserves of specie and banknotes to Edinburgh Castle to keep them out of Jacobite hands. However, after Edinburgh was taken and Charles Edward Stuart secured his victory at the battle of Prestonpans, a large number of Royal Bank of Scotland notes -- many from Glasgow -- came into the possession of the prince's staff. His secretary, John Murray of Broughton, presented these to the bank and demanded that Campbell exchange them for guineas, if necessary by bringing the reserves down from the castle. If this were not done, said Murray, the houses of bank directors and officials would be 'distressed'. 
By now Lord Milton and most of the bank's directors had fled, and Campbell and the two remaining directors, without much demur, agreed to Murray's demand. Although the castle was by now under siege by the highland army, they succeeded in gaining entrance to it, and informed Lieutenant-General Guest and General Preston, the castle's deputy governor, that they wanted access to the bank reserves deposited there, as Campbell put it, 'to do some business'. He and his party then brought down from the castle the reserves of specie and, that evening, exchanged over $3000 of coin for banknotes with Murray's representative. As Royal Bank of Scotland notes came into Jacobite hands in the remaining weeks of Jacobite occupation of Edinburgh, similar transactions more than doubled the amount exchanged, to $6700. It was a considerable help to the highland army, as it prepared for the invasion of England, to have all this added to its war chest. 
The seemingly weak-kneed response to Murray's demands and the apparent hoodwinking of General Preston raise questions about the motives of Campbell and his colleagues, so obviously at variance with the wishes of Lord Milton; it is also inconceivable that General Preston, resolute Hanoverian that he was, would have allowed the Royal Bank's reserves to leave the castle, had he known their ultimate destination. Perhaps Campbell was Jacobite at heart. The Breadalbane Campbells, unlike the Argyll Campbells, had been strongly Jacobite in the rising of 1715, though in 1745 Lord Glenorchy, the second earl's heir, was a determined whig. It may have been that Campbell, in the absence of Lord Milton, was responding to the wishes of the aged second earl, his uncle, the clan chief, and an erstwhile Jacobite, who remained at Holyroodhouse throughout the six weeks of the occupation, and whose Hanoverian loyalties were suspect. 
Curiously, when Hanoverian rule returned to Edinburgh in November 1745, though Lord Milton made clear his disapproval of what had been done, there were no active recriminations by him against Campbell and his directors. It may have been that the risk of embarrassment to the Royal Bank, to Lord Milton himself, and possibly to the second earl of Breadalbane was considered too great to allow disclosure. Campbell seems to have maintained the view that he had done nothing more than he was legally obliged to do. (A contrary view would be to question whether Murray in treasonable defiance of King George's rule could claim the protection of his laws.) 
In 1728 Campbell had married Jean Kirk ('nee' Stirling), a widow, who died in 1739. Campbell's second marriage took place in Edinburgh in the early part of 1751, to Anna Caroline, eldest daughter of James Campbell of Tofts, and they had seven sons and eight daughters. His second son, Colin, fought in the American War of Independence and became governor of Gibraltar. Initially Campbell resided in Newbank House, which belonged to the bank, in Newbank Close, off the High Street; later he moved to Restalrig, outside the city. After his second marriage, he moved to a more fashionable area, acquiring a house in the Citadel, Leith. Duncan Ban Macintyre, himself something of a Jacobite, composed, probably in the 1760s, a long eulogy in Gaelic verse in Campbell's honour, extolling his demeanour, hospitality, and attachment to all things highland. A portrait of 1749, in the possession of the Royal Bank of Scotland, shows him (despite the recent prohibition of the wearing of tartan) in highland dress and fully armed. 
Although he held a position of power and influence in the Royal Bank, Campbell's duties were not full-time. He acted as the Scottish representative of the Equivalent Company, which had close links with the bank, and had been set up in 1724 to dispense the pecuniary 'equivalent' paid to Scotland after the 'Act of Union'. He acted as agent to the second earl of Breadalbane and his son, Lord Glenorchy, and for other highland gentry, keeping their personal accounts, and performing business and personal service for them in Edinburgh. He was a partner in the Marble and Slate Company of Netherlorn, and was involved in the management of a coalmining company and the Edinburgh Sugar House. 
John Campbell's long reign at the Royal Bank coincided with the years of vigorous expansion, during which the Scottish banking system became the most developed in Europe. He died at Edinburgh in January 1777. 'The Diary of John Campbell: a Scottish Banker and the Forty-Five' published by the Royal Bank of Scotland in 1995 reproduces Campbell's diary in full for the crucial months of 1745. Long excerpts from the diary for these months had been published without much accompanying comment in the 'Miscellany of the Scottish History Society' (1893) but little attention was paid to their implication, least of all by Neil Munro in his 'History of the Royal Bank of Scotland, 1727-1927', though Walter Biggar Blaikie, in his article on Prince Charles Edward Stuart in the 'Book of the Old Edinburgh Club' for 1909, did raise an eyebrow at Campbell's 'grotesque' action. 


@@@@@


doc= 47726


Blacker, Carlos Paton (1895-1975), psychiatrist and eugenicist, was born on 8 December 1895 in Paris, the elder of the two sons of Carlos Blacker and Caroline Frost. His father, a gentleman of independent means, was descended on his maternal side from a prominent Peruvian political family, and one of Blacker's cousins, Pedro Beltran, served for a time as prime minister of Peru. Blacker's mother was the daughter of a Confederate general from St Louis who gained some distinction during the American Civil War. French was C. P. Blacker's first language and he remained bilingual throughout his life. Both Blacker and his brother were educated at Eton College, which Blacker left to serve as an officer in the Coldstream Guards from 1915 to 1919. He was wounded, and decorated with the Military Cross. Blacker's experiences during the First World War, in which his brother was killed, had an enduring impact on him and contributed to a falling away from his Roman Catholic origins and to his decision to practise psychiatry. During his last years Blacker returned in his mind to the war, writing an extensive account (unpublished) of his life in the trenches. 
Following the war Blacker entered Balliol College, Oxford, graduating in 1922 with distinction in natural science and zoology. While at Oxford Blacker represented the university at foils and was captain of the boxing club from 1920 to 1922, establishing a pattern of vigorous physical activity that saw him still running 5 miles a day or plunging into icy waters for a swim when in his mid-sixties. Blacker, in 1923, married Helen Maud Pilkington (1894-1984), the daughter of Major A. J. Pilkington, whose family was living in Florence at the time. From 1922 to 1925 he trained for medicine at Guy's Hospital, London, and obtained his MB (1927) and later his MD (1931) from Oxford. From 1927 to 1936 he was registrar of psychological medicine at Guy's. He left to join the psychiatric staff of the Maudsley Hospital, London, where, with the Second World War years excepted, he spent much of the remainder of his clinical career, retiring in 1960. Blacker's many professional publications included 'Human Values in Psychological Medicine' (1933), 'Voluntary Sterilization' (1934), and 'The Chances of Morbid Inheritance' (1934). 
Immediately upon the outbreak of war in 1939 Blacker rejoined the Coldstream Guards as a regimental medical officer, was evacuated at Dunkirk and was awarded the George Medal for his gallantry in rescuing a wounded fellow officer from a minefield in which two men had already been killed. In 1942 he was seconded to the Ministry of Health as adviser on population and medico-social problems to undertake a comprehensive survey of psychiatric facilities required in the post-war period. His important report, 'Neurosis and the Mental Health Services' (1946), provided guidelines for both in-patient and out-patient psychiatric requirements, including special child psychiatric facilities, developed by the new National Health Service. 
Blacker's appointment to the Ministry of Health was an acknowledgement of the reputation he enjoyed in the inter-war years not only as a psychiatrist but as an influential authority on the eugenic aspects of birth control and population. His interests in the social consequences of human heredity and variability, which led him to eugenics in the 1920s, were stimulated by his biological studies at Oxford and his reading of Sir Francis Galton, whose broad goals of eugenic improvement Blacker sought to advance as general secretary of the Eugenics Society from 1931 to 1952. Under Blacker the Eugenics Society was transformed from an unfocused, amateur propaganda agency dabbling uncertainly in the newly emerging areas of birth control and genetics, into a quasi-professional research foundation committed to family planning and the serious study of population problems. 
Blacker's interest in birth control began when he was a medical student at Guy's Hospital. He was distressed by the large number of poor female clinic patients desperate for help in avoiding further pregnancies. He complained of the medical profession's irresponsible hostility to birth control and warned that unless doctors began to take an interest in the field it would be pre-empted by non-medical people like Marie Stopes with her 'flowery and highly-coloured books'. The publication of 'Birth Control and the State' (1926) was the first of Blacker's many books and articles advocating the medicalization of contraception and pointing out its great value for the improvement of physical, mental, and 'racial' health. He was instrumental in founding the birth control investigation committee (BCIC) in 1927 composed of scientists and doctors committed to studying the medical and sociological effects of contraception. Blacker also persuaded a reluctant Eugenics Society to endorse birth control as a eugenic weapon and to finance the BCIC as well as the unique, decade-long efforts of the Oxford zoologist, John Baker, to find a simple, reliable contraceptive for use by the most populous and, allegedly, eugenically least desirable sectors of society. 
In his ultimately vain efforts to win for eugenics the scientific credibility and respectability he believed it deserved as an instrument of rational demographic planning and social improvement, Blacker recruited prominent scientists, social scientists, and physicians to the cause. As an advocate of a more liberal minded, scientific, reform eugenics, Blacker persuaded the Eugenics Society, sometimes under threat of his own resignation, to forge alliances with the National Birth Control Association, later the Family Planning Association (FPA), and with new demographic research groups such as the population investigation committee (PIC) and population and economic planning, all of which the Eugenics Society agreed not only to finance, but, in the case of the PIC and FPA, to house for a time in the society's offices in Eccleston Square. Blacker served for several years as honorary secretary of the PIC. 
The close ties that Blacker fashioned between eugenics, birth control, and population studies in the 1930s culminated in 1944 in the achievement of one of his long-term goals, the appointment of the royal commission on population (1949), whose ranks, from chairman down, contained a number of prominent eugenicists. Blacker hoped that their role on the prestigious commission would revive the scientific credibility of a eugenics movement tainted by its association with the race hygiene policies of the Nazis. But he acknowledged in a brief history, 'Eugenics: Galton and after', published in 1952 to coincide with his resignation as general secretary of the Eugenics Society, that his efforts had failed. 
Following his resignation, Blacker became increasingly involved in international population issues, serving as the first chairman of the Simon Population Trust and playing an important role as an ally of Margaret Sanger in the founding of the International Planned Parenthood Federation in 1952. He brought to the often tempestuous international conferences many of the qualities of patience, courtesy, good humour, and compromise that made it possible for him to work so successfully throughout his life with the many difficult and contentious people who populated the birth control and eugenics movements. Tall, spare, and determined, he was to some a formidable, efficient, rather distant person who remained every inch an old Etonian and ex-Coldstream Guards officer. But to his close friends, who called him 'Pip', Blacker was warm, generous, and unfailingly loyal and supportive. 
As a consulting psychiatrist to the merged Bethlem Royal and Maudsley Hospital Blacker continued to see patients at a weekly clinic until shortly before his death. As he lay dying in 1975 the Eugenics Society, which had awarded him the Galton medal in 1957, sent him a silver Galton plate commemorating his many years of service to the cause. He died before he could see it of a cerebral thrombosis on 21 April 1975 at the Royal Surrey County Hospital in Guildford, survived by his wife, one son, and two daughters, one of them the Japanese scholar Carmen Elizabeth Deidre Blacker (1924-2009). He was buried at Shamley Green, Surrey. 


@@@@@


doc= 47727


Tredgold, Alfred Frank (1870-1952), physician, was born at 49 Liversage Street, Derby, on 5 November 1870, the son of Joseph Tredgold, a builder's foreman, and his wife, Bessey Smith. His ancestors belonged to the Cornish family of Tregol, but his own branch of the family came from Lincolnshire. Six of his near relatives were members of the medical profession. He studied medicine at Durham University and the London Hospital, where he won scholarships and prizes in biology, anatomy, physiology, pathology, and medicine. After qualifying in 1899 he married Zoe (died 1947), daughter of F. A. Hanbury, barrister-at-law. In the same year he was offered a research scholarship in insanity and mental disease, recently founded by the London county council. He chose mental deficiency as his subject and worked for two years in the LCC's asylums and newly built Claybury Laboratory under F. W. Mott. When the scholarship expired he entered general practice to earn a living. In 1905 he was appointed as one of the main medical investigators to the royal commission on the care and control of the feeble-minded. His views were largely endorsed in the report of the commission, which was released in 1908. In the same year he published the first edition of his 'Mental Deficiency (Amentia)', which became the standard text on the subject, going through eight editions in his lifetime alone. His ideas and campaigning efforts paved the way for a specialized system of institutional care under the 'Mental Deficiency Act' of 1913. 
Tredgold had been commissioned as an officer in the 2nd volunteer battalion of the Queen's regiment in 1905. On the outbreak of the First World War he offered his services as a mental expert to the Royal Army Medical Corps. However, the importance of such skills was not yet recognized and Tredgold remained a combatant. He served at Gallipoli, and in Egypt and Sinai, rising to the rank of major. In 1916 he was invalided home with severe dysentery, but he remained in command of the local Territorial depot in Guildford. Between the wars he was the leading consultant in mental deficiency in the country. He became neurologist to the Royal Surrey County Hospital and physician in psychological medicine to the London Hospital. He lectured at the Bethlem and Maudsley hospitals and at the London School of Economics. He served on the mental deficiency committees of the Board of Education and the BMA, and on the Ministry of Health's (Brock) committee on sterilization. He was elected FRCP in 1929, was president of the psychological section of the Royal Society of Medicine, and in 1927 gave the Galton lecture to the Eugenics Society. He was one of the driving forces behind the Central Association for Mental Welfare, a voluntary organization which provided community supervision for defectives, and he taught on its training courses for social workers and medical officers. His 'Manual of Psychological Medicine' (1943) proved to be another widely read textbook. 
Tredgold argued that amentia (his preferred term for mental deficiency) was generally caused by the inheritance or acquisition of a defective germplasm, through poor stock or the effect of alcohol, syphilis, and other poisons. This disposition led to below average intelligence, social failure, and immorality. Training could ameliorate but not cure this pathological condition. Tredgold continued to support his germplasm theory, despite mounting evidence for a genetic explanation. Regarding defectives as a danger to society, he was an ardent proponent of lifetime segregation. However, he was at first wary about sterilization, resigning from the Eugenics Society in 1931 over its claim that sterilization would halve the number of defectives over three generations -- in his view a wild overestimate. Nevertheless, in 1934 he endorsed the Brock report's proposals for a voluntary scheme and thereafter joined the campaign to legalize voluntary sterilization. 
Shortly after the death of his wife, in 1947, Tredgold lost the sight in one eye through glaucoma. Loss of sight in the other eye and a stroke disabled him in his final years, but he still managed to prepare new editions of his books with the assistance of his son, Roger Francis Tredgold (1911-1975). He died at his home, St Martin's, Clandon Road, Guildford, on 17 September 1952. He was survived by two daughters and a son. The elder daughter, Joan Alison (1903-1989), was principal of Cheltenham Ladies' College in 1953-64, and his son, physician-in-charge of the department of psychological medicine, University College Hospital, oversaw later editions of 'Tredgold's Mental Deficiency'. 


@@@@@


doc= 47730


Peach, (Clement) Blair (1946-1979), schoolteacher and victim of police brutality, was born on 25 March 1946 in New Zealand. He was educated at the Victoria University of Wellington, where he was co-editor of a literary magazine, 'Argot'. Following graduation he took a series of jobs (including as a hospital orderly) before emigrating to London in 1969. Soon after arrival he became a teacher at the Phoenix School in Bow, east London, a school for children with special needs, where he remained until his death. He joined the Socialist Workers' Party and was active in the Socialist Teachers' Association and, within the National Union of Teachers, the East London Teachers' Association, of which he became president in 1978. Meanwhile he formed a relationship with Celia Stubbs, which endured until his death. 
Peach was particularly active in the anti-racist movement of the 1970s. In 1974 he was tried but acquitted on a charge of threatening behaviour after challenging a publican's refusal to serve black customers. The late 1970s saw the rise in visibility of far-right organizations such as the National Front, and Peach joined counter-demonstrations organized by the Anti-Nazi League. On 23 April 1979 he took part in a demonstration outside the town hall in Southall, west London, to protest against a meeting being held there by the National Front. The latter had few members in the area, and memories were still fresh of the murder of Gurdip Singh Chaggar by racist thugs in 1976. A petition signed by 10,000 residents seeking to have the meeting cancelled was ignored. On the day itself all the major local factories were closed by strikes. Some 2500 police were deployed to protect the few hundred National Front members from the protestors, estimated at between 3000 and 6000. When police cleared the area in front of the town hall the scene became violent; missiles were thrown, more than 40 people were injured (including 21 police), and there were more than 300 arrests. In a police raid on the Peoples Unite building, which was being used as a makeshift headquarters by the anti-racist demonstrators, Clarence Baker, manager of the band Misty in Roots, was beaten by police truncheons and left in a coma for five months. 
Following the break-up of the demonstration Peach was sheltering on the corner of Beachcroft Avenue and Orchard Avenue, Southall, when about 8.30 p.m. a police carrier arrived, disgorging six members of the police's Special Patrol Group. Peach was beaten about the head, causing skull fractures. He was taken in by a local family, who called an ambulance, but he died early the next day at Ealing Hospital, Southall. His funeral, on 13 June, was attended by over 10,000 people. The inquest conducted from 28 April to 29 May 1980 by John Burton, coroner for Greater London (western district) was controversial: Burton made clear early on that he did not believe Peach had been killed by a policeman, and he was dismissive of the evidence of the fourteen witnesses, both other protestors and local residents, who, he said, 'did not have [the] experience of the English system' to be reliable witnesses ('The Guardian', 22 Jan 2010). The inquest returned a verdict of death by misadventure. Meanwhile, an internal Metropolitan Police inquiry was conducted by Commander John Cass. Peach's partner, Celia Stubbs, campaigned for the inquiry's findings to be made public, but it took thirty years to achieve her goal. Meanwhile the graffiti 'Who killed Blair Peach?' became familiar on many London railway bridges and walls, and the police cover-up over his death was said by Lord Scarman to be a contributing factor to the Brixton riots of 1981. 
Though some details had been leaked earlier, the Cass report and ancillary documents were finally published on 27 April 2010. It was clear that Cass had been reluctant to come to this conclusion, but the report stated that Peach had almost certainly been killed by one of six members of Special Patrol Group carrier U11 with an unauthorized weapon, such as a lead-weighted cosh or a rubberized police radio. Cass also reported that a raid on lockers at the Special Patrol Group headquarters had uncovered a variety of unauthorized weapons, including several coshes and illegal truncheons, knives, crowbars, and a 3 foot wooden stave, as well as in one locker a collection of Nazi regalia. Cass concluded that it was impossible to know with certainty which particular officer killed Peach, since the officers involved had refused to co-operate and evidence had been tampered with (all six officers' uniforms had been dry-cleaned before being handed over for inspection); nevertheless he strongly recommended that three officers should be charged with conspiracy to pervert the course of justice. In the event no charges were ever brought. 


@@@@@


doc= 47731


Clarke, Thomas James (1858-1916), Fenian organizer, was born on 11 March 1858 at Hurst Park on the Isle of Wight, first of four children of Sergeant James Clarke of the British army (1830- 'c'.1890) and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Palmer. His father was a member of the Church of Ireland, his mother a Roman Catholic, in which religion he was raised. Sergeant Clarke was transferred to South Africa in 1859; he returned to Dungannon, co. Tyrone, in 1865 and retired from the army in 1868. Thomas attended St Patrick's national school in Dungannon. A challenge to his father's values, together with sectarian tensions in that part of Ulster, would appear to explain Clarke's youthful espousal of Fenianism. 
Clarke emigrated to the United States in 1880, becoming employed as a hotel porter in Brooklyn and joining the Napper Tandy branch of the Clan na Gael. He recrossed the Atlantic on a dynamiting mission in 1883 with the assumed name of Henry Hammond Wilson. An informer caused Clarke's arrest in possession of explosive material in London on 4 April 1883; he was sentenced at the Old Bailey on 14 June to penal servitude for life. Internment was in the harshest of conditions in Millbank, Chatham, and Portland gaols, experiences described in his posthumously published 'Glimpses of an Irish Felon's Prison Life' (1922). He was released in 1898; unemployment forced his return to the United States in 1899, where he worked as a pattern maker before becoming secretary to the veteran physical force nationalist and journalist John Devoy. Clarke married John Daly's niece Kathleen (1878-1972) ['see 'Clarke, Kathleen] on 16 July 1901 in New York. The couple had three sons: John Daly, Thomas, and Emmet. When Devoy established the exile nationalist newspaper the 'Gaelic American' in 1903, Clarke became assistant editor. A key figure in both public and secret Irish-American ranks, Clarke was heavily involved in resistance to the rumoured Anglo-American alliance. He became a US citizen in 1905. With the backing of the Clan na Gael he returned to Dublin in 1907 where he ran two newsagent/tobacconist shops in Amiens Street and Parnell Street. 
Clarke's arrival in Dublin followed soon after the revival of the Irish Republican Brotherhood (IRB); he allied himself with Denis McCullough, Sean McDermott, and Bulmer Hobson in their battle against its ineffective, aged leadership. He was instrumental in the establishment of the organization's newspaper, 'Irish Freedom', and promoted the rise of Patrick Pearse to advanced nationalist prominence. The Parnell Street shop became the informal meeting-place for visiting Fenians even though it was known to the police. For Clarke the Ulster crisis and the founding of the Irish Volunteers in November 1913 provided a great opportunity to realize his separatist aims. In a letter of 14 May 1914 he told Devoy: 'Young fellows who had been regarded as something like wastrels now changed to energetic soldiers and absorbed in the work, and taking pride that at last they feel they can do something for their country that will count. 'Tis good to be alive in Ireland these times. (O'Brien and Ryan, 2.444-6)' Clarke opposed fiercely John Redmond's takeover of the Irish Volunteer provisional committee in June 1914; he soon welcomed enthusiastically, however, the opportunity for physical force republicanism that the outbreak of the First World War offered. 
Elected a member of the IRB's supreme council in 1913, and of its military council in 1915, Clarke was the most important link with the USA in the planning of the Easter rising. He organized the huge funeral in July-August 1915 of the old dynamiter Jeremiah O'Donovan Rossa. Clarke was the only member of the military council who opposed a day's postponement to the rising from Easter Sunday following the collapse of the German arms landing and Eoin MacNeill's cancellation of the Volunteer parade. He was based in the General Post Office throughout the rising, and opposed the decision to surrender. Subsequently he was cruelly treated by British forces. 
Clarke was the first signatory to the proclamation of the Irish republic read out by Pearse on Easter Monday. He was one of the first three rebels to be executed in Kilmainham gaol on 3 May 1916; his brother-in-law, Ned Daly, was executed the next day. 
Along with Devoy, Clarke represented the long-term personification of the Fenian tradition in Ireland and America, never wavering from a belief in physical force republicanism. Although a supporter of cultural nationalism, he did not speak Irish. His legacy was preserved by his indomitable wife, Kathleen, who became an independent Fianna Fail senator and served as lord mayor of Dublin (1939-41). 
A thin, pale man with a trim moustache, Clarke was prematurely aged by his prison experiences. He was inflexible, disciplined, and taciturn, and remains a somewhat shadowy figure. Kathleen frequently complained that Pearse was given the attention in accounts of the rising that her husband merited. 


@@@@@


doc= 47732


Shirley, Sir Thomas (c.1590-1654), antiquary, was the third son of Sir George Shirley (1559-1622) of Staunton Harold, Leicestershire, and his wife, Francis (1564-1594), daughter of Henry, Lord Berkeley of Berkeley, Gloucestershire. He married Mary ('b'. 'c'.1596, died after 1650), daughter of Thomas Harpur of Rushall, Staffordshire, about 1616; they had seven children. Shirley was knighted on 22 May 1622. His elder brother, Sir Henry Shirley, bt, inherited the family's main estate in Leicestershire, Northamptonshire, and Warwickshire and Sir Thomas was left with the family's manor of Botolph's Bridge in Huntingdonshire as his chief property. He mainly resided there and at the family's principal mansion at Staunton Harold, Leicestershire. 
Shirley's main claim to fame was as a member of the circle of midland antiquarians associated with William Burton, William Dugdale, Sir Simon Archer, and Thomas Habington. He exchanged references with Archer and Burton, who visited him at Staunton Harold in the late 1620s; he collaborated with fellow Catholic Habington on his history of Worcestershire during the 1630s; and in May 1638 he joined with Dugdale, Sir Edward Dering, and Sir Christopher Hatton to form a group calling itself the Students of Antiquity who were dedicated to co-operative research in the London archives. Out of the researches of the midlands circle came a scheme for a series of county histories to match Burton's 'Description of Leicestershire', published in 1622. Shirley offered his services as historian of Warwickshire in 1631, but soon after decided to concentrate on the history of his own family and the work was assigned first to Archer, and then, later, to Dugdale. Shirley's 'Genealogicke history', which traced the achievements of his family from the time of their Anglo-Saxon ancestor, Sewale of Ettington, to his brother Sir Henry, was completed in the late 1630s, but never published. It also provided the material for the remarkable Shirley roll, a huge illuminated pedigree commissioned in 1632 which depicted the family's descent along with coloured drawings of deeds, armorial glass, and funeral monuments. 
Sir Thomas's other principal work, a massive compendium entitled 'The Catholic armorist', combined his love of heraldry with his devotion to the Catholic religion. His parents were both dedicated Catholics and his wife's father was renowned for suffering for his faith during Elizabeth's reign. Thomas followed their examples. He remained a recusant throughout his life, enduring heavy financial penalties -- which led to the seizure and mortgaging of his manor at Botolph's Bridge -- and also a spell of imprisonment. This commitment was expressed in 'The Catholic armorist' which took the form of a study of coats of arms into which he worked a defence of the Catholic faith and an account of the families that had remained loyal during the years of persecution. The work was finished about 1650, but was never published. It was apparently intended that it should circulate in manuscript among the families whose achievements Shirley recorded. 
Sir Thomas spent part of the 1640s in exile in France, but had returned to Staunton Harold by 1653 and died the following year; he was buried in the church of St Peter Paul's Wharf, London, on 4 February 1654. 


@@@@@


doc= 47736


Oats, Francis (1848-1918), mining engineer and authority on diamonds, was born on 24 October 1848 at South Torfrey Farm, Golant, near Fowey, Cornwall, the elder child of Francis Oats (1796-1874), farmer, and his wife, Marion, 'nee' Rundle ('b'. 1810). About 1854 his family moved to St Just. As a working miner he attended the classes of the Mining Association of Cornwall and Devon and was top of his class in 1866, when he obtained a first-class pass in mineralogy and passes in mining and chemistry, becoming a pupil-teacher in 1867. Poverty prevented him from accepting the free place offered to him at the Royal School of Mines. 
In 1870 Captain Frank Oats -- as he was commonly called -- became an underground superintendent at Botallack mine, St Just, and in 1874 he was sent by the Griqualand West government to the Kimberley diamond fields in South Africa as provincial engineer and inspector. Also in 1874, on 17 August, he married Elizabeth Ann ('b'. 1855), daughter of John Olds, a butcher, at St Just parish church. They had four children -- three sons and a daughter -- born between 1880 and 1888. Oats was back at Botallack in 1876 but returned to Kimberley in 1877 as engineer to the Kimberley Mining Company and manager of the Victoria Diamond Mines Company. Here he stressed the technical arguments in favour of consolidating the diamond producers' interests as a director of the Victoria Company. That concern was taken over by De Beers Consolidated Mines in 1887, when Oats joined its board; he was chairman from 1906 to 1918. From 1889 he was a member of the De Beers diamond sales committee, and from 1898 to 1908 he represented Namaqualand in the Cape parliament. Being the best-qualified director on the De Beers board, he undertook work for the company in Mashonaland, Nama Land, and south-west Africa, prospecting for diamonds, and elsewhere in South Africa for other minerals. He visited British Guiana and Brazil in 1901 to inspect diamond mines, and in 1907 he went to France and exposed as fraudulent the claim by Henri Lemoine that he had made artificial diamonds. Besides directorships in numerous South African companies, some not connected with mining, he was a director of Levant Mine, St Just (1889-1918), and director and later chairman of Basset Mines, Illogan (1896-1918), spending half of each year in Cornwall and half in South Africa. 
Frank Oats died at his daughter's house at 1 Bird Street, Port Elizabeth, Cape Province, South Africa, on 1 September 1918. His 'Times' obituary described him as a very able Cornishman, ambitious, somewhat pugnacious, and masterful, but a born captain of industry. 


@@@@@


doc= 47741


Pandit, Vijayalakshmi (1900-1990), diplomatist, was born on 18 August 1900 at Anand Bhavan, Allahabad, India, the second of the three children and elder daughter of Motilal Nehru (1861-1931), lawyer and nationalist leader, and his wife, Swarup Rani. Her father, one of the most successful lawyers of his day, ensured that she received a good education from an English governess. Eleven years younger than her brother, the statesman Jawaharlal Nehru, she was nevertheless close to him both as a child and throughout their lives. As a young woman Sarup Kumari Nehru formed a close attachment to a Muslim journalist, Saiyid Hossain, who was working on a newspaper owned by her father. However, he was not acceptable to her family, let alone to conservative Allahabad society, and the relationship was brought to an end. Shortly thereafter her family sent her to stay for a short while with Mahatma Gandhi in his 'ashram'; she remained unconvinced of the value of a wholly ascetic life. On 10 May 1921 she married Ranjit Sitaram Pandit (died 1944), a lawyer and scholar from Kathiawar, and took the name by which she became known throughout the world. They had three daughters, one of whom, Nayantara Saghal, became a well-known novelist. 
As a young bride Vijayalakshmi Pandit lived in Calcutta, where her husband practised law. From 1930, however, she joined the other members of her family in Gandhi's civil disobedience campaign against British rule. Her first arrest came in 1932, and she served several terms of imprisonment, totalling thirty-six months. She also held a series of elected offices, including that of minister of local government and health in the pre-independence Congress governments in the United Provinces in 1937-9 and 1946-7. From 1944 to 1945 and again in 1946 she was in the United States, where her daughters were attending college, and where, at Gandhi's request, she spoke for the Indian nationalist cause in the critical period leading up to independence. Her rapport with Americans, statesmen and public alike, played a major role in sustaining American support for India's cause. In the same period, in 1945 she attended the San Francisco United Nations preliminary conference as an unofficial delegate, and in 1946 headed the Indian delegation to the first United Nations general assembly at Lake Success. She headed India's delegation on four further occasions. In 1947 she became India's first ambassador to the USSR, although here she was unable to establish a close rapport with the Soviet leadership. She was transferred to Washington in 1949, where her earlier popularity with the American public grew. On her return to India in 1951 she stood successfully for the Lok Sabha (lower house of the Indian parliament), where she sat until 1954. 
In 1953 Vijayalakshmi Pandit became president of the United Nations general assembly, a significant first for a country in the developing world (she was also the first woman to occupy the post). She was then sent to London as high commissioner, where she served from 1954 to 1961, as well as being accredited as India's first ambassador to Ireland and Spain. She was also to be governor of Maharashtra state from 1962 to 1964. It was a notable achievement at this time for a woman to hold such a range of distinguished political and diplomatic positions. 
After her brother's death in May 1964 Mrs Pandit's political star dimmed and she held no further public offices, although she took over Nehru's Phulpur constituency in the Lok Sabha from 1964 until she resigned in 1969. She did not hide her disagreements with her niece, Indira Gandhi, and she was strongly critical of the declaration of an internal emergency in 1975. In the 1977 election campaign she campaigned vigorously for the opposition. Mrs Pandit spent her retirement in the foothills of the Himalayas, near Dehra Dun, where she died on 1 December 1990. She had published a memoir of her time in gaol, 'Prison Days' (1945), and an autobiographical volume, 'The Scope of Happiness' (1979). 


@@@@@


doc= 47742


Amrit Kaur (1889-1964), politician and advocate of women's rights, was born on 2 February 1889 at Kapurthala Palace, Lucknow. She was the only daughter among the six children of Sir Harnam Singh (1851-1930), youngest son of Sir Raja Randher Singh Bahadur GCSI of Kapurthala, a small princely kingdom in the Punjab, and Rani Harnam Singh, daughter of Gokal Nath, a Bengali Christian. The original surname of the family was Ahluwalia, which is a surname of families of Rajput descent (princely families dropped the use of surnames). As a result of his conversion to Christianity, Harnam Singh lost the right of succession to the Kapurthala throne, but he and his sons occupied important positions in the British administration. Amrit Kaur grew up amid the lavish splendour of a royal household. She was sent to England for her education and studied at the Sherborne School for Girls in Dorset. She was not a particularly bright student and her interests were in sports and games. She was captain of the school hockey and cricket teams and won many tennis tournaments. After leaving Sherborne, she spent some time in a school in London and later at Oxford University, but did not sit for any examination. 
On her return to India Amrit Kaur lived with her parents in Jullundur and never married. While her family had close connections with the raj, and was influenced by English culture, at the same time it had its roots in Indian traditions. Her father, though Anglicized and loyal to the British, maintained close contacts with several nationalist leaders, among them Gopal Krishna Gokhale, who frequently visited their home. It was from Gokhale that Amrit Kaur first heard of Gandhi and was inspired to devote herself to the service of the country. Gandhi's first public speech in India delivered after his return from South Africa in 1915 deeply moved her. She came to know him personally when he came to their home in Jullundur in 1919 to recuperate from injuries suffered during the Punjab disturbances following the Jallianwalla Bagh tragedy. She felt a growing urge to join Gandhi's Sabarmati ashram but bowed to family pressure to stay at home. She joined Gandhi's Sevagram ashram in 1936, at the age of forty-seven, after the death of both her parents, and worked as his secretary. She gave up all her finery and started wearing 'khadi'. Her relationship with Gandhi was close and humane, but she retained a sharp independence of mind. She continued to spend part of the year in her palatial family house, Manorville, in Simla. She served on the board of trustees of the All-India Spinners' Association and of the Hindustani Talim Sangh, two Gandhian institutions, during Gandhi's lifetime. 
Amrit Kaur was deeply committed to improving the status of women in India, opposing purdah, polygamy, and child marriage and wanting to promote women's education. She was a founder member of the All-India Women's Conference (AIWC; 1927) and its president in 1937. She was also a founder member of the All-India Women's Education Fund Association and was responsible for starting Lady Irwin College in New Delhi. On behalf of the AIWC she appeared before Lord Lothian's franchise committee in 1932 and the joint select committee of the British parliament in 1933, and voiced her disapproval of separate electorates for women as well as of communal electorates. Together with the AIWC she took a firm stand against the British communal award (1932). 
At the time of the third round-table conference, Rajkumari Amrit Kaur, together with Dr Muthulakshmi Reddy and Begum Hamida Ali went to London to put the demands of Indian women regarding franchise before the joint select committee of parliament. The three Indian women established contacts with various British women's groups who were sympathetic to the demands of Indian women. Before leaving for India, Rajkumari suggested that a liaison group be formed so that a lasting link between British and Indian women could be maintained. As a result the Liaison Group of Women's Societies was formed in 1922 comprising five societies -- the British Commonwealth League, Six Points Group, Women's Freedom League, Women's International League, and St John's Social and Political Alliance. On the Indian side was the AIWC, which appointed Rajkumari Amrit Kaur as the liaison officer. The British groups asked Mrs Grace Lankester to act as their liaison officer. The Liaison Group continued to function until 1951. She was on the subcommittee of the AIWC which formulated an Indian women's charter of rights in 1946. She was also a member of the constituent assembly subcommittee on minorities, and objected to the guarantee of freedom of religious propaganda and practice, reacting obviously to the Muslim League propaganda for Pakistan in 1946-7, and wanted freedom of religion to be limited to religious worship only. She championed the cause of a uniform civil code relating to marriage, inheritance, divorce, and guardianship. She was a member of the advisory board on education of the government of India under the chairmanship of Sir John Sargent, and a deputy leader of the Indian delegation to UNESCO in London (1945) and Paris (1946). 
Amrit Kaur's political work also involved her in opposition to the British. She went to Bannu in the North-West Frontier Province to advocate the cause of the Indian National Congress, and was arrested and convicted on 16 July 1937 by the assistant commissioner on a charge of sedition. She was sentenced to imprisonment until the rising of the court and fined 50 rupees. She was active during the Quit India movement in 1942 and processions led by her were subjected to lathi (baton) charges. She was arrested in Kalka and lodged in Ambala gaol, but owing to ill health she was transferred to Simla and put under house arrest. 
After independence Amrit Kaur became India's first health minister and remained so until 1957, after which she was a member of the Rajya Sabha (upper house). As health minister she was responsible for starting the prestigious All-India Institute of Medical Sciences in New Delhi, whose outpatients' department is named after her. She laboured hard to raise money from New Zealand, Australia, West Germany, Sweden, the Rockefeller Foundation, and others for various wings and activities of the institute. She and her brother Shamsher Singh donated their family home, Manorville, as a holiday home for the staff and nurses of the hospital. 
Amrit Kaur chaired the Indian Red Cross Society for fourteen years and was elected president of the International Red Cross conference in New Delhi in 1957. As health minister she led the Indian delegation to the World Health Assembly in 1948, 1949, 1951, and 1953, and played a role in the establishment of the first regional office of the World Health Organization in south-east Asia and in 1948 was its chair. She was the first woman and the first Asian to be elected president of the World Health Assembly (third assembly, 1950). She was also an honorary fellow of the American Public Health Association. She took a keen interest in the training of nurses and helped in the development of the College of Nursing and was vice-patron of the Nurses' Training Association. Her love of sports manifested itself in her starting the National Sports Club of India, of which she was president from 1948 to 1959. She was vice-president of the All-India Council of Sports for several years, and chairman of the board of governors of the National Institute of Sports. The sports coaching scheme named after her was her idea. She was president of the All-India Lawn Tennis Association (1954-9) and of the Table Tennis Federation of India (1955-61). 
Amrit Kaur was closely associated with YWCA in Delhi and at the All-India level. Though a Christian, she was not a regular churchgoer. To her the essence of Christianity was selfless service. She received the Rene Sand memorial award from the International Conference of Social Work, Rome; the Count Bernadotte gold medals of the League of Red Cross Societies of various European countries; and was a dame grand cross of the order of St John of Jerusalem. Rajkumari Amrit Kaur died on 6 February 1964 at her residence at 2 Willingdon Crescent, New Delhi. She was cremated according to old Hindu family tradition. The archbishop of Delhi held a service at her residence and another at Nigambodh Ghat on the banks of the Jumna River in Delhi, where the funeral pyre was lit by her brother Kanwar Singh. 


@@@@@


doc= 47743


Naidu, Sarojini (1879-1949), politician and poet, born on 13 February 1879 in Hyderabad, was the second child and eldest daughter of Aghornath Chattopadhyay 
(Chatterji; 1851-1915)
and his wife, Baradasundari, otherwise Varada Devi. Her younger brother, Virendranath (Chatto) Chattopadhyaya, became a noted Indian nationalist and communist. Their father, a DSc of Edinburgh University, came from a family of Sanskrit scholars of east Bengal and was a bon viveur with a wide range of interests which included literature (Western and Indian) and alchemy. As principal of Nizam's College, Hyderabad, he developed an empathy with Indo-Islamic culture, and his ardent patriotism at times got him into trouble with the authorities. His wife was a skilled musician and dancer. Between them they created a joyous home imbued with high culture. Sarojini was deeply influenced by her father and the environment at home. Educated more at home than at school, she became a celebrity when at the age of twelve she stood first in the matriculation examination of Madras University. The following year she wrote a long poem in English modelled on Walter Scott's 'Lady of the Lake'. A volume of her poems was published in 1895. She had been sent to England in 1895 on a scholarship granted by the 'nizam' and spent three years at King's College, London, and Girton College, Cambridge. Always opposed to structured education, she did not take any degree but acquired two important literary friends, Edmund Gosse and Arthur Symons. The former advised her to give up imitating English romantic poetry and try instead 'to be a genuinely Indian poet'. Sarojini took this advice to heart and began to write verses with an exclusively Indian background. The very lush poems which resulted were first published in a volume entitled 'The Golden Threshold' (1905). In his introduction to the volume Gosse described her as India's most accomplished poet, at least among those writing in English. 
Following her return to India Sarojini married Dr Govindarajulu Naidu in December 1898, with whom she had fallen in love as a teenager. The marriage, registered under the 'Act III' of 1872, was a civil marriage and 'progressive' on several counts -- a marriage of love, between individuals belonging to different castes and linguistic cultures. The couple had two sons and two daughters. Their Hyderabad home was described by a friend as an expression of perfect artistic taste. 
From 1903 Sarojini Naidu entered the public phase of her career without abjuring her poetic pursuits. Between that year and 1917, she came into close contact with some of the most illustrious figures of India's political and cultural life -- Gokhale, Tagore, Mrs Besant, Gandhi, and Jawaharlal Nehru. In 1904 she attended the Bombay session of the Indian National Congress and by 1909 she had emerged as a political leader of the first rank, thanks to Gokhale's patronage and her prominent role in the 1907 Calcutta meeting condemning the partition of Bengal. Besides, she had participated in the Madras conference on widow remarriage in 1908, beginning thereby to play a prominent role in the women's movement. She was awarded the kaisar-i-Hind medal by the government for her services during a plague epidemic. Her socially radical views were given a practical expression when she participated in the All-India Depressed Classes conference. Her concern for Hindu-Muslim unity made her a great admirer of M. A. Jinnah, whom she first met in 1919. 
But the one encounter which changed Naidu's life was her meeting with Gandhi in 1915. Nationalist politics rather than poetry now became her dominant concern. In 1925 she presided over the Cawnpore session of the Indian National Congress. In 1928 she went to the USA as an unofficial ambassador of the nationalist movement and pleaded the cause of Indian independence in a very effective lecture tour from coast to coast. In 1930 she was arrested for her participation in the civil disobedience movement. She was also one of the hand-picked group of followers who accompanied Gandhi on the famous Dandi march to violate the British government's salt laws. In 1931 she participated in the round-table conference in London. She was appointed governor of United Provinces, India's largest state, in 1947, and died there while she was still holding that office on 1 February 1949. She was cremated three days later. 
Sarojini Naidu was an outstanding example of India's pioneering women who achieved a high level of education, championed the rights of women, participated in the struggle for independence, and contributed to many areas of national life. She was a person of great charm, with a strong sense of humour. Her opposition to colonial rule notwithstanding, she, like Nehru, was deeply influenced by English culture, and English was in effect her mother tongue. The cosmopolitan ambiance of her paternal home had given her a sense of empathy with the grand tradition of Indo-Islamic culture, and one of her dominant concerns in public life was the achievement of Hindu-Muslim unity. The partition of India and the communal violence which accompanied it tarnished for her, as for many others in her generation, the sense of fulfilment when India became free. 


@@@@@


doc= 47744


Gandhi, Indira Priyadarshini (1917-1984), prime minister of India, was born on 19 November 1917 at Allahabad, United Provinces, the only child of Jawaharlal Nehru (1889-1964), one of the principal leaders of the Indian nationalist movement and India's first prime minister, and Kamala ('c'.1899-1936), daughter of Atal Kaul, a businessman of Delhi. Both her parents were Kashmiri Brahmans. Indira was an only child, brought up in the wealthy, Westernized, politicized, and bustling household of Motilal Nehru, her grandfather, one of the most prominent lawyers of the province. 
Three generations of the Nehru family, several aunts, and many family retainers and political activists resided in or engaged in political work in the grand family residence, known as Anand Bhavan ('Happy Home'). Indira was a favoured child in this household, though she recalled unkind treatment and devastating remarks about her made by her aunt Vijayalakshmi Pandit, whom she never forgave. Moreover, in the midst of this bustle of family and political activity Indira was often alone and lonely, especially during the periods of intense nationalist activity, when many of her family, including at times both her mother and father, were in gaol. 
Long and frequent periods of separation from one or both parents and prolonged travel and residence away from home contributed to the development of several of Indira's characteristic personality traits: a strong sense of self-reliance and personal responsibility for her own fate, those of others, and later the country; personal courage; mistrust of others and detachment, manifested in a lifelong inability to maintain close relationships with people other than her nearest family members; the frequent use of silence in her private and public relations as a means of obtaining her wishes, and of withdrawing from conflict temporarily in order to bide her time for later action; a tendency to blame others for difficulties and misfortunes; a determination in the face of a perceived hostile world to prevail nevertheless against all odds in the attainment of her goals. A gangly child, she became in maturity an attractive woman, who carried herself with great poise and dignity. 
Although Indira was often with her father and from her twenties onward became his personal confidante and hostess, she was closer in her formative years to her mother. The disparate character and lives of her father and mother, the former a thoroughly Westernized and modern man, an agnostic, and an intellectual, the latter a simple, traditional, and religious woman, were reflected also in their daughter's personal and private views on life. Publicly she projected her father's outlook, privately her mother's faith. 
Indira's formal education was obtained at numerous schools and universities in India and abroad, including the Ecole Nouvelle at Bex in Switzerland, St Mary's Convent School in Allahabad, the Pupil's Own School in Poona, Rabindranath Tagore's Visva-Bharati University at Santiniketan, Badminton School near Bristol, and finally Somerville College, Oxford. Her education at most of these places was interrupted by travel with her father, her own discontent, and at Oxford by academic failure. Although she became proficient in French, she was otherwise an indifferent student. 
Contrary to social custom and against her father's wishes, Indira married on 16 March 1942 Feroze Gandhi, a Parsi, who had for long been a part of the Nehru household and a trusted intimate of her mother. Although Indira and Feroze became estranged from each other within a few years and she spent more and more time with her father while Feroze spent more time with other women, they had two children, Rajiv, born on 20 August 1944, and Sanjay, born on 14 December 1946. Feroze died in 1959, after which Indira remained a widow, though there were at times unconfirmed rumours of liaisons with other men. 
Indira Gandhi was, of course, a dedicated nationalist, who had seen her parents and other relations move in and out of gaol in pursuit of the goal of Indian independence and who had herself spent nine months in gaol in 1942-3. She was also in her soul a political person, deeply involved in 'power politics' and committed to the attainment of specific goals, though without the overall vision of a new society which guided her father. From her youth she demonstrated an abiding interest in activities and programmes for the benefit of children, the low castes, and the poor, which was ultimately reflected in concrete policies for these groups when she came to power. 
However, the most dramatic and consequential actions in Mrs Gandhi's political career arose primarily out of political combat and international conflict. Of these, the first in a long series occurred when she was elected president of the Indian National Congress in 1959, while her father was prime minister. Initially against her father's wishes, she helped instigate a protest movement in the state of Kerala against policies of a duly elected communist government with a majority in the legislature, then used that movement as a pretext for actions -- legal in form, but against the constitution in spirit, and deceptive in practice -- which led to the dismissal of the government and the establishment of president's rule (rule by the central government) in the state. 
Indira Gandhi was passed over in the succession to her father in 1964, which was handled by a group of state party bosses known as the syndicate, who chose instead Lal Bahadur Shastri as Nehru's successor. Inducted into Shastri's cabinet as minister for information and broadcasting, a relatively minor portfolio, she made little mark or impression. Even when she was chosen as prime minister in January 1966 to replace Lal Bahadur after his sudden death in Tashkent, it was not because of her achievements or her political support, but because the still politically dominant syndicate members saw her as a manageable person whose selection would prevent the ascendance of Morarji Desai, perceived as a dangerous and unmanageable rival to them. Nor did she display at first any of the self-assurance and political skill for which she later became famous. 
Mrs Gandhi's dynamism, combativeness, and assertiveness only became evident when she began to feel threatened by fears that the syndicate was trying to control her and then displace her from power, and by the disastrous results of the first general elections held while she was prime minister, in 1967, during which the Congress failed for the first time to win a two-thirds majority in parliament, and in the aftermath of which the Congress lost power in half the Indian states. Her first decisive act came in the midst of these dangers in 1969, when the president of India died in office. Fearing the election as president of a man chosen by the syndicate, she defied her own party, lobbied for another candidate, who succeeded as a consequence of her efforts, and was expelled from the Congress. In the midst of this conflict she became head of a rival Congress, which ultimately became in effect her party, called the Indian National Congress (Indira), or for short the Congress (I). 
In national elections called at her request in 1971 Indira's Congress prevailed against the syndicate-dominated Congress with a two-thirds majority in parliament. In the March 1972 state legislative assembly elections which followed, the Congress (I) again emerged triumphant, winning large majorities in all the larger states of the union, establishing definitively her personal political dominance and that of her party in the country. 
In the midst of the internal struggle to establish her power base India and Indira had to face the consequences of the civil war in Pakistan between the East and West wings, which led to an influx of an estimated 9 to 10 million refugees from the East wing. Failing to win support from Western countries to force a peaceful settlement of the struggle on Pakistan and the return of the refugees, she turned to the Soviet Union, signing a treaty of peace, friendship, and co-operation in August 1971 with the understanding that its terms implied Soviet support to prevent US involvement in opposition to any Indian action against Pakistan. In December 1971 India invaded East Pakistan, defeated the Pakistan army there, and thereby brought independence to the new state of Bangladesh. 
Despite India's triumph in war under her leadership, and the massive character of the victory against all her rivals in the 1971-2 elections, as well as the absence of significant opposition to her leadership in her own party, Mrs Gandhi never felt secure in power. She always felt threatened by both domestic and international forces, which she saw as bent on thwarting her policies and displacing her from power. She took numerous measures, therefore, to deal with what she perceived as the remaining opposition to her authority -- measures including challenges to the independence of the judiciary through judicial appointments, and the assertion of the supremacy of parliament over the supreme court, as well as the enactment of measures additional to the already extensive armoury of laws to control domestic dissent through preventive detention of persons without trial. 
Mrs Gandhi also took measures to prevent the rise of strong opposition parties and to control dissent within her own party in the states through the use or threat of president's rule and by removing from the Congress state legislature parties the power to elect their leaders, whom she chose herself. Elections to party positions in the Indian National Congress itself were stopped, and all important party appointments and decisions were made directly by her or in her name by her closest advisers. Within the central government all cabinet ministers were either people without independent power bases or saw their power bases undermined while they served under her leadership. Increasingly, Mrs Gandhi took her own decisions independently of the cabinet, in consultation only with a shifting clique of high-level bureaucrats personally loyal to her, former retainers from the Nehru household, and her younger son, Sanjay. 
A few voices were raised from among the opposition parties and from some non-party figures contending that Mrs Gandhi was bent upon establishing personal, authoritarian rule in the country. Charges were also made that under her rule corruption, endemic in Indian politics, had become so massive as to constitute a qualitative change, including such matters as the buying and selling of the loyalty of members of the state legislatures to undermine opposition parties and the collection of large monetary contributions for the party coffers from state party leaders and businessmen. Domestic food shortages and price rises in 1973-4 precipitated discontent in the states of Bihar and Gujarat, where popular movements were launched to displace the Congress from power. At this time also an old and highly respected nationalist leader, Jayaprakash Narayan, emerged from political retirement to take up the leadership of all the forces opposed to the authoritarian tendencies and the corruption which had been spreading under Mrs Gandhi's leadership. 
An unexpected fillip was suddenly provided to the opposition to Mrs Gandhi when an election petition, filed in a local court and alleging the use of corrupt practices in her own election to parliament in 1971, succeeded in June 1975, and her election was declared invalid. Under the laws she would have been disbarred from contesting an election for six years, which would have terminated her position as prime minister and threatened her future political career. Mrs Gandhi responded, as always in the face of a major threat, by buying time through an appeal to the supreme court while she gathered the internal strength for decisive action. That action came on 25 June 1975 in the form of a declaration of emergency for the entire country, and the arrest of thousands of opposition leaders and activists and of hundreds of people from her own party, including Congress members of parliament and of the state legislatures. Complete press censorship was imposed, the laws under which her election was declared invalid were themselves invalidated, the powers of the prime minister's office were strengthened, the terms of the national parliament and of the state legislatures were extended, and the preventive detention laws were fortified further to nullify even the use of the right of habeas corpus in the courts. 
During the succeeding two-and-a-half years of emergency rule Mrs Gandhi allowed her son Sanjay Gandhi (1946-1980), who held no elected position in government, to exercise power and authority in her name in relation to party members and government bureaucrats. He in turn recruited into the party thousands of younger people, many of them hooligans and ruffians, who used threats and force to intimidate rivals and those who opposed Mrs Gandhi's authority or his own. Many of Sanjay Gandhi's actions and those of his followers, as well as the zealousness of bureaucrats determined to prove their loyalty to the leaders of the new regime, produced popular discontent and fears, which lingered below the surface during the emergency rule. These measures included forced sterilizations of men as part of Sanjay Gandhi's family planning programme, destruction of squatter settlements in the cities, and the police firing on crowds which gathered to protest such actions. 
When Mrs Gandhi decided to seek to legitimize her rule by releasing virtually all political prisoners and holding an election in January 1977, this discontent provided an important basis for her defeat by a new force, called the Janata Party, formed by most of the important opposition parties and leaders in the country. During the two-and-a-half years of Janata rule, most of the emergency laws and measures were rescinded and the basic features of the constitutional order were restored. Attempts to convict Mrs Gandhi and her son for illegal acts committed during the emergency foundered, as did the Janata government itself in July 1979, when, as a consequence of internal divisions and the efforts of Sanjay Gandhi, the Janata Party split, the government fell, and no new majority could be found in parliament. The failure of efforts to arrest and convict Mrs Gandhi, followed by the disintegration of the Janata Party, brought her public sympathy and renewed political support as she became seen as the political leader most likely to bring stability to the country. 
In an election called for January 1980 to replace the parliament Congress (I) prevailed and Mrs Gandhi again became India's prime minister. Most of the opposition-controlled state legislatures were soon dismissed and new state legislative assembly elections called, which restored the Congress to power in most of the states once again. Mrs Gandhi's gratification over her triumph was marred by personal tragedy in the sudden death of her favoured son and political heir apparent, Sanjay, in a plane crash on 23 June. 
Mrs Gandhi governed for the next four years for the most part without resort to the extreme measures adopted during the emergency. However, her attempts to consolidate her power anew everywhere in the country led to interventions which precipitated turmoil in the north-east, in Kashmir, and in Punjab. The latter proved to be the most serious, where violent terrorist groups overshadowed the routine politics of the state, which had to be placed under president's rule. After the leader of the Sikh militants and his followers had taken refuge in the Golden Temple at Amritsar, the holiest site of the Sikh religion, Mrs Gandhi ultimately ordered the Indian army to launch an assault within the temple precincts to remove them, during which many hundreds of defenders, soldiers, and visitors to the shrine were killed. Far from settling the Punjab conflict, this action embittered virtually the entire Sikh population of the world and led to an insurrection which lasted for a decade thereafter. On 31 October 1984 Mrs Gandhi was assassinated by two of her own Sikh bodyguards in the garden of her residence in New Delhi. During her funeral in Delhi organized mobs took vengeance in the slaughter of thousands of Sikh residents. Her body was cremated near her father's and son's cremation sites at Raj Ghat in Delhi and her ashes were scattered by her surviving son, Rajiv, from a plane over the Himalayan mountains. 
Indira Gandhi was succeeded immediately after her death by her son Rajiv Gandhi (1944-1991), who had been groomed for the succession after the death of Sanjay. Aided by a great wave of sympathy for his bereavement, Rajiv led the Congress to a landslide victory in the general elections held in December 1984. He remained prime minister for a full term, until the Congress was defeated in the general elections held in November 1989, after which he became leader of the opposition in parliament. In the midst of mid-term elections in May-June 1991 he, too, was assassinated in a suicide bomb blast in Madras, carried out on 21 May under the orders and by a member of the Liberation Front of Tamil Eelam, the Sri Lankan secessionist organization whose leader had become hostile to Rajiv because of his withdrawal of support to the movement. Rajiv's death brought to an end the dynastic succession in the prime minister's office of three generations of the Nehru family, who, in or out of office, were the central figures in Indian politics throughout the post-independence era. 
During the two decades in which she dominated Indian politics, Indira Gandhi left a mixed legacy of highly controversial actions and policies, some of them long-lasting, others short-lived. In her early years as prime minister she adopted policies consistent with the then socialist bent of the Indian state: bank nationalization and abolition of the privy purses of the princes, which persisted, and nationalization of the wholesale trade in wheat, which was withdrawn. The green revolution in agriculture also began during her first years in office. Most of the institutional changes introduced during the emergency lasted only as long as the emergency itself. During her last four years in office she shifted the Congress stance from its historic position of protector of minorities, particularly Muslims, towards one more identified with Hindu pride, thereby laying the basis for the rise of contemporary militant Hindu nationalism and the associated upsurge of Hindu-Muslim riots. In her struggles to undermine her rivals and build new bases of support for herself and her party she patronized new leaders from among the middle (so-called 'backward') castes, lower castes, and tribals, which permanently altered political and social alignments in several of the Indian states. During her stewardship of the Indian National Congress the party organization became virtually defunct and dependent overwhelmingly on her personal appeal for its electoral success. Corruption in public office reached previously unheard-of proportions and became systematized. 
In international relations she departed from Nehru's policy of non-alignment, and moved towards an alliance with the Soviet Union, formalized in the treaty of 1971. Even before this alliance relations with the United States had become embittered as a consequence of her criticism of US actions in Vietnam, her desire to free India from dependence upon US foreign aid, and the government of India's continued identification with the Palestinian cause and hostility to Israel. The lowest point in US-Indian relations was reached during the Bangladesh crisis and the Third Indo-Pakistan War of 1971, when the United States threatened India with the dispatch of the nuclear-powered aircraft-carrier 'Enterprise' into the Bay of Bengal. On 18 May 1974 she announced to the world that India had succeeded in carrying out an underground nuclear explosion, which she described as a 'peaceful nuclear test'. In all these matters and many others Mrs Gandhi stood her ground against foreign criticism and objections and asserted calmly, proudly, and sometimes defiantly India's right to take an independent position in international politics. 
Indira Gandhi in life and death was the most controversial Indian political personality of her times. Even members of her own family and her in-laws polarized around her. She remained an immensely popular figure for tens of millions of Indians, especially among the poor and otherwise disadvantaged groups and classes. However, although she retained the loyalty of many intellectuals identified with the left, the predominant image of Mrs Gandhi among most of the literate and especially the Westernized intellectual classes has become that of a paranoid personality, a political opportunist with no consistent or coherent political views, a wrecker of Indian political institutions, and a demagogue. 
Mrs Gandhi's international reputation (aside from feelings towards her in the United States) was much more favourable, especially among the non-aligned countries, who looked to India and to her for leadership and defence of their economic interests against the industrialized powers. She was particularly favoured in the Soviet Union; honorary doctorates from Moscow State University and the Soviet Academy of Sciences were awarded to her in life as well as the Lenin prize after her death. Numerous other honours and awards of this type were also granted to her in Europe, including degrees from Oxford and the Sorbonne, in developing countries, and from international organizations. She received as well many such awards in her own country, including its highest honour after her successful prosecution of the Bangladesh war as prime minister, the bharat ratna. 


@@@@@


doc= 47746


Gandhi, Indira Priyadarshini (1917-1984), prime minister of India, was born on 19 November 1917 at Allahabad, United Provinces, the only child of Jawaharlal Nehru (1889-1964), one of the principal leaders of the Indian nationalist movement and India's first prime minister, and Kamala ('c'.1899-1936), daughter of Atal Kaul, a businessman of Delhi. Both her parents were Kashmiri Brahmans. Indira was an only child, brought up in the wealthy, Westernized, politicized, and bustling household of Motilal Nehru, her grandfather, one of the most prominent lawyers of the province. 
Three generations of the Nehru family, several aunts, and many family retainers and political activists resided in or engaged in political work in the grand family residence, known as Anand Bhavan ('Happy Home'). Indira was a favoured child in this household, though she recalled unkind treatment and devastating remarks about her made by her aunt Vijayalakshmi Pandit, whom she never forgave. Moreover, in the midst of this bustle of family and political activity Indira was often alone and lonely, especially during the periods of intense nationalist activity, when many of her family, including at times both her mother and father, were in gaol. 
Long and frequent periods of separation from one or both parents and prolonged travel and residence away from home contributed to the development of several of Indira's characteristic personality traits: a strong sense of self-reliance and personal responsibility for her own fate, those of others, and later the country; personal courage; mistrust of others and detachment, manifested in a lifelong inability to maintain close relationships with people other than her nearest family members; the frequent use of silence in her private and public relations as a means of obtaining her wishes, and of withdrawing from conflict temporarily in order to bide her time for later action; a tendency to blame others for difficulties and misfortunes; a determination in the face of a perceived hostile world to prevail nevertheless against all odds in the attainment of her goals. A gangly child, she became in maturity an attractive woman, who carried herself with great poise and dignity. 
Although Indira was often with her father and from her twenties onward became his personal confidante and hostess, she was closer in her formative years to her mother. The disparate character and lives of her father and mother, the former a thoroughly Westernized and modern man, an agnostic, and an intellectual, the latter a simple, traditional, and religious woman, were reflected also in their daughter's personal and private views on life. Publicly she projected her father's outlook, privately her mother's faith. 
Indira's formal education was obtained at numerous schools and universities in India and abroad, including the Ecole Nouvelle at Bex in Switzerland, St Mary's Convent School in Allahabad, the Pupil's Own School in Poona, Rabindranath Tagore's Visva-Bharati University at Santiniketan, Badminton School near Bristol, and finally Somerville College, Oxford. Her education at most of these places was interrupted by travel with her father, her own discontent, and at Oxford by academic failure. Although she became proficient in French, she was otherwise an indifferent student. 
Contrary to social custom and against her father's wishes, Indira married on 16 March 1942 Feroze Gandhi, a Parsi, who had for long been a part of the Nehru household and a trusted intimate of her mother. Although Indira and Feroze became estranged from each other within a few years and she spent more and more time with her father while Feroze spent more time with other women, they had two children, Rajiv, born on 20 August 1944, and Sanjay, born on 14 December 1946. Feroze died in 1959, after which Indira remained a widow, though there were at times unconfirmed rumours of liaisons with other men. 
Indira Gandhi was, of course, a dedicated nationalist, who had seen her parents and other relations move in and out of gaol in pursuit of the goal of Indian independence and who had herself spent nine months in gaol in 1942-3. She was also in her soul a political person, deeply involved in 'power politics' and committed to the attainment of specific goals, though without the overall vision of a new society which guided her father. From her youth she demonstrated an abiding interest in activities and programmes for the benefit of children, the low castes, and the poor, which was ultimately reflected in concrete policies for these groups when she came to power. 
However, the most dramatic and consequential actions in Mrs Gandhi's political career arose primarily out of political combat and international conflict. Of these, the first in a long series occurred when she was elected president of the Indian National Congress in 1959, while her father was prime minister. Initially against her father's wishes, she helped instigate a protest movement in the state of Kerala against policies of a duly elected communist government with a majority in the legislature, then used that movement as a pretext for actions -- legal in form, but against the constitution in spirit, and deceptive in practice -- which led to the dismissal of the government and the establishment of president's rule (rule by the central government) in the state. 
Indira Gandhi was passed over in the succession to her father in 1964, which was handled by a group of state party bosses known as the syndicate, who chose instead Lal Bahadur Shastri as Nehru's successor. Inducted into Shastri's cabinet as minister for information and broadcasting, a relatively minor portfolio, she made little mark or impression. Even when she was chosen as prime minister in January 1966 to replace Lal Bahadur after his sudden death in Tashkent, it was not because of her achievements or her political support, but because the still politically dominant syndicate members saw her as a manageable person whose selection would prevent the ascendance of Morarji Desai, perceived as a dangerous and unmanageable rival to them. Nor did she display at first any of the self-assurance and political skill for which she later became famous. 
Mrs Gandhi's dynamism, combativeness, and assertiveness only became evident when she began to feel threatened by fears that the syndicate was trying to control her and then displace her from power, and by the disastrous results of the first general elections held while she was prime minister, in 1967, during which the Congress failed for the first time to win a two-thirds majority in parliament, and in the aftermath of which the Congress lost power in half the Indian states. Her first decisive act came in the midst of these dangers in 1969, when the president of India died in office. Fearing the election as president of a man chosen by the syndicate, she defied her own party, lobbied for another candidate, who succeeded as a consequence of her efforts, and was expelled from the Congress. In the midst of this conflict she became head of a rival Congress, which ultimately became in effect her party, called the Indian National Congress (Indira), or for short the Congress (I). 
In national elections called at her request in 1971 Indira's Congress prevailed against the syndicate-dominated Congress with a two-thirds majority in parliament. In the March 1972 state legislative assembly elections which followed, the Congress (I) again emerged triumphant, winning large majorities in all the larger states of the union, establishing definitively her personal political dominance and that of her party in the country. 
In the midst of the internal struggle to establish her power base India and Indira had to face the consequences of the civil war in Pakistan between the East and West wings, which led to an influx of an estimated 9 to 10 million refugees from the East wing. Failing to win support from Western countries to force a peaceful settlement of the struggle on Pakistan and the return of the refugees, she turned to the Soviet Union, signing a treaty of peace, friendship, and co-operation in August 1971 with the understanding that its terms implied Soviet support to prevent US involvement in opposition to any Indian action against Pakistan. In December 1971 India invaded East Pakistan, defeated the Pakistan army there, and thereby brought independence to the new state of Bangladesh. 
Despite India's triumph in war under her leadership, and the massive character of the victory against all her rivals in the 1971-2 elections, as well as the absence of significant opposition to her leadership in her own party, Mrs Gandhi never felt secure in power. She always felt threatened by both domestic and international forces, which she saw as bent on thwarting her policies and displacing her from power. She took numerous measures, therefore, to deal with what she perceived as the remaining opposition to her authority -- measures including challenges to the independence of the judiciary through judicial appointments, and the assertion of the supremacy of parliament over the supreme court, as well as the enactment of measures additional to the already extensive armoury of laws to control domestic dissent through preventive detention of persons without trial. 
Mrs Gandhi also took measures to prevent the rise of strong opposition parties and to control dissent within her own party in the states through the use or threat of president's rule and by removing from the Congress state legislature parties the power to elect their leaders, whom she chose herself. Elections to party positions in the Indian National Congress itself were stopped, and all important party appointments and decisions were made directly by her or in her name by her closest advisers. Within the central government all cabinet ministers were either people without independent power bases or saw their power bases undermined while they served under her leadership. Increasingly, Mrs Gandhi took her own decisions independently of the cabinet, in consultation only with a shifting clique of high-level bureaucrats personally loyal to her, former retainers from the Nehru household, and her younger son, Sanjay. 
A few voices were raised from among the opposition parties and from some non-party figures contending that Mrs Gandhi was bent upon establishing personal, authoritarian rule in the country. Charges were also made that under her rule corruption, endemic in Indian politics, had become so massive as to constitute a qualitative change, including such matters as the buying and selling of the loyalty of members of the state legislatures to undermine opposition parties and the collection of large monetary contributions for the party coffers from state party leaders and businessmen. Domestic food shortages and price rises in 1973-4 precipitated discontent in the states of Bihar and Gujarat, where popular movements were launched to displace the Congress from power. At this time also an old and highly respected nationalist leader, Jayaprakash Narayan, emerged from political retirement to take up the leadership of all the forces opposed to the authoritarian tendencies and the corruption which had been spreading under Mrs Gandhi's leadership. 
An unexpected fillip was suddenly provided to the opposition to Mrs Gandhi when an election petition, filed in a local court and alleging the use of corrupt practices in her own election to parliament in 1971, succeeded in June 1975, and her election was declared invalid. Under the laws she would have been disbarred from contesting an election for six years, which would have terminated her position as prime minister and threatened her future political career. Mrs Gandhi responded, as always in the face of a major threat, by buying time through an appeal to the supreme court while she gathered the internal strength for decisive action. That action came on 25 June 1975 in the form of a declaration of emergency for the entire country, and the arrest of thousands of opposition leaders and activists and of hundreds of people from her own party, including Congress members of parliament and of the state legislatures. Complete press censorship was imposed, the laws under which her election was declared invalid were themselves invalidated, the powers of the prime minister's office were strengthened, the terms of the national parliament and of the state legislatures were extended, and the preventive detention laws were fortified further to nullify even the use of the right of habeas corpus in the courts. 
During the succeeding two-and-a-half years of emergency rule Mrs Gandhi allowed her son Sanjay Gandhi (1946-1980), who held no elected position in government, to exercise power and authority in her name in relation to party members and government bureaucrats. He in turn recruited into the party thousands of younger people, many of them hooligans and ruffians, who used threats and force to intimidate rivals and those who opposed Mrs Gandhi's authority or his own. Many of Sanjay Gandhi's actions and those of his followers, as well as the zealousness of bureaucrats determined to prove their loyalty to the leaders of the new regime, produced popular discontent and fears, which lingered below the surface during the emergency rule. These measures included forced sterilizations of men as part of Sanjay Gandhi's family planning programme, destruction of squatter settlements in the cities, and the police firing on crowds which gathered to protest such actions. 
When Mrs Gandhi decided to seek to legitimize her rule by releasing virtually all political prisoners and holding an election in January 1977, this discontent provided an important basis for her defeat by a new force, called the Janata Party, formed by most of the important opposition parties and leaders in the country. During the two-and-a-half years of Janata rule, most of the emergency laws and measures were rescinded and the basic features of the constitutional order were restored. Attempts to convict Mrs Gandhi and her son for illegal acts committed during the emergency foundered, as did the Janata government itself in July 1979, when, as a consequence of internal divisions and the efforts of Sanjay Gandhi, the Janata Party split, the government fell, and no new majority could be found in parliament. The failure of efforts to arrest and convict Mrs Gandhi, followed by the disintegration of the Janata Party, brought her public sympathy and renewed political support as she became seen as the political leader most likely to bring stability to the country. 
In an election called for January 1980 to replace the parliament Congress (I) prevailed and Mrs Gandhi again became India's prime minister. Most of the opposition-controlled state legislatures were soon dismissed and new state legislative assembly elections called, which restored the Congress to power in most of the states once again. Mrs Gandhi's gratification over her triumph was marred by personal tragedy in the sudden death of her favoured son and political heir apparent, Sanjay, in a plane crash on 23 June. 
Mrs Gandhi governed for the next four years for the most part without resort to the extreme measures adopted during the emergency. However, her attempts to consolidate her power anew everywhere in the country led to interventions which precipitated turmoil in the north-east, in Kashmir, and in Punjab. The latter proved to be the most serious, where violent terrorist groups overshadowed the routine politics of the state, which had to be placed under president's rule. After the leader of the Sikh militants and his followers had taken refuge in the Golden Temple at Amritsar, the holiest site of the Sikh religion, Mrs Gandhi ultimately ordered the Indian army to launch an assault within the temple precincts to remove them, during which many hundreds of defenders, soldiers, and visitors to the shrine were killed. Far from settling the Punjab conflict, this action embittered virtually the entire Sikh population of the world and led to an insurrection which lasted for a decade thereafter. On 31 October 1984 Mrs Gandhi was assassinated by two of her own Sikh bodyguards in the garden of her residence in New Delhi. During her funeral in Delhi organized mobs took vengeance in the slaughter of thousands of Sikh residents. Her body was cremated near her father's and son's cremation sites at Raj Ghat in Delhi and her ashes were scattered by her surviving son, Rajiv, from a plane over the Himalayan mountains. 
Indira Gandhi was succeeded immediately after her death by her son Rajiv Gandhi (1944-1991), who had been groomed for the succession after the death of Sanjay. Aided by a great wave of sympathy for his bereavement, Rajiv led the Congress to a landslide victory in the general elections held in December 1984. He remained prime minister for a full term, until the Congress was defeated in the general elections held in November 1989, after which he became leader of the opposition in parliament. In the midst of mid-term elections in May-June 1991 he, too, was assassinated in a suicide bomb blast in Madras, carried out on 21 May under the orders and by a member of the Liberation Front of Tamil Eelam, the Sri Lankan secessionist organization whose leader had become hostile to Rajiv because of his withdrawal of support to the movement. Rajiv's death brought to an end the dynastic succession in the prime minister's office of three generations of the Nehru family, who, in or out of office, were the central figures in Indian politics throughout the post-independence era. 
During the two decades in which she dominated Indian politics, Indira Gandhi left a mixed legacy of highly controversial actions and policies, some of them long-lasting, others short-lived. In her early years as prime minister she adopted policies consistent with the then socialist bent of the Indian state: bank nationalization and abolition of the privy purses of the princes, which persisted, and nationalization of the wholesale trade in wheat, which was withdrawn. The green revolution in agriculture also began during her first years in office. Most of the institutional changes introduced during the emergency lasted only as long as the emergency itself. During her last four years in office she shifted the Congress stance from its historic position of protector of minorities, particularly Muslims, towards one more identified with Hindu pride, thereby laying the basis for the rise of contemporary militant Hindu nationalism and the associated upsurge of Hindu-Muslim riots. In her struggles to undermine her rivals and build new bases of support for herself and her party she patronized new leaders from among the middle (so-called 'backward') castes, lower castes, and tribals, which permanently altered political and social alignments in several of the Indian states. During her stewardship of the Indian National Congress the party organization became virtually defunct and dependent overwhelmingly on her personal appeal for its electoral success. Corruption in public office reached previously unheard-of proportions and became systematized. 
In international relations she departed from Nehru's policy of non-alignment, and moved towards an alliance with the Soviet Union, formalized in the treaty of 1971. Even before this alliance relations with the United States had become embittered as a consequence of her criticism of US actions in Vietnam, her desire to free India from dependence upon US foreign aid, and the government of India's continued identification with the Palestinian cause and hostility to Israel. The lowest point in US-Indian relations was reached during the Bangladesh crisis and the Third Indo-Pakistan War of 1971, when the United States threatened India with the dispatch of the nuclear-powered aircraft-carrier 'Enterprise' into the Bay of Bengal. On 18 May 1974 she announced to the world that India had succeeded in carrying out an underground nuclear explosion, which she described as a 'peaceful nuclear test'. In all these matters and many others Mrs Gandhi stood her ground against foreign criticism and objections and asserted calmly, proudly, and sometimes defiantly India's right to take an independent position in international politics. 
Indira Gandhi in life and death was the most controversial Indian political personality of her times. Even members of her own family and her in-laws polarized around her. She remained an immensely popular figure for tens of millions of Indians, especially among the poor and otherwise disadvantaged groups and classes. However, although she retained the loyalty of many intellectuals identified with the left, the predominant image of Mrs Gandhi among most of the literate and especially the Westernized intellectual classes has become that of a paranoid personality, a political opportunist with no consistent or coherent political views, a wrecker of Indian political institutions, and a demagogue. 
Mrs Gandhi's international reputation (aside from feelings towards her in the United States) was much more favourable, especially among the non-aligned countries, who looked to India and to her for leadership and defence of their economic interests against the industrialized powers. She was particularly favoured in the Soviet Union; honorary doctorates from Moscow State University and the Soviet Academy of Sciences were awarded to her in life as well as the Lenin prize after her death. Numerous other honours and awards of this type were also granted to her in Europe, including degrees from Oxford and the Sorbonne, in developing countries, and from international organizations. She received as well many such awards in her own country, including its highest honour after her successful prosecution of the Bangladesh war as prime minister, the bharat ratna. 


@@@@@


doc= 47747


Shastri, Lal Bahadur (1904-1966), prime minister of India, was born on 2 October 1904 at Mughal Sarai, Benares district, United Provinces, the second of three children of Sharda Prasad, teacher, and his wife, Ramdulari Devi, daughter of Hazarilal of Mirzapur. He had two sisters. His father died during his infancy in 1906, leaving the family with few resources. Lal Bahadur, a member of the Kayastha caste, lived ever after -- in later life by choice rather than necessity -- in simplicity, eschewing modern comforts and amenities, and at times even limiting consumption of basic necessities for himself and his family. He married Lalita Devi, 'nee' Lalmani, daughter of Ganesh Prasad, on 16 May 1928; they had six children. He was educated at Harish Chandra high school and Kashi Vidyapith, Benares, the nationalist university, where he was among the first students admitted and from where he received his degree of Shastri, which he used ever after as his surname. He joined the Servants of the People Society upon his graduation and remained a member of it -- ultimately becoming its president -- for the rest of his life, which was otherwise devoted exclusively to political activity. 
Lal Bahadur Shastri was a Gandhian, who lived simply and sought to work for the benefit of the poor and common people. He participated in all the major movements for independence, from the non-co-operation movement of 1921 to the movement of individual 'satyagraha' in 1941, as a consequence of which he spent more than nine years in gaol in numerous terms of imprisonment. His political patrons included Purushottam Das Tandon, Jawaharlal Nehru, and Pandit Govind Ballabh Pant. He worked in Allahabad, after moving there in 1929, under Tandon in the Servants of the People Society and as secretary of the District Congress Committee, Allahabad, in both of which organizations Tandon was the president. At Allahabad Shastri became close to Nehru as well. From the 1930s on he progressed upward politically both in the party organization of the Indian National Congress and in legislative and governmental positions. Just before independence he became a trusted member of the government of Pandit Pant in United Provinces, where he served first as his parliamentary secretary, then as home minister from 1947 until 1951. 
Shastri's move to Delhi occurred in 1951 as a consequence of the rift between two of his former patrons, Tandon and Nehru, which led to the displacement of Tandon by Nehru as president of the Indian National Congress. Nehru, who was also prime minister at the time, called Shastri to Delhi to become general secretary and to organize the party's first general election campaign in 1952. After the overwhelming victory of the Congress in the 1952 elections Shastri successfully contested election to the Rajya Sabha, the Indian upper house, after which he was taken into the government as minister for railways and transport. In a demonstration, rare in post-independence Indian politics, of strict responsibility and accountability for his performance, he resigned from his post in 1956 after a major railway accident in Madras, involving considerable loss of life. However, Nehru did not allow him to remain idle and assigned him the task of co-ordinating the election campaign of 1957. He was again taken into the council of ministers in 1957. In April 1961 he replaced Pandit Pant as home minister of the government of India. In 1963 he resigned from government once again under the Kamaraj plan, a major strategic political move which was ostensibly designed to improve the functioning of the Congress organizations and governments throughout the country, but which also laid the basis for the succession to Pandit Nehru, who became gravely ill in January 1964. 
Shortly after Nehru's stroke Shastri, Nehru's chosen heir, was called to rejoin the cabinet as minister without portfolio. Upon Nehru's death he was selected unanimously, though not without some discontent among rival contenders, as the second prime minister of India. He was installed on 9 June 1964. 
In his brief tenure as prime minister Shastri introduced economic policies in favour of agriculture and private investment which deviated from those of Nehru. However, his major contribution to Indian politics was as a 'troubleshooter' for others and a peacemaker while in office, who worked to settle disputes in the party, the country, and international relations in several crises concerning Assam, Punjab, Kashmir, the official language issue, and relations between India and Ceylon, Nepal, and Pakistan. Ironically, though peace and conciliation were his hallmarks, his greatest accomplishment is often considered to be India's victory during his prime ministership in the Second Indo-Pakistan War. He died in Tashkent, Uzbekistan, on 11 January 1966, of heart failure, on the evening after signing the peace agreement there restoring the 'status quo ante bellum'. Shastri, a Hindu, was cremated, the final irony being the naming of his cremation site, a national memorial in Delhi, as Vijaya Ghat, commemorating India's victory in the war against Pakistan. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 47748


Jenkin, (Alfred) Kenneth Hamilton (1900-1980), social historian and industrial archaeologist, was born at Green Lane, Redruth, Cornwall, on 29 October 1900, the only child of Alfred Hamilton Jenkin, solicitor (died 1919), and his wife, Amy Louisa, 'nee' Keep. Born into a family connected with mining since the mid-eighteenth century, he took a special interest in the mines and mining people of his native county from an early age. He was educated privately, then at school in Stoke Bishop, at Sherborne School (one term), Clifton College, and University College, Oxford, graduating BA with second class honours in English in 1922 and BLitt in 1924 for a thesis on Richard Carew, the Cornish antiquary. 
Settling in St Ives, Jenkin began freelance writing, lecturing, and broadcasting. His first book, 'The Cornish Miner' (1927), established him as a historian and writer, and became a standard work. Numerous books and articles followed on various aspects of Cornish life and also on copper smelting and slate quarrying in Wales, salt production in Cheshire, bell founding in Loughborough, steel smelting in Sheffield, and coalmining from the Forest of Dean to Scotland. The result of many years of research and mine-walking led to his monumental 'Mines and Miners of Cornwall' in 16 parts (1961-70), 'Wendron Tin' (1978), and two books on Devon mines. 
On 15 July 1926 Jenkin married Luned Marion Jacobs ('b'. 1904), the second daughter of William Wymark Jacobs, the humorous writer. They had two daughters. The marriage was dissolved in 1939. On 22 January 1948 he married Elizabeth Elsie Lenton (died 1977), formerly the wife of Stanley Lenton, and daughter of Clement Philip Le Sueur, shipping agent. Apart from absences while studying and a few months in London he lived all his life in Cornwall, in Redruth, St Ives, and Mullion, returning to Redruth in 1954. He died at Treliske Hospital, Truro, on 20 August 1980, and was buried beside his second wife in St Euny's parish churchyard, Redruth. 
During a busy and active life Jenkin was a founder member of the Cornish gorsedd in 1928, and was given the bardic name of Lef Stenoryon, Voice of the Tinners. He helped to found the St Ives and Mullion Old Cornwall societies, as well as the Federation of Old Cornwall Societies, of which he was secretary and later president and life vice-president. He served on the council of the Royal Institution of Cornwall for half a century, during which time he became its president and life vice-president. In recognition of his devotion to historical research the council twice granted him the institution's Jenner medal. In 1935 he was a founder member of the Cornish Engines Preservation Society, now the Trevithick Society, and on his retirement in 1974 after long service on its committee he was awarded the Trevithick gold medal. In the 1950s, with others, he persuaded the Cornwall county council to set up a county record office, now one of the country's finest, serving on its committee until his death. In 1974 he became a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries. Finally, in 1978, as a recognition of his contribution to the literature and social and economic history of Cornwall and to Cornish scholarship, Exeter University conferred on him the honorary degree of DLitt. 
A tall, spare figure, Jenkin was an accomplished and witty speaker, and a friendly and very likeable person. He was happy at any time to discuss matters Cornish, and to share his findings with others. He divided his great collection of books, manuscripts, and maps between the local studies library in Redruth, the Royal Institution of Cornwall Library, and the county record office, both in Truro, each of which has a collection bearing his name. 


@@@@@


doc= 47749


Harrison, Agatha Mary (1885-1954), industrial welfare reformer and unofficial diplomat, was born on 23 January 1885 at Sandhurst in Berkshire, the youngest daughter of Charles Harrison, a Methodist minister, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Tilt. She was educated at Jersey Ladies' College and at Redland School, Bristol, but her schooling was interrupted after her father died in 1898, though she continued her studies for a time as a pupil teacher, and obtained the Froebel certificate, which qualified her to teach young children. 
She entered industrial welfare work with Boots the Chemist in Nottingham, and in 1915 moved to the Metal Box Company in Hull, where she made a deep impression with her vigorous championship of women workers' rights. One employee recalled that he 'never knew a woman that could get her own way as well as Miss Harrison' (Harrison, 19). In 1917 the London School of Economics appointed her to the first academic post in Britain concerned with industrial welfare. This work led to her appointment in 1921 by the Young Women's Christian Association as an investigator into industrial conditions in China. There she became particularly concerned with the issue of child labour, and her often successful efforts to persuade industrialists to dispense with it gave her valuable experience in negotiating in adverse conditions. 
From 1925 to 1928 she worked in the USA for the YWCA's education and research division, after which she returned to Britain to work for the Women's International League for Peace and Freedom. In 1929 she joined the Whitley commission on labour in India, serving as personal assistant to the only woman member, Beryl Power. Her six months in India fostered her sympathy with Indian nationalism, as well as her conviction that conflicts could best be resolved by patient listening and quiet firmness. 
When the round-table conference on India was held in London in 1931, she helped with the arrangements made for Gandhi by sympathizers, and he -- evidently impressed by her strong personality -- asked her to commit herself to working for a better understanding between India and Britain. She became secretary of the India Conciliation Group, working with C. F. Andrews and Quakers like Carl Heath and Horace Alexander. This organization lobbied actively for Indian independence throughout the 1930s. She spent three extended periods in India in those years, and came to know Gandhi well, acting as an intermediary for him during his Rajkot fast in 1939. 
This direct experience sustained her work through the difficult years of the Second World War, 1939-45, and enabled her to return to India after the war to help in the background as the cabinet mission from the new Labour government negotiated with nationalist leaders. Her skills in mediation were also helpful in the conflicts that followed the partition of the subcontinent. 
In 1940 she joined the Society of Friends (Quakers) and thereafter took an active part in its various international committees. In 1950 she joined the small Quaker team of observers at the United Nations' general assembly, and applied herself to improving contacts between the Western powers and the communists. Her distinctive mode of operation -- an impeccable courtesy coupled with a sense that she believed totally in the integrity of those with whom she was dealing -- was of immense service in this daunting task. She had great dignity: a colleague who knew her at the London School of Economics said that she looked like 'a tragedy queen'; and she would even dress for dinner in the inappropriate setting of the Quaker Centre in Calcutta. But this grave formality was qualified by an impish sense of humour which she skilfully exploited in stressful situations. 
In Geneva in 1954, at the conference to end the war in Indo-China, she prepared the way for informal contacts between the Chinese diplomats there and non-communist representatives. She died in Geneva from a heart attack on 10 May; her remains were cremated in Geneva, where her ashes remain. 


@@@@@


doc= 47750


Boulton, Sir Harold Edwin, second baronet (1859-1935), songwriter and philanthropist, was born at Lower Woolwich Road, Charlton, Kent, on 7 August 1859, the elder son and third of eight children of Samuel Bagster Boulton (1830-1918), of Copped Hall, Totteridge, Hertfordshire, who was created baronet in 1905, and his wife, Sophia Louisa (died 1900), daughter of Thomas Cooper of Newbury, Berkshire. Samuel Boulton was co-founder of Burt, Boulton, and Haywood Ltd, timber merchants and chemical manufacturers; he was also winner in 1884 of the Telford medal for research in the chemical industry, and a founder in 1889 of the London Labour Conciliation and Arbitration Board. Harold Boulton was educated at Harrow School and Balliol College, Oxford, where he was awarded a third in classical moderations in 1879 and a third in 'literae humaniores' in 1881. With James Rennell Rodd he founded and edited a magazine of contemporary poetry, and he was runner-up for the Newdigate prize poem in his final year. 
Boulton had enjoyed singing at Harrow, where he led the school choir, and after an undergraduate reading party in Scotland he became interested in Scottish folk-songs and their preservation, and wrote new words to traditional melodies himself. The most famous of these was 'Skye Boat Song' (1884), which tells the story of the escape of Bonnie Prince Charlie (Charles Edward Stuart) after his defeat at Culloden in 1746. He wrote English words for 'All through the Night', the traditional Welsh lullaby, and edited many collections of songs, including 'Songs of the North', in three volumes (1885, 1905, and 1925), gathered from the highlands and lowlands of Scotland; 'Songs of the Four Nations (1892)'; 'National Songs and some Ballads (1908)'; and 'Prince Charlie in Song' (1933), a collection of Jacobite songs. His lyrics were set to music by well-known composers, including Charles Villiers Stanford, who wrote the music for 'For Ever Mine' (1891), and Granville Bantock, who set 'Song to the Seals'. Edward German wrote the music for many of the songs, including 'Glorious Devon' (1905) and 'The Drummer Boy' (1908). Boulton's published poetry includes 'Songs Sung and Unsung' (1894), 'The Ballad of Thyra Lee' (1899), and 'Lyrics and other Poems' (1902). In 1926 he published 'The Huntress Hag of the Blackwater', a medieval romance in verse, which was followed by 'An Unrecorded Miracle of St Columba' (1930) and the verse saga 'Olaf and Uaine' (1934), 'a tale of a thousand years ago'. Boulton was an ovate bard of Wales and president of the Scottish Literature and Song Association in 1929, and was made a director of the Royal Academy of Music in 1931. He was also honorary secretary of the Keats-Shelley Memorial Association from 1906 to 1926, and was present at the opening of the memorial in the piazza di Spagna, in Rome. 
Boulton became involved in the university settlement movement shortly after leaving Oxford. Toynbee Hall was founded in January 1884 in the East End of London by a group of Balliol men, but Boulton was one of those mainly associated with Keble College and the high-church party, and supported by Octavia Hill, who thought that a settlement should be religious in character: Oxford House opened in the autumn of 1884 in a disused church school in the large slum parish of St Andrew, Bethnal Green, the most densely populated district of east London. There the focus was on setting up clubs for working men -- as an alternative to public houses -- and for boys. The Oxford House Club, founded in 1885, was the first started in the East End and became a model for other clubs. Among its many other cultural and sporting activities it was famous for its male voice choir. Boulton, with James Granville Adderley, head of Oxford House from 1885 to 1886, founded the Federation of Working Men's Social Clubs, and by the time he was elected president in 1895 there were sixty-five federated clubs. He remained president until 1930. While living at Oxford House he helped to found the People's Palace Horticultural Society, which was an offshoot of the People's Palace which had opened in 1887, and with Charles Bethune he founded the House of Shelter at Bow, where homeless men could find refuge and help in getting employment. In 1932 he was elected chairman of the Mendicity Society. Boulton remained at Oxford House until his marriage, on 26 January 1889, to Adelaide Lucy (died 1926), daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel Duncan Henry Caithness Reay Davidson, of Tulloch Castle, Dingwall, Scotland. They had two sons, the younger of whom was killed in action in 1917, and one daughter. 
Boulton had joined the family firm after leaving Oxford and touring Canada, and in 1903 he and his father started the Dominion Tar and Chemical Company in Nova Scotia, setting up tar-distillery companies and creosoting plants. He visited Canada at least once a year until 1918, when he became chairman on the death of his father and inherited the baronetcy. He sold the company in 1929. Before the First World War he was a captain in the Queen's Own Cameron Highlanders, and during the war he served in the City of London yeomanry, the rough riders. He was appointed CBE in 1918. He was president of the Associated Tar Distillers and a member of the Association of British Chemical Manufacturers from its foundation in 1916. First president of the British Association of Wood Preservers in 1930, in that year he published 'A Century of Wood Preserving'. 
Boulton's interests also extended to medical and nursing organizations: he was a member of the committee of the London Hospital from 1896 to 1921; he helped to organize bush nursing in Australia in 1910; he was vice-president of the Queen's Institute for Nurses, and chairman from 1908 to 1932; from 1909 to 1914 he was honorary commissioner for Canada of the St John Ambulance Association; he was chairman of Queen Mary's Hostel for Nurses from 1918 to 1921; and chairman of the committee for the national memorial to Queen Alexandra from 1926 to 1928. 
Following the death of his first wife on 26 April 1926, Boulton remarried on 29 December 1926. His second wife was Margaret Cunningham McKennet (died 1938), widow of Robert Charles Simpson Moodie of Montreal, and daughter of James Lennox Lyons of Montreal. Boulton died at Grosvenor House, Park Lane, London, on 1 June 1935 after a long illness. A requiem mass was held on 4 June at Farm Street Church, London; he was buried at Brookwood cemetery the same day. 


@@@@@


doc= 47751


Savarkar, Vinayak Damodar (1883-1966), Hindu nationalist, was born on 28 May 1883 in Bhagur village (near Nasik, then part of the Bombay presidency), the second of four children of Damodarpant and Radhabai. He had two brothers, Ganesh and Narayan, and a sister, Mainabai, and belonged to a Chitpavan Brahman family with some ancestral property and a reputation for Sanskrit learning. Savarkar was educated at Shivaji high school, Nasik, and Ferguson College, Poona, before going to London to study law in 1906, and married in 1901 Mai, daughter of a minister of the petty princely state of Jawhar near Nasik. 
Savarkar grew to maturity in a high-caste Hindu milieu where traditions of Maratha Hindu valour under Shivaji and his Peshwa successors against Mughal rulers in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries were being constructed to provide sustenance for an emergent nationalism, within which anti-British and anti-Muslim strands commingled in varying proportions. Aged ten, after hearing about a Hindu-Muslim riot in a distant part of India, Savarkar led schoolfriends in an attack upon a neighbouring mosque. He became well known, however, as a fervent anti-British patriot from about 1900 onwards, organizing the Mitra Mela revolutionary secret society in the Bombay presidency (it was renamed Abhinava Bharat -- Young India -- in 1905), and translating the works of the Italian nationalist Mazzini into Marathi. In England from 1906 to 1910, Savarkar tried to send bomb manuals to Indian revolutionaries from London, and celebrated the fiftieth anniversary of the 1857 rebellion as a prime example of united struggle against British rule: it was the subject of his first book, 'The First Indian War of Independence', which was immediately banned. Extradited to India in 1910 for his alleged role in organizing the killing of a British official in Nasik (a case which also involved his elder brother, Ganesh Damodar), Savarkar attempted to escape at Marseilles, and the British intrusion onto French soil to recapture him became a celebrated case in international law. 
The British transported Savarkar to the Andaman Islands (1911-21), imprisoned him in Ratnagiri, Bombay presidency (1921-4), and kept him interned in that district until 1937: these experiences confirmed his stature as Veer (heroic) Savarkar, the epithet by which he came to be generally known. Savarkar's 'The Story of my Transportation for Life' (1927), however, indicates that prison life was decisive in his transition to a consistently anti-Muslim nationalism. He urged Hindu prisoners to give up caste prejudices in order to unite against alleged efforts at conversion by Muslim warders, made an abortive offer of co-operation with the British in 1914 in the context of Ottoman Turkey's alliance with Germany, and during the non-co-operation- 'khilafat' united anti-colonial upsurge under Gandhi (1919-22) quarrelled with prisoners imbued with 'vitiated and eccentric... notions of... Hindu-Muslim unity' (Savarkar, 'Transportation', 544). 
In Ratnagiri prison Savarkar wrote his immensely influential 'Hindutva / Who is a Hindu?' (1923), in which a Hindu was defined as anyone, irrespective of specific religious beliefs or rituals, who acknowledged India as both fatherland and 'holyland that is the cradle-land of his religion' (pp. 74-5). Nationalism was thus implicitly merged with a Hindutva (Hindu-ness) that soared over differences of caste or sect, but insisted on a common history and culture, grounded in an 'Aryan' conquest of the subcontinent that had assimilated non-Aryan elements in a hierarchized unity. Simultaneously, Indian Muslims and Christians were declared incapable of full patriot status: with holy lands in Arabia and Palestine, 'their names and their outlook smack of foreign origin' (Savarkar, 'Historic Statements', 1). 
Savarkar, who prided himself on his rationalist and 'modern' views, won a reputation while interned as a social reformer who encouraged inter-dining among castes and the opening of schools and temples to untouchables -- but he condemned Ambedkar's call to the latter to convert to Buddhism. He also became a well-known writer of Marathi plays, novels, and anti-Muslim histories, who campaigned for Sanskritized Marathi and Hindi (as the 'national' language) purged of 'Muslim', Urdu influences. After 1937 Savarkar tried to build up the Hindu Mahasabha (of which he was president, 1937-42) as a political alternative to the Indian National Congress and the Muslim League, around the central slogan: 'Hinduise all politics and militarise Hindudom.' He urged Hindus to join the army, opposed the anti-British Quit India movement (1942), and denounced Gandhi for 'appeasing' Muslims during the Hindu-Muslim riots associated with the emergence of independent India and Pakistan in 1947. Anti-Brahman crowds attacked his house when Gandhi was murdered in January 1948 by Nathuram Godse, a disciple who in his trial (where Savarkar was a fellow accused) assumed sole responsibility for the crime but hailed Savarkar as the ideological alternative to Gandhian non-violence which 'would result in the emasculation of the Hindu Community'. Savarkar was acquitted, and went on advocating virulently militaristic, anti-Muslim and anti-Christian policies (there was a 'menace of Christianistan', he declared in 1953, in missionary schools and hospitals). Savarkar's last statement before his death in Bombay on 26 February 1966 called on the Indian government to 'immediately... equip India with... nuclear weapons and missiles' (Savarkar, 'Historic Statements', 244). Organizationally marginalized in his last years (the Mahasabha was routed in every election after 1946), Savarkar, and particularly his 'Hindutva' text, remained a principal ideological influence on the eventually more successful alternative Hindu-nationalist formation built up around the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh of K. B. Hedgewar, which became embodied politically in the last decades of the twentieth century in the Bharatiya Janata Party. 


@@@@@


doc= 47752


Hedgewar, Keshavrao Baliram (1889-1940), Hindu nationalist, was born on 1 April 1889 at Nagpur, Maharashtra (then capital of Central Provinces in British India), the youngest of six children of Balirampant, a poor orthodox Deshastha Brahman priest, and Revatibai. He grew up in a high-caste Hindu milieu where traditions of Maharashtrian Hindu valour against pre-colonial Muslim rulers were being fostered to provide sustenance for an emergent nationalism, that could be both anti-British and anti-Muslim in shifting proportions. Expelled from Nilchiti high school, Nagpur, for anti-British activities inspired in Maharashtra by Bal Gangadhar Tilak, Hedgewar studied at Yeotmal national school and (1910-14) the National Medical College, Calcutta, where he is said to have had connections with the Anushilan revolutionary nationalist secret society. He returned to Nagpur permanently in 1914 with a medical degree, but never practised as a doctor. He remained a bachelor. Hedgewar was imprisoned for a year (1921) for participating in the Gandhian non-co-operation movement, but, like his early political mentor, Dr Moonje (principal associate of Tilak in Nagpur), became hostile towards Gandhi's methods and ideals: in particular, in the words of a biographer, for 'overemphasising the importance of Muslim participation in the freedom struggle'. 
Hedgewar was influenced by the ideals of exclusivist, anti-Muslim Hindu nationalism propounded by V. D. Savarkar in his 'Hindutva' (1923), and decided to give that ideology a firm organizational basis. The specific contexts for his foundation of the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS), or National Volunteer Organization, in September 1925 were constituted by acute Hindu-Muslim tensions in Nagpur (where Moonje and Hedgewar had set up a Hindu Sabha and organized a big procession in October 1923 defying a government order not to play music before mosques), and the development of anti-Brahman movements among Hindu lower castes (of which, too, the Nagpur region became a principal centre in the 1920s). The meeting that set up the RSS felt that educated, high-caste Hindus should acquire combat skills themselves, and not depend any longer on lower-caste muscle-men. 
The RSS displayed its street-fighting capacities in the September 1927 Nagpur Hindu-Muslim riots in which twenty-two were killed, but concentrated more on a long-term, unostentatious building up of organizational strength through what its founder liked to call 'man-making' and 'cultural' work. Its exclusively male membership was recruited very young (boys of twelve to fifteen being preferred, with minds like 'clean slates'), and organized into locality-based 'shakhas' (branches) which met every day at fixed times for physical training, exposition of a simple Hindu nationalist ideology that was propagated also through rituals and occasional festivals, and the inculcation of the virtues of unquestioning loyalty and obedience. In November 1929 the RSS adopted the principle of 'following one leader', under which Hedgewar became 'sarsang-chalak', supreme director, on a lifetime basis, of a totally centralized, self-consciously undemocratic structure. In addition, he was given the power to appoint his own successor. The model, supposedly, was that of the patriarchal Hindu joint family, and RSS culture tried to blend martial discipline with familial ideology. Unlike any real family, women remained excluded from RSS membership, but in 1936 Hedgewar agreed to the formation of a subsidiary women's organization, the Rashtrasevika Samiti. Under Hedgewar's successor, M. S. Golwalkar, this system of affiliated organizations, floated and usually controlled by the RSS, proliferated into the 'RSS family', foremost among whose members in the 1990s were the Bharatiya Janata Party and the Viswa Hindu Parishad. 
Hedgewar briefly gave up headship of the RSS when he courted arrest in 1930 as part of Gandhi's civil disobedience movement. His RSS biographer, C. P. Bhishikar, explains this in terms of Hedgewar's desire to propagate the ideals of his organization among nationalists in prison. The RSS itself kept consistently aloof from all anti-British movements, and so (except briefly in the Central Provinces in 1932-4, when government servants were banned from joining it) never became an object of colonial repression despite its paramilitary ways. Relations with the other major Hindu nationalist organization, the Hindu Mahasabha patronized by V. D. Savarkar (of which Moonje had become a leader) were initially close, but later became uncertain because of the RSS preference for long-term 'cultural', rather than directly political, work. In 1934, for instance, it lost a prominent organizer, Nathuram Godse, the future assassin of Gandhi, to the Mahasabha because of Hedgewar's refusal to make the RSS a more political body. 
Initially confined mainly to Maharashtra, the RSS spread rapidly into northern India as Hindu-Muslim relations worsened there in the late 1930s, and organizers were also sent to the southern provinces by Hedgewar in 1938. There were about 500 'shakhas' with 60,000 members by 1939, and in 1940 the last 'officer's training camp' that Hedgewar was able to address was attended by trainees from every province except Assam, Orissa, and Kashmir. About half the branches, however, were still located in Maharashtra, and recruitment remained largely confined to high-caste, urban middle- and lower middle-class groups. Hedgewar had been in ill health since 1932, and died of high blood pressure in Nagpur on 21 June 1940, having had the satisfaction, as he had stated in his last speech to RSS trainees, of seeing before his eyes 'a miniature Hindu Rashtra [Nation]'. 


@@@@@


doc= 47755


Narayan, Jayaprakash (1902-1979), political activist and social worker, was born on 11 October 1902 in the village of Shitab Diara, Bihar, in an upper caste (Kayastha) family of modest means, the fourth of six children of Harsu Dayal, a government official, and his wife, Phul Rani Devi. He had two brothers and three sisters. He married Prabhavati Devi (died 1973) in October 1920 when he was eighteen and she fourteen. Although the marriage was never physically consummated, Prabhavati having been persuaded by Mahatma Gandhi to take a vow of lifelong celibacy, they lived in all other respects throughout their mature lives together in close companionship. Aside from his association with a 'Communist Free Lovers' Club' during his time at the University of Wisconsin, there is no other indication of an active sexual life, and he left no descendants. Jayaprakash, or J. P. as he was often called, was a tall, lean, and handsome man, somewhat austere and aloof in appearance, though in fact gentle and agreeable in his personal relationships. 
Narayan's early education in Patna, at the Patna collegiate school and Patna College, was disrupted by his participation in the non-co-operation movement of 1921. Although he enrolled briefly thereafter in a new nationalist institution, Bihar Vidyapith, he completed his education in the United States, where he lived between 1922 and 1929. He took courses at the University of California at Berkeley, Iowa University, the University of Wisconsin at Madison, and Ohio State University, where he received BA and MA degrees in 1928 and 1929 respectively, supporting himself throughout by taking various odd jobs. Although his early interests were in science subjects, he came under the influence of communist and socialist teachers and students at the University of Wisconsin, leading to a change towards sociology, in which he received his MA degree. 
Narayan was prevented from studying for a PhD by news of his mother's illness, which brought him back to India, where vigorous nationalist activities were under way. Through his wife, whose father was a very important Bihar politician, and who herself was ensconced in Gandhi's 'ashram' at Ahmadabad, Narayan soon found himself at the centre of nationalist politics and in personal contact with both Gandhi and Nehru. Although he came close to and worked with Nehru at first, he immediately carved out a singular position for himself as the leading exponent of the position that the Indian National Congress must articulate a social and economic programme that went beyond the mere demand for independence from British rule. In 1934 he was one of a small group who formed the Congress Socialist Party, of which he became general secretary, to work within the Indian National Congress, seeking to influence the social and economic policies of the parent organization. 
Narayan participated actively in most of the major movements against British rule after his return to India, and was imprisoned in 1932, in 1940, and again in 1943, emerging from gaol only in April 1946. He was one of the leading socialist figures in the Quit India movement of 1942, having escaped from prison in September of that year. 
After the achievement of Indian independence in 1947 Narayan and several of his colleagues in the Congress Socialist Party severed their ties with the parent body to form a party of opposition initially called the Socialist Party, but renamed the Praja Socialist Party (PSP) after a merger with another party in 1953. In 1954 he announced his retirement from politics to join the Sarvodaya movement for social reconstruction in the countryside, emphasizing voluntary land redistribution, communal land ownership, small-scale production, and self-sufficient, self-governing village communities, but he did not finally sever his relations with the PSP until 1957. These shifts in his principal activities in Indian public life were all marked by major breaks in his political thought: from Marxism and sympathy with Soviet communism to disenchantment with the latter as well as with Indian communist practices and a shift to democratic socialism, followed by disenchantment with party politics and a shift to constructive social work and moral criticism of political authority and, finally, disillusionment with the pace and effectiveness of Sarvodaya and a call for total revolution in the moral, economic, and social bases of society through struggle, including mass movements when necessary. 
During his years of retirement from active politics J. P. sought nevertheless to influence government policy and public opinion through his prolific writings on contemporary political issues, domestic and international; through public speeches and exhortations to the country's political leaders; and by offering his services as an impartial negotiator. He was also active in organizing relief activities in times of disaster and catastrophe, such as during the 1966-7 Bihar famine. 
However, Narayan's most important and dramatic single contribution to his country's history occurred between 1974 and 1977, when he emerged from political retirement to lead the developing movement of opposition in different parts of the country to what he considered to be the dictatorial leadership of the prime minister, Indira Gandhi, and the debasement of politics which had occurred during the previous decade as the Indian National Congress became increasingly corrupted and its members sycophantically dependent upon Mrs Gandhi, her family, and her political entourage. It was at this time also that he gave his new call for a 'total revolution'. He was detained along with most other opposition leaders and many thousands of activists during the two-year emergency authoritarian regime imposed by Mrs Gandhi between 1975 and 1977. Despite broken health from confinement, he lived long enough to play a central role in forging the opposition unity which made possible the defeat of Mrs Gandhi and the Indian National Congress in the 1977 parliamentary elections, and the restoration of the basic features of the previous parliamentary system by the Janata government which succeeded hers. Jayaprakash Narayan survived, melancholy at the disintegration of the Janata Party and government in July 1979, in ill health and on dialysis, until his death, in Patna, on 8 October 1979. 


@@@@@


doc= 47756


Bose, Subhas Chandra (1897-1945), Indian political leader, was born on 23 January 1897 in Cuttack, Orissa, the ninth child and sixth son of Janaki Nath Bose (1860-1934), a lawyer and government pleader, and his wife, Prabhabati, 'nee' Dey (1869-1944). They were high-caste Hindu Bengalis of the Kayastha caste. His eldest brothers, Satish and Sarat, were barristers, and Sarat was an important political leader as well. Another brother, Sunil, was a leading medical doctor in Calcutta. 
Bose was educated at the Protestant European School and Ravenshaw Collegiate School, Cuttack, and then at the Presidency College, Calcutta, one of the foremost colleges of India. In 1915 he was expelled from the Presidency College for complicity in the beating of Professor Oaten, a college instructor, whom many students felt had maligned Indians. After a year Bose was admitted to the Scottish Church College, another leading college, and graduated with the highest honours in philosophy in 1919. At the urging of his father he went to England, studied at Cambridge University as a non-collegiate student, and prepared for the Indian Civil Service examination. To the surprise of many he passed the 1920 examination in the fourth position, was appointed, but then resigned to join the Indian national movement headed by M. K. Gandhi nationally and C. R. Das in Bengal. Bose was personally friendly with some British people, but he hated the British presence in India passionately, and his central concern through his adult life was to terminate the raj. 
Bose returned to Calcutta, joined the Indian National Congress, and, as a favoured lieutenant of Das, was chosen chief executive officer of the Calcutta Corporation in 1924. He worked for Hindu-Muslim amity and improvement of civic life, but after a few months was gaoled for involvement with acts of violence against the British raj. No formal charges were made and no trial took place, but Bose served about three years in gaol, two of them under unpleasant circumstances in Mandalay, Burma. Released for health reasons in 1927, and with Das now dead, Bose quickly rose to the leadership of the Bengal Provincial Congress. In 1928 he became a general secretary of the Indian National Congress, helped to prepare the Nehru report on Indian self-rule, and became a widely popular leader of the younger leftists in national politics. He had strong support from urban workers, middle-class nationalists in Calcutta and towns through the countryside, women, and students. Bose pressed Gandhi to move more quickly and forcefully for complete independence. He began to call himself a socialist and advocated a socialist programme for the reconstruction of India once independence was gained. 
As commander of the Congress Volunteers at the 1928 Congress session, he drilled young Indians to help control the meeting. Some of these Indians later formed an underground revolutionary group, the Bengal Volunteers. Bose's ties to this group, which carried out acts of violence, together with his mass following as a Congress leader, made him a marked man to officials of the raj. His connection to such revolutionaries also made him untrustworthy to Gandhi, a principled non-violent activist. Bose was in and out of gaol from 1930 to 1933 and was even elected mayor of Calcutta in 1930 while imprisoned. He spent a good deal of the period 1933 to 1937 in Europe recovering his health. While in Europe he wrote 'The Indian Struggle' (1935), an account of Indian politics from 1920 to 1934, and 'An Indian Pilgrim', a brief, insightful autobiography, eventually published in 1965. Based in Vienna, he also did propaganda work for Indian nationalism and visited many European countries, including Italy and Ireland, where he was warmly welcomed. About 1934 he met an Austrian woman, Emilie Schenkl (1910-1996), who became his secretary. In December 1937, according to Miss Schenkl, they married secretly at Badgastein. 
In 1938, with Gandhi's blessing but not complete confidence, Bose became president of the Indian National Congress. He took the initiative in forming the planning committee of the Congress. The next year he decided to run again, against Gandhi's wishes. With the support of the left and strong support in some provinces outside his native Bengal, he defeated Gandhi's candidate, P. Sitaramayya, but then felt compelled to resign his presidency after a controversy about the selection of the working committee, the Congress executive. Bose formed the Forward Bloc, a pressure group within the Congress working for immediate direct action against the raj. 
Imprisoned again in 1940, Bose fasted, and was released in December. With the Second World War under way, and now convinced that the British would never leave India peacefully, he determined to flee the country and work with some foreign power hostile to the British. He hoped to recruit and train a military unit which would combine with forces within India to drive the British out by violent means. On 17 January 1941 he slipped out of his Calcutta house, reached the Indian frontier, and walked into Afghanistan. Receiving Italian, German, and Russian help, he travelled as Orlando Mazzotta to Berlin, where he set up the Free India Centre, a propaganda operation, and the Indian Legion, a small fighting force recruited from Indian prisoners taken in north Africa. Unhappy in Europe, Bose was finally allowed by Hitler to leave for south-east Asia in February 1943. He was forced to leave behind in Vienna his wife and his daughter, Anita, born in 1942. 
Travelling by German and Japanese submarines, and then by air, Bose reached Tokyo in spring 1943. He courted and impressed Prime Minister Tojo, who supported his efforts to reconstitute the Indian National Army (INA) and to set up the provisional government of Azad Hind, or Free India. Bose's army was constituted mainly from Indian soldiers taken prisoner at Singapore, and was supported by the Free India League, a nationalist organization backed by the Indian community of south-east Asia. Beloved by his followers, Bose was called Netaji, or revered leader. He also recruited a regiment of women headed by Lakshmi Swaminathan, who were trained to fight but never entered combat. Bose worked diligently for communal harmony between Hindus, Muslims, and Sikhs within his army, and continued to make the broadcasts to India that he had begun in Germany. 
In an endeavour to fulfil his slogan of 'chalo Delhi', or 'on to Delhi', Bose induced the Japanese to undertake an invasion of eastern India in 1944. Their forces briefly entered India, but this effort ended in a catastrophic defeat for the Japanese and the INA. Bose fled and was mortally burned in a plane crash in Taiwan on 17 August 1945. He died in a Japanese military hospital nearby, was cremated the following day, and his ashes were delivered by a Japanese officer to Tokyo. There they were turned over to Indian nationalists, who placed them in a Buddhist temple, where they remained, as no subsequent government of India was willing to receive them back into India because of potential controversy about how he died. Many followers of Bose in India and south-east Asia believed that he did not die in the air crash, but escaped, possibly to Soviet territory. For several decades the myth of his imminent return was spread among Indians who hoped that he would emerge to help India combat its many problems by his forceful leadership. He was remembered for his devotion to his country by most Indians, some of whom, like Gandhi, disagreed with his choice of means to reach the goal of independence. Bose was one of those Indian nationalists who believed that violence in a noble cause would not corrupt the end sought. 


@@@@@


doc= 47757


Das, Chittaranjan (1870-1925), Indian nationalist and barrister, was born on 5 November 1870 in Calcutta, the second child and eldest son of Bhuban Mohan Das, a solicitor of the Calcutta high court, and his wife, Nistarini Devi. His youngest brother, P. R. Das, became a judge of the Patna high court. 
Das was educated at the London Missionary Society Institution, Bhowanipore, Calcutta, and then at Presidency College, Calcutta, one of the foremost colleges of India. He sailed to England in 1890 to take the Indian Civil Service examination. However, he failed in this effort, and changed course and entered the Inner Temple. He was called to the bar in 1893 and upon his return to India enrolled as a barrister at the Calcutta high court. After paying off large debts left by his father he gradually became one of the highest-paid Indian barristers, and amassed considerable wealth. 
In 1897 he married Basanti Devi, the daughter of Barada Nath Haldar, diwan of Bijni estate in Assam. Basanti Devi played some part in nationalist politics and she, along with her son Chitta Ranjan Das, her husband, and many political activists, was arrested during the 1921 non-co-operation movement. Basanti Devi lived until May 1974. 
As a lawyer Das made his early successes in the 'mofussil', or local courts, outside Calcutta. He took up civil and criminal cases, but became famous in India at first for his passionate and shrewd defences of Indian nationalists charged with terrorism in political cases, the most famous of which was the Alipore bomb case of 1908. In this case he defended Aurobindo Ghose, public political leader and secret revolutionary theorist. Das gained an acquittal for Ghose, who two years later flew to Pondicherry and later became known as the guru and philosopher Sri Aurobindo. 
Das participated in politics from his student days in England and was linked to the extremist party in the Indian National Congress from 1905 onwards. However, the moderate group was more successful in outlasting the extremists, who fell into disarray from about 1910. Das continued his legal work and sporadic political participation and re-emerged in 1917 as a leader of a revitalized Indian National Congress in Bengal. 
By 1919 he became the foremost nationalist in the Bengal Congress at about the time that M. K. Gandhi came to the leadership of the national Congress. Das at first opposed Gandhi's call for non-co-operation, but then, as Gandhi demonstrated his political skill and wide support, Das joined with him in energizing the national non-co-operation campaign of 1920 to 1922. Das was arrested in 1921 and was in gaol when Gandhi called off the campaign because of acts of violence by Indian nationalists. 
Angered by what he believed was short-sightedness and incorrect strategy by Gandhi, Das, together with Motilal Nehru, father of India's first prime minister, Jawaharlal Nehru, founded the Swaraj party. This party operated within the Congress as an opposition group to Gandhi's loyal supporters, and outside the Congress as a party participating in the elections to the provincial legislative councils and the central legislative assembly from 1923. Their strategy was to deadlock the councils from within, and both Das in the Bengal legislative council and the elder Nehru in the central legislative assembly had considerable success. 
Das was also elected mayor of Calcutta in 1924 under the revised 'Calcutta Municipal Act'. He flourished from 1923 to 1925 as leader of the Bengal Congress, leader of the opposition in the Bengal legislative council, mayor of the second city of the British empire, and national president of the Swaraj party. Part of his effort in all these roles was to have Hindus and Muslims work together and to this end he had formulated the Bengal pact of December 1923. The pact specified how this co-operation was to be achieved, 'inter alia', through additional places for Muslims in public employment. It was utilized in Bengal, but not accepted by the national Congress. As the political leader of a province in which Muslims had a slight majority, Das believed he needed Muslim help to achieve the goals he sought, and for this brief period he had a good deal of Muslim support. 
At the height of his political success his health began to fail and he retreated to his mountain home in Darjeeling in May 1925. Gandhi visited him there. On 16 June 1925, succumbing to severe fever, he died. Gandhi led the enormous funeral procession in Calcutta, and said: 'Deshbandhu [friend of the country] was one of the greatest of men... He dreamed... and talked of freedom of India and of nothing else... His heart knew no difference between Hindus and Mussalmans and I should like to tell Englishmen, too, that he bore no ill-will to them. (Gandhi, 'Collected Works' 27.250)' Throughout his life Das was religious, and was attracted to the emotional Vaishnava Hinduism of Bengal which stressed the centrality of the principle of love. He wrote several books of religious poetry in Bengali, one of which was translated into English by Aurobindo Ghose as 'Songs of the Sea' (1920). As a passionate Bengali who loved his country and was himself non-violent, he opposed, but did not disown, some of the Bengalis who turned to acts of violence. He preferred open political work inside and outside government institutions aiming for the independence of his country. 


@@@@@


doc= 47758


Sapru, Sir Tej Bahadur (1875-1949), Indian nationalist and political mediator, was born in Aligarh on 8 December 1875, of a Kashmiri Pandit family, the son of Ambika Prasad Sapru, and grandson of Radha Khrishen Sapru, of the Indian provincial service. He married Durga Devi Madan in 1888; the couple had two daughters and three sons: Prakash Narain Sapru, later a judge of the Allahabad high court, Anand Narain Sapru, of the Indian Civil Service, and Triyugi Narain Sapru, later professor of law at Allahabad University. Sapru's wife died in 1910, and thereafter he remained notoriously shy with women. Much influenced by Professor Andrews, a close follower of John Stuart Mill, he took first-class honours in English at Agra College, in both his bachelor's (1894) and his master's degrees (1895). He also took an LLM at Allahabad University (1895) and an LLD (1902) -- only the second person to do so. 
Sapru began practising law in Moradabad in 1896, but in 1898 moved to Allahabad where, at 19 Albert Road, he spent the rest of his life. There in 1906 he was admitted as an advocate, making him the equal of members of the English bar. In due course he became arguably the most distinguished lawyer in India, appearing not only in Allahabad and Lucknow, but in Calcutta, Madras, and Lahore, and was in frequent demand by Indian landlords and princes too. He was at the same time a considerable scholar in Persian, and a leading devotee of Urdu poetry, language, and literature. 
From an early age Sapru was interested in the Indian National Congress, and by his own lights remained a staunch Indian nationalist. He first spoke at the Madras Congress in 1908, and was closely involved with the 1910 Congress in Allahabad. In 1913 he was nominated to the United Provinces' legislative council and there led a campaign for a governor-in-council to bring the province into line with Bengal, Madras, and Bombay. In 1914 he became president of the United Provinces' provincial political conference, and in 1916 played a major part in the Lucknow pact between Congress and the Muslim League which sought to reconcile Hindu and Muslim political interests. In that year he was elected to the central legislative council. By now he was seen by some younger nationalists such as Jawaharlal Nehru as their potential leader. Energetic in seeking further constitutional reforms, he was incensed at the government's treatment of Annie Besant. He was, however, substantially assuaged by the Montagu declaration of 1917 promising India eventual self-government, and by the Montagu-Chelmsford reforms which ensued. While vehement in his opposition to the 'Rowlatt Acts' of 1919, he joined with other leading 'moderates' to break away from the Congress in 1918 to form what became the National Liberal Federation to work the Montagu-Chelmsford reforms to the full. By the time of M. K. Gandhi's accession to Congress's leadership he was thus no longer a member. 
While always retaining a high personal regard for Gandhi, the deep commitments he had now developed to the rule of law, and to pursuing British precedents for the attainment of self-government without revolutionary upheaval, Sapru found it impossible to join Gandhi in non-co-operation and civil disobedience. Instead he served on the Feetham committee on the allocation of governmental functions, appeared before the joint select committee of the British parliament on Indian reforms in 1919, and in 1920 accepted appointment as law member of the viceroy's council. There, apart from instituting some notable reforms, for example by removing racial distinctions in the criminal procedure code, he not only successfully urged the viceroy, Lord Reading, not to arrest Gandhi until he had called off his non-co-operation campaign, but late in 1921 played the pivotal role in persuading Reading to call a round-table conference which, if Gandhi had been more adroit, could well have initiated further reforms that did not come for another fifteen years. 
Sapru retired from the viceroy's council in 1922 and was made a KCIE. In 1923 he was a delegate to the Imperial Conference (where he had a notable clash with General Smuts over the rights of South Africa's Indian minority) and became (as again in 1927) president of the National Liberal Federation. During the 1920s he was more intimately involved than anyone else in discussions about Indian constitutional reforms, and became as he remained the greatest constitutional expert on either the Indian or the British side. Closely involved with Besant's commonwealth of India proposals in 1923, he served in 1924 on the government-appointed Muddiman reforms inquiry committee and contributed to its important minority report. 
Along with so many others Sapru was outraged by the appointment of the all-white Simon commission on Indian constitutional reforms in 1927, and not only supported its boycott, but played a large part in drafting the Indian riposte, the Nehru report of 1928. He was then foremost in persuading the next viceroy to make the Irwin declaration of October 1929 promising further constitutional reform and a round-table conference in London. Despite an initial success he was twice frustrated, however, in persuading Congress's leaders to attend the conference, first by their launching of civil disobedience in March 1930, and then, in association with M. R. Jayakar, in the Yeravda gaol discussions with Gandhi and the Nehrus the following summer. He and a good many others none the less went to London, where Sapru was pre-eminent in winning the Indian princes' support for an Indian federation, thereby securing the British government's support for further constitutional reforms. On returning to India he and his associates were rewarded by the Gandhi-Irwin pact of March 1931 under which civil disobedience was suspended and Gandhi agreed to attend a second round-table conference in London later that year. That conference, however, was fruitless, deeply riven by communal issues (which led Sapru to resign from the Liberal Party for its involvement in these), and upon Gandhi's return to India civil disobedience was renewed. 
During 1932 Sapru played a principal part in negotiating the Poona pact with Gandhi and a range of Hindu orthodox and untouchable leaders that sought to resolve the constitutional position of India's untouchables. He was to the fore, too, among those successfully denouncing the apparent decision of the British to abandon the conference method for framing constitutional reforms, and attended both a third conference and the discussions of the joint select committee on Indian constitutional reforms, which finally led to the 'Government of India Act' of 1935. For his major contributions to these Sapru was sworn of the privy council, but in India found himself relegated to the political sidelines. From there he was brought back in 1941, not least by Gandhi, to act as a mediator between Congress and the Muslim League, and between Congress and the viceroy, Lord Linlithgow. His principal instrument was a series of non-party conferences over which he presided for several years. He failed in 1941 to persuade Linlithgow to countenance an Indian national government which for the duration of the Second World War would be 'responsible to the Crown', but by dispatching an open telegram to Churchill early in 1942 he succeeded brilliantly in precipitating Sir Stafford Cripps's mission to India and its accompanying promise that India would have independence at the end of the war. He was considerably less successful with Jinnah and the Muslim League, despite one final effort through the Sapru report of 1945 which epitomized all his constitutional expertise. 
Sapru appeared briefly in 1946 for the defence in the Indian National Army trials, but by then had Parkinson's disease. Had he been well he would very probably have chaired the Indian constituent assembly. Although he had for many years been spurned by Jawaharlal Nehru, they were touchingly reconciled at the end. With India independent under the rule of law and a parliamentary democracy, Sapru died well content, despite his dismay at India's partition, in Allahabad on 20 January 1949. 


@@@@@


doc= 47759


Prasad, Rajendra (1884-1963), president of India, was born at Zeradei, a village in the Saran district of Bihar, on 3 December 1884, the youngest son of Mahadev Sahai, who owned a small 'zamindari' (landed estate) and practised Indian medicine. Prasad learned Persian at home and then joined first the district school at Chapra and then a private school at Patna. In 1897 he married Rajbansi Devi; they had two sons. 
Gaining a scholarship, in 1902 Prasad moved to Presidency College in Calcutta, graduated in 1906, and went on to take an MA degree in English literature. After teaching for a year at a college in Muzaffarpur he returned to Calcutta to take a degree in law and set up a legal practice in 1911. He also taught at the law college. 
Living in Calcutta, Prasad was influenced by the agitation from 1905 over the partition of Bengal; and in 1911 he joined the Indian National Congress. But his interests were mainly in his home province. In 1913 he presided over the Bihar students' conference in Monghyr and the next year was active in flood relief operations. In 1916 he shifted his legal practice to Patna, where a high court had been set up. The next year he came into contact with Mahatma Gandhi, who had interested himself in the agitation of the workers in the indigo plantations at Champaran; this marked a turning point in Prasad's life. In 1920 he joined Gandhi's non-co-operation movement and gave up his legal practice. As the movement required the boycott of educational institutions managed or subsidized by the government, Prasad established a National College at Patna and was its first principal. He also started 'Desh' ('Nation'), a Hindi newspaper. 
In 1924 Prasad served as chairman of the Patna municipal committee; but his primary concerns in the twenties were the promotion of 'khaddar' (handspun cotton) and the propagation of Hindi to replace English as the all-India language. In 1928 he visited Britain to assist an old client whose case came up before the privy council, and thereafter travelled in Europe. At an anti-war conference in Graz, Austria, he was beaten up by right-wing elements. 
In 1930 the Congress again engaged in a civil disobedience campaign led by Gandhi; Prasad was arrested in July and served a sentence of six months in Hazaribagh gaol. He was in the same prison again from January to July 1932, and from January 1933 to 15 January 1934. On the day of his release there was a massive earthquake in Bihar, followed by floods. Prasad's organization of relief operations brought him to national attention. He was elected president of the Congress for the annual session at Bombay in October. 
For the next few years Prasad was at the centre of policy making in the Congress. He was regarded as an unquestioning follower of Gandhi, a leader of the right-wing group in Congress and the man acceptable to all sides in compromise settlements. In April 1939 he was re-elected president of the Congress in the crisis caused by the resignation of Subhas Chandra Bose following differences with Gandhi, and served in that capacity until March 1940. 
In August 1942 Prasad, being a member of the Congress working committee which was outlawed by the government at the start of the Quit India campaign, was arrested and detained in Bankipore gaol until June 1945. From his early youth a sufferer from asthma, his poor health did not permit his joining the other members of the working committee in detention in Ahmednagar Fort, and the conditions under which he was detained were less stringent. In gaol he wrote in Hindi a book on the possible consequences of a partition of the country, later translated and published in English as 'India Divided' (1946), and completed his autobiography, which he had begun in the early forties. 
After his release Prasad was a Congress participant in the negotiations with the British government. In September 1946, when the Congress decided to join the interim government, he took charge of the food and agriculture portfolio. He was also, on 11 December 1946, elected president of the newly formed constituent assembly. But he left the government in December 1947 again to become president of the Congress, when the party was riven by a dispute between the organizational and governmental wings. 
On 26 January 1950, when India became a republic, Prasad was elected president of the republic, and was re-elected in 1952 and 1957. But on each occasion he was elected by a majority in the Congress Party against the wishes of the prime minister, Jawaharlal Nehru. Prasad was a conservative Hindu conformist out of tune with the secular socialist views of Nehru. In consequence, relations between the president and the government were not happy. Prasad did not reconcile himself to the opinion of legal experts that he was bound to accept ministerial advice in all cases. He was particularly opposed to changes in Hindu personal law granting women the rights of divorce and inheritance; and in 1951 Nehru prevailed only by threatening resignation. 
Prasad was tall, well-built, muscular, and of a dark complexion. He at no time enjoyed good health and in 1961 was seriously ill. After retirement in 1962 he returned to Patna and died there at the Sadaqat 'ashram' on 23 February 1963. 


@@@@@


doc= 47760


Khaliquzzaman, Choudhry (1889-1973), politician in India and Pakistan, was born on 25 December 1889 in Chunar, in the district of Mirzapur, of the North-Western Provinces of India. He was the fourth of the eight children of Sheikh Mohammad Zaman, an assistant 'tahsildar' in British service, and his second wife, Maqboolunnisa Begum, the youngest daughter of Choudhri Riyasat Ali of Bhilwal. He had five brothers and two sisters. Khaliquzzaman was educated at the Jubilee High School, Lucknow, and the Muhammadan Anglo-Oriental College, Aligarh, from which he graduated finally with a BA and LLB in 1916. 
At Aligarh, Khaliquzzaman formed friendships with young Muslims like himself who were to push the All-India Muslim League in a radical direction; he also came under the influence of the charismatic pan-Islamist politician Muhammad Ali. In 1912-13 he joined Dr Ansari's Red Crescent mission to assist the Turkish wounded in the Tripoli war. In 1916 he both joined the Indian National Congress and became joint secretary of the All-India Muslim League. In 1917 he began to practise as junior to Muhammad Nasim, the leader of the Oudh bar. In 1919 he assisted the ''ulama'' of Firangi Mahal in setting up the central 'khilafat' committee to press for the protection of the Turkish caliphate and the holy places of Islam. In the non-co-operation movement which followed, in alliance with the Congress led by Gandhi, Khaliquzzaman was the leading political figure in Lucknow, presiding over its Congress committee and going to gaol from December 1921 to December 1922 for his civil disobedience activities. 
From 1922 to 1937 Khaliquzzaman took a nationalist stance. He regarded Motilal Nehru as his leader, supporting Nehru's Swaraj Party. At the same time he was chairman of the Lucknow municipal board, 1923-5 and 1929-32. In 1928 he supported Nehru's proposals for a constitutional future for India (the Nehru report) without separate electorates for minorities. In 1929 he was secretary of Dr Ansari's newly formed Muslim Nationalist Party, which was to fight for Muslim interests within the Congress; and in 1930 he was nominated president of the Congress at a time when government had declared it illegal. From 1932 he was secretary of the Muslim Unity Board, which won one third of the Muslim seats in the 1934 elections to the central legislative assembly. In 1936 he helped to make a deal with M. A. Jinnah on behalf of the board which permitted anti-landlord elements in Muslim politics to have a major voice on the Muslim League parliamentary board. Through this arrangement on 8 February 1935, Khaliquzzaman rejoined the League. 
The events surrounding the 1937 general elections were a defining moment in the life of Khaliquzzaman and also in the fortunes of the All-India Muslim League. After the Congress won a substantial victory in the United Provinces, it refused Khaliquzzaman's offer of a coalition with the League, the talks breaking down in part over the number of places to be found for Leaguers in the cabinet, but in the main because the Congress insisted on completely absorbing the League party in the assembly. From now on Khaliquzzaman was leader of the opposition and devoted his energies to the revival of the All-India Muslim League, seconding its 'Pakistan Resolution' on 23 March 1940. He was a League member of the United Provinces legislative assembly until 1947 and a key figure in the leadership at all-India level. After partition Khaliquzzaman did not immediately go to Pakistan, being elected to the Indian constituent assembly and accepting from Jinnah the leadership of the Muslims of independent India. In October 1947, however, he migrated to Pakistan. 
Khaliquzzaman's career in Pakistan was less successful. From 1948 to 1950 he was president of the Muslim League. In 1950 he launched his abortive Islamistan movement to create a confederation of Muslim countries. In 1953 he was made governor of East Pakistan but resigned in 1954 when governor's rule was proclaimed there. He was ambassador to Indonesia in 1954-6 and founded the Convention Muslim League in 1962 to support President Ayub Khan and the new Pakistan constitution. 
Khaliquzzaman was married first in 1910 to his cousin Fasih-un-Nisa, daughter of Muhammad Nasim, and second in 1930 to Zahida Khatoon, the niece of Haji Istafa Khan, the owner of the well-known Lucknow perfumers Asghar Ali Muhammad Ali. Both wives migrated to Pakistan, the first living the life of a traditional Muslim housewife in Larkana, Sind, and the second living with her husband in Karachi. After falling into a coma, Khaliquzzaman died in Karachi on 17 May 1973 and was buried in the Mewa Shah graveyard there. He was survived by five sons and four daughters from his marriages; his second wife was a poet and minister in the West Pakistan government. Khaliquzzaman was of medium build, habitually wore a moustache, and was known by his friends as Khaliq. He was widely respected as a shrewd, tough, individualistic and, at times, controversial politician. In his frank autobiography, 'Pathway to Pakistan' (1961), in which he was critical of Jinnah, he also declared that 'the greatest sacrifice I made for the Muslim cause was my dissociation with my loving and affectionate Hindu friends' (Khaliquzzaman, 342). 


@@@@@


doc= 47761


Khan, Abdul Ghaffar (1890-1988), Pakhtun nationalist, was born in the village of Utmanzai in the Peshawar district of the North-West Frontier Province. He was the fourth child of Khan Behram Khan, an influential Muhammadzai landlord. Following admission to a mosque school at the age of five, he was educated at the municipal board high school, Peshawar, and the Edwardes Memorial Mission School. He quit before completing his studies, to obtain an army commission. He reportedly abandoned this career because he had witnessed a British subaltern insulting an Indian officer. He then restlessly spent a brief spell in a school at Campbellpur and attended the Muhammadan Anglo-Oriental College, Aligarh. Behram Khan wanted him to follow his elder brother, Khan Sahib, to England for studies, but this plan also fell through. 
Despite his own chequered education, Abdul Ghaffar Khan worked from 1910 onwards to popularize schooling among the unlettered Pakhtun tribesmen of the frontier. The Pakhtun nationalist the Haji of Turangzai encouraged his endeavours. He was also influenced at this time by the Muslim seminary at Deoband which he clandestinely visited, and by the writings of Maulana Abul Kalam Azad, who later became the most prominent Muslim Congressman. 
Abdul Ghaffar Khan clashed with the British in April 1919, when he organized a public meeting at Utmanzai to protest against the 'Rowlatt Act', which curtailed Indian legal rights in case of emergency. He was arrested but was released shortly afterwards. He thus embarked on a life of prolonged spells of imprisonment by both the British and Pakistani authorities. After his release he led a party of 'muhajarins' (religious refugees) to Afghanistan in August 1920 during the 'khilafat' movement of protest against the treatment of the 'khilafat', the sultan of Turkey, after the First World War by the victorious allies. He soon retraced his steps convinced of the futility of 'hijrat' (religious flight) and attended the December Nagpur session of the Indian National Congress. This session was dominated by the Gandhians, who adopted the creed of non-violent non-co-operation which became the guiding principle of his own public career. Indeed, in later years he was known as the Frontier Gandhi. He resumed his educational activities in 1921, opening an Azad high school at Utmanzai and forming the Anjuman Islah-ul-Afghania (Society for the Reform of the Afghans) to carry on his work. By this date he had also been elected president of the provincial 'khilafat' committee. His anti-British activities culminated in arrest on 17 December 1921. The poor diet in the frontier and Punjab gaols in which he served his three-year sentence undermined his health. But his spirit was unvanquished, he mixed freely with Hindu and Sikh prisoners, and for the first time read the Hindu scriptural text, the 'Gita', and the Sikh scripture, the 'Granth Sahib'. On his release his followers honoured him with the title Fakhr-i-Afghan (the Pride of the Afghans). 
Shortly afterwards he proceeded on 'haj' to Mecca with his second wife and her elder sister. The pilgrimage ended tragically in Jerusalem, where his wife fell to her death from a staircase leaving a son, Abdul Ali, and a daughter, Mehar Taj. Abdul Ghaffar Khan's first wife, who had borne him two sons, Ghani and Wali Khan, had also died prematurely, during an influenza epidemic. Ghaffar Khan did not remarry after this second tragedy. 
In May 1928 Abdul Ghaffar Khan launched the monthly Pashto language journal, the 'Pakhtun', which thereafter served as his mouthpiece. Through its columns he expounded his philosophy of Pakhtun nationalism, moral and social reform, non-violence, and Islam. The following year he embodied these ideals in a new grass-roots party called the Afghan Jirga. Three months later, in November 1929, he launched a parallel organization, the Khudai Khidmatgars ('Servants of God'), which was established on quasi-military lines. This movement soon overshadowed the Afghan Jirga. Its members wore uniforms dyed with red brick dust, since their ordinary white clothing showed the dirt too easily. The British thereafter dubbed them the Red Shirts. 
Abdul Ghaffar Khan toured the frontier to enrol Khudai Khidmatgars. He both called on the people to reform their social and religious condition, and articulated the poorer classes' grievances against the pro-British large khans from whom he said 'they could expect nothing' as their only 'desire was to shake hands with the Sahib Bahadurs and to secure employment for their sons'. Although his organizations proclaimed the goal of complete Indian independence, they only affiliated to the Congress in August 1931. Its leaders at this and other times deferred to him because of his immense authority and mass following. The Khudai Khidmatgars' involvement in the civil disobedience struggles of 1930-32, moreover, strengthened the Congress's national claim to be a secular cross-communal organization. For his part, Abdul Ghaffar Khan allied with them in the Indian freedom struggle and quest for Hindu-Muslim unity, but his first priority remained specifically Pakhtun interests. 
The British arrested Abdul Ghaffar Khan in April 1930 at the outset of the civil disobedience movement in the frontier. The unrest continued unabated, however, during his incarceration in Gujrat gaol. While in prison he fasted and observed a day of silence each week. He was released after the Gandhi-Irwin pact of 5 March 1931 which ended civil disobedience, and returned in triumph. Many in the crowds which flocked to hear him speak regarded him as a saint who could cure diseases. It was also from this time that he was called the Frontier Gandhi. Abdul Ghaffar Khan certainly cut an impressive figure, tall, rugged, and bearded, clad in rough 'khadi' (hand-spun cloth) which he at times wrapped over his head. 
The ensuing truce between the Congress and the raj collapsed with the failure of the second round-table conference early in December 1931. Abdul Ghaffar Khan toured the Peshawar valley in preparation for a civil disobedience campaign. The British, however, struck first, and in a crackdown on 24 December they arrested him and the other top frontier nationalists including his brother Dr Khan Sahib. But the continuing disturbances convinced the British that repression should be tempered by constitutional reform. In 1932 they accordingly extended representative government to the frontier. 
The Khan brothers were released in August 1934, but externed from the frontier and the neighbouring Punjab. Undaunted they travelled as far afield as Patna, Allahabad, and Calcutta to address meetings. They also stayed as guests at Gandhi's Wardha 'ashram' in central India. Abdul Ghaffar Khan was perfectly at home in its austere and simple surroundings. His children Abdul Ali and Mehar Taj later joined him at the 'ashram'. He refused to preside over the 1934 Bombay Congress session, declaring: 'I am a Khudai Khidmatgar, I shall only render service'. He nevertheless consented to inaugurate the 'swadeshi' exhibition at Bombay and joined the executive committee of the All-India Village Industries Association, which was devoted to Gandhian economic reconstruction. Abdul Ghaffar Khan was rearrested at Wardha on 7 December 1934 after exactly 100 days' freedom. He was later charged with speaking in a way to 'cause disaffection and bring the Government into hatred and contempt'. He served a two-year sentence in Bombay and United Provinces gaols before being released in August 1936. Another year passed before he could return to the frontier. His homecoming resulted from the formation of a Congress-led coalition ministry headed by his brother Dr Khan Sahib following the 1937 provincial elections. Ghaffar Khan used his unaccustomed freedom to reorganize the Khudai Khidmatgars. He also arranged tours for both J. Nehru and Gandhi. On the occasion of the latter's visit in September 1938 he emphasized the importance of the principles of non-violence. 
Dr Khan Sahib's ministry resigned following the outbreak of the Second World War. The subsequent civil disobedience movement initiated by the Congress was, in the frontier, very muted in comparison with other regions. Disturbances were limited to the Mardan district. When he attempted to make his way there in defiance of a government ban, Abdul Ghaffar Khan was arrested once more, on 27 October 1942. He spent the remainder of the war years in prisons at Haripur, Abbottabad, and Risalpur. He ran literacy classes for the Khudai Khidmatgars and encouraged them to read both the 'Koran' and the 'Gita'. Every Sunday the political prisoners assembled to sing Iqbal's national verse, 'Hindustan Hamara'. This was followed by talks, discussion, and story-telling. Such displays of communal amity increasingly contrasted with the polarization outside the prison walls. By the time of his release in 1945 the Muslim League had emerged as a major force in both frontier and all-India politics. 
Ghaffar Khan attended the 1945 Simla conference as a Congress delegate. He also campaigned vigorously in the 1946 provincial elections. Although the Congress retained power in the frontier, the Muslim League's advance in the Punjab strengthened its Pakistan demand. The Congress high command reluctantly accepted the idea of partition as the price of independence. In Abdul Ghaffar Khan's eyes, however, this was an act of betrayal which threw the Khudai Khidmatgars 'to the wolves'. He exhorted his followers to boycott the June 1947 referendum on the frontier's future, as it did not include an option for Pakhtunistan along with those for India and Pakistan. The referendum result was a crushing blow for the Khan brothers. More than 99 per cent of the total number of votes were cast for Pakistan, although the turnout at 51 per cent was admittedly low. 
Pakistan came into being on 14 August 1947: within a week the frontier Congress ministry of Dr Khan Sahib had been dismissed. Abdul Ghaffar Khan took the oath of allegiance to Pakistan as a member of the constituent assembly. The Khudai Khidmatgars had earlier severed their connections with the Indian Congress and replaced the tricolour with the red flag as their party symbol. But the authorities were inevitably suspicious of his continued championing of Pakhtunistan at a time of tension with neighbouring India and Afghanistan. In May 1948 he attempted to spread the Khudai Khidmatgars movement throughout Pakistan. Within a month he was arrested with his son Wali near Bahadur Khel in Kohat, on the charge of planning and fomenting open sedition against the state. The Khudai Khidmatgars were banned shortly afterwards. Ghaffar Khan was in fact to spend even longer periods of imprisonment in Pakistan than in British India. 
He was first released in January 1954, but was again externed from the frontier. He attended the budget session of the constituent assembly in Karachi. The following year he headed the campaign against the merging of the provinces of West Pakistan into 'One Unit'. This caused conflict with the authorities. It also led to a breach with Dr Khan Sahib, who in October 1955 became the chief minister of the newly integrated West Pakistan. After a brief spell in prison Abdul Ghaffar Khan joined Baluchi and Sindhi nationalists and left-leaning Punjabi and Bengali politicians to form the National Awami Party in 1957. It called for the dissolution of the One Unit scheme and demanded federal reorganization which would give greater regional autonomy. The National Awami Party's successful passage of a bill through the West Pakistan assembly which provided for the dissolution of the One Unit precipitated Pakistan's headlong descent to military take-over and the abrogation of the 1956 constitution. Abdul Ghaffar Khan was arrested in October 1958 along with other opposition leaders. He was released the following April on account of his age and poor health. But he was disqualified from being a member of any elected body and placed under restrictive orders. He defied these to tour the frontier and was subsequently rearrested in Dera Ismail Khan on 12 April 1961. His health deteriorated alarmingly as he languished in the familiar surroundings of Haripur prison. Shortly after his release in January 1964 he journeyed to England for medical treatment. During this time he stayed at the Sussex home of a former opponent, Sir Olaf Caroe, the one-time governor of the frontier. 
Abdul Ghaffar Khan embarked on a lengthy self-imposed exile in Afghanistan in December 1964. His contention that the Durand line, which demarcated Pakistan's western frontier, was an imperialist legacy which artificially divided the Pakhtuns of Pakistan and Afghanistan assured him a warm welcome from the government, although his championing of the Pakhtuns was not well received by Afghanistan's ethnic minorities. He briefly visited India in November 1969 to receive the Nehru peace award. The formation of a National Awami Party government in the frontier in 1972 enabled him to return to Pakistan. A caravan of 6000 lorries escorted him from the Afghan border. Within two months the Bhutto regime had dismissed the frontier government and arrested Wali Khan and the other top National Awami Party leaders for anti-state activities. Abdul Ghaffar Khan was later arrested to prevent his returning to Afghanistan. 
After the fall of Bhutto, General Zia ul Haq reversed the policy of repression. He dropped the Awami leaders' charges and released them. After some hesitation Abdul Ghaffar Khan was permitted to return to Afghanistan. For the next two years he shuttled between there and Pakistan. He again ran foul of the Pakistan authorities because he urged the refugees from the Soviet invasion to return home, and denied that the Afghan conflict was a 'jihad' (holy war). In December 1985 he attended the Congress centenary celebrations in India, but was now increasingly frail. On 15 May 1987 he was admitted to hospital in Bombay, but was discharged a month later and travelled to Delhi, where he suffered a stroke on 4 July 1987. From then until his death he never fully recovered consciousness. He was taken by special plane from Delhi to Peshawar on 16 August 1987. After a bout of pneumonia, he died in Peshawar on the morning of 20 January 1988. 
Abdul Ghaffar Khan's remarkable career was reflected in the events which surrounded his funeral. The Indian premier, Rajiv Gandhi, flew hurriedly to Peshawar to pay his respects. The governments of India, Pakistan, and Afghanistan each declared a period of official mourning. In accordance with his wishes, Abdul Ghaffar Khan was buried in war-torn Afghanistan. Around 15,000 mourners accompanied the body from Pakistan to its Jalalabad resting place, where they were joined by the beleaguered Afghan president, Dr Najibullah, and his cabinet colleagues. 
Abdul Ghaffar Khan was held in such respect because of his sincerity and devotion to the ideal of non-violence. An intensely religious man who lived an austere life, he nevertheless acted as the secular conscience of the Indian subcontinent. 


@@@@@


doc= 47762


Zia ul Haq, Mohammad (1922-1988), president of Pakistan, was born on 12 August 1922 in Jullundur in the pre-partition Punjab province of British India. He was born into a lower-middle-class Arain family. This was not the martial caste background from which the Indian army traditionally drew its Punjabi Muslim recruits. Zia was, however, able to take advantage of the widening of the army's base during the Second World War. He completed his studies at the elite St Stephen's College in Delhi and, following a short period at the College of Combat, Mhow, joined the British Indian army in 1944. He was commissioned into the 13th lancers and saw service in Burma, Malaya, and Java. After the creation of Pakistan, he was posted to the armoured corps centre at Nowshera in the North-West Frontier Province. 
Zia was profoundly influenced by his family's uprooting from their native Jullundur to Peshawar. He was thereafter to share many of the attitudes of the east Punjabi refugee community in Pakistan. These included distrust of India, a fierce national pride, and commitment to the cause of Kashmiri self-determination. Zia's personal piety, arising from his attachment to the puritanical Deobandi sect of Sunni Islam, was also to touch a popular chord. 
Shortly after his marriage to his cousin Shafiqa in August 1950, Zia joined the Guides Cavalry. However, his military career really took off only after a highly successful period at the Command and Staff College in Quetta in 1955. He now rose steadily through the ranks; he was promoted brigadier in 1969 and seconded to Jordan, where he helped King Hussein's forces in their operations against the Palestine Liberation Organization. On his return home Zia commanded the 1st armoured division for three years. He was still relatively unknown, however, when in the spring of 1976 he became head of the Pakistan army. The prime minister, Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, had promoted him over the heads of half a dozen more senior generals. Ironically, the very characteristics which had appealed to Bhutto, Zia's piety, patriotism, and professionalism, turned him into a successful coup-maker in the troubled period which followed the prime minister's alleged rigging of the 1977 national elections. Zia shared the important group of corps commanders' belief that the country was slipping into chaos. He also sympathized with the opposition Pakistan National Alliance's portrayal of the Bhutto regime as morally corrupt. 
Zia launched the coup against Bhutto -- codenamed operation Fairplay -- on 5 July 1977. He served first as chief martial law administrator, and from September 1978 as president. Martial law was withdrawn on 30 December 1985, but Zia retained his post as chief of army staff and continued to wield power through the presidency. Unlike his predecessor Ayub Khan, who was hounded from office, Zia remained firmly in control until the end. 
Zia's political survival rested on his skill in wrong-footing opponents, and on the favourable external environment following the December 1979 Soviet occupation of Afghanistan. This transformed him overnight from an international pariah to America's front-line ally in the fight against communism. The Reagan administration provided $3.2 billion of military and economic assistance, despite concerns over human rights abuses and Pakistan's clandestine nuclear weapons programme. The Pakistan economy also benefited from the large sums sent home by skilled migrant workers in the countries around the Persian Gulf. These amounted to about 40 per cent of total foreign exchange earnings, and enabled annual rates of economic growth in excess of 6 per cent during the Zia era. 
The martial law era was punctuated by unfulfilled promises of national elections and by discussion of the relevance of democracy for an Islamic state. Zia maintained that a Western-style democracy was unsuitable for Pakistan. A 350-member nominated assembly, known as the Majlis-i-Shura, was formed at the end of 1981 to suggest plans of action for the establishment of an Islamic democracy. Zia eventually agreed to hold 'party-less' elections in February 1985, following a referendum on his Islamic policies which was linked with his re-election as president. The eleven-party Alliance Movement for the Restoration of Democracy, which had mounted a major campaign in Sind in 1983 against the Zia regime, boycotted both the polls. Sind missed out on the prosperity of the Zia era partly because it did not export labour to the gulf. The sense of alienation felt by its populace was completed by Zia's hanging of Bhutto, Pakistan's first Sindhi prime minister, on 4 April 1979. 
The Islamization process became the most identifiable feature of the Zia regime, and increasingly its 'raison d'etre'. It encompassed the areas of personal religious observance and dress codes, judicial reform, education, and the attempt to abolish interest from banking practices. The 1981 Ramadan ordinance made eating, drinking, and smoking in public a crime during the period of fasting. Prayer wardens were introduced some three years later to persuade and inspire persons to perform their daily prayers. Zia introduced special shariat courts, with the power to strike down any law found 'repugnant' to Islam. In May 1981, for the first time in Pakistan's history, ''ulama'' (religious scholars) were appointed as judges. From 1979 theft, murder, adultery, and intoxication were subject to the Islamic penal code and laws of evidence. The enforcement of an Islamic code with respect to sexual crimes was especially controversial because of its discrimination against women. Cases arose in which female rape victims were convicted of adultery and publicly flogged, while their assailants went free. Further Islamization measures included the establishment in 1980 of an Islamic university in Islamabad and the massive expansion of mosque schools. Many of the later Taliban fighters in Afghanistan were to graduate from these schools. Provision of Islamic banking facilities through profit and loss accounts was introduced in January 1981. As a social welfare measure, the government sought to oversee the collection of zakat (alms) by compulsorily deducting this charity tax from bank accounts. 
Islamization, which was stoutly opposed by women's groups and human rights activists, stirred up sectarian tensions between Sunnis and Shi'a. It thus did not provide the ideological glue for Pakistani society for which Zia had hoped. The Shi'a felt increasingly estranged from the state-sponsored Islamization process which encouraged Sunni legal practice. 
Karachi experienced mounting ethnic violence from 1986 onwards. Ethnic allegiances had been encouraged by the party-less 1985 elections. Some writers have also claimed that Zia sought to undermine opposition to his regime in Sind by dividing and ruling on ethnic lines in the province. Clashes between 'mohajirs' and Pushtuns, later extended to the Sindhi community. The growing lawlessness was encouraged by the ready availability of weapons and drugs as a result of the war in Afghanistan. Zia justified his dismissal of the hand-picked prime minister, Muhammad Khan Junejo, on 29 May 1988, in terms of the deteriorating security situation. Party-less elections were scheduled for November. However, Zia died on 17 August 1988, following the unexplained crash of his C-130 aircraft minutes after its take-off from Bahawalpur. Others killed in the crash included the US ambassador Arnold Raphel. 
Zia's supporters viewed him as a pious Muslim who halted his country's moral decay and contributed to the collapse of the Soviet empire through support for the Afghan freedom fighters. Detractors condemn him as an intolerant and vindictive ruler who cynically manipulated Islam to remain in power. His popularity with certain sections of Punjabi society was demonstrated by the huge crowds of mourners at his burial on 20 August 1988 at the Faisal mosque in Islamabad. 


@@@@@


doc= 47763


Mujibur Rahman, Sheikh (1920-1975), president of Bangladesh, was born in Tungipara, Faridpur district, Bengal, on 17 March 1920, the first of six children of Sheikh Lutfur Rahman, a middle-class landowner, and Sahera Begum. He had one brother and four sisters. Sheikh Mujibur Rahman (usually referred to as Sheikh Mujib or simply Mujib) married a cousin, Begam Fazilat-un-Nisa. They had three sons and two daughters. Their eldest child, Sheikh Hasina Wajed, who was born on 28 September 1947, became the leader of the Awami League, with which her father was associated throughout most of his active political career. 
Mujib studied politics and law at the universities of Calcutta and Dacca but did not receive a degree from either. He was heavily involved with student politics and active in the Muslim League in its campaign to gain the partition of India to create a separate homeland for the Muslims. In 1949 he was associated with Huseyn Shaheed Suhrawardy, a former premier of Bengal and future prime minister of Pakistan, in the founding of the Awami (People's) Muslim League. This party soon changed its name to the Awami League as it decided to admit non-Muslims, who had been barred from membership in the Muslim League. When the Awami League allied with the Krishak Sramik (Farmers' and Workers') Party to defeat the Muslim League in the 1954 East Bengal provincial election, Mujib became minister of commerce, a posting that is generally judged to have been unsuccessful. His principal role, however, had been and would continue to be as a party organizer. When Suhrawardy died in 1963 Mujib became 'de facto' leader of the East Pakistan Awami League. 
General Muhammad Ayub Khan had taken control of Pakistan in 1958 and banned political parties. When parties were again legalized in 1962, Mujib and his party demanded greater autonomy for East Pakistan. In January 1966 he startled a meeting of opposition leaders in Lahore, West Pakistan, by putting forward his demands in the shape of the Six Points. These suggested a parliamentary system of government to replace the presidential system of Ayub, and a number of economic measures that would have given East Pakistan almost complete control over its assets and foreign exchange earnings. Mujib was arrested a number of times, most notably in 1968 when he and others were accused of conspiring with India to gain independence for East Pakistan. The trial was never completed and Mujib was freed to join negotiations between Ayub and the opposition. These failed, and the failure culminated in the resignation of Ayub in March 1969. 
Ayub's successor, General Agha Muhammad Yahya Khan, called for elections in December 1970. In East Pakistan Mujib and his Awami League won 160 of the 162 seats, thereby securing a majority of the 300 seats in the national assembly although winning no seats in West Pakistan. The party campaigned on the Six Points, but as negotiations among Mujib, Yahya, and Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, whose People's Party of Pakistan had won a majority of the seats in West Pakistan, failed to establish a common ground on which the national assembly could begin its deliberations on a new constitution, the stance of many of Mujib's party members, and perhaps of Mujib himself, became one of demanding independence rather than autonomy under the umbrella of a united Pakistan. Mujib delivered an important speech on 7 March 1971 during which he came just short of declaring independence, but then and in the next few days declared that Bangladeshis, as they were coming to be known, should no longer pay taxes or obey Pakistani laws. His almost Gandhian approach however failed, and violence broke out. On 25 March the Pakistan army, hastily reinforced from West Pakistan, cracked down on Bangladeshis, including a particularly forceful attack on Dacca University. Mujib was arrested and transported to prison in West Pakistan. Civil war had begun and would not end until 16 December 1971, when the Pakistan army in Bangladesh surrendered to the combined forces of the Indian army, which had entered the war in early December, and the Mukti Bahini, the liberation army of Bangladesh. 
Mujib was to have been tried for treason but the trial was not completed and he was not sentenced. When Bhutto took over the presidency of Pakistan from Yahya Khan in December he declared that he would release Mujib unconditionally, but expressed his hope that the two wings of Pakistan could be reunited. Mujib was released on 7 January 1972 and returned to Dacca (renamed Dhaka) on 10 January after stopping in London and New Delhi. The welcome to the man who would become known as Bangabandhu (Friend of Bengal) was tumultuous. Mujib had been named president of Bangladesh by the government in exile, but chose instead to be prime minister of his proposed parliamentary system of government. A constitution was adopted in 1972 creating a parliamentary form and enshrining the four principles of Mujibbad (Mujibism): secularism, socialism, democracy, and nationalism. 
It turned out, however, that leading a country to independence was less difficult than governing a newly independent state, especially one that had been devastated by the civil war. Mujib relied heavily on socialism, only to see both agricultural and industrial production fail to reach pre-independence levels. Corruption was widespread, notably in the distribution of relief supplies that came from many nations. Despite an overwhelming victory for the Awami League in an election in 1973, in which fraud was widely suspected, opposition to Mujib began to grow rapidly. Near famine conditions in 1974 added to the discontent. He also instituted a special military force, the Rakhi Bahini (defence force), which angered many in the regular army. 
On 25 January 1975 Mujib pushed through an amendment to the constitution which created a presidential system with himself as president with nearly full powers. He followed this on 6 June 1975 with the establishment of a single-party state. The new party combined the names of the two major parties that had contested as part of the United Front in 1954: Bangladesh Krishak Sramik Awami League. Neither of these steps quelled the growing opposition in the country at large and in the military. 
On 15 August 1975 Mujib was assassinated along with his wife, their three sons, and several other members of his family by disgruntled army officers. The assassination of Mujib and his immediate family took place at his residence on Road 32 in the Dhanmondi residential area of Dhaka; he had not moved into the presidential palace. Two daughters who were out of the country survived: Hasina, later, as noted above, the leader of the Awami League and who became prime minister in 1996, and Rehana, who resided in Brunei. Mujib's residence was converted into a museum, but in the destruction accompanying the assassinations most of the papers and other property of Mujib was destroyed. He was buried in Tungipara. 
The memory of Mujib as the liberator of Bangladesh is honoured; his alteration of a democratic system to an authoritarian one is not. This is perhaps best exemplified by the campaign run by the Awami League in the 1991 election, when it campaigned for a return to a parliamentary system as embodied in the unamended 1972 constitution, and avoided reference to the authoritarian actions taken in 1975. The Awami League won the parliamentary election in 1996. 


@@@@@


doc= 47764


Ayub Khan, Mohammad (1907-1974), president of Pakistan, was born on 14 May 1907 at Rehana, in the Hazara district of the North-West Frontier Province of undivided British India. He was the fifth child of Mir Dad Khan, a retired Indian army junior officer. The family were comfortably off, but not wealthy members of the Tarin. They were 'lowland' Pushtuns whose native tongue was Hindko. Ayub was thus culturally isolated during his youth from the Pushtun nationalism of Abdul Ghaffar Khan's Khudai Khidmatgar movement. Ayub's later contribution to Pakistani nation-building was to lie not by the way of Pushtun nationalism, but by co-opting the Pushtun to the project of a centralized state. 
His pious father had earmarked Ayub for religious training rather than a military career. These hopes were ended when the adolescent Ayub slapped the village 'maulvi' (priest) when he chastised him. Ayub seemed far more interested in horse-riding than in studying, but Mir Dad Khan insisted that he be sent to the prestigious Muhammadan Anglo-Oriental College at Aligarh in the United Provinces. Here Ayub met Muslims from across northern India and gradually improved his Urdu pronunciation. He also imbibed the college's modernist approach to Islam which was to be a hallmark of the social and religious policy of his later rule. 
Ayub sailed for England in July 1926 to take up a scholarship at the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, from where he was commissioned in 1928. He saw active service in Burma during the Second World War as the second in command of the 1st Assam regiment. In August 1947 he was appointed as an advisory officer to the ill-fated Punjab boundary force commanded by Major-General Rees. This force lamentably failed to prevent the massacres which accompanied the partition of the Punjab following independence. Ayub was later to date his distrust of politicians and his insistence on a strong army from this experience. These sentiments were reinforced during his posting as general officer commanding in East Pakistan from January 1948 onwards. He experienced the Bengali language riots and the turbulent student movement in Dacca at first hand. On 17 January 1951, shortly after his return to West Pakistan, he became the first Pakistani commander-in-chief, replacing the remaining British general, Douglas Gracey. From October 1954 to August 1955 Ayub also served as minister of defence. This was a period during which power was increasingly slipping from the politicians to the ailing, but authoritarian governor-general, Ghulam Muhammad. Ayub shared with Ghulam Muhammad and, later, with his successor Iskander Mirza, a distrust of the apparently chaotic democratic process. Ayub's main concern was to strengthen the Pakistan army, and to this end he was instrumental in forging closer security ties with the United States. The fear that these ties might be endangered if Bengali politicians from the more populous eastern wing of the country held power in the wake of Pakistan's first projected national elections precipitated the military coup of 8 October 1958. Some five months earlier Mirza and Ayub had separately conveyed their opinion to the US ambassador that 'only a dictatorship would work in Pakistan'. Following the coup President Mirza named Ayub as chief martial law administrator. But the Mirza-Ayub duumvirate lasted only until 27 October, when Mirza was deposed and shunted off to exile in London. Ayub Khan then became president of Pakistan, a post which he was to hold for over a decade. 
Ayub sought to ensure political stability through a system of 'guided democracy'. This was to provide the platform for the modernization of the country. Its key components were land reform, and social reforms such as the Muslim family laws ordinance of 15 July 1961. Ayub also believed that rapid economic growth led by the private sector would assist the modernization process. Political parties were banned until July 1962, and the freedom of many individual politicians to take part in public life was restricted under the accountability process instituted by Ayub. These measures had an especially alienating impact in East Pakistan, where the Bengali elite had always looked to democratic politics rather than to influence in the bureaucracy and army to make its voice heard. The basic democracy scheme was introduced in 1959. This consisted of a five-tier structure of representation. Direct elections were held only at the lowest tier of union councils, and even here up to a third of the voting members could be nominated. The 1962 constitution created a powerful president who was to be elected by the 80,000 'basic democrats'. Although Ayub claimed that the system was to provide a training in citizenship, it was primarily intended to create a loyal support base for his regime. However, when Ayub's fortunes began to decline the basic democracy scheme proved a useless prop. 
Ayub's social and economic reforms had a more lasting impact. The 1959 land reforms, with their high ceilings and generous compensation, were far from radical, but they did encourage the shift in parts of the Punjab from feudalism to capitalist farming, and the Muslim family laws ordinance formed the high-water mark of Islamic modernist influence with its establishment of arbitration in divorce cases and its discouragement of the contraction of polygamous marriages. The ''ulama'' (religious scholars), however, branded these reforms un-Islamic and were henceforth implacably opposed to Ayub's government. 
Ayub Khan attached so much importance to economic advancement that he assumed the chairmanship of the planning commission in 1961. Compared with other developing countries, however, the key role in economic growth was given to the private sector. This reflected the preferences of the United States, which was Pakistan's major aid-giver. Rapid growth was achieved, including a rise in per capita income of 14 per cent during the period of the second five year plan (1960-65). But this growth-orientated strategy of directing resources to an entrepreneurial elite generated increasing social and regional tensions. 
With the restoration of the political parties following the lifting of martial law and the introduction of a new constitution in 1962, discontent was increasingly channelled into opposition to the regime. Ayub was uncomfortable with his new political role (from December 1963) as head of the 'court party' Convention Muslim League. Although he won the tightly controlled 1965 presidential election contest against Fatima Jinnah, the sister of Pakistan's founder, the campaign revealed growing discontent. This was increasingly orchestrated by his former protege and foreign minister, Zulfikar Ali Bhutto. Bhutto had split with Ayub after his alleged betrayal of Pakistan's interests in the 1966 Tashkent treaty. This had been brokered by the Soviet leader Kosygin in the wake of the 1965 Indo-Pakistan War, which had been caused in part by the infiltration of insurgents into the Indian state of Jammu and Kashmir. Ayub's acceptance of a ceasefire on 22 September 1965 had shocked a populace fed on a diet of victory reports by the state-controlled media. 
Popular disturbances from November 1968, sparked by clashes between students and the police, lost Ayub the support of his former army colleagues. By March 1969 he was forced to step down in favour of General Agha Muhammad Yahya Khan. Ailing with heart problems, Ayub lived in quiet retirement in Islamabad, and died there on 20 April 1974. His son, Gohar Ayub, after an army career, rose to prominence in contemporary Pakistan politics. 
Ayub Khan is remembered as a hard-headed administrator whose modernizing impulses foundered because his regime never acquired political legitimacy. Despite his best intentions, the 'golden decade' of development exacerbated class inequalities and Bengali grievances. 


@@@@@


doc= 47765


Aylward, Margaret Louisa (1810-1889), philanthropist and Roman Catholic nun, was born on 23 November 1810 in Thomas Street, Waterford, the fifth child of William Aylward (died 1840), merchant, and his wife, Ellen Mullowney, 'nee' Murphy ('c'.1781- 'c'.1860). There were ten children born of the marriage, and a half-brother, from Ellen Murphy's first marriage, also lived with the family. The family's wealth was based on the provisions trade. 
Aylward was educated at a local Quaker school and at the age of ten was sent as a boarder to the Ursuline convent in Thurles, co. Tipperary. She became fluent in French and a talented artist. When she returned to Waterford in 1830 she became involved in various charities around the city. Her sister Catherine joined the religious congregation, the Sisters of Charity, in Dublin in 1834 and Aylward followed her into that congregation. There she came under the influence of Eliza Bodenham, the mistress of novices, who in 1839 was dismissed from the congregation, an action that caused havoc in the community. Many of the novices subsequently left the community, believing that Bodenham had been harshly treated. Aylward was among those who left, and between 1839 and 1842 she continued to correspond with Bodenham, who had plans to begin a school for young ladies. 
By 1845 Aylward was again considering joining a religious community and by the end of that year had become a novice in the Ursuline convent in Waterford. By January 1846, however, she had left the order. She moved to Dublin in 1848 and became involved in extensive philanthropic work: she worked with the lay charity the Ladies' Association for the Spiritual and Temporal Relief of the Sick Poor, known as the Ladies' Association. She organized a branch of this society in Marlborough Street in Dublin in 1851. The aim of the association was to relieve distress among the poor but also to catechize. Within five years it had 148 lady visitors and several branches around the city, and had formed St Mary's Industrial Institute, which attempted to find needlework for poor women. 
Aylward worked closely with the Catholic clergy and was instrumental in bringing the French Daughters of Charity of St Vincent de Paul to Dublin in 1858 after eight years of negotiation. The visitations undertaken by Aylward and her co-workers in the Ladies' Association had alerted them to the extent of protestant missionary work among the poor in Dublin. She was particularly concerned with the work of the Irish Church Missions, which was an openly proselytizing organization and targeted the children of the very poor by educating and feeding them. Aylward and members of the Ladies' Association often stood outside the schools run by the Irish Church Missions and took down the names of the children attending. This led to acrimonious exchanges between the Ladies' Association and the agents of the Irish Church Missions. In order to counteract protestant proselytism Aylward founded an orphanage, St Brigid's, in 1856, which boarded out children to Catholic families. Aylward oversaw the running of the orphanage in all its details. In 1860 she failed to deliver up a child who had passed through the orphanage after the child's mother insisted on raising her daughter as a protestant, and, having claimed not to know of the child or her whereabouts, was imprisoned for six months on a contempt of court charge. The case was widely reported in the press of the period, and led to the disbandment of the Daughters of St Brigid, a group of six lay women, who formed the core of the Ladies' Association and the committee of the orphanage. Aylward's health was seriously affected by her imprisonment, but undaunted she established her first school in Dublin within five months of her release. With a reluctance perhaps born of her own failure to persevere in noviciates, she formed the religious congregation the Sisters of the Holy Faith, which was canonically approved in 1867. Organizing a religious congregation made her work appear respectable and allowed for permanency, particularly after her prison experience. The name of the new congregation echoed its mission against protestant proselytism. Aylward (who took the name Agatha on the founding of the congregation) remained independent in her actions; she did not, for example, wear a religious habit, and had numerous disagreements with clerics. 
Aylward suffered much ill health in her later years. For the last two years of her life she was bedridden as a consequence of varicose ulcers. She was also affected by erysipelas for a great number of years. She died on 11 October 1889 and was buried in the convent cemetery at Glasnevin, Dublin. 


@@@@@


doc= 47766


Byers, Margaret (1832-1912), educationist and temperance activist, was born in April 1832 at Windsor Hill, Rathfriland, co. Down, the fourth child and only daughter of Andrew Morrow, a noted temperance activist, and his wife, Margaret Herron. The family engaged in farming and also operated a flax mill. On the death of her father in 1840 Margaret Morrow was sent to live with two paternal uncles in Stoke-on-Trent, England. She was later educated at Mrs Treffry's school in Nottingham, where she taught for a year before her marriage. She returned to Ulster to marry the Revd John Byers, a Presbyterian minister, on 24 February 1852. Immediately after the marriage the couple set sail for Shanghai, where John Byers was to act as a missionary. Her brief visit to America 'en route' for China left her deeply impressed by the American high school system of education. Its broad curriculum and the idea that the education of boys and girls should be similar remained central to her educational thinking. After arrival in China in 1853 John Byers became fatally ill and while returning to Ireland, via New York, died at sea. 
Margaret Byers, whose only child, a son, had been born in China, returned to Ulster and took up a teaching post in Cookstown, co. Tyrone, in 1854. On moving to Belfast in 1859 she opened an 'establishment for the boarding and education of young ladies'. This was the Ladies' Collegiate School, founded to educate girls over the age of thirteen years. Byers was influenced by the English girls' high school movement of the 1870s, which placed great stress on public examinations and the study of Latin and mathematics, and attempted to downgrade the importance of 'accomplishments' in girls' education. She built a new school in 1873 and this took the name of Victoria College and School from the jubilee year of 1887. In 1878 she took part in a delegation organized by her close friend Isabella M. S. Tod to extend the benefits of the newly introduced 'Intermediate Education (Ireland) Bill' to girls. According to her son it was Byers who persuaded Lord Chancellor Cairns to allow the inclusion of girls in this bill. The introduction of the 'Intermediate Education Act' (1878) proved to be an important step on the way toward making university education available to women. The act also provided money for prizes, scholarships, and exhibitions for girls on the same terms as boys. She took immediate advantage of the intermediate act and the new public examination system it introduced. In the 1880s and 1890s Victoria College and School became one of the top prizewinners. The curriculum of the school was varied and not all the pupils took examinations. Along with the more academic subjects were taught domestic science, art, and music. Nursery, elementary, secondary, and university education, along with teacher training, were all part of the school's work. In 1884, when the Royal University of Ireland admitted women to matriculation for the first time, Byers opened a separate university department in her school. 
Byers was a member of the Central Association of Irish Schoolmistresses, founded in January 1882 to ensure that concessions won for girls through the intermediate act would not be diluted or taken away. Its campaign, which ran to 1890, was successful. In 1899 Byers was invited to give evidence before a parliamentary commission to report on the intermediate board. She remained a strong supporter of the intermediate system, arguing that it had revolutionized girls' secondary education in Ireland. Byers was also a member of the first senate of Queen's University, Belfast. 
Byers was a strong temperance activist. In 1873 she helped to organize the Belfast Women's Temperance Association (WTA) and Christian Workers' Union, which later affiliated with the British WTA. Part of the work of the Belfast WTA was the founding, in 1876, of the Prison Gate Mission for Women. Byers later became the first president of the Irish Women's Temperance Union, which was founded in 1894. She was opposed to home rule for Ireland and was an active supporter of the Women's Liberal Unionist Association. Byers was also an advocate of the franchise for women and was a committee member of the Ulster branch of the National Society for Women's Suffrage. In 1905 the University of Dublin (Trinity College) conferred an honorary degree of doctor of laws on her; she was the first Ulster woman to be so honoured, in recognition of her outstanding work in education. 
Margaret Byers died at her home, 3 Lower Crescent, Belfast, on 21 February 1912 and was buried in Belfast city cemetery. Her son Sir John William Byers (1853-1920), professor of midwifery at the Queen's University of Belfast, survived her. 


@@@@@


doc= 47767


Jellicoe, Anne William (1823-1880), educationist, born in Mountmellick, Queen's county, was the daughter of William Mullin (1796-1826), a Quaker schoolmaster, and his wife, Margaret Thompson (1801-1840). Little is known about her early life. Orphaned by the time she was seventeen years of age, she married John Jellicoe (died 1862), a flour miller, in 1846 and they moved to Clara, King's county, in 1848. It was here, in the aftermath of the famine, that she began her first attempt to provide some kind of paid work for women. She set up an embroidery school for sewed muslin in 1850 and for lace crochet work in 1853, arranging for the export of the work to Glasgow. Both were gone by 1856, but the experience convinced her that women's work would remain limited and poorly paid until women were better educated. This conviction was reinforced when she moved to Dublin with her husband in 1858. Once again she came up against great poverty, this time in the Liberties area of the city. She helped revive Cole Alley infant school, run by the Quakers for poor children of all creeds, by going into homes and persuading mothers to send their children to this school. 
When the Social Science Association met in Dublin for the first time in 1861, Anne Jellicoe was asked to prepare a paper on the working conditions of women factory workers in Dublin. Out of this came the first society in Ireland for the employment of women, which she founded with the help of Ada Barbara Corlett. Called the Irish Society for Promoting the Employment of Educated Women, after the London society of the same name, it soon became known as the Queen's Institute. Its committee of twenty-eight men from the professional and business life of the city and thirty-eight women, mostly titled ladies of the highest social standing, restricted the institute to working only with middle-class women. The assumption that these 'distressed gentlewomen' were educated and therefore easily trained proved to be a major stumbling-block to the institute's progress. Its first phase, 1861-6, was one of only limited success in the employment of women -- the most successful classes being those directly linked to jobs, such as the sewing-machine class, law writing, and the work of telegraph clerks. It was only during the institute's second stage, 1866-80, when it became involved in girls' secondary and higher education, that it became much more successful. Ironically this occurred only after Anne Jellicoe had left the Queen's Institute in 1864 because of its refusal to start a training course for governesses. 
Widowed in 1862, Anne Jellicoe continued her educational work. She decided to set up a training college for teachers, but was persuaded by Archbishop Chenevix Trench, the newly appointed archbishop of Dublin, to base her new college on the model of Queen's College, London. Alexandra College, Dublin, founded in 1866, became the first institution in Ireland to aspire to a university-type education for women over fifteen years of age. It had close links with the University of Dublin from the beginning, as the fellows and professors of Trinity College both taught and set the written examinations in Alexandra College. The range of subjects covered (theology, history, English language and literature, French, German, Italian, Latin, geography, arithmetic, algebra, geometry, natural science, mental and moral philosophy, music, and drawing) also raised it above the ordinary level of girls' second level schools in Ireland. In the period 1880-1904 it prepared girls for the degrees of the Royal University of Ireland, and was also in the vanguard of the movement to persuade Trinity College, Dublin, to open its degrees to women, which finally occurred in 1904. Anne Jellicoe was lady superintendent of the college, remaining at its head until her death, judiciously guiding it through the early years, when acceptance of the need for women's higher education was by no means universal. 
In April 1869 Anne Jellicoe founded the Governess Association of Ireland, to help 'promote the higher education of ladies as teachers' by founding studentships and exhibitions in schools and colleges. While the association never reached its full potential due to lack of funds, it did further the higher education of women by persuading Trinity College, Dublin, to establish examinations for women, first held in 1870. It also brought Anne Jellicoe into contact with Maria Grey, who came to both Belfast and Dublin in January 1872 to spread her ideas about the high school movement for girls. Both women shared a passionate conviction in the right of women to higher education, but feared that their efforts to gain public sympathy and funds for this cause might be endangered by the emerging women's suffrage movement. As a result Anne Jellicoe remained outside any of the political delegations of the 1870s which lobbied for reform of girls' secondary and higher education, and did not take any active part in the campaign to win the suffrage for women. 
The founding of Alexandra School in 1873 to act as a feeder to the college was another testimony to Anne Jellicoe's vision. She believed that the college could not survive financially without a school, and this was proved true in the 1880s, during a general depression, when the school's profits allowed the college to continue despite heavy losses. Although the Queen's Institute had both a school and college it did not survive beyond 1880, and this seems to have been due to its attempts to cater for every conceivable examination, while striving to retain its technical origins. 
A very shy woman with a keen sense of humour, Anne Jellicoe once remarked that 'action is more my forte than speech-making' (A. Jellicoe, 'A Few Words Addressed to the Students Representative Body, Alexandra College, 5 March 1878', 1878). She ceased to be a member of the Society of Friends at about the time of her husband's death, becoming a member of the Church of Ireland. She loved music and art and was wont, as a friend remarked, on gala days, 'to go about, not in garb of drabs or greys, but with a brilliant red shawl which mostly trailed on the ground after her' ('Alexandra College Jubilee Record, 1866-1916', 1916, 11-12). Anne Jellicoe died at her brother's house, 13 South Road, Birmingham, on 18 October 1880, and was buried on 21 October at the Friends' burial-ground, Rosenallis, Mountmellick. 


@@@@@


doc= 47768


Mallon, John (1839-1915), detective, was born on 10 May 1839 at Meigh, co. Armagh, a small village in the parish of Killeavy. His father, Thomas Mallon, a Catholic tenant farmer, may have belonged to the secret Ribbon Society. Mallon went to the local national school and Newry model school. He was apprenticed to a draper for three years, but in November 1859 went to Dublin, hoping to join the Royal Engineers. He was turned down as insufficiently qualified but a local landlord (Colonel Close) sent him to Sir Henry Lake, chief commissioner of the Dublin Metropolitan Police. 
Mallon joined the Dublin Metropolitan Police on 1 December 1859 as a clerk. His intelligence, discretion, and hard work impressed Superintendent Daniel Ryan, head of the G (detective) division. In 1861 Mallon became confidential clerk to Ryan, who delegated much business to him. Mallon's activities against Fenianism gave him extensive knowledge of the separatist movement, and a personal network of spies and informers. In 1869 he became the youngest inspector in the force. In 1874 Mallon succeeded Ryan as head of G division, having been promoted over several senior officers. 
Mallon's name became widely known in the early 1880s through his activities against the Land League, its allies and directors in the Irish Parliamentary Party, and the separatist secret societies with which some of its supporters were linked: it was he who arrested Charles Stewart Parnell, leader of the Irish Parliamentary Party, in 1881. After the assassination of Lord Frederick Cavendish and under-secretary Burke in Phoenix Park, Dublin, on 6 May 1882, Mallon was prominent in the 'Star Chamber' headed by Judge John Adye Curran, which gathered evidence against the Invincibles (the group accused of the assassinations) and tricked one of their leaders, James Carey, into turning informer. Lord Spencer, the lord lieutenant, reported in August 1882 that the Dublin detective service depended on Mallon: 'were he to die or be killed we have no one worth a row of beans' (K. R. M. Short, 'The Dynamite War', 1979, 88). 
In 1883 Mallon was promoted to chief superintendent, continuing to supervise intelligence operations in Dublin. He claimed his achievement was not fully acknowledged because of his Catholicism, and that some Castle officials suspected his loyalty. This may reflect his necessarily ambiguous relationship with his sources. While Mallon reported regularly on subversive activities, he refused to commit much of his knowledge to paper and kept secrets from his superiors to protect his informants. He gave this reason for refusing to testify at the Parnell commission, though he gathered evidence for 'The Times' in its attempt to link the Irish party with political violence. His relations with Patrick Egan, Land League treasurer and Invincible organizer, were particularly shadowy. Some suspected that Egan had given information to Mallon and that Mallon had enabled him to escape to America. 
Until his promotion in 1883, when he moved into Dublin Castle, Mallon lived openly on the North Circular Road, Dublin, defying plots against his life. He maintained a tone of affable familiarity with his suspects and claimed that for him preventing crimes by warning conspirators was preferable to making arrests after a crime had been committed. Thus he spread fear and distrust among opponents and promoted a legend of his own omniscience. 
Mallon claimed to be a good Catholic and nationalist. He was pious, and perhaps had nationalist sentiments, but used these professions to manipulate potential sources of information and suspects under interrogation. His reports sneer at most of the objects of his surveillance; his recollections exaggerate his own role in the Phoenix Park investigation. This arrogance, encouraged by success in making informers -- a $5 note, he said, bought a great deal of patriotism -- could be dangerous; some claimed Mallon might have prevented the Phoenix Park murders if he had not despised the Invincibles. 
In 1893, with the help of his old adversaries in the Irish Parliamentary Party, Mallon became assistant commissioner of the Dublin Metropolitan Police, the first officer in the force to attain this post from the ranks. He still supervised G division until his retirement (1 January 1902), when he returned to Meigh, bought a small estate, and became a JP for Armagh. He had married, on 8 January 1866, Elizabeth Byrne, daughter of a Dublin greengrocer, John Byrne, and they had three sons and a daughter; his wife predeceased him. Mallon became ill after mass at Meigh on 9 October 1915 and died at the parochial house, Meigh, an hour later. He was buried at Old Killeavy burial-ground. 


@@@@@


doc= 47769


O'Donoghue, Daniel (1833-1889), politician, was the only son of Charles James O'Donoghue (1806-1833) and his wife, Jane Frances O'Connell, who was widowed in the year of her son's birth and subsequently married John McCarthy O'Leary. The O'Donoghues belonged to a congeries of interconnected families of Gaelic lineage (including also O'Connells, McCarthys, and McGillacuddys), who retained possession of lands in co. Kerry and west Cork into the nineteenth century. Daniel's mother was the niece of Daniel O'Connell, the Liberator. The designation of the head of the family by definite article and surname was a translation of Gaelic usage. Young Daniel inherited the title and lands in the first year of his life, and was educated by the Jesuits at Stonyhurst College in Lancashire between 1844 and 1847. On reaching his majority the O'Donoghue (as he was called) was generous, if not downright profligate, in his dealings with tenants and others. On 10 February 1858 he married Marie Sophie (died 1891), daughter and heir of John Ennis of Ballinahowen Court, co. Westmeath. Six sons were born to them between 1859 and 1875. 
The O'Donoghue arrived on the Irish political scene in the mid-1850s as a youthful swashbuckler. He sided with the independent oppositionists such as George Henry Moore MP, against the Catholic-Liberals who followed the policy of co-operation with the whigs. The O'Donoghue was returned as MP for co. Tipperary in March 1857 following an epic by-election contest with a Catholic whig. With Moore out of parliament from 1857, the O'Donoghue's role was enhanced. Over the years that followed he was prominent in almost every public manifestation of popular nationalist sentiment. Behind the scenes he was one of a group of about a dozen notables who from early 1858 discussed among themselves the launching of an organization to renew campaigning for national independence. In December 1860 the O'Donoghue publicly advocated a policy of abstention from Westminster, thus presaging a move to set himself up as leader of a nationalist movement. In May 1861 he travelled to Boulogne to meet John Mitchel and won the latter's endorsement for a programme combining constitutional and non-constitutional campaigns. However, the Fenian leader, James Stephens, would co-operate only on his own terms. From 1861 to 1864 Stephens used his secret organization to obstruct the O'Donoghue's attempts at launching a public movement. The O'Donoghue eventually abandoned his nationalist project in 1865-6, embracing instead the emerging alliance between majority Irish opinion and the Liberals which came to be embodied by Gladstone. In 1865 he transferred to the borough of Tralee -- a less expensive constituency than Tipperary -- and represented it until its abolition in 1885. Although he described himself in the 1880 election as a home-ruler, he in fact remained aloof from both the Buttite and Parnellite movements. He died on 7 October 1889 at his home, Ballinahowen Court, co. Westmeath, after a brief illness. He was buried in the family vault at Muckross Abbey, Killarney, on 10 October 1889. A grandson, Geoffrey O'Donoghue, was prominent among the members of the Connaught Rangers in the Punjab who mutinied in June 1920 in sympathy with Sinn Fein. 


@@@@@


doc= 47770


O'Keeffe, Robert (1814-1881), Roman Catholic priest, was born on 11 April 1814 in Green Street, Callan, co. Kilkenny, the posthumous son of Robert O'Keeffe, grocer and ironmonger, and his wife, Eleanor Fennelly. He was educated at Callan, at St Kieran's College, Kilkenny (1831-4), and at St Patrick's College, Maynooth, co. Kildare (1834-40), where he was admitted to postgraduate studies in the Dunboyne Establishment. In 1840 he was ordained priest and appointed to St Kieran's College, where he was teacher and administrator until 1849. From 1849 to 1860 he served as curate at Ballyragget, co. Kilkenny, and in the latter year became parish priest of Rathdowney, Queen's county, and one of the vicars forane of the diocese. In January 1863 he became parish priest of his native Callan. 
O'Keeffe mobilized opinion and resources in Callan in support of a number of projects including the devotional and charitable Society of St Vincent de Paul, but mainly in the field of education. The Christian Brothers opened their doors to the schoolgoing boys of Callan in September 1868 in substantial new premises provided through the voluntary effort and subscriptions of townspeople under O'Keeffe's direction. Pupils flocked to the brothers, leaving only a handful on the rolls in the boys' national school, of which O'Keeffe was 'ex officio' manager. He was soon busily revitalizing the national school to compete with the Christian Brothers, and it reopened in January 1869 as Callan Academy. It had a board of management, a former model school headmaster as principal, and a wide range of subjects, and was affiliated to the Department of Science and Art, South Kensington. His promotion of the academy brought O'Keeffe into bitter conflict with his curates and the bishop, Edward Walsh. His offence was that by advancing an alternative to the conventional model of governance and curriculum in Irish Catholic schools he had broken ranks on one of the most contentious issues in the contemporary church-state conflict. 
Between 1869 and 1875 O'Keeffe fought a series of civil actions for libel against the curates and Bishop Walsh, and eventually against Cardinal Cullen, who in 1871 had been given plenary papal authority to address the Callan problem. O'Keeffe was successful in most of these cases, but ultimately he was routed. For contravening the canonical prohibition against a cleric taking a fellow cleric before a civil court, he was first suspended and then, in November 1871, removed from office. He refused to yield up his parish church, which was thereupon placed under interdict by Cullen. Already the townspeople were bitterly divided between opponents and supporters of O'Keeffe, and riots and affrays were to be a feature of life in Callan for a number of years. On foot of the bishop's certification that he was no longer parish priest, O'Keeffe was removed by the relevant government bodies from his positions as school manager and workhouse chaplain. He appealed to British opinion and initially received substantial financial support; his case was raised in both houses of parliament during 1872. The title of his book 'Ultramontanism v. Civil and Religious Liberty' (1874) signified an appeal to liberal and protestant sensibilities. By late 1875, however, it was clear that neither government nor parliament, courts, or British liberal opinion would prevent the deployment of canon law in Ireland against one who had freely submitted to it. 
Comprehensively defeated and in dire financial straits, O'Keeffe held out until 1879, when he signed an unqualified apology and was granted a small pension. Thereafter he lived quietly with relatives near Thomastown, co. Kilkenny, until his death on 1 February 1881. His funeral mass in Thomastown was attended by a large number of priests and he was buried in his family's grave in Newtown cemetery, co. Kilkenny. The dramatic events in Callan with which he is identified have inspired two works of fiction: Francis MacManus, 'The Greatest of these' (1943), and Thomas Kilroy, 'The Big Chapel' (1971). 


@@@@@


doc= 47771


Power, Jane Wyse (1858-1941), Irish nationalist and feminist, was born in May 1858 in Main Street, Baltinglass, co. Wicklow, the youngest of the seven children, three daughters and four sons, of Edward O'Toole, provision dealer, and his wife, Mary Norton. She grew up in Dublin, where her father set up shop in 1860 in the St Stephen's Green area, and probably attended a local convent school. She was well educated, articulate, and in appearance tall and dark-haired. Her first political involvement was in the Ladies' Land League (1881-2), of which she became a central executive member. While the male leaders were imprisoned from October 1881 to May 1882 the Ladies' Land League, headed by Anna Parnell, sister of Charles Stewart Parnell, ran the land campaign. Anna became estranged from her brother, owing to different interpretations of land league policy, but O'Toole remained devoted to both. On 5 July 1883 she married John Wyse Power ('c'.1859-1926), journalist and member of the Irish Republican Brotherhood. They had four children, three daughters and a son, none of whom left any children. 
In 1893 Jennie Wyse Power and her husband became active members of the Gaelic League. In 1899 she set up a business, the Irish Farm Produce Company, with restaurant attached, at 21 Henry Street, Dublin. The family lived above the business, which became a nationalist meeting-place. A feminist and suffragist, Wyse Power was a member of the Irishwomen's Suffrage and Local Government Association, founded in 1876, and later of the Irish Women's Franchise League, founded in 1908. When eligibility for women as poor-law guardians was achieved in 1896, she was elected as a guardian in Dublin South and served from 1903 to 1911. In 1900 she was a founding member of Inghinidhe na hEireann (Daughters of Ireland), founded to facilitate women's active participation in the male-dominated nationalist movement. Its first president was Maud Gonne. In 1905 she became a founder and executive member of the National Council, from 1908 called Sinn Fein ('we ourselves'), who were committed to Irish self-reliance and self-government. She took a middle position in debate among feminist-nationalist women as to which took priority. She believed that the demand to include women's suffrage should not be pushed before the 'Home Rule Bill' was passed, in case it held up the bill's passage, but once passed she was ready to campaign for its inclusion. 
Wyse Power became a member, and later president, of Cumann na mBan (League of Women), established in 1914 as an auxiliary to the Irish Volunteers. She was among the Cumann members who shared the belief that the First World War was an opportunity for Irish nationalism. The 1916 proclamation was signed at her house, and she and her family actively supported the 1916 rising. After that date she became an executive member of the new Sinn Fein, now an umbrella group for nationalists committed to separation from England. When it won the 1918 election and set up its own parliament (Dail Eireann) and government, she acted as treasurer of the party and as a judge in the Sinn Fein courts. She was elected to Dublin corporation in 1920. 
One of a minority in Cumann na mBan who accepted the Anglo-Irish treaty of 1921 as a stage towards complete independence and a united Ireland, she resigned and joined the pro-treaty Cumann na nGaedheal Party and became a member of the Seanad (senate) of the Irish Free State. Disillusioned with her party when the boundary commission of 1924 failed to make any change in the partition of Ireland, she resigned in 1925 to become an independent. When Eamonn De Valera's party, Fianna Fail, came into government in 1932 she liked its policies of economic self-sufficiency and of dismantling aspects of the treaty. She joined it in 1936, and became a Fianna Fail senator. She remained a consistent supporter of women's rights, opposing policies of both Cumann na nGaedheal and Fianna Fail governments which restricted women's full citizenship and employment opportunities. When Fianna Fail abolished the Seanad in 1936 her public political life ended. 
John Wyse Power had died in 1926, and in 1929 Jennie sold her business and lived with her daughter Nancy at 15 Earlsfort Terrace, Dublin. She died in Dublin on 5 January 1941 and was buried in Glasnevin cemetery beside her husband and her daughter Maura. 


@@@@@


doc= 47772


Tod, Isabella Maria Susan (1836-1896), campaigner for women's rights, was born on 18 May 1836 in Edinburgh. Her father, James Banks Tod, was a Scottish merchant, and her mother, Maria Isabella Waddell, was a native of co. Monaghan. Tod was always proud of her Scottish blood and frequently alluded to the fact that one of her ancestors signed the copy of the solemn league and covenant at Holywood, co. Down, in 1646. Little else is known of her family background or circumstances, though she had at least one brother, Henry, a merchant who lived in London. She was educated at home, apparently by her mother, who had a profound influence on her life. By the 1860s she was living in Belfast with her mother, who remained with her until her death in 1877. For a period Tod earned her living by writing leaders for the Belfast newspaper the 'Northern Whig'. 
Tod first entered public life in 1867, when her paper 'On advanced education for girls of the upper and middle classes' was read for her at a meeting of the National Association for the Promotion of Social Science. The immediate result of this meeting was Tod's organization of a committee to promote alterations in the married women's property laws. In 1867 she was instrumental in establishing in Belfast the Ladies' Institute, whose original function was to provide classes for young women interested in improving their education and hence their employment prospects. The institute organized lectures on such subjects as modern languages, history, and astronomy, and it also petitioned the Queen's College, Belfast, eventually successfully, to allow women to take their examinations. Tod played a leading role in ensuring the inclusion of girls in the 'Intermediate Education Act' (1878), which proved an important step toward making university education available to women. She was also instrumental in setting up the Ulster Schoolmistresses' Association to look after the interests of girls' education. 
The difficulties involved in securing educational rights for women led Tod to believe that the acquisition of the franchise was the clearest way to secure change for women in society. In 1871 she organized the first suffrage society in the country, the North of Ireland Women's Suffrage Committee. Her speeches were widely reported in the suffrage journals and daily newspapers of both Ireland and England. She shared platforms with, and was a friend of, many of the leading English suffragists, such as Helen Blackburn, Josephine Butler, and Lydia Becker. She campaigned to ensure that women were granted the municipal franchise and was rewarded for her efforts by the granting of this franchise to Belfast women in 1887, eleven years before women in other Irish towns were bestowed with the same privilege. 
From the beginning of her career Tod was a strong temperance advocate, and in 1874, with Margaret Byers, she formed the Belfast Women's Temperance Association. She established a Belfast branch of the Ladies National Association (LNA) to campaign for the repeal of the 'Contagious Diseases Acts' and served on the executive committee of the London-based LNA until 1889. 1886 saw the introduction of Gladstone's first 'Home Rule Bill' for Ireland. The bill was seen by Tod as the instrument that would destroy all her work. In later years she was to write: 'I can scarcely write of the sickening shock of the Home Rule proposals of 1886. Knowing Ireland thoroughly, I knew that all the social work in which I had taken so prominent a part for twenty years was in danger, and that most of it could not exist for a day under a petty legislature of the character which would be inevitable.... I shrank in horror from the revival of the religious and racial difference which was certain to ensue. ('The Queen')' As always, Tod threw herself into a campaign to ensure that the bill would not pass. The resulting crusade, which found her canvassing in Devon, Cornwall, and London, not only lost her a number of friends in the suffrage movement but also seriously damaged her health. The last ten years of her life were devoted primarily to ensuring that home rule would not become a reality. 
Isabella Tod died at her home at 71 Botanic Avenue, Belfast, on 8 December 1896. The cause of her death was given as pulmonary illness, an illness, it was claimed, that was brought on and exacerbated by the stress of her campaigns against home rule. She was buried in Balmoral cemetery, Belfast. 


@@@@@


doc= 47773


Carr, Ralph (1711-1806), merchant and banker, was born on 22 September 1711, the eldest son of John Carr (1667-1739), of Whickham and Newcastle upon Tyne, and his wife, Sarah (1679-1733), daughter of William Wynne of Newcastle. Carr was apprenticed to a Newcastle merchant at the age of seventeen, serving out the last year of his time with one of his master's correspondents in Amsterdam, an experience which proved advantageous when he returned to Newcastle in 1738 to set up in business on his own account. He soon built up an extensive network of correspondents in coastal ports throughout Europe, dealing principally in grain, but gradually extending his interests to a wide range of other goods, from grindstones to groceries, and usually trading on his own behalf, but sometimes acting as shipping agent for other merchants. Trading networks of this kind depended on a complicated subsidiary trade in bills of exchange, and within a few years he had become convinced that opening a bank in Newcastle to handle this business would yield a handsome profit, a conviction that was strengthened during the 1745 rebellion when he became involved in transmitting funds as well as provisions to the army in Scotland. However, Carr was a deeply cautious man, unwilling to take even moderate risks, an attitude that prevented him from developing his potentially lucrative contacts with merchants in Boston and New York. The banking project therefore hung fire until 1755, when he entered into a partnership with three other Newcastle merchants, each of whom contributed $500 to the initial capital of the enterprise that became known as the Old Bank. The venture, which Carr described as his 'hobby horse', yielded its founder a handsome profit, not least because he channelled his own business through the bank free of charge. In 1786 he used some of the proceeds to purchase an estate at Hedgeley in Northumberland and shortly afterwards retired from active trade. 
Like his father before him, Carr had prudently delayed marriage until he was well established in the world, and it was not until 29 November 1758 that he married Isabella (1727-1797), the daughter of Henry Byne, vicar of Ponteland, Northumberland. They had six children. He died on 7 May 1806 and was buried at Ponteland. He was succeeded by his eldest son, John Carr (1764-1817), who in 1802 had married the granddaughter and eventual heiress of William Cotesworth (c.1668-1726) of Gateshead. 


@@@@@


doc= 47774


Cockerell, Sir Charles, first baronet (1755-1837), banker, was born at Bishops Hull, Somerset, on 18 February 1755, the fifth son of John Cockerell (1714-1767), of Welsh descent, with interests in the West Indies, and of his wife, Frances (died 1769), 'nee' Jackson, a descendant of Samuel Pepys, the diarist. Charles had four sisters; one of his brothers was the architect Samuel Pepys Cockerell (1753-1827). After two years at Winchester College and a course of accounts and bookkeeping at a school in Bromley by Bow, Middlesex, in 1776 he followed his eldest brother, John (died 1798), who had been commissioned into the East India Company's army, to Bengal as a writer in the company's civil service. With an interval of leave, Cockerell was to remain in India until 1801. 
Nearly all Charles Cockerell's Indian service was spent in Calcutta, where his most important appointment was as the company's postmaster-general from 1784 until 1792. Thereafter he remained a servant of the company, but without official employment, while he devoted his time to transacting his own private business as a partner in what was called a 'house of agency'. Houses of agency were a relatively new development in British India. They handled the concerns of Europeans in India, acting as their agents for their business dealings, arranging remittances to Britain, and financing shipping, plantations, and other private enterprises. 
In 1784 Cockerell became a partner in the agency house established by William Paxton (1744-1824). When Paxton went to London to extend their business there, Cockerell managed the Calcutta house, which as Paxton and Cockerell, later Paxton, Cockerell, and Trail, became the most successful agency concern of its time. Although one of his contemporaries doubted whether Cockerell had 'a heart that could raise a thermometer above the freezing point' (J. P. Wade to F. Fowke, 1 Feb 1789, BL OIOC, MS Eur. E 8, fols. 169-70), he seems to have been a popular as well as a conspicuous figure in Calcutta society. His brief first marriage, on 11 March 1789, was to Maria Tryphena Blunt (died 1789), daughter of Sir Charles William Blunt, third baronet (1731-1802), of the East India Company's service. She died that October. Their marriage was commemorated by an opulent painting of the couple at a harpsichord by Francesco Renaldi (1755- 'c.'1799). Cockerell was churchwarden of the new St John's Church in Calcutta. 
In 1801 Cockerell moved to Britain. He became a partner in the London house of Paxton, Cockerell, and Trail (later Cockerell and Trail, and Cockerell & Co.), first in the Strand, then in Pall Mall and finally at Austin Friars in the City. The firm continued to transact Indian agency business, as well as banking for British clients. Cockerell's interests spread very widely beyond the bank. He became a director of the Globe Insurance Company, the Arkendale and Derwent Mining Company, and the Gas, Light, and Coke Company. No doubt a wealthy man when he left India, his fortune at his death was assessed at $140,000. Cockerell entered parliament as MP for Tregony in Cornwall in 1802 and, with an interval of two years, was to remain an MP, representing a number of constituencies, for the rest of his life. He identified himself politically with the former governor-general, Richard, Marquess Wellesley, to whom he appears to have advanced large sums of money. Through Wellesley's influence Cockerell was made a baronet in 1809. 
Cockerell maintained a large London house at Hyde Park Corner, but he also set himself up as a landowner in Gloucestershire. He bought Sezincote from the estate of his late brother John and instructed his architect brother, Samuel Pepys Cockerell, to convert it to a house in the Mughal taste. Samuel was aided by Humphry Repton and the artist Thomas Daniell, who had travelled in India, painted many buildings there, and could therefore check the designs for authenticity. Work was begun in 1806 or 1807 and continued into the 1820s: a pastiche of the Taj Mahal, and 'Hindoo' motifs were included in the house and its outbuildings. The result was probably the most ambitious attempt up to that time to reproduce Indian architecture in Britain. 
On 13 February 1808 Cockerell married for the second time. His new wife, with whom he had a son and two daughters, was the Hon. Harriet Rushout (died 1851), second daughter of John Rushout, first Baron Northwick (1738-1800). Through his brother-in-law's family interest Cockerell represented the borough of Evesham from 1819 until his death. Cockerell lived in London and at Sezincote in some state. He entertained lavishly. Warren Hastings, his near neighbour, was a frequent guest. The Indian traveller Mirza Abu Talib, who was once entertained by Cockerell with 700 other diners, paid tribute to his generosity: 'Had he been my brother, he could not have behaved with more kindness' (Head, 31). From 1835 to 1837 Cockerell was one of the commissioners of the Board of Control for India. He died at Sezincote on 6 January 1837, just before his eighty-second birthday. His title passed to his son, Charles Rushout Cockerell (1809-1869), who changed his name to Rushout in 1849. 


@@@@@


doc= 47775


Collet, Sir Mark Wilks, first baronet (1816-1905), merchant and banker, was born at Highbury Grove, Highbury, Middlesex, the second of three sons of James Collet, a native of the Isle of Man, and his wife, Wendelina Elizabeth van Brienen, of Dutch origin. His father died when Mark was young, and his mother initially moved to Douglas, Isle of Man, and subsequently to Archangel, Russia, where her family were merchants. Mark was educated in Archangel, where he learned both Russian and French; his first language, which he used with his mother, was German. In 1832 Wendelina returned to London, where she ran a boarding-house, and Mark became a clerk in Liverpool with Henry Patry & Co., a firm associated with the leading London merchant house of Thomas Wilson & Co. Collet was henceforth to devote his career to trade with the United States. 
Collet claimed in 1833 that his main recreation was listening to sermons, and he was a deeply religious man throughout his life, who believed that subordination to an all-powerful and all-wise God gave strength to bear any problems. Certainly, he had his share of family responsibilities, for he supported both his mother and his two feckless and incompetent brothers. The consolations of religion also helped him in his own difficulties, for Thomas Wilson & Co. failed in the crash of 1837, when a number of merchant houses specializing in the Anglo-American trade failed. The business was taken over by Purton, Parker & Co., with whom Collet continued as a clerk, making two trips to the United States in 1840-42. The firm was not successful, and was dissolved in 1842. Although Collet would have preferred to remain with a merchant house, he reluctantly accepted a position as sub-manager of the Bank of Liverpool, at a salary of $500. He returned to his mercantile career in 1846 as a partner of J. W. Cater and Thomas Arnott, whose partnership in the existing Liverpool merchant house of J. W. Cater & Co. was dissolved and reconstituted as J. W. Cater, Collet & Co. in London and J. W. Cater & Co. in Liverpool. The capital of $30,000 was supplied by Cater, who took a minimal role in the business, drawing interest and a small share of the profits. Arnott ran the business in Liverpool in return for a quarter of the profits and $750 a year; Collet was responsible for the business in London, for which he received a third of the profits and a salary of $1000 a year. Collet followed the pattern of many able men without capital, providing the expertise which allowed firms to continue despite the absence of capable family members in the next generation. The initial term of partnership was seven years, with the right to give notice after three or five years, an option which Collet used in 1851 when he was approached by another, more prestigious, American merchant house which urgently needed a new partner: Brown, Shipley & Co. 
The business of Brown Shipley had been developed by the family of Alexander Brown (1764-1834), a Belfast linen merchant, who had emigrated to Baltimore in 1800, where he became a successful general merchant. One son, John, was sent to Philadelphia in 1818 to establish John A. Brown; another son, James, went to New York in 1825 to form Brown Brothers; and Alexander Brown & Sons continued in Baltimore. The eldest son, William (1784-1864), left for Liverpool in 1808, where he became a major merchant, above all in raw cotton, which was ordered from his father's agents in the American south. In 1825 William was joined by Joseph Shipley, an American who was agent in Liverpool for a Philadelphian merchant. He was crucial to the survival of the firm in the crisis of 1837, and the name of the firm was subsequently changed to Brown Shipley when he became a partner in Liverpool and the firms in the United States. 
Increasingly, the focus of the business shifted from trade to finance, and away from Baltimore and Philadelphia to Brown Brothers in New York, and William devoted more time to politics. Shipley was responsible for most of the business, with the assistance of F. A. Hamilton, who had been the Browns' agent in New Orleans before he was offered a partnership in 1845. When Shipley retired and returned to America in 1850 it was crucial to recruit a new junior partner, and the choice fell on Collet, whose expertise in American trade finance was invaluable. With some hesitation, he accepted the offer of 26,000 shares to become a partner. 
Collet was, like other major figures in the City of London, a meritocrat whose technical skills and business competence were crucial to the success of a family firm. Such men were sometimes kept in salaried positions and denied partnerships; in other cases, they became junior partners with a share in the profits, who were accorded less status. The relationship between family and non-family members was prone to tensions, and a careful negotiation of the competing dictates of a competitive market and dynastic ambitions was crucial for continued success. In the case of Collet and the Brown family, the relationship was threatened on two occasions in the 1860s, when Collet complained that he was exploited and slighted by the family. 
William Brown died in 1864, and left his shares to his brother James in New York, who failed to increase the holdings of Collet and Hamilton, much to their annoyance. It was, Collet informed Hamilton, unreasonable that James 'should appropriate to his family the shares which have been held out to the Juniors for years as their future reward' (Collet to Hamilton, 15 Aug 1865, Collet MS U1287, C79/5). When Collet was offered additional shares, he angrily complained that they were inadequate recompense for his work, and was even more outraged by the demand that he cede power to James to dispose of shares and appoint his successors as senior partners by will. Collet was horrified that his and Hamilton's judgement should be ignored and their property controlled by an unknown nominee. 'If Mr Brown suspects you or me of any design in the event of his death to oust his family and to appropriate to ourselves the goodwill and style of the house, he grievously misjudges the men who have placed a confidence in him, which should have called forth some response of a similar feeling towards ourselves' (Collet to Hamilton, 8 April 1865, ibid.). 
Brown responded by simply handing all the shares to his son. James Brown, it seemed to the aggrieved junior partners, 'wishes to legislate for eternity' with the result that he was threatening the survival of the firm through his 'foolish attempt to obtain advantages to the detriment of others in which he is not likely to succeed' (Hamilton to Collet, 7 and 10 April 1865, Collet MS U1287, C79/6). The tension resurfaced in 1868, when two issues collided. Collet was weary of his 'severe and incessant labour' and wished for some relief through the appointment of another partner, provided that it did not mean the renewal of a 'claim to an absolute hereditary proprietorship in the House' and the appointment of a senior partner over his head (Collet to Hamilton, 3 and 7 March 1868, ibid., C79/9). At the same time, James Brown was contemplating retirement and the withdrawal of his capital, or at most leaving it in the firm without bearing risks. Collet feared that the firm would decline to second-class status, and that the junior partners would be left to bear the risks and the work. 'If the family wish to maintain the House', he pointed out to Hamilton, 'they must assume the risks incident to doing so; certainly, it would not be fair nor just to ourselves if we tied ourselves to stay and keep our property in and liable, while they seriously reduced theirs' (Collet to Hamilton, 19 March 1868, ibid.). Although the immediate crisis passed, the problems of the 1860s exposed in a stark way the difficulties of reconciling the hereditary principle with the maintenance of a successful firm. The attempt to entrench family control alienated the junior partners, who were often the more competent members of the firm; the withdrawal of capital left non-family members to carry risks to an unacceptable extent. 
Despite the slight to Collet's self-esteem, he became a leading figure in the establishment of the City after the main operation of Brown Shipley moved from Liverpool to London in 1863. He became a director of the Bank of England in 1866, and served until his death; he was governor in 1887-9 and was created baronet in 1888. He amassed a fortune of $248,500 by the end of 1876, with his house at 2 Sussex Square, London, and personal investments valued at $88,500; the balance was presumably in the firm. In 1878 he bought a small estate of 399 acres, St Clere, Kemsing, in Kent, for $50,000, and subsequently invested in a wide portfolio of English and American shares. Meanwhile, the firm was trapped in conservative ways, largely dependent on supplying credit to customers of Brown Brothers in New York, and the aged Collet was not the man to revive the firm. He pointed out, rather defensively, to Brown Brothers in 1899 that even J. P. Morgan had difficulties in finding a suitable partner in London and it was scarcely surprising that he had no more success (Kynaston, 190-91). 
Eventually, the answer was found through dynastic ambitions which the Browns no doubt appreciated. On 23 July 1850 Collet had married, in Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk, Susanna Gertrude, the daughter of James Eyre, a Church of England priest. She died in 1851, leaving a daughter, Linda Susan Penelope, who married in 1870 Frederick William Norman, the son of Collet's fellow director of the Bank of England, Geoffrey Warde Norman. Frederick Norman was a director of Martin's Bank, and their son, Montagu Collet Norman (Collet's grandson), spent some time at Martin's before joining Brown Shipley in 1894. He gained experience in the United States before he became a partner in 1900. Only in 1903, after service in the South African War, did he take an active role in the firm. Montagu Norman proved to be Collet's successor in business; Collet's heir to the landed estate was his son by his second marriage, on 8 May 1862, to Antonia Frederica, the daughter of Joseph Edlmann, merchant, of Chislehurst in Kent. Their only child, Mark Edlmann Collet, was born in 1864, but he took no interest in the City, and settled in the south of France with his invalid wife before moving to the Isle of Man. Collet died on 25 April 1905 at his London house, 2 Sussex Square, of bronchial pneumonia. 


@@@@@


doc= 47776


Cotton, Sir William James Richmond (1822-1902), businessman and politician, was born at Stratford-le-Bow, London, on 13 November 1822, the eldest son of William Cotton. He received a private school education before joining a solicitor's office and then becoming a leading partner in Culverwell, Brook & Co., leather, hide, and tallow brokers. In 1846 he married Caroline, the daughter of Charles Pottinger of Sunderland; they had twelve children. Cotton published in 1850 a poem called 'Imagination' dedicated to Charles Dickens. He also wrote 'Smash: a Sketch of the Times, Past, Present and to Come' (1860) referring to railway speculations at a time of commercial panic. Among his other interests he owned extensive iron ore mines in Norway, was director of the Liverpool and London and Globe Fire and Life offices, and served as chairman of the Staines and West Drayton Railway Company. 
Armed with a fine business reputation, Cotton began his civic career in 1866 when he was elected alderman for Lime Street ward in the City of London. He served as alderman until 1892, the last four years in the ward of Bridge Without. He had also gained recognition as the deputy chairman and joint treasurer of the Lancashire and Cheshire Operative Relief Fund in 1861. Building on these foundations, he was elected sheriff of London and Middlesex in 1868-9, and was appointed magistrate for London and Hertfordshire, commissioner of lieutenancy for London, chairman of the City police committee, and commissioner of Inland Revenue for Hertfordshire. He was elected to the London school board in 1870, and served in the City area until 1879. He was also made chairman of the board of governors of the Mary Datchelor schools, member of the Thames Conservancy Board, governor of Christ's, St Bartholomew's, St Thomas's, Bridewell, and Bethlem hospitals, and a governor of Queen Anne's Bounty. In 1892 he was appointed chamberlain. 
Cotton was lord mayor of London in 1875-6, and hosted a banquet to celebrate the homecoming of the prince of Wales from India at a reported cost of $50,000. This was one of the few remarkable events in an unremarkable year, although Cotton oversaw a fund for eastern war victims and a mass meeting held on the subject of the 'Bulgarian atrocities'. Closer to home, funds were raised for the sufferers of the floods of the Thames and the fens. 
Above all, Cotton was an advocate for the City guilds. He was a member of the courts of the Furriers', Fanmakers', and Loriners' companies, master of the Haberdashers' and Saddlers' companies in his mayoral year, and master of the Turners' Company (1891-3). When the livery companies were under attack from Liberal opponents, Cotton became chairman of the City Guilds Defence Association and championed their cause in parliament. As a result he was a member of the 1884 royal commission appointed to inquire into the livery companies of the City of London, and both co-author of the dissenting minority report and sole author of an additional protest ('Commissioners... livery companies', 39.57-76). One of his main objections concerned the passages relating to technical education, a subject in which he took a more voluntarist stance. 
It is not surprising, then, that as an unsuccessful Conservative candidate for Southwark in December 1868, Cotton campaigned on 'constitutional principles', opposing sitting members on the Irish question. Issuing 'a very liberal address', he won 2495 votes, despite putting his name forward only forty-eight hours before the poll. He was member of parliament for the City of London from 1874 (the first Conservative alderman to be elected for forty-four years) until standing down after the election of 1885. However, he increased his vote in the interim, and remained the most popular candidate. As a critic of Disraeli over his Russian policy, he was denied the customary baronetcy at the close of his year as lord mayor, the honour being conferred only on 5 July 1892. Cotton had a reputation for 'manly independence', a term that, placed alongside his business and civic achievements, may also serve as his epitaph. In spite of suffering from gout for twenty-five years, he served the public continuously until his death, following a relatively short illness, at his home, 9 Bramham Gardens, Kensington, London, on 4 June 1902. 


@@@@@


doc= 47778


Dicksee, Lawrence Robert (1864-1932), accountant and writer on accounting, was born on 1 May 1864 at 27 Howland Street, London, the youngest of five children of John Robert Dicksee (1817-1905), artist, and his wife, Mary Ann, 'nee' Barnard. He grew up in a family with strong artistic associations, and was the cousin of the painter Francis Bernard Dicksee (1853-1928). Dicksee was educated at the City of London School ('c'.1867-1881), where his father taught between 1852 and 1897, holding the position of head drawing-master. He was articled in 1881 to the chartered accountant George Norton Read, whose office was at 31 Queen Victoria Street, in the City of London. This was just one year after the formation of the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales, and in November 1886 Dicksee was one of the earliest to qualify for membership by examination. He then set up in practice in London, three years later joining Peter Price in Cardiff to form Price and Dicksee. Dicksee returned to London in 1894 as partner (from 1898 senior partner) in Sellars, Dicksee & Co. in the City of London. Dicksee married in 1894 Nora Beatrice, daughter of Rowland Plumbe FRIBA. The couple lived at a number of addresses in north London before settling at Hampstead, about 1908. They had one son who was a casualty of the 1914-18 war. 
It has been said that fraud was endemic in Victorian business, and it is widely believed that the young accountancy profession did much to establish its reputation by the ability of accountants to discover and disentangle the financial implications of fraudulent schemes. Dicksee, together with Peter Price's son, discovered one such fraud at the Cardiff Building Society in 1890, $8500 (at that time a substantial sum) having been stolen by the society's bookkeeper. Dicksee also demonstrated an early interest in education. He took evening classes at the University of South Wales and Monmouthshire, and in 1892 published 'Auditing: a Practical Manual for Auditors'. Dicksee's 'Auditing' was a major landmark in the development of an accounting literature. It was the second major textbook on auditing (the first was F. W. Pixley's 'Auditors, their Duties and Responsibilities', 1881), but contained a much broader coverage of accounting matters than did its predecessor. It was phenomenally influential, being read both by students preparing for professional examinations and by practising accountants. It ran to fourteen British editions during Dicksee's lifetime. The impact of Dicksee's 'Auditing' was not merely local: Robert H. Montgomery, founder of the firm which became the American segment of Coopers and Lybrand, published, with permission, an American version of Dicksee's 'Auditing' in 1905. Indeed, it has been said that Montgomery's adaptation of Dicksee's text to American needs marked the beginning of an American literature in accounting. 
Dicksee's experience with the Cardiff Building Society may well have been responsible for the famous text's emphasis (possibly overemphasis) on the detection of error and fraud as audit objectives. The weight given to these matters by Dicksee has been interpreted as evidence of a late nineteenth-century preoccupation with error and fraud detection to the exclusion of the informational content of published accounts. There is growing evidence to suggest that the nineteenth-century audit was rather more broadly based, and it is possible that Dicksee's influential text may have contributed to a narrowing in the scope of the audit in the years that followed. 
A second major textbook, entitled 'Advanced Accounting', appeared in 1903, and many other books and articles by Dicksee were published. Not all his writing carried his name and he is thought to have been responsible for a great deal of editorial comment in 'The Accountant' -- the highly influential and authoritative journal first published in 1874. The conclusion that Dicksee 'provided a literature for accounting single-handed' (Kitchen and Parker, 218) is ambitious but not without foundation. 
Dicksee's two major texts were principally directed towards the identification of best practice and encouraging its more widespread adoption. Concerns with the need for conservatism and the strict application of the realization principle (the recognition of profit at the time a sale takes place) feature prominently in his writings. Dicksee's later work grew increasingly critical of contemporary practice. The period after the First World War was marked by the growing use of secret reserves, a device for smoothing reported profits and dividend payments, based on the conviction that a significant upturn in profits gives rise to demands for larger dividends and disappointment on the part of the capital market and shareholders generally when the rate must be cut. Secret reserves, viewed favourably by many of the profession's leaders until the revelations in the case of 'R. v. Lord Kyslant and another' in 1931, were the subject of swingeing criticism by Dicksee in a public lecture delivered at the London School of Economics (LSE) on 7 October 1920, as was the practice of using omnibus headings to encapsulate most of the assets belonging to a company in a single financial total. 
The development of accounting as an academic discipline was slower in Britain than in the USA and Europe. Dicksee's appointment to the first British chair of accounting within the faculty of commerce at the University of Birmingham in 1902 was an early encouraging development, however. He combined this part-time appointment with a lectureship at the LSE. He was awarded an honorary MCom by Birmingham in 1903, but resigned his appointment there three years later in order to give more time to his work at the LSE, where he became professor of accounting in business organization in 1914, reflecting the commercial orientation of his commitments. In 1919 he was appointed Sir Ernest Cassel professor of accounting when the London commerce degree was introduced, and served as dean of the faculty of economics at the University of London for the 1925-6 session, at the end of which he retired. Dicksee died of cancer at his home, Hazeboro Lodge, 153 Haverstock Hill, Belsize Park, London, on 14 February 1932. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 47783


Heath, John Benjamin (1790-1879), merchant and banker, was born on 6 June 1790 at Genoa, Italy, the eldest son in a family of two sons and three daughters of John Heath (1749-1830), a merchant, and his wife, Jane Louise Pasteur (1736-1834). His father came from a nonconformist family which during the 1720s had been involved in the west-country wool trade. This Exeter family had religious and filial ties with continental Europe, and in 1764 John Heath was apprenticed to Doxat et Aubert of Genoa. In 1774 he became a partner in Robert Aubert et Cie of Geneva -- his mother, Rose Mary Michelet, having connections with this city's Huguenot community. Charles Heath followed his brother John, and in 1781 went to Genoa, where he was joined in a business partnership by Lyle Gibbs of Antony Gibbs & Sons. In 1798 John Heath established the London house of Heath & Co. In consequence of all these trading and social links, Heath & Co. became one of the Anglo-European mercantile houses responsible for the transmission of funds from England to Austria during the revolutionary and Napoleonic wars. 
John Benjamin Heath attended Harrow School (1798-1806) and for a time was fag to Lord Byron. He then entered his father's business, and in 1816 was appointed consul-general for the kingdom of Sardinia, a reflection of the firm's commercial ties with northern Italy. During the first half of the nineteenth century Heath & Co. became an established part of the City. This can be traced through the positions held by John Benjamin Heath, who was chairman of both the London Life Association and the Society of Merchants Trading to the Continent; most importantly, he was a director of the Bank of England for fifty years. A member of the bank's internal committee of 1838 which considered the restructuring of its business, he served as deputy governor between 1842 and 1845. No doubt because of his deep involvement in the preparation and first consequences of the 1844 'Bank Charter Act', in 1845 Heath was appointed governor of the bank in succession to William Cotton. 
A man of wide-ranging interests, Heath was master of the Grocers' Company in the City of London in 1829, and in the same year he published 'Some Account of the Company of Grocers'. An accomplished musician and linguist, he was active in literary and archaeological circles. He was a member of the Roxburghe Club and also of the Dilettante Society. 
In 1811 Heath married Sophia (1793-1863), the daughter of Robert Bland MD, of London. The couple had a large family, of whom four sons and three daughters survived their parents. Heath was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries in 1832 and a fellow of the Royal Society in 1843. A barony in the kingdom of Italy was bestowed on him in 1867 (and later inherited by his eldest son). His wife predeceased him in 1863, and was buried in a vault at Highgate cemetery. He was laid to rest alongside her following his own death, on 16 January 1879 at 66 Russell Square, London. 
Heath's eldest son, 
Robert Amadeus Heath entered the family firm in 1837, where he was the junior partner until his father's death in 1879. During the mid-nineteenth century Heath & Co. remained important in Anglo-Italian trade, with Robert appointed vice-consul of Sardinia in 1844. The firm developed into a merchant bank through Heath's interest in Russian state finance and then Brazilian affairs, marked by his becoming chairman of the Sao Paulo Railway in 1861, three years after its establishment. Heath & Co. was located at 31 Old Jewry in the City, and it was there in May 1863 that the informal and private meetings were held that led to the creation of the International Financial Society (IFS), one of the first English corporate investment banks. 
The first initiative came from a French merchant bank, Credit Mobilier; however, a group of leading bankers and financiers from the City of London decided to establish their own independent concern. This was chaired by Heath, and involved the participation of a number of City firms, including Robert Benson & Co., Samuel Dobree & Sons, Fruhling and Goschen, Frederick Huth & Co., George Peabody & Co., Stern Brothers, and Heath & Co. An interest in art led Heath, together with Sir William Drake, a City solicitor, and Sir Austen Henry Layard, the archaeologist who, with Drake, had been responsible for the creation of the Ottoman Bank in 1856, to resuscitate the Venetian glass trade. This eventually resulted in the formation of the Venice and Murano Glass and Mosaic Company to safeguard future production. 
Most of Heath's business life from 1863 was devoted to the affairs of the IFS, and from 1865 he became the linchpin of its permanent management committee. During 1863 he had overseen the society's reconstitution and reflotation of the Hudson's Bay Company. He conducted the society's ill-fated involvements in the Italian Land Company and the Italian Building Society, property companies which were to rebuild Turin as Italy's capital, and, similarly, he worked with the merchant bank Glyn Mills to float the loan that financed the emperor Maximillian's bid for a Mexican empire. 
The IFS was a major force in the City during the boom of the mid-1860s, but the investment bank fell prey to the 1866 crisis, and for fourteen years thereafter Heath was largely responsible for its reconstruction, a task which at times, as in 1872, he found 'irksome'. He was thus obliged to run the English Erie Committee between 1869 and 1871. The objective of this association was both to protect British investors' interests and to dislodge Jay Gould from the management of the Erie Railroad Company in an episode that has been dubbed the 'Erie wars'. More positive was Heath's role as a founder of the Syndicate Union during the early 1870s, which institutionalized the relationships between the IFS, the Ottoman Bank, and the Anglo-Austrian Bank. 
On the death of his father Robert Heath succeeded to the family's Italian barony. It would appear that he had lived largely under his father's shadow and the chairmanship of the IFS had been the only major outlet for his considerable energies, together with his chairmanship of the Sao Paulo Railway and a directorship of the Royal Exchange Assurance. There is every indication that Heath's business career over its last sixteen years was one of disappointment. The family firm never regained, during John Benjamin Heath's declining years, the status that it had held during the mid-century, and although Robert Amadeus Heath nursed the IFS back into liquidity, his early death prevented him from capitalizing on this considerable success. 
Robert Heath died at 42 rue des Mathurins, Paris, on 5 June 1882, survived by his wife, and was buried at Highgate cemetery, Middlesex. 


@@@@@


doc= 47784


Henderson, Alexander, first Baron Faringdon (1850-1934), stockbroker and financier, was born at 25 Upper Winchester Street, Islington, London on 28 September 1850, the second son of the six sons and three daughters of George Henderson, printer, proof corrector, and Greek and Hebrew scholar, of London, and his wife, Eliza Cockshott, the daughter of a cabinet-maker. He was probably educated at a private day school in Ealing, where the family had moved, and in 1867 he became a clerk in the office of the leading City accountant, William Welch Deloitte. 
In 1872, Henderson joined Deloitte's former partner, Thomas Greenwood, who had become a stockbroker specializing in railways. He became a member of the stock exchange in 1872 and in 1873 a partner in Greenwood & Co. The next year, he married Jane Ellen Davis (died 1920), the daughter of Edward William Davis, gentleman of Ealing. Greenwood retired in 1884, to become an assistant to the preacher C. H. Spurgeon, and Henderson made his brother Henry (1862-1931) a partner in 1886. The firm became broker to most of the mainline British railway companies, as well as many lines in Spain and Latin America, including the Central Argentine Railway, Buenos Aires Great Southern Railway, and the Central Uruguay Railway. Henderson was also involved with port developments, telephones, electricity, and tramways throughout Latin America, where he was well placed as a result of family connections. His brother Frank (1858-1935) settled in Montevideo, but the most important link was his youngest brother, Brodie Henderson (1869-1936), who was apprenticed to the engineer, James Livesey (1833-1925), the consultant on many of the railways with which Henderson was involved. In 1891 Alexander bought Brodie a partnership in Livesey's firm, which allowed him to co-ordinate the engineering and financial interests of the family in ventures such as the Trans-Andes Railway. Both Alexander and Henry acquired large personal investments in these concerns, as well as acting as brokers for the firms. 
Henderson was also involved in domestic ventures. In 1887 he assumed responsibility for financing the Manchester Ship Canal, and he was a director from 1890 to 1897. He acquired an interest in the Shelton ironworks in Staffordshire at some point before 1891; and in 1894 he became director of the Manchester, Sheffield, and Lincolnshire Railway. The intention was to convert this local company into a trunk line between Manchester and London, and Henderson was crucial to providing the necessary finances. He created a rolling-stock trust, which bought equipment for the railway to use on hire purchase, and he raised finance in the City. In 1899, he became chairman of what had become the Great Central Railway. He had grandiose schemes. In 1900 he formed a company to build a dock at Immingham on the Humber, and the Great Central announced that it would take a lease; the new dock opened in 1912. However, the Great Central largely duplicated existing services and never lived up to its ambitions. By 1907 Henderson was planning an amalgamation with the Great Northern Railway. Terms were agreed in 1908-9, but the bill was rejected by the Commons. The Great Central was eventually absorbed into the London and North Eastern Railway in the reorganization of 1922, and Henderson was deputy chairman until his death. His last major achievement in international finance came in 1901, when he was responsible for the merger of the small British tobacco firms into the Imperial Tobacco Company in order to face American competition. 
In 1889 Henderson bought a country house and estate of 3500 acres at Buscot Park, near Faringdon, in Berkshire. Most of the day-to-day business at Greenwoods was left to Henry, and Alexander was freed to spend more time on two pursuits: animal breeding and collecting works of art. (Ownership of Buscot, with its collections, passed to the National Trust.) He became president of the Shire Horse Society and the Hampshire Downs Sheepbreeder's Association. He purchased paintings both by old masters and by the Pre-Raphaelites, most strikingly Burne-Jones's sequence of 'The Legend of the Briar Rose'. Increasingly, however, he became involved in politics, winning West Staffordshire in a by-election in 1898 as a Conservative, a seat which he held until 1906. He re-entered parliament in a by-election in 1913, for St George's, Hanover Square, which he held until he was made a peer in 1916. He was committed to imperial preference, and was both treasurer of the Tariff Reform League and a member of the tariff commission. He also acted as a conduit for Conservative Party funds to supportive newspapers, and it was in part for his services to central office that he obtained a baronetcy in 1902. He provided financial backing to the newspapers of C. Arthur Pearson, the chairman of the league; he acquired the 'Standard' and 'Evening Standard' in 1910, and was a shareholder in the 'Daily Express'. 
Henderson's business interests followed suit as he increasingly turned to the empire, and especially to the construction of railways in Africa in association with his brother Brodie. He acquired control of the Shire Highlands Railway around 1900, and built a major extension; he was also a creditor of the British Central Africa Company until 1912, when the debts were paid by a competing railway promoter in return for abandoning a further extension by the Shire Highlands Railway. His major business venture before the war was the creation of the National Bank of Turkey in 1909, in association with Sir Ernest Cassel and John Baring, Lord Revelstoke. The bank had been encouraged by the Foreign Office, as a response to the Imperial Ottoman Bank, which was dominated by French interests, but subsequent Foreign Office support was minimal. The hopes of developing railways, public works, and industry were disappointed, and the National Bank complained that the Foreign Office did not back its attempt to involve British capital, in co-operation with German banks, in extending railways. The problems were exacerbated when the ships it financed for the Turkish navy were seized during construction by the British government at the outbreak of war. Furthermore, the bank was responsible, with Royal Dutch Shell and Calouste Gulbenkian, for the formation of the Turkish Petroleum Company in 1911, which held the exploration rights for large parts of the Middle East, with the significant exception of the concession to William Knox D'Arcy in Persia. This led to conflict with the Anglo-Persian Oil Company which, with backing from the British government, argued for the transfer of the bank's shares. Transfer was finally achieved in 1925, shortly before a huge oilfield was discovered in Iraq. Henderson's concerns for the future of British production, which had led him to support tariff reform, and his disappointment at the lack of government support for British business overseas in competition with the Germans, was to have a new urgency during the war. 
During the First World War, Henderson visited Norway, Denmark, and the Netherlands to inquire into the blockade; he was deputy chairman of the shipping control committee; he chaired a committee to consider the relationship between the consular and diplomatic services in order to improve commercial intelligence; and he served on the Balfour committee on commercial and industrial policy. He argued on the Balfour committee that exports should be increased if the country were not to be bankrupted by surplus capacity after the war, and he submitted a minority report in favour of a 10 per cent 'ad valorem' duty on imports. He took his case further as chairman of a committee appointed in 1916 to consider the financial facilities for trade. The committee recommended an industrial trading bank to overcome what was seen as the complacency of the City, and in 1917 the British Trade Corporation (BTC) was formed, of which he was governor until 1926. The proposal owed much to Dudley Docker, who believed that the main purpose of the political system was to expand foreign trade and develop British economic power, which were essential to survival as a nation. The venture arose from the feeling that German industry before the war, especially large firms such as AEG and Siemens in electrical engineering, were destroying their British rivals as a result of backing by the banks, and particularly in exports. Victory on the battlefields was not enough; measures had also to be taken to develop engineering to dominate world markets. The aim of the BTC was to assist industry in financing large overseas contracts, on more generous terms than were offered by banks; information offices were to be opened in cities throughout the world. It was also argued that the German firms achieved their dominance as a result of protection. Support for the scheme came from the large engineering, munitions and electrical exporters such as Vickers and Armstrong, which led to suspicion among smaller firms, which feared that policy was being dominated by monopolists; Henderson himself saw, quite correctly, that the main difficulty was in raising finance for small and medium concerns -- the point made by the Macmillan committee in 1931. The BTC also met opposition from the merchant banks, which resented the suggestion that they had failed industry: the existing financial system was, they argued, perfectly adequate for British circumstances. The downfall of the BTC, however, was the tension, which was never resolved, between strategic and commercial considerations. 
The government had been willing to support the BTC during the war as a means of countering German commercial dominance, especially in the Mediterranean and the Middle East, and in order to protect oil supplies. It was, in this sense, a continuation of the National Bank of Turkey, and in 1919 the BTC purchased the bank for $243,119. It also acquired the Levant Company and a merchant house trading in the eastern Mediterranean; it invested in the Portuguese Trade Company, formed the Anglo-Brazilian Commercial and Agency Company with the London and Brazilian Bank, and participated in the Inter-Allied Trade and Banking Corporation. It formed the South Russia Banking Agency to assist the allied support of White Russia, and attempted to develop a trade in manganese ore, before the victory of the Red Army. Like the National Bank, the BTC soon ran into difficulties, for its investments were not commercially viable and it received little support from the Foreign Office, which was wary of trade diplomacy. It did not pay any dividends after 1920 on an issued capital of $1 million, and went into voluntary liquidation in 1926. The assets were acquired by the Anglo-International Bank, of which Henderson became a director, and he bought back the assets of the National Bank of Turkey. Henderson felt that it was 'more than ever desirable to keep the flag flying' (Davenport-Hines, 'Dudley Docker', 148), an attempt which had cost him in all $643,500. His war-time efforts were, however, rewarded by a peerage in 1916, and the Companionship of Honour in 1917. He sat on one final committee, that on national expenditure in 1921-2. 
The firm of Greenwood & Co. became less central to the activities of Henderson, and most of his wealth was outside the stockbroking business. There had been a reluctance to bring in outside partners, and it was clear that Alexander's two sons did not have sufficient dynamism. His elder son was Lieutenant-Colonel G. H. Henderson, who died in 1922, twelve years before his father. Alexander's brother Henry died in 1931, and his surviving son died in 1933, shortly after Greenwoods merged with Cazenove Ackroyd in 1932. The new firm became one of the most respectable brokers in the City; family members continued to be partners, and the office manager of Greenwoods, William Brabner, who handled Henderson's personal affairs, was given specific responsibility for the family investments. Apart from expertise in Latin America, Greenwoods brought a major asset to the merged firm -- investment trusts. In 1909 Henderson created the Witan Investment Trust to handle his personal finances and to supervise the various family settlements; by 1924 its book value was $2,148,487. 
Alexander Henderson died on 17 March 1934 at his home, 18 Arlington Street, Westminster, and was buried at Eaton Hastings church near Buscot. After his death Brabner created the Henderson Administration to handle the assets of the family, which included $1,117,408 left by Alexander in 1934, $423,327 left by his brother Henry in 1931, and a total of $936,532 left by his two sons in 1922 and 1933. Management of the investments was the responsibility of Charles Micklem, one of the senior partners in Cazenove. Micklem, with James Capel, dominated the trust market in the 1930s. By servicing investment trusts, both inside the firm and outside, Micklem secured a regular income from broking, and the family's assets benefited from the firm's best deals. 
Henderson's name survived in the City through the activities of Henderson Administration, which proved more successful than many of the ventures with which he had been involved since the 1890s. By the time of his death, his campaign for imperial preference was being realized; but it cannot have been any consolation to the right-wing imperialist Henderson that his heir, his grandson Gavin Henderson, second Lord Faringdon (1902-1977), was closely involved with the Labour Party and an ardent anti-colonialist. What many of Gavin's colleagues in the Labour Party did accept was the need for improved financial and government support for production, but of a type with which Henderson and Docker would have had little sympathy. 


@@@@@


doc= 47785


Holden, Samuel (1674/5-1740), merchant, was baptized at Christ Church, Southwark, Surrey, in August 1675, the son of the merchant Joseph Holden, citizen and haberdasher of London (originally from the East Riding of Yorkshire), and his second wife, Priscilla Watt. His father died in 1683, when Samuel was only eight, but the boy inherited useful connections in the City. In 1692, at seventeen, he was apprenticed, in the Drapers' Company, to the great Baltic merchant, Nathaniel Gould, later treasurer of the Eastland Company, governor of the Russia Company, director and governor of the Bank of England, and director of the new East India Company, a major collaborator of Sir Gilbert Heathcote in the creative whig financial activity of 1694-1710. Gould sent young Holden to Riga to learn his trade. At the conclusion of his apprenticeship, he continued in business in Russia, but had returned to London as an independent merchant by 1709, when on 1 March he was elected assistant (director) of the Russia Company, and on 4 April married, at St Michael, Wood Street, Jane (1679/80-1766), daughter of John Whitehall (or Whitehaulgh), citizen of London. They raised one son, who died in 1736, and three daughters. 
During his Riga years, Holden became friendly with Matthew Shiffner (died 1756), with whom he later participated in major commercial undertakings. Shiffner, a native of Russia, had resided long enough in England to become naturalized on 8 October 1711. On his subsequent return to Russia, Shiffner married in 1720 Hedwig Agnata Bruiningk (1704-1793) of Riga, later 'gouvernante' to Anna, duchess of Courland, niece of Peter the Great, and future Russian empress (1730-40). Such court connections must have appeared most useful to his allies trading to Russia, where firms with which Shiffner was connected -- particularly Shiffner and Wolff -- had enough influence to obtain valuable export privileges and army supply contracts. 
In London, Holden was at various times active in the trades to Lisbon, Leghorn, Smyrna, the West Indies, and New England, but he played a major part in trade to Russia. He collaborated with John Gore in importing Russian iron, and with Shiffner and Wolff in cloth shipments to the Russian army and in hemp exports from Russia. Some of this hemp was sent directly to Leghorn, and olive oil returned to Russia. Peter the Great showed confidence by entrusting Holden with the care of Russian apprentices sent to England for training. The British government also entrusted him with the transportation of horses to Russia as gifts for the tsar, as well as with remittances to British diplomatic representatives there. In London, his growing standing was marked by his selection as assistant, consul, and ultimately (1728-40) governor of the Russia Company, and by his long service during 1720-40 on the court of directors of the Bank of England, of which he became deputy governor in 1727-9 and then governor in 1729-31. In 1737 he was also one of the City trustees for the loan of $370,000 to the Holy Roman emperor, secured on the copper mines of Hungary. Holden, close to the Walpole administration, was regularly consulted by the Board of Trade on the negotiations leading to the British-Russian commercial treaty of 1734, and in 1735 was elected member of parliament for East Looe, a Treasury-controlled borough. He was also named one of the directors of the Royal Hospital at Greenwich. 
By the 1730s Samuel Holden was a leading figure among dissenters. In 1735 he was asked by the Massachusetts house of representatives to serve as their agent in London, but he declined the honour as inconsistent with his other commitments. Nevertheless, in 1732, when the dissenting communities were seriously excited by the possibility of obtaining the repeal of the 'Test and Corporation Acts', he agreed to serve as chairman of a committee set up that year by the deputies from the three principal dissenting confessions to work for repeal. His personal opinions were, however, expressed in his presidential address to a 'general assembly' of dissenters on 29 November 1732. He warned his listeners that, with a parliamentary election in the offing, this was not a propitious time to bring the issue before parliament. Yet he made his own unqualified dissenting sympathies clear by referring in the speech to the 'bigotry' and 'interest' of those who opposed repeal. The printing of his address in the London press evoked a pamphlet reply ('A Letter to Samuel Holden', 1732) from a pro-ministerial author more sympathetic to the established church. Holden's rejoinder ('An Answer to a Letter to Samuel Holden', 1732) was his only known avowed publication. Several other pro-repeal pamphlets published about the same time were addressed to Holden, by implication recognized as the lay leader of dissent. One of these ('An inquiry into the Propriety of Applying to Parliament for the Repeal of the Corporation and Test-Acts', 1732) referred to the divisions among the dissenters 'heightened by a secret management, under ministerial direction, by representing the most dismal consequences to some of them, at private conferences, which by these few were to be sent among the rest of the people'. This can be interpreted as criticism both of Holden's closeness to the ministry, and of his style of leadership, but had little immediate effect. Holden kept his committee quiet during the excise crisis of 1733 and the election of 1734, but, when the repeal question was finally brought before the Commons in 1736, Walpole disappointed his dissenter friends by continuing inactive and neutral. Holden, obviously embarrassed, spoke for the repeal bill during that session, but, on its defeat, felt obliged to resign as chairman of the dissenting deputies' special committee. 
Holden was particularly interested in the Congregational colonies in New England. His correspondents there included the prominent Boston clergyman Benjamin Colman, who, on a visit to London in the 1690s, had lodged with Holden's mother, Mrs Thomas Parkhurst. In the 1730s, Holden sent Colman books and cash worth nearly $1000 sterling, for distribution to the deserving. At Holden's death Colman published in Boston a memorial sermon of tribute (1740), and in London a selection of Holden's letters to him on spiritual topics (1741). Samuel Mather, another eminent Massachusetts divine, dedicated to Holden his 'An Apology for the Liberties of the Churches in New England' (1738). 
At the time of his death, Samuel Holden resided in Roehampton House, Surrey, an impressive leased villa, and kept a counting house in Bishopsgate Street in the City. He also owned property in Lincoln's Inn Fields, as well as landholdings in Derbyshire, which secured his wife's dower rights. At his death on 12 June 1740, he left a personal estate of over $80,000. Of this, $60,000 was left to his wife and two surviving daughters, with the balance to be used for charitable purposes selected by his widow. Part of this benefaction went to Harvard College, and was used there for the construction of Holden Chapel. Holden was buried in St Bride's Church, Fleet Street on 20 August 1740. In 1744 Samuel Holden's daughter Mary became the second wife of John Jolliffe MP. In 1866 their great-grandson, W. G. H. Jolliffe, was created Baron Hylton. 


@@@@@


doc= 47786


Barrow, Sir John, first baronet (1764-1848), promoter of exploration and author, was born on 19 June 1764 at Dragley Beck, Ulverston, Lancashire, the only child of Roger Barrow, journeyman tanner, and his wife, Mary. Educated at the local Town Bank grammar school, which he left at the age of thirteen, Barrow worked successively as a clerk in a Liverpool iron foundry, as a landsman on a Greenland whaler, and as a mathematics teacher in a Greenwich academy preparing young men for a naval career, until offered the position of comptroller of household to Lord Macartney's embassy to China (1792-4). He served with distinction during this embassy and Macartney's governorship of the Cape of Good Hope (1797-9), collecting much of the commercial and strategic intelligence about the eastern seas and southern Africa that Macartney forwarded to Henry Dundas, president of the Board of Control and secretary of state at war. Barrow was promoted to the post of auditor general to Cape Colony in September 1798, and married Anna Maria Truter (1777-1857) at Stellenbosch on 26 August 1799. His intention to settle at the Cape was frustrated by its return to the Dutch in 1803. He was offered the second secretaryship of the Admiralty by Dundas (by then Lord Melville) on 5 May 1804, and this he held, except for the period between 10 February 1806 and 7 April 1807, until 28 January 1845. 
Barrow was elected to the Royal Society in 1805 and the Royal Society Club three years later. Through these he formed his close personal and professional relationship with Sir Joseph Banks, the president of the Royal Society. At Banks's suggestion, Barrow served on the council of the Royal Society for the first time in 1815 and over the next fifteen years alternated his council membership with his Admiralty colleague John Wilson Croker. He was appointed a vice-president several times thereafter. With Croker, assisted by Davies Gilbert, Thomas Young, and Thomas Amyot, Barrow attempted to have Robert Peel elected as president in 1826. The rift between amateur and professional scientists over the election of the duke of Somerset was a factor in his agreeing to assist Francis Beaufort and William Henry Smyth to form the Royal Geographical Society in 1830. He chaired early meetings of the new society, and secured royal patronage; he served as president between 1835 and 1837 ['see 'Founders of the Royal Geographical Society of London]. 
An ardent imperialist, Barrow entered the Admiralty convinced that Britain's security and future wealth depended on control of the world's sea lanes both for trade and for defence. He took an active interest in the development of naval dockyards and other facilities during the Napoleonic and American wars, and actively promoted the careers of promising young naval officers when peace was declared in 1815. His incomparable knowledge of naval traditions and organization was drawn upon by Sir James Graham in 1832 when the Navy Board and other civilian boards responsible for aspects of naval administration were replaced by departments answerable directly to the Board of Admiralty. 
Even before hostilities ceased, Barrow, with Banks's assistance, initiated a series of expeditions to trace the course of the Niger, which culminated with Richard Lander's expedition of 1831. News of the melting of the north polar ice cap, conveyed to Banks by William Scoresby in 1817, prompted an equally sustained search for the north-west passage. Sir John Franklin's fatal voyage (1845) was the last of these planned attempts. Other parts of the world also claimed Barrow's attention. Australia was of particular interest, and he actively fostered the careers of the explorers Phillip Parker King, Allan Cunningham, and Charles Sturt, among others. 
In 1837, when negotiating the details of George Grey's expedition to north-western Australia, Barrow convinced Lord Glenelg, then colonial secretary, to occupy Port Essington on Australia's north coast to safeguard the Australia-Asia trade route. This was the culmination of a string of strategic annexations which Barrow advocated publicly from 1804, when he argued that the Cape of Good Hope should have been retained after the peace of Amiens. His successful arguments for the annexation of Fernando Po to control the west African slave trade, made in 1827, compelled the then colonial secretary, Lord Bathurst, to declare: 'if coveting islands is a breach of the Ten Commandments, then he [Barrow] is the greatest violator of the decalogue in the kingdom' (Eddy, 235). Barrow was an equally strenuous advocate of overseas settlement, publicizing both the Albany settlement in Cape Colony (1820) and the foundation of Swan River Colony (Western Australia) in 1829, and emigration to southern Africa, southern and eastern Australia, and Upper Canada. He played a major role in the decision to send the Amherst embassy to China in 1815, having advocated such a mission as early as 1809. 
As a writer Barrow is best known for his 'Mutiny on the Bounty' (1831) but, during his lifetime, his accounts of his travels in eastern Asia and southern Africa, published between 1801 and 1807, were better known and more influential. These established new standards for travel writing. In all, he wrote or edited seventeen full length books (including biographies of his personal heroes Peter the Great and the admirals Howe and Anson) as well as half a dozen articles in both the 'Edinburgh Review' and the 'Geographical Journal', more than twenty entries in the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica', and over two hundred articles in the 'Quarterly Review'. His interests ranged widely, but the great bulk of his output had a geographical focus, usually with an underlying imperial theme and a belief in progress and the superiority of British civilization. He wrote extensively about Asia, the Americas, Australia and the Pacific, the eastern Mediterranean, and Africa, and used the 'Quarterly' for his promotion of exploration and imperial expansion. Through his friendship with John Murray, the 'Quarterly''s publisher, he also secured the publication of a succession of travellers' accounts which generated the great public interest in exploration in the period after 1815. Collectively, these activities established his pre-eminence within British geography. 
In 1835 Barrow was made a baronet for his contributions to science and literature. He died on 23 November 1848 at New Street, Spring Gardens, London, and was buried in the Pratt Street cemetery, Camden Town. His friends and admirers erected a memorial to him (modelled on the Eddystone lighthouse) on Hoad Hill at the head of Morecambe Bay and overlooking his birthplace, in 1851. 
Of Barrow's children, the eldest son was George Barrow (1806-1876), while the second son, John Barrow (1808-1898), most closely mirrored his father's career. He was born on 28 June 1808, educated at Charterhouse, and entered the Admiralty as a clerk in 1824 through Croker's influence. He was appointed head of the Admiralty record office in 1844 in recognition of his development of a system for recording naval correspondence and of his rescue of valuable Admiralty documents dating back to the Elizabethan period. Equally active in geographical and Royal Society circles, he was a founder member of the Hakluyt Society (1846) and the only civilian member of the Arctic council established in 1851 to co-ordinate the search for Franklin. A minor, if fairly prolific, author, he published ten well reviewed volumes of his travels throughout Europe, as well as biographies of Drake (1843) and Sir William Sidney Smith (2 vols., 1848); he also edited several other works. Following his retirement from the Admiralty in 1855, he took an active interest in the militia, where he held the rank of lieutenant-colonel. He was a founder member of the Alpine Club in 1857. He died on 9 December 1898 at Monterosa, Kingham, near Chipping Norton, Oxfordshire, and was buried at Kensal Green cemetery. 


