@@@@@


doc= 47790


Gray, John (c.1799-1883), socialist and writer on economics, was by his own account educated between the ages of nine and thirteen at Repton School, Derbyshire, where he 'learned little else than to catch fish, to play at marbles and to climb trees' (Gray, 338). Subsequently, at the age of fourteen, he was employed in a manufacturing and wholesale house in Cheapside. It was from this time on, he informs us, that he concerned himself with the reform of the social system. 
Having penned an abortive tract on the subject, entitled 'The national commercial system', Gray, at the instigation of his brother James, took an interest in the ideas of Robert Owen and heard him speak at the London tavern debates of August 1817. However, it was some years before Gray once again committed his ideas to paper; his first published work was 'A Lecture on Human Happiness', published in January 1825. Gray claimed that he had arrived at the central ideas of this book independently of Owen, but it certainly reflects many of the central concerns of Owenite socialism. It is, in essence, an indictment of competitive capitalism, which in Gray's view (substantiated by reference to Patrick Colquhoun's 'Treatise on the Population, Wealth, Power and Resources of the British Empire', 1814), had produced a distribution of wealth skewed in favour of the unproductive part of the nation and detrimental to those whose labour was its source. This distribution was effected by means of unequal exchanges which in a competitive context favoured the owners of capital and land, who were able to exact interest and rent from those with only their labour to sell. Gray argued further that these evils could be eliminated by the formation of co-operative communities where the business of competitive exchange would have no place. 
This preoccupation with co-operative communities led Gray to take an interest in that established by Abram Combe and Archibald Hamilton at Orbiston near Motherwell in 1825. He visited it in that year but his reaction, as expressed in 'A Word of Advice to the Orbistonians' (1826), was highly critical. In 1825 too he began publishing a 'gratis' newspaper given over entirely to advertisements, the 'Edinburgh and Leith Advertiser'. This was converted into a regular newspaper but failed after fifty-three numbers, to be replaced by the 'Edinburgh, Leith, Glasgow and North British Commercial and Literary Advertiser' (later the 'North British Advertiser'), which proved commercially successful. In 1830 he sought to establish a printers' hall in Edinburgh which would enable several firms to share modern machinery in common premises. This proved a disaster and led to a short period of imprisonment for debt, but the business of newspaper publishing was ultimately to make Gray's fortune: at the peak of its success some 19,000 copies of the 'North British Advertiser' (merged with another of Gray's papers, the 'Ladies' Own Journal', in 1874) were being distributed in Scotland and the north of England. 
Yet in the 1830s and 1840s Gray continued to stress the need for a change in existing economic and social arrangements. Specifically, in 'The Social System: a Treatise on the Principle of Exchange' (1831) he abandoned his earlier communitarianism and argued for a technocratically run and centrally planned economy. This could be effected through a national chamber of commerce that comprised 'eminent merchants, bankers, brokers etc', a single 'controlling and directing power' which 'having the means of ascertaining, at all times, the actual stock of any kinds of goods in hand, would always be able to say at once where production should proceed more rapidly, where at its own pace and where also it should be retarded' (Gray, 45). The power to do this would be derived from its control of the means of production (a control to be voluntarily given to it by the owners of land and capital) and would be exercised in particular to ensure that aggregate demand expanded 'pari passu' with aggregate supply, so eliminating the general economic depressions which had bedevilled Britain in the post-Napoleonic wars period. Here we have one of the first examples of an attempt to articulate a political economy of central planning. 
The salient themes of 'The Social System' were to be reiterated in 'An Efficient Remedy for the Distress of Nations' (1842). However, by 1848 and the publication of his 'Lectures on the Nature and Use of Money' Gray had abandoned the idea of central planning and his antipathy to competition and had come to believe that a full and efficient utilization of resources could be secured by a fundamental reform of the monetary system. As he put it, 'a few salutary monetary laws are all that are wanted'. 
Little is known about Gray's private life, in particular the years after 1850. The death on 30 January 1831 of his first wife, Caroline Mordaunt, is recorded on a monument in St Cuthbert's parish churchyard in Edinburgh, and there is mention here too of a second wife, Jane Renny, by whom, together with a married daughter, he was survived. It is also known that, after residing at Faldonside, Galashiels, in the 1840s, he purchased an estate of 26 acres, Bonaly Tower, near Edinburgh, in October 1854. This was sold in 1866, Gray having previously moved to Church Road in Upper Norwood, a part of London which in the 1880s was, as one commentator has put it, 'the home of people who thought they were no small beer'. It was here that he died on 26 April 1883, leaving a personal estate of $14,831. 


@@@@@


doc= 47794


Cooper, Daniel (1785-1853), merchant, was born at Bolton, Lancashire, one of at least two sons of Thomas Cooper and his first wife, Hannah. Little is known of his early life but in 1815 Cooper was convicted of theft and transported for life to the penal colony of New South Wales. He arrived in Sydney in 1816, and was granted a conditional pardon in 1818 which was made absolute in 1821. In 1819 he married Hannah Dodd (died 1836), a fellow convict who had been sentenced to sixteen years' transportation in 1816. There were no children of the marriage. 
Cooper opened a general store in Sydney, from which he diversified into shipping and brewing. In 1821 he became a partner in the firm of Hutchison, Terry & Co., which expanded from flour milling into general merchandising and banking. Cooper and another former convict, Solomon Levey, took over the firm in 1825, each investing $30,000. Levey had been sentenced to seven years' transportation in 1813, and had arrived in Sydney in 1815. He was granted an absolute pardon in 1819, when he married Ann, the daughter of William Roberts, a wealthy emancipist. Although she left Levey, her dowry allowed him to build up a flourishing business in real estate, retailing, shipbroking, sealing, rope making, and grazing. He was also a leading figure in the formation of the Bank of New South Wales, of which Cooper became a director in 1828. The firm of Cooper and Levey subsequently became a major merchant house in Sydney, combining a large retail trade with the import of goods and the export of wool, as well as having related interests as shipowners, shipping agents, and whalers. Both Cooper and Levey invested much of their profits in extensive holdings of land, which placed them among the largest squatters and holders of stock in New South Wales. 
Expansion of the firm demanded a closer connection with London, in order to purchase goods for export to Sydney and to provide trade credit, a similar need to that faced by F. G. Dalgety. In 1826 Levey settled in London, with the purpose of opening a branch there, but he made the disastrous mistake in 1829 of joining Thomas Peel as a partner in his ill-fated scheme to develop the Swan River in Western Australia. Levey supplied $20,000 capital to the abortive venture. Fortunately for Cooper, much of his wealth was invested outside the firm in real estate, and he was able to escape from the crisis caused by Levey's ill-judged speculation. As a result Cooper took on new partners in Sydney, and returned to England in 1831 in order to purchase goods and to arrange shipping. Eventually the difficulties caused by Levey's involvement with Peel were resolved, in 1843, when Cooper reached a settlement with John Levey-Roberts, the son of Solomon Levey, who had opted for a life of leisure in Paris. Cooper died of disease of the heart at the Gloucester Hotel, Gloucester Place, Brighton, on 3 November 1853. 
The bulk of Cooper's estate was left to his nephew, 
After a period with a Franco-American firm in Le Havre, Cooper joined his uncle's business in London in 1842. In the following year he became a partner in his brother-in-law's merchant house in Sydney, which he took over with his elder brother in 1848. He became sole proprietor of Cooper Brothers in 1852, which was by now one of the leading merchant houses in the city. Cooper prospered from the gold rush and owned considerable property in Sydney as well as extensive grazing lands. He was also a director of the Sydney Railway Company and of the Bank of New South Wales from 1847. He married Elizabeth Hill in 1846, and they had two sons and three daughters. His uncle's fortune and his own wealth made him a significant figure in New South Wales, where he became a leading Liberal member of the legislative council and assembly, serving as speaker between 1856 and 1860. In 1856 he started to construct Woolhara House, on the estate acquired by his uncle. He joined the senate of the University of Sydney in 1857, and was knighted in the same year. 
Cooper returned permanently to England in 1861, and became much occupied with philanthropic activities. He gave generously to support the families of those killed in the Crimean War, and in the early 1860s he helped to organize relief funds for distressed textile-workers during the Lancashire cotton famine. Depicted as 'a little man -- serene, smiling and graceful', Cooper had a broad and pale forehead. 'Looking at that head one could swear its owner was a heavy subscriber to Bethal Unions and a victim of begging letters' (Martin, 452). In 1863 he was raised to the baronetcy for his public services during the Lancashire distress and took Woolhara as his title. 
Cooper also served as agent-general for New South Wales in England, and he was a leading participant in the controversies over the operation of the wool market in the early 1870s. The colonial sheep farmers were at this time attempting to wrest control of the wool market from their London consignees, which brought Cooper into conflict with Dalgety, the largest of the London-based wool importers. Dalgety denounced Cooper as a 'little Sydney blaguard' (Dalgety to Nichols, 10 Aug 1871), who was 'thoroughly unscrupulous, untruthful and pertinacious' (Dalgety to Blackwood, 5 Oct 1871). Dalgety was considerably annoyed by suggestions that the brokers and merchants in London were robbing and exploiting the colonial growers, and he fumed that 'Never in the annals of Commerce of London had there been a more disgraceful and dastardly attack... on a respectable body of men as that made by Sir Daniel Cooper, who merited the contempt and scorn of every right minded man for his conduct.... Yet in the Colonies he appears to have gained the admiration and gratitude of the Squatters... by his mendacity and trickery. (Dalgety to secretary of the Melbourne chamber of commerce, 10 Aug 1871, Australian National University, archives of business and labour, N39/42)' Dalgety and Cooper represented the change taking place in the operation of the wool market in the 1870s. Private partnerships such as Dalgety's firm faced increasing difficulties in securing sufficient credit to provide funds to the squatters in the colonies, and to cover the sale of wool in London. By contrast Cooper represented the Bank of New South Wales, which had access to credit on more favourable terms; he marked the incursion into the City of London of colonial banks and pastoral finance houses. As well as acting as the agent-general for New South Wales in London, in 1881 Cooper was chairman of the London committee of the Sydney International Exhibition. He was appointed KCMG in 1880 and GCMG in 1888. Sir Daniel Cooper died at his London home, 6 De Vere Gardens, Kensington, on 5 June 1902. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 47795


Simcoe, Elizabeth Postuma (1762-1850), diarist and artist, was born in September 1762 and baptized on 22 September at Aldwincle, Northamptonshire, the only child of Lieutenant-Colonel Thomas Gwillim ('bap'. 1726, died 1762?) and Elizabeth Spinckes ('bap'. 1723, died 1762). Her father died before her birth and her mother in childbirth. The orphaned heir to land in Northamptonshire and Herefordshire was given the name of Postuma in recognition of her situation. She was not, however, alone in the world. Her childhood was spent with loving grandparents and aunts on both sides of the family, principally her mother's younger sister, Margaret, who, when she married Admiral Samuel Graves in 1769, took Elizabeth to live with her in Honiton, Devon. The admiral seems to have been responsible for her unusually broad education. It was at his home that she met his godson, Lieutenant-Colonel John Graves Simcoe (1752-1806), whom she married on 30 December 1782. The couple had eleven children. Although the match between her property and his impecunious ability was logical, it seems also to have been a marriage of genuine affection. 
The Simcoes built Wolford Lodge on the Devon estate that Elizabeth inherited, and set about improving and extending the estate, all the while seeking a military or colonial appointment for Simcoe, who had field rank but no regiment. Finally, in 1791 he was appointed lieutenant-governor of the new colony of Upper Canada. With the two youngest of their six children, the Simcoes sailed from Weymouth in September 1791. 
Elizabeth Simcoe's renown in Canada is based on the diaries she began keeping on that trip. Until she returned to England five years later she kept daily notes, which were later expanded into longer diary entries and incorporated into letters to family and friends. Until early in the twentieth century the diaries remained unpublished and Canadian interest was centred on her husband as the first governor. Her diaries are attractive because of their infectious enthusiasm. Where other women in the colony complained of hardship, Elizabeth saw only adventure. Despite her involvement in her husband's activities she rarely mentioned politics. The people who appear in her diaries tended to be social contacts of her own class: the governor's military colleagues, visiting dignitaries, and women who maintained rounds of visits as if still in England. Her enjoyment of her role as the governor's wife no doubt added to her delight in all that she saw and did. In addition to the diaries Elizabeth, a talented artist, made many sketches, later turned into watercolours, which are frequently reproduced today as the most accurate records of a time and place. On their return to England, a set of thirty-two watercolours was presented to George III. She was particularly attracted to 'sublime' scenery, but she also made detailed drawings of flora and fauna, of aboriginal peoples, and of local curiosities. A number of maps from this period are also attributed to her drawing ability. The exception to the happy accounts of her life in Canada was the death of a daughter, born at Niagara, who lived only a year. Although she had now borne seven children, this was the first infant death. 
Governor Simcoe, who had been seriously wounded during the American War of Independence, found that the climate of Upper Canada adversely affected his health and requested leave to return to England. According to her diary (21 July 1796), Elizabeth Simcoe 'cried all the day' when they left Upper Canada. 
As soon as her husband's health was restored, Elizabeth was involved in the process of finding him another appointment. In 1798 he was gazetted lieutenant-general, and given command of the western district, which was vulnerable to the expected attack from France. A surviving diary records a journey of inspection on which she accompanied the general that year. In July 1806 Simcoe was appointed commander-in-chief in India, with a knighthood promised, but while Elizabeth was purchasing her wardrobe Simcoe was sent on a special mission to Portugal. He took ill aboard ship, returned to England, and died at Exeter a few days after his return. Elizabeth, who by now had nine living children, seven of whom were daughters, lost her natural ebullience. She had no financial problems, and she was an educated, intelligent woman with a large circle of friends and relatives, but her life had lost its focus. 
Elizabeth's childhood friend, the naturalist Mary Ann Burges, had purchased a home near Wolford and was her principal emotional support in this period. Almost immediately her maternal duty required that she turn her attention to launching her eldest son, Francis, in a career. In the family tradition, he chose the military and, sponsored by Lord Moira, was commissioned in 1807. He was killed at Badajoz in 1812. The next year Mary Ann Burges died. 
Elizabeth and her husband had always been devout members of the Church of England. Governor Simcoe had built a chapel at Wolford, and had been assiduous in seeing to the establishment of the Anglican church in Upper Canada. After the loss of husband, friend, and favourite child, Elizabeth turned increasingly to the evangelical wing of the Church of England, which she supported financially and with personal activity, since she considered it the best means of counteracting what she saw as the dangerously democratic tendencies of the period. Determined that her only surviving son, Henry Addington Simcoe (1800-1868), would not enter the army, she destined him for the church and campaigned for his advancement. 
As a widow, Elizabeth Simcoe did not withdraw from society. With her daughters, she wintered at Bath and Cheltenham, where they had many friends. When they were not receiving guests at Wolford, all the female family members seem to have gone on rounds of visits to titled friends. Although she never again travelled outside Britain, diaries survive for visits to Wales in 1814 and 1831. They reveal the same delight in awe-inspiring scenery, and the same determination to sketch what she saw, found in the Canadian diaries. In Wales she also looked for traces of her Gwillim ancestors. 
A notable aspect of Elizabeth Simcoe's life, and that of her daughters, is the intensity of female friendships revealed in their journals and correspondence. The women in these networks lived in the country, were all highly intelligent, interested in science, art, and languages, and seem to have been in control of their lives. 
Contact with Upper Canada was maintained. The Simcoe family owned property there, managed by an agent, until 1826. Sir Frances Head, a later lieutenant-governor, was a family connection, whose wife kept them abreast of political developments. Elizabeth Simcoe helped pay for the Cambridge education of the Revd Henry Scadding, the son of their agent, and also for at least one of the sons of John Strachan, first bishop of Upper Canada. After her mother's death the eldest daughter, Eliza, was still donating money for missionary activities in Upper Canada and writing to ecclesiastical authorities in England on behalf of the Canadian church. 
Elizabeth Simcoe died at Wolford on 17 January 1850, aged eighty-seven, and was buried on 27 January at the chapel there beside the husband she had survived for forty-four years. She had complained of declining health for some time, but was still active well into her eighties. It was Eliza who preserved her mother's diaries, drawings, and correspondence. Had it not been for her, Elizabeth Simcoe would be known only as the shadowy wife of a colonial governor, and a beneficent member of the Devon gentry, instead of her present status as one of the most admired founders of modern Ontario. 


@@@@@


doc= 47798


Leyland, Thomas (1752?-1827), merchant and banker, is thought to have been born in 1752, one of the two known children (he had a sister) of Richard Leyland of Knowsley, Lancashire. Nothing is known about his early life. By 1768, however, he was employed by Edward Bridge, cooper, of Liverpool. He then entered service with Gerald Dillon, an Irish trader, and by 1774 was his partner, having borrowed $500 to invest in the business. It was an inspired investment; in December 1776 they won $20,000 in the state lottery. Six months later Leyland married Ellen Bridge ('c'.1755-1839), daughter of his former employer, who had died in 1775. The marriage failed to produce children, but Leyland received one third of Ellen's mother's estate when she died in 1782. 
By this time Leyland was in business on his own, having dissolved his partnership with Dillon in 1781. During the next twenty years his commercial affairs blossomed as he diversified from the Irish trade into the trades in olive oil, sherry, wine, and African slaves. The last was particularly important since its capital requirements encouraged him to form alliances with other local merchants. In March 1790 investment in slaving voyages by Thomas Leyland & Co. stood at over $36,000. Leyland remained active in the trade until its abolition in 1807. Some voyages yielded rich dividends and undoubtedly contributed to his growing fortune. 
Seen as 'a man of amazing shrewdness, sagacity, and prudence' (Hughes, 177), Leyland remained appreciative of early good fortune, naming one of his ships 'Lottery'. Others, appropriately, were named 'Enterprise' and 'Fortune'. His growing wealth was accompanied by expanding business premises in Liverpool, and by 1800 he had offices and warehouses in Duke Street, Henry Street, York Street, and Nova Scotia. Two years later he purchased the 300 acre estate of Walton Hall, said to be 'a residence admirably suited for a commercial Gentleman of the first importance' (ibid., 172). 
In 1802 Leyland became a partner in the banking firm of Clarkes and Roscoe of Dale Street. As William Roscoe had abolitionist sympathies, this was a strange alliance, but Leyland strongly supported Roscoe when he stood successfully as a whig at Liverpool in the election of November 1806. Within two months, however, Leyland had left Roscoe's firm to establish his own bank, taking his nephew Richard Bullin as partner, and in May 1807 strenuously opposed Roscoe's re-election, accusing him of a 'bitter mortification' (HoP, 'Commons'). Interestingly, Roscoe finished bottom of the poll. In 1809 Richard's brother Christopher joined the new banking firm, now known as Leyland and Bullins. Based first in York Street and after 1816 in King Street, the bank prospered; between 1812 and 1827 customers' deposits doubled to $1.2 million, while loans to the public tripled to nearly $300,000. Following Leyland's death in 1827, it survived until 1901 under the guidance of the Bullins and, from 1849, the Naylors -- Leyland's niece Dorothy having married in 1809 John Naylor of Hartford Hill, Cheshire. 
Until the mid-1790s Leyland's interests were almost wholly centred on business, but his political standing in Liverpool rose in tandem with his wealth. In 1796 he was co-opted on to the Liverpool town council, and two years later was elected mayor. He was re-elected in 1814 and 1820. In addition to local office-holding, Leyland was also nominated in 1816 to challenge George Canning at a parliamentary by-election in Liverpool. Noted for his parsimonious nature, Leyland was a very reluctant candidate -- Canning dubbed him 'a man of straw' (HoP, 'Commons') -- and refused to campaign seriously; it was, Canning claimed, 'a struggle with an invisible phantom' (Hughes, 176). Despite his evident lack of interest, Leyland polled nearly 750 votes compared to his rival's 1260. He refused to be nominated for the 1818 parliamentary election, but in 1823 became a JP and deputy lieutenant for the county of Lancaster. 
Said to be 'a fine-looking man, with what some thought a stern and forbidding, but what we should call a firm and decided, look' (Hughes, 177), Thomas Leyland died on 29 May 1827 at his home, Walton Hall, Liverpool. He was buried in the family vault at Walton church, Liverpool. He was survived by his wife, Ellen, who died in 1839. The main beneficiaries of his will were his wife and his nephews, Richard and Christopher Bullin, who subsequently adopted the name and arms of Leyland. 


@@@@@


doc= 47799


Schloss, David Frederick (1850-1912), economist and civil servant, was born in West Derby, Lancashire, on 5 April 1850, the first son of Sigismund Schloss, merchant, of West Derby, and his wife, Rebecca Mocatta. He was educated at Manchester grammar school before matriculating at Corpus Christi College, Oxford, in 1869. He was one of the first Jews to be elected to a college scholarship, which he held from 1869 until 1874, when he graduated BA. His college career was illustrious: he was placed in the first class of classical moderations in 1871 and in the first class of 'literae humaniores' in 1873. He was called to the bar of Lincoln's Inn in 1875. On 14 April 1886 Schloss, aged thirty-six, then resident at 17 Davies Street, Berkeley Square, London, and already established as a barrister, married Rachel Sophia Waley, aged twenty-one, at the West London Synagogue, Marylebone. She was the daughter of Professor Jacob Waley. Schloss was well connected in Anglo-Jewish circles: the philanthropist F. D. Mocatta was his uncle and the banker Leonard Lionel Cohen became his brother-in-law. 
Schloss demonstrated in intellectual and practical ways his concern for the lives of the poor of London and particularly for those of Jewish immigrants. In 1885 he printed 'The homes of the poor' in 'Time', addressing the implications of the recent royal commission's report. In 1887 Schloss served as treasurer of the East London Tailoresses' Union and was active in the movement promoting the foundation of women's trade unions. He also supported a short-lived co-operative tailors' workshop, managed by a Mr Risenbury of Backchurch Lane. Schloss's interest in tailoring stemmed from his activities as a member of the Jewish Board of Guardians. He had regular contact with the Charity Organization Society and published several articles on 'sweating' in the 'Charity Organisation Review'. 
In October 1887 Beatrice Potter, hoping for information about 'sweating practices', obtained an interview with Schloss in his role of sanitary inspector (1884-1912) for the Jewish Board of Guardians. She was disappointed, although he did introduce her to the chief rabbi and his wife. Potter described Schloss as 'Gentleman Jew... Ugly little swarthy fellow, with loud and familiar manners and very full of his own importance but a good natured little soul' (Beatrice Potter's holograph diary, BLPES). Schloss's reluctance to help her stemmed perhaps from his own essay on 'The sweating system' in the 'Fortnightly Review' and his understandable unwillingness that she should steal his thunder. Charles Booth was sufficiently impressed to employ him to study the East End boot and shoe trades for 'Life and Labour of the People in London'. Assisted by Jesse Argyle, Schloss's investigation comprised over 220 interviews, and he spent much time himself in precise observation of the workers of Mr Fox's workshop in Ogle Street. He collected a good deal of material about women's work in the trade. 
Schloss is best described as a 'social radical', a member of the Fabian Society who criticized Gladstonian Liberalism and proposed in 1892 the formation of a fourth party, focusing on MPs such as R. B. Haldane and A. H. D. Acland, which was not socialist but progressive. By the early 1890s he had also established for himself a reputation as an economist whose work was based upon minute observation of carefully collected statistics. In 1893 Hubert Llewellyn Smith, a former associate of Charles Booth and commissioner for labour in the Board of Trade since 1892, appointed Schloss to a position of investigator in the labour department of the Board of Trade. In 1893 Schloss presented to the Royal Statistical Society, of which he was a fellow, a paper entitled 'The reorganisation of our labour department', which caused something of a stir in government circles. He produced several official reports for the department, including 'Foreign Immigration to the USA' (1893), 'Profit Sharing' (1894), 'Gain-Sharing', 'Strikes and Lockouts of 1898', and the 'Report on Trade Unions in 1898' (1900). He was promoted to senior investigator in 1903 before becoming director of the census production office in 1907. A founder member of the London Economic Club, his highly regarded 'Insurance Against Unemployment' (1909) and 'Methods of Industrial Remuneration' (in its several editions from 1892) were both in use at Cambridge until the 1930s. He was also a regular and respected reviewer for the 'Economic Journal'. Schloss died on 15 October 1912 at his home, 18 Hornton Court, Kensington, London, and was survived by his wife and three sons, (Sigismund) David Waley, Arthur David Waley, and Hubert David Waley (1892-1968), all of whom assumed the family name of their mother in 1914. 


@@@@@


doc= 47800


Symes, John Elliotson (1847-1921), college head, was born at 77 Grosvenor Street, London, on 31 December 1847, the second son of Edmond Sheppard Symes MD and his wife, Mary, formerly West. He was educated at University College School, London, before being admitted as a scholar at Downing College, Cambridge, in October 1867. He was president of the Cambridge Union and graduated in 1871 as tenth junior optime in the mathematical tripos; he proceeded MA in 1874. He taught at Lancing College, Sussex, from 1872 to 1875. In 1875 Symes was ordained priest and became a Cambridge extension lecturer, serving also as a curate in Stepney, London. Five years later he became second master at the Royal Grammar School, Newcastle upon Tyne. 
In 1881 Symes was appointed professor of language and literature at the newly founded Nottingham University College. On 31 December 1884 in Gateshead he married Eleanor Sabina Baylee, daughter of W. C. P. Baylee, vicar of Alston, Cumberland. At Nottingham Symes lectured also on history and political economy (Henry, later Baron, Snell was one of his students). He introduced teacher training and commercial courses, and later created an engineering department. As principal from 1890 he had far-reaching ambitions for the college, proposing to the Bryce commission on secondary education of 1894-5 that it should become an educational centre to serve the whole of the east midlands. He also wanted to see each region of the country with its own university or college. However, Symes's three decades as professor and principal brought only relatively modest growth to the college. It relied almost wholly on funds from the municipality, and most councillors wished for little more than a technical college. Incapable of cajoling his paymasters into laying out funds as an act of civic pride, by his views and activities he unwittingly turned the worthies of Nottingham against him. 
Although an acclaimed preacher in local churches, Symes shared platforms with such high-profile freethinkers as Charles Bradlaugh and with the unorthodox cleric Stewart Headlam. At the church congresses of 1877 and 1880 he helped to distribute humanist pamphlets, and at the latter congress commended the nobility of secularist principles. An executive member of the Guild of St Matthew, a pressure group for the promotion of Christian socialism, he regularly lectured to secularists in the hope of converting them. 
For a while Symes enthusiastically supported Bradlaugh's Land Law Reform League, founded to publicize Henry George's proposals for a land tax. George Bernard Shaw later quipped that the radical Symes was 'the chaplain of a pirate ship' ('Bernard Shaw: Collected Letters, 1898-1910', ed. D. H. Lawrence, 1972, 489). However, Symes soon resigned from the league, and in 'A Short Text Book of Political Economy' (1888) advocated a tax on the rental value of land, preferably topped up by a highly progressive income tax. He urged state action to relieve the widespread poverty and unemployment of the 1880s, advocating job-creating government workshops. He also protested at the low wages and poor working conditions of the Nottingham laceworkers. To assist the welfare of deprived children Symes was chairman of the committee of the Nottingham branch of the NSPCC and of the Children's Holidays in Country Cottages scheme. 
In 1887 Symes caused further rumpuses by delivering some public lectures on the Irish question, and was condemned for using the college to spread political propaganda. Having in various ways incensed councillors, businessmen, and other influential local people, he gave them every excuse to withhold extra funds from the college, and this ruled out any move to its becoming a university during Symes's principalship. 
Having fought off several attempts by the council to unseat him, Symes remained as principal until he retired in 1912, and was then made an emeritus professor. He thereafter intended to devote himself to work consistent with his strong sympathies; one part was the writing of 'Broad Church' (1913), in which he maintained that a socialist programme must above all be a moral one, to improve human character, rather than a purely material one. He died at the Pension Suisse, via Monteleone, Palermo, Sicily, on 31 March 1921. He was survived by his wife and by two daughters, both teachers at independent schools. 


@@@@@


doc= 47801


Lowndes, Noble Frank (1896-1972), underwriter and insurance company manager, was born on 28 August 1896 at Gisborne, New Zealand, the eldest of the six sons of Frank Forbes Lowndes, wool shipper, and his wife, Laura Louisa. After primary school, Lowndes worked in Gisborne in his father's firm, and later was employed by a large export firm in Auckland. At the outbreak of the First World War, Lowndes volunteered for the army and was sent to German Samoa, where he landed on his eighteenth birthday and raised the flag as a member of the 1st New Zealand expeditionary force. After six months he was invalided with tropical fever, and later, with the Anzacs, he was also wounded on the Western Front. 
After the war Lowndes returned to New Zealand to work for his father's transport business, but this became bankrupt in the post-war depression, and Lowndes found employment selling life assurance in Auckland. Promoted to head the firm's pension unit, he attempted to promote more sophisticated employee benefit schemes such as combined pension, life, sickness, and accident insurance, but his employers objected. He resigned to join an Australian company, Mutual Life and Citizens, and moved to Sydney, where he became the youngest ever life manager for New South Wales. In 1928 he married Maisie Hennessy of Gisborne; but they were later divorced. 
In 1932 Lowndes became manager of a newly opened branch of Mutual Life in London, but was again frustrated by opposition towards his underwriting ideas. In 1934 he therefore left Mutual Life to set up his own broking firm in London. His partners included his brothers Roy and Colin, and in 1938 the firm moved to 38 Lowndes Street in Belgravia, a street named after one of Lowndes's ancestors, a secretary to the Treasury under Queen Anne. 
Over the next thirty-five years, Noble Lowndes & Partners expanded to become an international business, specializing in the design of company pension schemes, insurance broking, and life assurance. By 1939 Lowndes was already regarded as one of the leading life insurance agents in the City of London. From the outbreak of the Second World War he enthusiastically promoted innovative endowment assurance schemes, under which premium contributions could be offset against the rising burden of taxation. He also persuaded insurance companies to issue full war-risk cover on all schemes arranged by his firm. After the war further innovations included the notorious 'top hat scheme' of 1946, criticized as a form of tax evasion. Under this scheme the nominal salary of a senior executive was reduced, and the difference paid by the employer as a premium on an endowment assurance. The object was to maximize the amount of premiums paid towards the pension, at no extra cost to the employer, while reducing the amount of income lost to taxation. 
By 1960 the success of this and other schemes had made Noble Lowndes the largest firm of pension consultants in the world. One in four British companies had a pension scheme devised by Noble Lowndes. The firm, which became a limited company in 1949, also expanded overseas, and business was extended to offer personal financial services to senior executives, most of whom came to Noble Lowndes through their pension schemes. 
Although intensely proud of British traditions, Lowndes saw himself as a wild colonial boy who had come back to the mother country to make good. A staunch New Zealander, during the Second World War he had kept open house at his Warlingham home in Surrey for New Zealand and Australian fighter pilots based at Biggin Hill. He retired to Jersey in 1960, a few years before the firm of Noble Lowndes was taken over by the merchant bank Hill Samuel. In 1964 he declined the offer of a life peerage to join the new Labour government in a finance portfolio, because 'it would have been the icing on the cake for my Establishment foes in the City'. He did, however, continue to act as an adviser to the government on national pensions. After his divorce from his first wife Lowndes remarried, and he and his second wife, Jane Hose, had a son and a daughter. He spent his leisure time sedately, gardening and playing bridge. He died in Jersey on 9 May 1972. 


@@@@@


doc= 47802


Gonner, Sir Edward Carter Kersey (1862-1922), economist, was born on 5 March 1862 at 35 Conduit Street, Mayfair, London, the second son of Peter Kersey Gonner, silk mercer, and his wife, Elizabeth Carter. He was educated at Merchant Taylors' School, London, before entering Lincoln College, Oxford, in 1880 to study history, in which he gained a first in 1884. After leaving Oxford he worked briefly for the London Extension Society. In the autumn of 1885 he moved to an appointment as lecturer in political economy, modern history, and English literature at University College, Bristol, the combination of subjects reflecting the demands of the University of London BA degree, for which Bristol prepared its students. In 1888 he moved from Bristol to University College, Liverpool, which was at that time a part of the federal Victoria University of Manchester together with Owens College, Manchester, and Yorkshire College, Leeds. In 1890 Gonner married Annie Ledlie; they had one daughter. 
In 1891 Gonner was appointed to the newly endowed Brunner chair of economic science at Liverpool, a post which he held until his death. He thus became part of a generation of Oxford history graduates who played a significant part in the development of the teaching of economics at Oxford and elsewhere; William Ashley, for example, was a close contemporary. The Liverpool appointment enabled Gonner to develop his interests in both history and political economy, and was to prove the formative influence on his development as a teacher and economist. At the end of the nineteenth century Liverpool was at the peak of its commercial significance, being Britain's principal Atlantic port and the second city of England as regards population and wealth. The college did not want for benefactors, and Gonner's initial appointment was endowed by members of the shipping and insurance community. Much of his early teaching was directed towards clerks seeking employment in this sector, and his courses were geared towards the Victoria University final examination or the local college business curriculum. His teaching was reflected in his published work during this period: an elementary textbook on the economics of commerce entitled 'The University Economics' (1888), 'Commercial Geography' (1894), and two works on socialism, 'The Socialist State' (1895) and 'The Social Philosophy of Rodbertus' (1899). By the end of the 1890s the college business curriculum had developed into a school of commerce, a joint venture between the city and the university college, which formed the basis on which the newly independent university initiated its bachelor of commercial science degree in 1909. 
In 1894 Gonner was responsible for a report to the British Association for the Advancement of Science on the teaching of economics in Britain and abroad, contributing an appendix on Britain which drew attention to a lack of systematic training in the subject, and a survey of provision for such training in continental Europe. At this time, he noted, the Cambridge and the Liverpool chairs were the sole full-time professorial appointments in economics, and Alfred Flux in Manchester was the only fully occupied lecturer. Popular teaching in political economy was generally more successful, Gonner observed, but in Britain the development of university teaching in the subject was hindered by a failure on the part of relevant professions, such as banking and the civil service, to require of its recruits more than a passing acquaintance with the subject. 
Gonner was twice elected president of section F (economics and statistics) of the British Association, and chaired meetings in Toronto (1898) and Australia (1914). The continuing breadth of his interests is demonstrated by the fact that, during the period 1906-9 he was a member of the royal commission on shipping conferences, and in 1912 he published his important study of the development of the English farming landscape, 'Common Land and Inclosure'. Ostensibly a history of the appropriation of common land for individual use, charting the impact of this transition upon cultivation and employment, it had an explicitly analytical framework which owed much to Gonner's work in geography and economics. Likewise his interest in and advocacy of the writings of David Ricardo, of which he published editions in 1895 and 1923, sets him apart from those of his contemporaries who were shaping an approach to economic history broadly hostile to the analytical style of the new economics. As a 'historical economist' there was a great deal more of the economist than the historian in Gonner's approach. This is also evident in his work during the First World War in the Ministry of Food where he worked first as an economic adviser, then as director of statistics. His administrative skills were also put to use as an industrial arbitrator for the Ministry of Labour. Gonner was appointed CBE in 1918 and KBE in 1921 for his wartime service. At his death he was working as a member of the editorial board established by the Carnegie endowment to produce a social and economic history of wartime administration. He died of bronchial pneumonia on 24 February 1922 at 42 Heathfield Road, Wavertree, Liverpool; his funeral took place at Willaston church, near Chester, on 27 February. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 47803


Aves, Ernest Harry (1857-1917), social investigator and civil servant, was born on 30 August 1857 at Cleveland Villa, Station Road, Cambridge, the son of William Owen Aves, tailor and woollen draper, and his wife, Mary Ann Coales. He was educated in Cambridge at Llandaff House by a Mr Johnson and matriculated sizar at Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1880. He graduated BA in 1884, having been placed in the first class of the moral sciences tripos, and proceeded MA in 1887. On 18 June 1887 he was admitted to the Inner Temple but, as an early resident of Toynbee Hall (1887-97), his attentions were diverted to the university settlement movement. From 1889 to 1907 he was secretary of the Universities' Settlements' Association and he served as sub-warden of Toynbee from 1890 to 1897. He was affectionately known as Father Aves or Pater by the members. Henrietta Barnett described him as 'tall, loosely put together, somewhat slouching in his gait, preternaturally grave, fond of propounding fundamental enquiries and anxious for exact truth from the inwardest parts' (Barnett, 63). He was immediately set to work by Canon Barnett collecting information about the people of St Jude's parish. It was a type of work which Aves expanded for Charles Booth between 1888 and 1903. He developed the great skill as an interviewer and observer which is only partially revealed in his contributions to Booth's 'Life and Labour of the People in London' (1891-1903) but to which justice is done in his unpublished reports in the Booth archive. His contribution to the final volume of the 'Industry' series (5 vols.) and to the 'Star' volume was especially notable, and sales of the final volume outstripped those for the rest of the series. He developed a close friendship and working partnership with Charles and Mary Booth which outlived the survey. He supported the extension of democratic association among producers and consumers, welcoming the new unionism, siding with the dockers in the strike of 1889, and becoming the first president of the Trafalgar branch of the Dock, Wharf, Riverside and General Labourers' Union. 
On 28 July 1897 Aves married Eva Mary Maitland and moved out of Toynbee Hall. The couple had two daughters: Geraldine Maitland ['see 'Aves, Dame Geraldine Maitland] was born on 22 August 1898 and Florence was born in July 1903. The family lived in a farmhouse in Witley and in Hampstead, where the girls attended Frognal School. While preserving his interest in Toynbee, and continuing to work for Booth on the 'Religious Influences' series, Aves built up a career in public service. He was appointed special commissioner on wage boards and compulsory arbitration in Australia and New Zealand in 1907-8. He joined the labour department of the Board of Trade as a statistical investigator in 1907, as an expert on the casual labour market and its conditions, and his report on the sweated trades was considered influential in achieving regulatory legislation for these industries. As chief administrator of the 'Trade Boards Act' (while chairman of the British and Irish trade boards, from 1912 to 1917) he extended the legislation to include fresh trades so that by 1917 there were eight English trade boards and five Irish. The 'Labour notes' which he regularly contributed to the 'Economic Journal', articles on wages and hours of labour in the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica', and his book 'Co-Operative Industry' (1907) provide statements of his progressive ideas. 
In his private life Aves was reported to have a fine sense of humour. In his bachelor days he was an enthusiastic mountaineer: he was elected to the Toynbee Alpine Club in December 1893 and engaged in several bold ascents. With his marriage in 1897 he became very much the family man, and a Toynbee friend recalled him teaching his young daughter rock-climbing near Tenby. He was indeed, by all accounts, a devoted husband and father, who painstakingly invented 'marvellous puzzle-letter cards, exactly suited to the capacity of each child' from divers parts of the globe. He was an avid photographer. He planned to return to rock-climbing among the glaciers in August 1914 but the war intervened. He received the news of Booth's death with sadness. Aves died, after a short illness, at Stoatby Rough, Thursley, Haslemere, Surrey, on 19 April 1917, leaving his widow and two daughters. His elder daughter, Dame Geraldine Aves, after graduating from Newnham College, Cambridge, followed her father into the civil service and became prominent in work with the social services, particularly regarding education and the care of the young and aged. Scholars have speculated about Ernest Aves's religious position; his daughter was a lifelong devout Anglican and was a member of the London diocesan synod and bishop's council from 1971 to 1979. 


@@@@@


doc= 47804


Luard, Henry (1792-1860), banker, was born on 4 December 1792, the fifth son of Captain Peter John Luard (died 1830) of Blyborough Hall, Lincolnshire, and his wife Louisa, daughter of Charles Dalbiac, of Hungerford Park, Wiltshire. Luard was one of eight brothers; he had no sisters. His eldest brother inherited the Lincolnshire property on the death of their father in 1830. Of the remaining six, three entered the army, two the church, and one took up a medical career. 
By contrast, Henry Luard, the only son not educated for a profession, was taken on at an early age by a mercantile trading house, probably in the City of London. His intuitive grasp of figures was recognized at once and he was quickly promoted to the responsible position of ledger keeper. This provided him with a sound commercial education, laying the groundwork for a long career in banking and commerce. A man of stout physical appearance, Luard, with widespread family connections and a number of distinguished musical attainments, moved easily between the business world of the City and the pleasant diversions of polite metropolitan society. On 13 November 1824 he married Jane, daughter of William Richards of Clatford, Hampshire. Together they had four sons, the eldest being Henry Richards Luard, university registrary. 
By the 1830s Luard's career was firmly in the ascendant, with appointments as director of the London Life Association and deputy chairman of the Southampton Dock Company. Luard was chiefly known, however, for his role as general manager of the London and County Bank between 1841 and 1856. Established in 1836, the London and County Bank was one of the new wave of joint-stock banks formed in the metropolis following the liberalization afforded by the 'Bank Charter Act' of 1833. Despite considerable business success, the bank quickly gained a reputation as a somewhat unlucky institution, and its first two decades were marred by ill-judged and, on occasion, fraudulent activities on the part of its most senior managers. Luard's appointment in 1841 was, in fact, occasioned by the unexplained disappearance of the previous general manager Thomas Dighton in connection with serious errors of commercial judgement. 
Showing strong determination of character, allied to his long-standing financial experience and an iron constitution, Luard worked unceasingly to remedy the bank's affairs, instituting a series of structural reforms in the operation and management of the bank. That he did so with the full co-operation, even admiration, of his colleagues is clearly evident in the report of a testimonial organized in 1853 by his branch managers: 'to record their high and grateful sense of the valuable and effective management of Henry Luard, Esq., the company's general manager. To his urbanity and gentlemanly deportment, combined with those rare talents which so eminently qualify him for the responsible post he fills, may be attributed, they feel, in a very great degree, the well-regulated and gratifying harmony which has characterised the conduct of their business for the several past years. ('Bankers' Magazine', 13, 1853, 752)' Within three years such sentiments must have carried a distinctly hollow ring: on 25 March 1856 Henry Luard resigned as general manager of the London and County Bank, on the grounds of irregular conduct of the bank's affairs which had left him deeply indebted both to the bank and to several other parties connected with it. An internal investigation following the suicide of the bank's chairman, John Sadler MP, who had been forging shares, revealed a number of dubious transactions, including unsecured loans (likely to produce a loss of $10,000 for the bank) in favour of parties to whom Luard was personally indebted. It appeared also that his personal finances bordered on insolvency. 
Despite this fall from grace, which brought such a sudden end to Luard's banking career, recognition is due for the many sound advances in the treatment of bank employees that he helped to promote, of which the establishment of a provident fund for their long-term protection was of especial note. Within a few short years Luard was dead. His body was found in a field at Thornbury, Devon, on 20 May 1860. An inquest held on the 21st revealed that he died suddenly, of unknown causes. 


@@@@@


doc= 47806


Lumsden, James (1778-1856), banker, was born at Glasgow on 13 November 1778, the eldest son of James Lumsden, a printer and engraver in the city, and his wife, Janet Craig. His education was obtained in the grammar school (later Glasgow high school), where he was a contemporary of the poet Thomas Campbell, and immediately after leaving school he entered his father's business as an apprentice. He succeeded to control of the business upon his father's death ('c'.1820). In Lumsden's hands it grew rapidly and diversified into manufacturing stationery and printing diaries, almanacs, and guidebooks. 
Lumsden was a man with an enormous range of interests. An eager innovator, he was on board Henry Bell's famous experimental trip across the River Clyde in his steamship 'Comet' in 1812. He was keen on the arts and encouraged painters such as Horatio McCulloch and Sir Daniel Macnee. He gave over fifty years of public service to the city of Glasgow. During the 1820s he spent a few years on the unreformed town council, but his reforming ideas made him unpopular with the tories and he was not re-elected until 1833, in the first open election to the new council. He became a magistrate at that time and served until 1853, save for the period 1838-41 when the tories regained control. From 1843 until 1846 he was lord provost. He belonged to a group of reforming whigs, known locally as 'the clique'. This group were free-traders, and strongly opposed to the corn laws, but it was in local politics that they made their mark. 
During his time as provost Lumsden was largely responsible for extending the boundaries of the city into the burghs of Anderston, Gorbals, and Calton. As a member of the Clyde Trust he took a major role in improving the navigability of the river. He was also a justice of the peace and deputy lieutenant for Lanarkshire. Lumsden's great energies were also devoted to social and philanthropic matters. He was treasurer of the Royal Infirmary for nineteen years, and used his many networks to raise funds. One of the promoters of the first model lodging houses, he took an interest in providing homes and night refuges for the homeless. He helped to found the City of Glasgow Native Benevolent Society and the Glasgow Athenaeum, and was three times president of the Incorporated Company of Stationers. The formation of what became the Glasgow Savings Bank in 1836 owed much to his energy and enterprise. 
Lumsden's first real involvement with banking came in 1830, when he was one of the original promoters of the Glasgow Union Bank, but a dispute over the powers of the chairman occasioned his withdrawal. In 1838 he was involved, with a group of Glasgow businessmen 'of the middling order, liberal-radicals' (Checkland, 335), in the formation of one of the strongest joint-stock banks, the Clydesdale Bank. Although aged sixty, Lumsden was the moving spirit in the enterprise. There were 776 shareholders, and within a year the paid-up capital was $375,000; by 1841 it was $500,000. The bank had strong Edinburgh support, and Lumsden organized the purchase of the fine offices of Ramsay-Bonars as the Clydesdale's Edinburgh branch. 
The bank had nine branches by the end of 1840, and in 1844 it took over the Greenock Union Bank. The founders of the bank have been aptly portrayed as 'thoroughly middle-class' and, in spite of their mildly radical politics, as 'hard-headed and cautious' (Checkland, 336). Lumsden served as chairman in 1838-41, and again in 1847. He retired from the bank in 1848. The records of the bank bear witness to his energy, imagination, and humour. The Clydesdale was one of only two of the Glasgow banks to maintain an independent existence into the twentieth century. 
In the business world Lumsden also helped found the City of Glasgow Life Assurance Company, the City and Suburban Gas Company, and the Caledonian Railway Company. His involvement with railway companies seems to have been relatively modest, and he did not get heavily involved in the speculations of the late 1840s. For a time he was involved in running river steamers, but withdrew in 1841. 
In 1802 Lumsden married Margaret (died 1819), the daughter of William Mirrlees, a saddler in Glasgow; they had two sons and a daughter. His wife's brother William was closely involved with Lumsden in many of his business pursuits, as was his son-in-law, Peter White, an accountant in Glasgow. Sir James Lumsden, one of his sons, was closely involved with the Clydesdale Bank; he served as a director and was chairman for a number of years. Throughout his life Lumsden was a faithful member of the Church of Scotland, and in 1850 he endowed a bursary for students of theology at Glasgow University. 
A man of many talents and connections, Lumsden died on 16 May 1856 from an inflammation of the stomach and bowels at 208 St Vincent Street, Glasgow. An obituarist recalled that 'It is scarcely possible to mention a single local cause or event of a public nature with which he was not intimately associated' (Munn, 308). 


@@@@@


doc= 47808


Manning, William (1763-1835), merchant, was born on 1 December 1763, the only surviving son of William Manning, merchant, of the parish of St Mary Axe in the City of London, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter and heir of John Ryan, a planter in St Kitts and Santa Cruz. The elder William Manning also came from a planter family on St Kitts, and soon after his marriage in 1751 started a merchant house in Bristol, trading to the West Indies, subsequently moving to London. His son joined the firm and took over on his father's death in 1791; he also inherited two-thirds of the Ryan estates on Santa Cruz from his mother, and purchased the remaining third. His status in the City was marked by his election to a directorship of the Bank of England in 1792. He remained a member of the court until 1831, serving as deputy governor (1810-12) and governor (1812-14). In 1793 he became a commissioner of exchequer bills; he also served as agent for St Vincent between 1792 and 1806, and for Grenada between 1825 and 1831. 
In 1786 Manning married Elizabeth, the daughter of Abel Smith, a Nottingham banker, with whom he had two daughters. After her death, he remarried in 1792; his second wife was Mary (1771-1847), daughter of Henry Leroy Hunter, a barrister of Reading, with whom he had four sons (including Henry Edward Manning, the future cardinal) and four daughters. The connection with the Smith family took Manning into Pitt's circle, and in 1794 he entered the Commons as the member for Plympton Erle, subsequently sitting for Lymington (1796-1806), Evesham (1806-18), Lymington again (1818-20 and 1821-6), and Penryn until 1830. He was a staunch supporter of the government, promoting the loyal declaration of London merchants in 1795, and subscribing to the loyalty loan of 1797. He served as a volunteer in the London and Westminster light horse in 1797, before joining the Bank of England Volunteers in 1798, where he rose to the rank of lieutenant-colonel in 1803. He was also a leading spokesman of the West Indies interest in the Commons, and was particularly active in the campaign for a dock to serve the West Indies trade. A committee of West Indies merchants was formed in 1795, and $800,000 was subscribed to a company to construct the proposed dock. He submitted the petition for the bill in 1796, and was instrumental in the appointment of a select committee against the opposition of the City corporation, which feared a threat to its income from the quays on the Thames. Although the bill failed, it was reintroduced in 1797, and was finally approved at the end of 1799. Manning was also active in urging compensation for slave owners, but he denied that he opposed abolition of slavery. 
By the 1790s Manning was a wealthy man at the heart of the City. He had a town house in Spring Gardens and a modest country house, Copped Hall, at Totteridge, on the outskirts of London; in 1813 he purchased the Coombe Bank estate at Sundridge, near Sevenoaks, for $40,000, a property which was more fitting to his status. He was, Cardinal Manning later remarked, 'of the Old Church Established religion; a friend of the bishops, many of whom were his close personal friends', especially Wilberforce and Tomline; and he remembered his father as 'one of the justest, most benevolent, most generous men I ever knew', who had a 'refinement and delicacy of mind' and a modest and sensitive aversion to display (Purcell, 7-8). These memories may say more about the cardinal's filial sentiments in old age than about his father's character, and may reflect the cares which descended on him from the end of the Napoleonic wars and the depression in the West Indies trade which marked a turning point in his prosperity. He was in difficulties in the 1820s, and in 1831 he became bankrupt. His son Henry, who led him away from his appearance before a commissioner of bankruptcy at the Guildhall, remembered 'his saying to me with much feeling, 'I have belonged to men with whom bankruptcy was synonymous with death.' It was so to him' (Purcell, 71). He resigned from the Bank of England, sold his estate, and withdrew from business and public life. His friends bought a life interest in his wife's marriage settlement, and subscribed to an income which allowed him to survive in the shabby gentility of Gower Street and a cottage near Petworth. He died at Gower Street on 17 April 1835, probably with his bankruptcy still undischarged, and was buried at Sundridge, Kent. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 47809


Devas, Charles Stanton (1848-1906), political economist, was born on 26 August 1848 at Long Ditton, Surrey, the second son of William Devas (died 1870), a merchant, later of Old Windsor, Berkshire, and his wife, Martha Anne (died 1894), daughter of Charles Stanton of Upfield, Stroud, Gloucestershire. He was educated at Eton College and from 1867 at Balliol College, Oxford, where he graduated in 1871 with first-class honours in the school of law and modern history. He entered Lincoln's Inn (1870) but was never called to the bar. The rest of his life was devoted to study, writing, and lecturing. He had become a Roman Catholic in 1867 and in 1876 was appointed as tutor in constitutional history and political economy at the short-lived Catholic University College in Kensington, founded by Cardinal Manning. He remained there until 1878 but did not obtain a professorship, although he is usually referred to as being professor of political economy. It seems that his only other salaried post was as external examiner in political economy at the Royal University of Ireland, a position he held for nine years. In 1874 he married Eliza Mary Katherine, daughter of Francis Ridout Ward of 26 Hyde Park Street, Westminster; they lived in London at 8 Inverness Gardens, Kensington, and had six sons and two daughters. Three of the sons became Roman Catholic priests and served as chaplains in the First World War, during which they won awards for gallantry; all three were appointed OBE after the war. A fourth son, Bertrand, became a writer and was for a time assistant editor of the 'Dublin Review'. 
Devas's most ambitious work was his 'Groundwork of Economics', published in 1883; the most influential was his 'Political Economy', published in 1892. This went into a third, revised, edition in 1907 (prepared by the author just before his death) and was also translated into German; it was recommended for many years by the Catholic Social Guild. Other subjects covered in his books and pamphlets included the Christian family, the historical importance of the Catholic church, the relationship between labour and capital, socialism, Christian democracy, and free trade. He contributed articles and reviews to the 'Dublin Review', the 'International Journal of Ethics', and the 'Economic Journal', and presented papers to the British Association (in 1894 and 1901), the Manchester Statistical Society, and various Catholic conferences. 
Devas was concerned to find an alternative to both socialism and 'laissez-faire' individualism. He admitted that socialism had a number of attractive features, and there is a welcome absence from his writings of the simplistic dismissal of it frequently found in contemporary Catholic writings. He was no dreamy-eyed medievalist and welcomed modern industrialized society; the challenge was to structure it so as to benefit all its citizens. Socialism was not the answer: its view of humanity was fundamentally unhistorical, its programmes would be unworkable, and, above all, there was total incompatibility between it and the family. The family was the basic unit of society, with rights and duties anterior to those of the state, to be protected at all costs. The solution lay in the establishment of a Christian democracy. This would not provide easy answers, but would protect labour by supporting trade unions and end cut-throat competition among employers: 'there must be regulated trading and collective bargaining' (C. S. Devas, 'The Meaning and Aims of Christian Democracy', 1899, 13). He condemned international free trade as a 'vampire [that] sucked the very life-blood of the nation' (introduction to J. Byles, 'Sophisms of Free Trade', 1904). Economics, he insisted, must be essentially ethical. There was some criticism of the dogmatism of his more overtly Catholic writings, but all praised the fairness with which he treated the views of opponents. 
Devas died suddenly of a heart attack on 6 November 1906 at Mount Pleasant, Farningham, Kent, while visiting his elder brother. 


@@@@@


doc= 47810


Taylor, Sedley (1834-1920), music scholar and benefactor, was born on 29 November 1834 at Kingston upon Thames, Surrey, the son of George Taylor, a surgeon. He was educated at University College School, London, and he matriculated at Trinity College, Cambridge, in Michaelmas 1855; he became a scholar in 1857, graduated BA (sixteenth wrangler) in 1859, and proceeded MA in 1862. He was junior bursar of Trinity from 1866 to 1869. Elected a fellow in 1861, and obliged as Trinity statutes then stood to proceed to ordination, he took deacon's orders and served as curate of St Michael's, Handsworth, Birmingham, in 1863-4. In 1869, however, he wrote that 'a course of inquiry... carried on for several years, has led me to form convictions very seriously at variance with the formularies which bind the conscience of the English clergy' ('The System of Clerical Subscription', 1869, 25). In 1897 Taylor declared that his loss of faith had 'dislocated and in great measure crippled' his life ('Cambridge Review', 25 Feb 1897, xliii-xlv). 
Since he did not take priest's orders Taylor's fellowship lapsed when he ceased to be bursar in 1869. Thereafter, he resided in Trinity until his death without a post in college or university, apart from serving as librarian of Trinity in 1870-71: he was of a type that subsequently became rare in Cambridge, dependent for his status as a don on personal activity rather than formal office. He remained unmarried. Conviviality was a way of life, and he took obvious and infectious pleasure in telling jokes and rendering comic songs, although a certain reserve suggested subtlety of character. Distinctive in appearance, his thick and spreading black beard is said to have provoked Alfred Marshall to refer to him as 'that owl in the ivy bush' (Knight, 85). 
Enjoying a private income, Taylor devoted himself to a variety of pursuits and good causes: he gave to many charities and privately to needy students. He was a constant supporter of Addenbrooke's Hospital and in 1907 began, with a crucial gift of funds, the Cambridge Dental Institute for the treatment of children's teeth, the first such agency in England. In 1911 he was given the freedom of the city of Cambridge because of his services. He was Liberal in his politics, and his long-continued advocacy of profit-sharing in industry, on which he became a British expert, should be seen as his sensitive response to current denunciations by Ruskin and others of unbridled capitalism. His essays on the subject were published as 'Profit-Sharing between Capital and Labour' (1884). On the main university contention of the day Taylor was an enthusiast for women's education. In the 1860s he helped to lead the group of dons planning the college that became Girton; he took a far-sighted view of its future, and opposed Emily Davies herself in his judgement that the college should move from Hitchin to Cambridge: 'the moral objections seem to be imaginary. There has never been the slightest difficulty with the ladies' lectures [at Cambridge], though many of those who attend are young girls' (Stephen, 246). Taylor was a member of Girton from 1872 until his death, and a generous benefactor. 
Music was an abiding pleasure and scholarly concern. Absorbed by the physics of music, Taylor carried out experiments on sound in the Cavendish Laboratory, and argued with scientific detail for the superiority of the tonic sol-fa notation over the staff system. He brought to his researches fluency in French and German, and his 'Sound and Music' (1873) transmitted to English readers the revolutionary acoustical theories of Hermann Helmholtz; it enjoyed two later editions, and was a standard textbook until the twentieth century. Other writings, on J. S. Bach and Handel, also exploited continental scholarship, but Taylor too modestly disclaimed his own creative talent, notably in clearly assembling the evidence for Handel's extensive borrowings and his genius in transforming them. Ahead of his time in his devotion to J. S. Bach, he translated and published some cantata choruses as anthems. He also composed some short pieces of music, although these attracted little popularity outside Cambridge, and he was a talented pianist and organist. While never having a stipendiary post, he was a luminary of the Cambridge faculty of music during its golden age under Sterndale Bennett and Stanford. Taylor was president of the Cambridge University Musical Society as an undergraduate, and again for many years as a don. He was also a leading figure in the Cambridge University Musical Club, founded in 1889 to promote chamber music; at its 500th concert in 1912 he was acclaimed in a celebration ode as 'chief elder brother of our brotherhood... loving pilot of our music's Odyssey' (Knight, 96). 
Taylor died at Fallowfield, Manchester, on 14 March 1920, and was buried in Weston Colville, Cambridgeshire, on 18 March after a funeral service in Trinity College chapel. 


@@@@@


doc= 47813


Menzies, Sir William John (1834-1905), lawyer and financier, was born in Edinburgh on 14 October 1834. His father, Allan Menzies (1804-1856), was a writer to the signet and professor of conveyancing (1847-56) in the university. His mother, Helen Cowan, was the daughter of Alexander Cowan, paper maker. Menzies was educated at Edinburgh Academy, the University of Edinburgh, and in Germany. He trained as a lawyer, was admitted writer to the signet in 1858, and subsequently established his own practice. In 1859 he married Helen Marshall, a widow, the daughter of Alexander Adie, an optician. Three years after her death in 1867 he married Ellen, the youngest daughter of William Young and the widow of William Tweedie. In 1878 his second wife, Ellen, died and in 1879 he married a third widow, Annie Percival, the eldest daughter of J. A. Drought of Whigsborough, King's county, Ireland, whose late husband had been T. S. Jones of the National Bank of India. 
In 1864, 1867, and 1872 Menzies travelled to the United States on behalf of clients. Greatly impressed by the economic potential and higher rates of return on capital there he formed the idea of founding a foreign investment company. Existing investment trusts were fixed trusts or legal trusts which terminated at a defined date and held a portfolio of securities that normally were not changed. Menzies instead proposed an investment company which would manage a flexible portfolio. The Scottish American Investment Company Ltd, formed on 29 March 1873, was the first investment company established in Scotland and the first to invest exclusively in the United States. 
Menzies devised a capital structure which showed a shrewd understanding of the savings market. Investors could participate in either or both the equity and the loan capital. The nominal capital was $1 million, but to start with only 50,000 shares of $10 each were for sale, and only $2 of each $10 was to be paid up. For the loan capital, the company proposed to issue debenture stock bearing interest at 5.5 per cent and secured on the amount of unpaid capital and on the investments themselves. Investors who wished to participate in the risk or equity capital thus had access to a large quantity of low-priced loan capital. By issuing 50,000 shares of $10 each -- a total capital of $500,000 -- but collecting only $100,000 (50,000 shares at $2) the company could borrow up to $400,000 in debentures at 5.5 per cent. This could then be invested in the United States where interest rates were 7 per cent and above. The income to pay the ordinary shareholders would come from the difference between home and overseas interest rates. Substantial capitalists who had sufficient cash to take a risk with only the security of the underlying investment could buy the ordinary shares, while people who wanted a safe and steady return, yet a higher yield than was available in Britain, could purchase debentures with double security. In just over a month the equity shares were fully subscribed. Debentures were also popular, and by March 1874 the company had reached the limits of its borrowing powers. 
Scottish American proved extremely successful. The ordinary dividend from 1874 to 1903, when Menzies retired, never fell below 10 per cent. Investments rose from $436,000 to $3.4 million in 1903. This record contrasted with the single-purpose ventures that Menzies and his coterie operated in mining, ranching, and forestry, where fraud, legal complications over foreign ownership of American land, managerial weakness arising from absentee ownership, and speculation without regard for the underlying value of assets lost money for investors. 
Scottish American usually avoided single-purpose ventures, but in 1883 part of the reserve funds were invested in town sites in the Northwest Territories of Canada. Site values fell and Menzies was severely criticized by shareholders who demanded that he should drop his promotional activities and concentrate on Scottish American's business. When another of his ventures, the California Redwood Company, failed two years later the press blamed the directors of Scottish American. Public enthusiasm for overseas investment nevertheless remained high and by 1890 Menzies had achieved international recognition as an expert on American investment. In 1895 he published 'America as a Field for Investment'. 
Menzies served both God and Mammon. He was active in the Church of Scotland as an elder, as representative of the presbytery of Skye at the general assembly, and as agent for the church (1868-1905). He was prominent in the campaign against the disestablishment and disendowment of the Church of Scotland in the 1885 general election. He jointly wrote the petition 'Appeal to the People of Scotland', which was circulated among the electors of W. E. Gladstone's Midlothian constituency and delivered to Gladstone, who was staying with Lord Rosebery at Dalmeny. In May 1903, at Holyrood, Menzies was knighted for his services to the church. 
Ill health forced Menzies to retire as managing director of Scottish American in 1903. He died on 14 October 1905 at his home in Canaan Lane, Morningside, Edinburgh, leaving his widow, Annie, who died in 1923, and a family of six sons and two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 47814


Pearse, John (bap. 1759, d. 1836), clothier and financier, was baptized at St Margaret's, Lothbury, London, on 19 December 1759, the eldest of the three sons of Nicholas Pearse (died 1795), clothier, and his wife, Sarah (died in or after 1770). Nicholas Pearse traded as Pearse and Bowden, Blackwell Hall factors, with premises at 41 Lothbury, City of London, and country houses at Woodford, Essex, and Heddington, Wiltshire. John Pearse was taken into partnership in Pearse and Bowden in 1780. He married, on 31 January 1787, Anne (died in or after 1835), daughter and coheir of John Phillimore, silk merchant, of 15 New Broad Street, London; three sons and three daughters were born of the marriage. Phillimore died early in 1795, leaving $35,000 to Anne and $10,000 to John, who inherited another $30,000 when his own father died later that year. 
Before this considerable increase in his material fortune Pearse had become involved with the Bank of England, where he served as a director (1790-91, 1793-8), as deputy governor (1799-1810), and as governor (1810-12), thereafter reverting to director until 1828. When the bank was confronted by the threat of invasion by Napoleon's troops in 1803, a 400-strong volunteer militia was raised from among the employees, which Pearse captained, and the important books and records were transferred to country houses for safe keeping; from 1806 to 1816 Pearse's home, Chilton Lodge, Chilton Foliat, Wiltshire (near Hungerford, Berkshire), was so used. From 1826 until his death in 1836 he was a governor of the Van Diemen's Land Company which traded with the colony of Van Diemen's Land. 
Pearse and his family were also employed in the Sun Fire insurance office. His father was a manager from 1767 to 1795, he himself acted as one from 1785 until his death, and his brother Brice Pearse (1770-1842), of Monkhams in Essex, from 1803 to 1842. Brice's son and grandson continued the connection until 1875. 
Pearse came into the public arena by signing the London merchants' declaration of loyalty to the administration of William Pitt the younger in 1795. Two years later he gave $10,000 through the bank and $1000 in a private capacity to the loyalty loan. His dealings as a clothier were denounced as corrupt profiteering in the House of Commons, where it was claimed that he had secured the contract to supply army greatcoats by undercutting his competitors with a bid of 16's'., such garments being inevitably of inferior quality -- 'when he had signed the contract he ran off to Fenchurch Street, to a slopseller there, and agreed to pay him at the rate of 13s each' ('The Times', 25 June 1808, 3b). Pearse's brothers, Nicholas and Brice, joined him in business, first at Lothbury and later at Long Acre, trading as J. and B. Pearse. 
Chilton Foliat estate was acquired about 1806 and in 1807 Pearse bought the manor of Hidden to add to it. In 1835 he and his wife Anne settled both holdings on their son John, but are said to have sold them on later that year to the Revd Sir William Henry Cooper ('VCH Berkshire', 4.193). Pearse also bought the manor of Hungerford Englefield in 1811. 
Pearse's ambitions were not bounded by finance and commerce in the City of London. In 1818 he became MP for Devizes in Wiltshire, holding the seat until 1832 as a respected constituency figure and speaking regularly in the House of Commons where he was a recognized expert on financial matters. In 1819 he was consulted on the resumption of cash payments, and he supported post-war repressive measures in the autumn of that year. According to Thomas Moore he was 'a good hearty jolly man of the world; knows everybody; was intimate with Sheridan' (HoP, 'Commons'). He died on 21 July 1836 at Craig's Court, Charing Cross, Westminster, London, leaving instructions that he was to be buried at Chilton Foliat. 


@@@@@


doc= 47815


Peel, Sir Sidney Cornwallis, baronet (1870-1938), soldier and financier, was born on 3 June 1870, at 70 Eaton Place, Pimlico, London, the third son of Arthur Wellesley Peel, first Viscount Peel (1829-1912), and his wife, Adelaide (died 1890), daughter of William Stratford Dugdale. His father was the fifth son of the Rt Hon. Sir Robert Peel, and was himself a politician, serving as a Liberal MP (1865-95), parliamentary secretary to the Poor Law Board (1865-71) and to the Board of Trade (1871-3), under-secretary at the Home Office (1880), and speaker of the House of Commons (1885-95). He was created viscount in 1895. 
The younger Peel was educated at Eton College where he was a king's scholar and Newcastle scholar, and at New College, Oxford, where he was placed in the first class in honour moderations and Greats. He was elected a fellow of Trinity College, Oxford, in 1893. Shortly afterwards he became secretary to the licensing commission, of which his father was chairman. Based on this experience he wrote 'Practical Licensing Reform' (1901). He was called to the bar at Lincoln's Inn in 1898. 
Peel served in the South African War from 1900 as trooper in the Oxfordshire imperial yeomanry, for which he received the queen's medal with three clasps. He recounted his experience in his book 'Trooper 8008: Experiences in the Boer War' (1901). Shortly after the war he went to Egypt as a newspaper correspondent and this led to a further book, 'The Binding of the Nile and the New Sudan' (1904). At this time he began a business association with Sir Ernest Cassel, who was active in business and financial affairs in Egypt -- an association which lasted until Cassel's death in 1921. This led to Peel's obtaining a number of important posts in the City of London, notably chairman of the London committee of the National Bank of Egypt (which had been founded by Cassel) and vice-president of the Morocco State Bank (also founded by Cassel). In 1901 he became an official in the National Discount Company, of which he became a director in 1911, and chairman in 1922. Also in 1911 he was appointed to the Oxford Chest at the invitation of the then chancellor of Oxford University, Lord Curzon. 
In 1914 Peel married Lady Delia Spencer, daughter of the sixth Earl Spencer. There were no children. In the same year he became major of B squadron of the Bedfordshire yeomanry, of which he had been an officer since 1902. He became colonel in May 1915. In June 1915 he took the regiment to France, where it served as part of the 1st cavalry division. In this role, his brother later recalled, 'into the grisly outlook he infused a certain humour which appealed to all ranks... a splendid regiment was the result' ('The Times', 20 Dec 1938). For his services he was mentioned in dispatches and received the DSO. He recounted his war experiences in 'O. C. Beds. Yeomanry' (1935). In November 1917 he was recalled to act as financial adviser to the Foreign Office. In December 1918 he was elected Conservative MP for the Uxbridge division of Middlesex, which he held until the general election of 1922. He did not stand for parliament again. 
In his capacity as financial adviser to the Foreign Office, Peel attended the Versailles peace conference in 1919, at which he was especially concerned with the Bulgarian settlement. In 1919 he became chairman of the export credits guarantee department advisory committee, a position which he retained until his death and in which, according to his 'Times' obituarist, 'he did some of the most original and successful administrative work of his life' ('The Times', 20 Dec 1938). He became deputy steward of Oxford University in 1922, and a member of the Oxford University statutory commission on its formation in 1924, resigning when he was appointed British plenipotentiary to the tariff conference in China in 1925-6. In 1927 he went to India as a member of the special committee of inquiry into the relations of the Indian states with the British government, a duty which continued until 1929. He was a member of the municipal banks committee, in 1926-7, and of other government committees. For some years he was secretary of the National Trust. He was made CB in 1929 and a baronet in 1936. 
Peel's brother wrote at his death: 'In his youth my brother was reckoned to be as efficient in mathematics as in classics. In virtue of this two-fold capacity he could master any subject with an accuracy derived from the former and with a width derived from the latter of these branches of study. ('The Times', 20 Dec 1938)' Peel died at his home, 26 Hill Street, off Berkeley Square, London, on 19 December 1938, after a lengthy and painful illness. His funeral service was held at St Michael, Cornhill. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 47819


Smith, Abel (1788-1859), banker and politician, was born on 7 July 1788, probably in Nottinghamshire, the eldest son of Samuel Smith (1745-1834), banker and politician, and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1835), daughter of Edmund Turnor, of Stoke Rochford and Panton Hall, Lincolnshire. Smith was one of four brothers; he also had nine sisters. In 1801 Smith moved with his family from Nottinghamshire to Hertfordshire when his father purchased the estate of Woodhall Park at Watton, near Hertford. He was educated at Harrow School and Trinity College, Cambridge. 
Born into one of England's great banking families, Smith was destined to become perhaps the most respected banker of his generation. In 1810 he became a partner in the London banking house of Smith, Payne and Smith, which conducted business from no. 1 Lombard Street. In addition to this bank, founded in 1758, the Smith family also established banks at Nottingham (1658), Lincoln (1775), Hull (1784), and Derby (1806). In an era when the Bank of England held a monopoly of joint-stock banking, and private banks in both London and the provinces were predominantly single offices with no more than six partners, the interlocking partnerships forged by the Smiths were of especial significance. Smith became a partner in the Lincoln bank in 1829, though his interests and reputation were always closely tied to London. 
Despite being a relative newcomer to London private banking, Smith, Payne and Smith weathered the financial storm of 1825-6 (when eighty private banks failed in London and the country) better than most. In the following decades the bank went from strength to strength. The key role played by Smith was highlighted in a memoir in 1859, which noted that: 'during the last half century, the name of Abel Smith has been intimately associated with the banking business of London, and under his able management the house which his grandfather in connection with the late Mr. Payne, founded, attained to a position second to no private bank in the kingdom. No man, probably, in modern times has exercised a greater or a more deserved influence in financial circles than Mr. Smith. He was amongst the shrewdest and most far seeing of those who trade in money. ('Bankers' Magazine', 205)' Smith's experience of financial affairs was also widely recognized at Westminster, where he was a member of parliament for the boroughs of Midhurst and Wendover and, between 1835 and 1847, the county of Hertfordshire. A nephew of the first Lord Carrington, Smith was in politics a consistent conservative, voting against the 'Reform Bill' in 1832. Though not a natural orator, he carried considerable authority when speaking with his customary brevity on the financial matters of the day. Together with Sir Robert Peel and George Grote, he was a member of the Commons select committee whose inquiry into banking led to the 'Bank Charter Act' of 1844, which sought to stabilize the currency by fixing the volume of bank notes in circulation. 
On 28 August 1822, Smith married his first wife, Lady Marianne Melville, daughter of the ninth earl of Leven and Melville. The marriage, which was childless, ended with her death on 22 March 1823. He married his second wife, Frances Anne (died 1885), daughter of General Sir Harry Calvert, of Claydon Hall, Buckinghamshire, on 12 July 1826. They had four sons and six daughters. Following the death of his father in 1834, Smith inherited the family seat of Woodhall Park and devoted increasing amounts of time to the management of the estate. A JP for Hertfordshire, he maintained a strong interest in improving the social fabric of the locality, particularly through the endowment of livings and provision for the building and renovation of churches in the surrounding rural parishes. However, despite his many duties as a resident landlord, Smith continued to take an active role in the management of the London banking house until his death. 
Smith died at Woodhall Park, Watton, Hertfordshire, on 23 February 1859. An obituary in the 'Hertford Mercury' (26 February 1859) noted that 'as a landlord he was just and liberal; and as a resident among a population born and employed upon the land, he was not unminded of the obligation imposed upon the rich, of wisely and judiciously helping the poor'. He was buried at Watton, Hertfordshire, on 2 March 1859. Smith died a man of immense wealth, with land and property in no fewer than eight counties, together with his property and banking interests in London and Lincoln. The entailed estate of Woodhall Park descended to his eldest son, Abel Smith (1829-1898), while his shares in the banking establishments passed to his second son, Robert Smith (1833-1894). Remaining property was divided variously between his four sons, with cash legacies granted to his daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 47820


Stenhouse, Alexander Rennie (1876-1952), insurance broker, was born on 6 March 1876 at Lenzie, Dunbartonshire, one of the three children of John Stenhouse, builder, and Sarah Janet Goodwin. Stenhouse was brought up at Stepps, near Glasgow. After the early death of his father, Stenhouse left the village school in Milleston at the age of twelve to work as an errand-boy for a Glasgow newsagents. He moved on to employment with an insurance firm in Glasgow, and then, aged twenty-one, went to America, where he became a manager for the Hartford Insurance Company of Connecticut. 
In 1903 Stenhouse returned to Glasgow and joined the National of Great Britain, an early specialist company, insuring risks protected by automatic fire sprinklers. However, in 1904 he started his own insurance broking firm from a small office at 154 St Vincent Street. In the following decade, Stenhouse's business grew rapidly. He had an eye for the market opportunities created by offering large discounts on hazardous commercial properties protected by the new technology of water sprinklers, experience of which he had gained in his previous posts. His business acumen was reinforced by his personal charm and sociable nature, and by his great facility for remembering names and faces. Clients visiting his office always found his door open, and 'A. R.' keen to engage them in conversation. Stenhouse became one of the first members of the Association of Insurance Brokers and Agents (established 1906), and from 1911 he chaired a separate committee for Scotland. 
In 1911 the business acquired two partners, but Stenhouse retained a controlling interest in A. R. Stenhouse & Partners. Before and after the war, offices were opened in Edinburgh, Dundee, Perth, and Newcastle. A London office was opened in 1929, and expansion in the south continued up to and beyond the Second World War. The firm also diversified into loss of profits, liability, accident, and motor insurance. Fire underwriting, however, especially of industrial risks such as jute and paper mills, remained the staple through which the company's reputation as the leading insurance brokerage in Scotland was made. 
By the early 1920s Stenhouse was said to have become a millionaire, not least through his expanding investment activities. In 1922 he founded Scottish Western Trust to manage his family interests, and became associated with a number of investment trusts in which insurance equities played a prominent part: Glasgow Financial Trust (1924), Great Northern (1924), Home and Foreign (1926), Midland-Caledonian (1928), Clyde and Mersey (1929). Following the crash of 1929, Stenhouse's domestic staff were cut from sixteen to two, and his family temporarily moved into a factor's house on his estate. Then further calamity struck. Stenhouse became implicated in the alleged fraudulent flotation of Scottish Amalgamated Silks by Glasgow Financial Trust. In February 1931 he was arrested, together with twelve others, and detained for three weeks before bail was granted. The charges related to obtaining money -- allegedly $438,000 -- from the public by misrepresenting Scottish Amalgamated as a healthy company when it was insolvent. One year after his arrest, and only two days before the trial was due to commence, charges were dropped. The case caused some shock in Glasgow business circles, but Stenhouse's reputation stood the test and recovery was rapid. It is said that within three years his personal fortune had reached $2 million. 
In Glasgow Stenhouse was a member of the incorporations of Bonnetmakers and Dyers, of Hammermen, and of Wrights, and of the Society of Deacons. He enjoyed walking in the countryside around the house he had built in 1937 at Garnkirk; he loved the poetry of Burns and could recite long passages from memory. On 31 March 1908 he married Hughina, daughter of John Cowan, a wine merchant. They had four sons (three of whom entered the family company), and two daughters. His third son, Hugh Cowan Stenhouse, became chairman of the main company after his father's death, bought out the original partners, and consolidated family control. Stenhouse died of heart disease on 3 November 1952 at his home, Garnkirk House, Chryston, Lanarkshire. He left $170,346 gross, but his estate was larger, much of it having been distributed to his family before his death. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 47822


Touche, Sir George Alexander, first baronet (1861-1935), accountant, was born in Edinburgh on 24 May 1861 as George Alexander Touch (the 'e' was added in 1906 by royal licence and authority because of annoyance with the persistent mispronunciation of his name), the third of the seven children of Anthony Murray Touch, a banker, an agent with the Edinburgh branch of the Union Bank of Scotland, and his wife, Margaret, daughter of Alexander Guild. He was educated at the Bonnington Academy, the Edinburgh Institute, and Edinburgh University before becoming indentured to the Scottish chartered accountant Alexander Thomas Niven in 1878. He was admitted to membership of the Society of Accountants in Edinburgh in 1883, having distinguished himself in actuarial science, and then, in common with many other Scots at that time, set off immediately for London, where he joined Broads, Paterson, and May, chartered accountants. On 4 June 1887 he married Jessie (1862/3-1917), daughter of Isaac Brown, wine merchant; they had four sons. 
In addition to accountancy, Touche's career encompassed politics and the management of investment trusts. He was appointed secretary of the newly formed Industrial and General Trust in 1889 which, in common with many other investment trusts, suffered following the Baring crisis of 1890, with the result that its capital was reduced in 1894. Following his appointment as manager, he worked to place the trust on a profitable basis and was subsequently appointed director in 1898 and chairman in 1908. He quickly became prominent in the investment world, and the restoration to prosperity of the Winchester House group of companies, as his investment trusts came to be known, formed a large and perhaps principal part of his life's work. It has been said that he did a great deal to lay down the principles on which investment trusts have been run ever since, and his obituary notice in the 'Accountants' Magazine' saw him principally as a creator and restorer of the trust company movement. At the time of his death in 1935 he was director of twelve major trust companies and chairman of nine of them. His many directorships outside the investment trust movement included also chairmanships of the Anglo-Argentine Tramways Company, the Midland Railway Company of Western Australia, and the Mexican Southern Railway. 
When called in by companies in difficulty, Touche saw himself as a reconstructor rather than a liquidator, and work in this area encouraged him to found an accountancy practice, George A. Touch & Co. (now Deloitte and Touche), in London in 1899. The firm was initially located in Bartholomew Lane but moved to Basildon House, Moorgate, in 1901. He later opened an office in Birmingham but his main energy was devoted to developing the firm's overseas operations. The first branch in Canada (in Toronto) was opened in 1909 and in the 1920s and 1930s his firm was one of the leading accountancy practices in that country. His first branch in the United States, Touch, Niven & Co., was established jointly with John B. Niven, the son of his own principal; this was set up in New York in 1900, and further offices were opened in Minneapolis, Chicago, St Louis, and Cleveland between 1913 and 1919. A Paris office was opened in 1920. At home, the firm remained relatively modest in size, having a staff of just 67 in 1939, which may be contrasted with the 345 partners and 4303 professional staff located in 22 offices in the United Kingdom in 1995. 
Touche was a staunch Conservative who was returned to parliament for North Islington in 1910; he retired because of ill health in 1918. He was an accomplished speaker who spoke with authority on financial matters. He became an alderman of the City of London in 1915 and was sheriff in 1915-16. Knighted in 1917, he was created a baronet in 1920 and was also one of his majesty's lieutenants for the City of London. In addition, he was made a knight of the Serbian order of St Sava. 
Touche served on the council of the Society of Accountants in Edinburgh from 1904 to 1908. Outside his business life, his recreations included riding and swimming. He also wrote poems which he sent in printed form to his friends at Christmas. Soon after his wife died in 1917, his health deteriorated. His public appearances became increasingly rare, as he worked mainly from his home near Dorking, Surrey, and travelled up to London only for board meetings. He died at Broomfield, Westcott, near Dorking, Surrey, on 7 July 1935. He was succeeded as second baronet by his eldest son, Norman George Touche. 


@@@@@


doc= 47823


Tritton, Joseph Herbert (1844-1923), banker, was born on 5 September 1844 at Olney Lodge, Battersea, Surrey, the eldest son of Joseph Tritton (1819-1887), a Quaker banker, and his wife, Amelia, daughter of Joseph Hanson of Brixton. He was educated at Rugby School ('c'.1855-1862). On 17 June 1867, he married Lucy Jane, the daughter of Henry Abel Smith (1826-1890) of Wilford, Nottingham, a member of a banking family with interests in Lincoln and Nottingham. They had five sons and four daughters. The family house was at Lyons Hall, Great Leighs, Chelmsford, the Essex property inherited by his father and passed on to him. 
After leaving Rugby, Tritton joined the bank of Barclay, Bevan, Tritton, Twells & Co. in 1867, and became a junior partner. He was following family tradition, as members of the Tritton family had held partnerships in the firm since 1783, when John Hinton Tritton (his great-grandfather) entered the bank. Through various changes of partnership and the takeover of Ransome, Bouverie & Co. of Pall Mall in 1888 and the Brighton Union Bank in 1894 the name Tritton remained in the title. The bank's name was distinctive and, in the years between 1888 and 1896, Barclay, Bevan, and Tritton, Ransome, Bouverie & Co. was popularly known as 'the long firm' ('DBB', 558). 
The business still operated as a private bank, as a member of the London Clearing House and as clearing bank for a number of country partnerships, many of which had family and Quaker connections with the partners in Barclay, Bevan, Tritton & Co. During the period when Tritton became a full partner it was becoming clear that the days of the private banks were numbered, and that to protect their relationship with the country banks and prevent their absorption into the rapidly growing joint-stock companies it was necessary to form a limited company. The partners in Barclay, Bevan, Tritton & Co. were the key figures in the foundation of Barclay & Co. in 1896. They nevertheless hoped to continue the private character of their existing institutions by restricting shareholdings to the partners of the twenty amalgamating firms (mostly Quaker). The character of the private banker is well illustrated by Tritton's pithy comment that there were 'three cardinal virtues in the banker's character -- Incredulity, Affability and the Power to say No' ('President's address to the Institute of Bankers', 1885). 
Tritton became a member of the first board of directors, as well as a local director in the Lombard Street local head office. He remained on the board until his retirement in 1918, and one of his sons followed him into the bank in 1914. Tritton was a progressive banker, and enthusiastic about the establishment of a professional forum for the training of young bankers and the discussion of professional issues. He was a founder member of the Institute of Bankers, serving on the council from the beginning, and served as the institute's third president (1885-1887), after Sir John Lubbock and Richard Biddulph Martin. He also served a second term of office in 1902-4. As president he started the practice of reviewing the previous year in his presidential address. One of the main reasons for establishing the institute was to improve the education of clerks and, in discussions over the type of syllabus to be offered, Tritton supported the Billinghurst scheme, which advocated a practical syllabus for training bankers. In 1902, when he sat on a committee to review the syllabus, he recommended the introduction of commercial history and geography. As chairman in 1886 he announced that his bank would follow the lead of the London and County Bank in offering a gratuity to successful candidates in the institute's exams. 
Tritton was active in most of the pressure groups representing bankers in the City. In the institute and other forums he contributed papers and took part in discussions on a variety of practical topics like bills of exchange and the London money market. He was a founder member and treasurer of the Central Association of Bankers formed in 1895 by representatives of the committee of the London Clearing House, the West End banks and the Association of English Country Bankers to 'speak in the name of all the Banks in the Country' (Green, 72). In addition he was a member of the Council of Foreign Bondholders, honorary secretary of the Committee of London Clearing Bankers (1891-1905), and a founder member of the London chamber of commerce, of which he became president. 
Tritton was a 'sound money' man and took a prominent position in the defence of the gold standard in the controversy over the remonetization of silver and the establishment of a connected rate for the two metals. Like most City men, Tritton feared it would lead to inflation and undermine Britain's position as a financial centre in the world. He was a chairman of the Gold Standard Defence Association established in 1895, and in the same year gave an address to the London Institution entitled 'The assault on the gold standard'. The assault came from the Bimetallic League, which saw the remonetization of silver as a way of easing trade with the rest of the world and thereby increasing employment at home. 
Consistent with his stand on the gold standard and free trade, Tritton argued for free trade saying that 'as a business man, in the centre of the business of the world, and with his hand on the pulse of the trade of the world he looked with dread upon even a suggestion to close our ports whether he considered the home trade or the international trade which brought an enormous profit to this country' ('The Times', 4 Jan 1904). 
Tritton was a lieutenant for the City of London, chairman of the Indo-European Telegraph Company, and a member of the Company of Shipwrights and of the fellowship of the Russia Company. In his private life he was keenly interested in genealogy and produced a history of his family called 'Tritton: the Place and the Family' in 1907. Like his father, he wrote religious poetry and was involved in charity work, particularly for the Young Men's Christian Association. He received the Persian order of the Lion and the Sun. 
In 1918 Tritton retired from the board of Barclays. A fall from his horse restricted his activities in his later years, and he died at his home, Lyons Hall, Great Leighs, Essex on 11 September 1923. He was described in an obituary as 'a link with a generation of business men which has now all but disappeared, and of a time when manners were more stately and life more leisurely' ('Journal of the Institute of Bankers', 1923). 


@@@@@


doc= 47825


Robinson, David (1787-1849), journalist and economist, was born at Garton on the Wolds in the East Riding of Yorkshire on 22 July 1787, the son of George Robinson and his wife, Ann, 'nee' Taylor. He spent his adult life in London. He was educated for a career in business, but began to write occasionally in local newspapers. From 1821, by what he later described as an 'accident', writing became his sole employment for the next fifteen years. All his work was published anonymously or pseudonymously, and half of it at most can be identified. 
From 1821 to 1823 Robinson wrote for John Stoddart's 'New Times', a government-supported high-tory London daily. Already in his mid-thirties, he hoped to write for the prestigious 'Quarterly Review', but his first article there was also the last. It appeared in the fifty-fifth issue (dated October 1822 but published in February 1823), heavily revised by the editor, William Gifford, who declined further articles. Lowering his sights slightly, in January 1824 Robinson moved to 'Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine', a monthly, where he stayed for eight years. His first article, 'Letter from Sampson Standfast, Esq. to Christopher North [the putative editor]', showed that he had already mastered the slashing style of 'Blackwood's', which he even employed in verse. A four-page, double-columned poem, 'New Lights' ('Blackwood's', 17, June 1825, 732-5), was an eighteenth-century political satire put into an intricate stanzaic form, probably Robinson's invention, at odds with the poem's content. Usually he chose prose, which John Stuart Mill (writing in 'The Examiner' on another 'Letter to Christopher North' by Robinson) described as 'the raving of a party politician' ('Newspaper Writings by John Stuart Mill', ed. A. Robson and J. M. Robson, 'Collected Works of John Stuart Mill', vol. 22, 1986, 229). 
Robinson had ninety-two articles published in 'Blackwood's' up to 1831. He left them unsigned or used changing signatures: 'Y. Y. Y.', 'One of the Old School', 'One of the Democracy', 'An English Freeholder', 'A Bystander'. Concerned that 'the Liberals are cut-throats when they can lay hold of a name' (Rashid, 269), he went to great lengths to preserve his anonymity. He thus obscured the fact that he was not a freelancer offering work to any editor who would accept it but a staff member, in fact 'Blackwood's' political authority. His most significant contributions were his pungent criticisms of Ricardian economists and of the economic policies of the liberal tory governments. He defended the corn laws and the poor law, while advocating cheap paper money as a solution to under-consumption. His attacks on free trade and bullionism were part of a larger critique, which challenged both the intellectual underpinnings and the practical effects of market reforms on the social order. He has been described as 'the most brilliant' of the school of 'Blackwood's' protectionist and paternalist defenders of the old social order (Perkin, 248). 
Robinson's connection with 'Blackwood's' ended in 1831, after some sort of rupture with William Blackwood. He moved to 'Fraser's Magazine', a London monthly then similar to 'Blackwood's' in politics and spirit. He claimed to have contributed to 'Fraser's' for four years; his articles, he estimated, totalled 600 pages (though he often underestimated the extent of his work). Attributions of articles in 'Fraser's' are uncertain, but in subject and style contributions by Robinson are identifiable from 1833 to 1837 on the established church in Ireland, and church establishments in general, which were seen to be under threat from the whig government and which became his principal theme. 
From 1837 Robinson suffered from illness and no further published writings by him are known. After trying unsuccessfully to return to the commercial world he became financially reliant on the kindness of friends. He was married, and his elderly mother was also dependent on him. He moved lodgings frequently, and was forced to sell many of his books. In 1846 or 1847 he moved from Kensington to Pimlico, near the Charlotte Chapel, whose incumbent, James Kelly, an evangelical, anti-Tractarian Anglican, sought help on Robinson's behalf. An application to the Royal Literary Fund, in October 1847, was supported by Kelly, Martin Tupper, and Edwin Lankester, physician to the Royal Pimlico Dispensary. Despite the evidence of Robinson's literary productivity, his claim was rejected on the ground that he had not published a separate work. He probably suffered from being an outsider, detached from the literary community. In late 1848 Lankester and Kelly raised a subscription for him, asserting in a newspaper advertisement that his plight was 'not the result of indolence or intemperance' (Royal Literary Fund, case no. 1180). 
Robinson moved, for the sake of his health, to Wickham, Hampshire, where he died of consumption on 19 February 1849. He was buried in the churchyard of St Nicholas, Wickham, on 26 February. No stone identifies his resting place. An obituary, which bears the mark of Lankester and which was originally published in 'The Athenaeum', obliquely criticized the Royal Literary Fund for declining Robinson's application for support: he had been 'for many years a contributor to the leading magazines, his writings in which often displayed great power, and excited much attention. Mr. Robinson was, however, one of those victims with which the bye-places of literature abound, for want of some institution within the republic of letters itself on which the sick and the destitute might have a citizen's claim. ('GM', 2nd ser., 31, 1849, 442)' His wife and mother survived him; there had been no children. Robinson has received renewed attention since the identification in the mid-twentieth century of his articles in 'Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine'. 


@@@@@


doc= 47828


Abbot, John (1751-1840?), naturalist and artist, born at Bennet Street, St James, London, on 1 June 1751, was the second of the five children of John Abbot (died 1787), a prosperous attorney, and his wife, Ann Clousinger. As a youth, Abbot developed a passion for entomology and for drawing, an enthusiasm that was supported by his father, who retained Jacob Bonneau, an accomplished draughtsman, as an art instructor for his son. The elder Abbot also bought illustrated works of natural history, including George Edwards's four-volume classic, 'A Natural History of Uncommon Birds' (1743-51), which exerted a major stylistic influence on his son. The Abbots received as a gift a copy of Mark Catesby's 'Natural History of Carolina, Florida, and the Bahama Islands' (1731-43), a work that probably contributed to Abbot's later decision to move to America. As a teenager, Abbot achieved a remarkable mastery of artistic technique, and by 1770 was invited to exhibit his watercolour drawings of British insects at the Society of Artists of Great Britain, of which he was an honorary member. Apprenticed to his father as a law clerk in 1769, Abbot found that legal matters were 'little to my liking when my thoughts was ingrossed by Natural history'; and in the same year he firmly resolved to pursue natural history as a career, after being awestruck by the vast entomological collections of Dru Drury. Under Drury's influence, Abbot decided to travel to North America; and in 1773, having received sponsorship from the Royal Society and from Drury and Thomas Martyn ('fl'. 1760-1816), Abbot sailed to Virginia, where he began shipping specimens to his British patrons. In December 1775 he moved to the lower Savannah River area of Georgia, where he lived for the rest of his life, residing at various times in Savannah and in Bulloch, Burke, and Screven counties. 
Abbot apparently supported himself almost entirely by providing specimens and watercolour drawings of insects, spiders, and birds to buyers in America and to his correspondents in Britain and Europe, including William Swainson, Heinrich Escher (1776-1853), John Francillon (1744-1816), Baron Frederic de Lafresnaye (1783-1861), Edward Smith Stanley, thirteenth earl of Derby, and John Latham. During much of his lifetime, Abbot was the most prolific and talented illustrator of birds and insects in America; and Swainson noted that Abbot's insect specimens were 'certainly the finest that have ever been transmitted as articles of commerce to this country' (Simpson, 'North Carolina Historical Review'). 
Because Abbot never published any works under his own name, the extent of his contributions to ornithology and entomology remained largely unrecognized until the latter half of the twentieth century. Although he may have viewed his work as mostly commercial, his data and illustrations were of considerable significance to a number of major scientific publications. He remains best-known for providing data and the 104 illustrations to the earliest extensive monograph devoted entirely to North American entomology, Sir James Edward Smith's 'Natural History of the Rarer Lepidopterous Insects of Georgia' (1797). Abbot made an additional 103 drawings intended as a second volume; these were sent to Swainson but remained unpublished until after being rediscovered in the 1980s in New Zealand. Abbot's specimens from Georgia were used for illustrations in Thomas Martyn's 'Psyche: Figures of Nondescript Lepidopterous Insects' (1797); in Jean A. Boisduval's and John L. Le Conte's 'Histoire generale et iconographie des Lepidopteres et des Chenilles de l'Amerique septentrionale' (1829-33); and in Charles A. Walckenaer's 'Histoire naturelle des insectes: Apteres' (1837, 1841). Some of Abbot's observations on wasps were used by Charles Darwin in his 'Journal of Researches during the Voyage of HMS Beagle' (1845). Although Abbot's bird illustrations were not reproduced during his lifetime, he provided extensive data for John Latham's second supplement to his 'General Synopsis of Birds' (1801), for Latham's multi-volume 'General History of Birds' (1821-8), and for Alexander Wilson's 'American Ornithology' (1808-14). Thousands of Abbot's original watercolour drawings of insects, spiders, and birds survived in public and private collections in the United States and in Britain. 
In creating his illustrations, Abbot used graphite to sketch the outline of the subject on paper and then completed the drawing using watercolours. His entomological drawings demonstrate an extraordinary attention to detail, with individual scales and fine texture shown accurately. His style was heavily influenced by Eleazar Albin's 'Natural History of English Insects' (1720, 1749), which portrayed the metamorphosis of Lepidoptera by showing a dominant food plant, with feeding larvae, pupae, and adult. Abbot's early use of this format suggests that he may have learned to rear Lepidoptera from larvae while he was still in London. In most of his drawings, Abbot arranged the insects in tabular and geometric patterns radiating around a central point, thus resembling specimens placed in collection boxes or drawers. His ornithological illustrations are remarkable for their detail of morphology and plumage, particularly in recognizing sexual and age differences. These drawings are in the old style, now known as 'stump and magpie' or 'bonsai', in which the bird is perched on a small, stunted tree trunk, which is usually gnarled and twisted toward one side and adorned with generalized moss, lichens, or other embellishments. Abbot probably learned this style from his set of Edwards's 'Natural History of Uncommon Birds', from at least twenty plates of which he copied the outline figures, as the basis for more than sixty of his own drawings. Abbot also borrowed outlines and plates from Latham's 'General Synopsis of Birds' (1781-1801) and from Wilson's 'American Ornithology' (1808-14). He probably used a sketchbook or master set to produce many of his bird drawings, as there is extensive duplication of illustrations among his many surviving collections, which contain more than 1400 plates showing more than 210 species. 
Correspondence indicates that Abbot was married and had a son, but no details have been confirmed, and both apparently died before Abbot. He is believed to have died in 1840, but the date is not definitively established. He was buried on the plantation of his friend William McElveen in Bulloch county, Georgia. 


@@@@@


doc= 47830


Murrow, Edward Roscoe (1908-1965), radio and television broadcaster, was born on 25 April 1908 at Polecat Creek, near Greensboro, North Carolina, USA, the youngest of the four sons (one of whom died in infancy) of Roscoe C. Murrow ('c'.1879-1955), farmer, and his wife, Ethel (1876-1961), schoolteacher, daughter of George Van Buren Lamb, farmer. His parents were both Quakers. In 1913 the family moved west to Blanchard, Washington, where his father worked as an engine driver for a timber company. Murrow was educated at Edison High School, and in 1926, after a year working as a compassman on a survey gang in the timber camps of the Olympic peninsula, he enrolled at Washington State College, Pullman. It was at this time that he became Edward, and shortened his name to Ed. At college he took a course in radio broadcasting, the first such course in the United States, and graduated in 1930 with a BA in speech. 
In 1930 Murrow was elected president of the National Student Federation of America, based in New York city. From 1932 to 1935 he was assistant director of the Institute of International Education, and through this he became assistant secretary to the emergency committee in aid of displaced German scholars, formed in 1933 to place exiled German professors in American universities. On 27 October 1934 he married Janet Huntington Brewster ('b'. 1910), daughter of Charles Huntington Brewster, car dealer, of Middletown, Connecticut: they had one son. She was a cousin of Kingman Brewster, later president of Yale University and American ambassador in London from 1977 to 1981. 
Murrow joined Columbia Broadcasting System (CBS) in 1935 as director of talks and education, and in 1937 was appointed European director, based in London. At first he had no staff, but as war approached he built up a team of reporters. In Warsaw at the time of the 'Anschluss', he chartered a plane and flew to Vienna, where he made his first broadcast on 13 March 1938, the day before Hitler entered the city. After war was declared, Murrow and the other American correspondents in London were given every facility by the BBC: the American liaison unit helped to arrange visits to enable them to see as much as possible of the British war effort, as the government realized the propaganda value of these broadcasts in influencing American public opinion. Murrow remained in London throughout the blitz, and managed to get permission from the Air Ministry to send live reports from rooftops during air raids, refusing to go into an air-raid shelter except as a reporter. In his daily broadcasts to America, which always began 'This is London', he described in detail, in a calm, deliberate style, what he saw happening in London, against a background of air-raid sirens and falling bombs. He saw his role as that of a reporter, not a commentator, but the effect was to bring the reality of war and the extent of British suffering to the American public, and to help the British cause in the United States. At a dinner in honour of Murrow in New York in December 1941, the poet Archibald MacLeish said: 'You burned the city of London in our houses and we felt the flames that burned it. You laid the dead of London at our doors and we knew the dead were our dead -- were all men's dead -- were mankind's dead -- and ours. (Friendly, xvi)' He flew on over twenty-five bombing missions: many thought his best report was from the plane 'D-for-Dog', returning from a bombing raid on Berlin on 3 December 1943. He was the first allied war correspondent at Buchenwald, reporting on its liberation on 15 April 1945. Many of his broadcasts to America were repeated by the BBC, and he also appeared on BBC programmes: he was a frequent panellist on 'Freedom Forum', and he introduced 'Meet Uncle Sam' in 1941. A close associate of the prime minister, Winston Churchill, and a frequent visitor to Chartwell, Murrow greatly admired Britain for maintaining parliamentary democracy throughout the war. In his last broadcast before leaving London he said, 'I am persuaded that the most important thing that happened in Britain was that this nation chose to win or lose this war under the established rules of parliamentary procedure... I have been privileged to see an entire people give the reply to tyranny that their history demanded of them. (10 March 1946)' Murrow returned to New York in 1946 as vice-president and director of public affairs at CBS, but he hated administration, and returned to radio broadcasting in 1947, when he was also appointed to the CBS board of directors. For the next twelve years he delivered a nightly radio news broadcast. With Fred Friendly, later president of CBS News, he established the CBS documentary unit, and launched the radio documentary series 'Hear it now' in 1948, which became the television series 'See it now' in 1951. In 'See it now' Murrow tackled the most controversial and important subjects of the day. His programmes on McCarthyism, including an attack on Senator Joseph McCarthy himself on 9 March 1954, helped to discredit McCarthy, who was condemned by the senate in 1955. He interviewed J. Robert Oppenheimer, the nuclear physicist accused of disloyalty, and in 'The lost class of 1959' reported on the closed schools of Norfolk, Virginia. Continuing his wartime tradition of eyewitness reports, he flew on bombing missions during the Korean War, reported in September 1957 from Little Rock, Arkansas, on the desegregation of schools, and flew into the eye of Hurricane Edna with the air weather service. 'See it now' came to be regarded as the most important television show on the air, but it was dropped in 1958, and Murrow, worried by the replacement of serious programmes with popular entertainment during peak viewing hours, took a year's sabbatical in 1959. 'CBS Reports' replaced 'See it now', but Murrow had less control over the content. One of the last programmes he narrated was 'Harvest of Shame', put out at Thanksgiving 1960, an expose of the exploitation of migrant farm labourers, described as a 1960 'Grapes of Wrath'. In a lighter vein, from 1953 to 1959 Murrow presented 'Person to Person', in which he went into the homes of famous people. During these years he continued to visit Britain and to take part in BBC discussions, and he covered the coronation in 1953 for CBS. 
Murrow left CBS in 1961 on his appointment by President Kennedy as director of the United States Information Agency (USIA) in Washington, with a seat on the National Security Council. Kennedy wanted the USIA to play a more active role in promoting a good image of the United States abroad, and Murrow concentrated on improving the Voice of America broadcasts, establishing the principle that all the facts should be broadcast, including those embarrassing to the government, believing that such objectivity could only enhance the prestige and credibility of the Voice of America. He felt that the director should take part in making policy, or at least be informed in advance, but one of his first tasks was to explain the Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba in April 1961, an invasion he disapproved of, and had not known about. Murrow was suggested as a possible Democrat senator in 1962, but he collapsed with pneumonia, and in 1963 was operated on for lung cancer. He resigned from the USIA in January 1964. 
Murrow was awarded the medal of freedom, the highest American civil honour, in 1964, and was appointed an honorary KBE in March 1965. He died of lung cancer on 27 April 1965 at his home, Glen Arden Farm, Quaker Hill, Pawling, New York. 


@@@@@


doc= 47832


Knight, Eric Mowbray (1897-1943), author and journalist, was born on 10 April 1897 in Menston, near Leeds, the third of the four sons of Frederick Harrison Knight, a prosperous but profligate Quaker wholesale jeweller, and his wife, Hilda Marion Creasser (1876?-1919?). The elder Knight disappeared in 1899, reputedly killed in the South African War but suspected of having absconded to Australia, leaving his family in penury. Hilda Knight secured a post as governess in a noble household in St Petersburg, remaining there for some years before emigrating to the United States, where she remarried. Eric was sent to live with relatives in Leeds and later in Skircoat Green. A pupil at the Bewerley Street School in Leeds until the age of thirteen, he had become a 'half-timer' the previous year while working as a bobbin-setter in a worsted mill, and later worked in an engineering works, a glass-blowing factory, and a spinning mill. In 1912 the family was reunited in Philadelphia, but Knight soon left home to work in a lumber yard and carpet mill before attending the Cambridge (Massachusetts) Latin school and the Boston Museum of Fine Arts School. 
Shortly after marrying Dorothy Noyes Hall of Boston on 28 July 1917, Knight enlisted in Princess Patricia's Canadian light infantry, later seeing action as a signaller in Flanders and in France. After the war Knight, by now the father of three daughters, tried unsuccessfully to establish himself as a painter and as a journalist. In the 1920s he served as an artillery specialist with the US army reserve at Fort Sill, Oklahoma, subsequently settling in Philadelphia, where he found employment as a film critic on the 'Public Ledger' between 1928 and 1934. Estranged from his first wife by 1929, Knight married the writer and editor Jere Brylawski (1907-1996) on 2 December 1932. 
A six-month stint in Hollywood as a screenwriter whose scripts were never adopted left Knight with a distaste for the American film industry. The Knights then cultivated an alfalfa ranch in southern California before returning to the east, where they eventually bought and renovated Springhouse Farm, a ramshackle stone house attached to a working farm in Pleasant Valley, Pennsylvania. On the basis of a handful of published stories and an unimpressive first novel, 'Invitation to Life' (1934), Knight resolved to devote himself fully to writing. His first short story had been published in 1930, and for the next twelve years his fiction appeared regularly in American magazines, especially the 'Saturday Evening Post' and 'Esquire'. Many of these stories were reminiscences of Yorkshire village life, usually laced with local dialect and frequently involving a whimsical character named Sam Small, the protagonist of his novella 'The Flying Yorkshireman' (1938). 
Knight's 'Song on your Bugles' (1937) was a quasi-autobiographical proletarian novel recounting the struggles of a gifted young Yorkshireman to reconcile artistic fulfilment with working-class solidarity; though favourably reviewed, it was a commercial failure. The next year he published a contemporary thriller set in Los Angeles, 'You Play the Black and the Red Comes Up', under the pseudonym Richard Hallas. In 1938 the 'Saturday Evening Post' commissioned Knight to report on industrial conditions in distressed areas of Yorkshire. His first-hand account, expressing outrage at the closing of mines and factories, also inspired his fourth novel, 'The Happy Land' (1940), published in England as 'Now we Pray for our Country'. In 1940 he agreed to expand a previously published short story into a juvenile novel, the enduringly popular 'Lassie Come Home', the story of a resourceful and loyal sheep dog. The original film, starring Roddy McDowall and Elizabeth Taylor (1943), was followed by six sequels, six television series, and was updated and remade in 1994. 
Despite disenchantment with British industrial and diplomatic policies and his assimilation to American life, Knight responded to the advent of war as a patriotic Yorkshireman. His last and most successful novel, 'This above All' (1941), acclaimed as one of the finest novels of the war, was both a realistic love story that transcended class boundaries and a debate about whether Britain, weakened by social stratification and deficient leadership, deserved to win. During the second half of 1941 'This above All' was the best-selling novel in America and was quickly adapted into a popular Hollywood film starring Tyrone Power and Joan Fontaine. 
For the first time Knight achieved literary fame and financial security. He lectured extensively on behalf of the British war effort and was interviewed in the media. He travelled to England late in 1941 to report on conditions in wartime London, to broadcast about America to British audiences, and to collaborate with Paul Rotha on the documentary film 'World of Plenty' for the Ministry of Information. Knight was commissioned in the American army after being recruited by Frank Capra to provide scripts for the military propaganda series 'Why we Fight' and for 'Know your Ally -- Britain', among the most significant documentary films ever produced. In addition he wrote 'A Short Guide to Great Britain', an orientation manual distributed to American soldiers before embarkation. 
Although Knight always regarded himself as a British expatriate, his accent retaining traces of his Yorkshire background, his personal and professional identity was increasingly American, and at the end of 1942 he became a citizen. On 15 January 1943 Knight, recently promoted to the rank of major in the army special services division, was killed when a transport plane on which he was travelling to Cairo crashed in the Surinam jungle. In 1944 he was posthumously awarded the Legion of Merit for his role in explaining the war to American soldiers. Although his only lasting monument is 'Lassie Come Home', its name immortalized as his never was, Knight merits recognition for his contribution to greater Anglo-American understanding. 


@@@@@


doc= 47833


Baseley, (Cyril) Godfrey (1904-1997), radio broadcaster and writer, was born on 2 October 1904 at The Square, Alvechurch, Worcestershire, the second of the three children of Walter Ernest Baseley, master butcher, and his wife, Mary Ellen, 'nee' Court. His parents were members of the Society of Friends, and he was sent to Quaker boarding-schools, Sibford in Oxfordshire and Bootham in York. More athletic than academic, he left school without passing matriculation examinations, and worked in the family butchery business. 
In adult life Baseley professed no formal religion: at his request there was no religious ceremony at his cremation; but when he married his wife, Bessie Hartwright 
(always known as Betty; 'b'. 1912/13)
, on 6 August 1934 it was according to the rites and ceremonies of the Church of England. They had two daughters. 
Apart from competitive motorcycling, Baseley's main hobby was amateur dramatics: he studied elocution and drama at night school (where he eventually taught), and was soon playing small parts in the professional theatre in Birmingham. From Birmingham too he began to broadcast with increasing regularity from 1929 until 1939 as actor, narrator, and poetry reader. 
At the outbreak of the Second World War, all BBC contracts were cancelled, and so Baseley found work first in civil defence, then in an aircraft factory, and finally with the Ministry of Information. He travelled the midlands with a loudspeaker van, writing and delivering (and at times improvising, at which he excelled) morale-boosting talks on the theme 'Dig for victory'. 
Baseley's country background and his knowledge of farming and gardening (in which, though, he had no formal training), together with his resonant baritone voice, led to his being engaged on a full-time BBC staff contract. From 1 May 1943 he was attached to the outside broadcasts department in London; but after three months he willingly returned to Birmingham, where, apart from a brief spell in television in London, he was based for the rest of his professional life. 
As a BBC staff producer, Baseley commissioned, or wrote, scripts; he engaged performers, whom he directed at the microphone; he learned how to manage BBC budgets, how to work with technical staff, and (sometimes with difficulty) to comply with the strictures of his superiors. He had enormous flair for invention, and energetically defended his suggested programmes. He was formidable in argument, but fair-minded enough to modify apparently fixed views in the face of persuasive reasoning. 
Baseley originated many programmes, mainly on farming and the countryside. At a farmers' advisory council meeting to discuss such broadcasts, one Lincolnshire farmer, Henry Burtt, suggested that what was wanted was 'a farming Dick Barton' ('Dick Barton' being an immensely popular adventure radio serial in short episodes). At what seemed an absurd suggestion most people present laughed. Baseley did not. He developed the idea, and against initial opposition persuaded the BBC to give 'The Archers', as it was called, a week's trial from 29 May 1950. Well received when broadcast in the midland region in 1950, it began regular broadcasts on the national Home Service from 1 January 1951, and became one of the BBC's most successful programmes. It won plaudits and prizes and, for some of its participants -- but oddly not for Baseley himself -- national honours. For more than twenty-one years it became almost an obsession: he believed it to have social significance above mere entertainment. 
Fearing that BBC plans in the document 'Broadcasting in the Seventies' might threaten the programme, Baseley published in 1971 ''The Archers': a Slice of my Life'. Ten of its twelve chapters recounted the origin and growth of the programme and his part in it. In 1972 he was, without warning and for debatable reasons, dismissed by letter. He was to have no further contact with the programme. He turned to lecturing and writing, producing several books on country themes. He made no great fortune but, through an otherwise quiet retirement, his name continued to be linked with 'The Archers'. 
Not always an easy man to work with, Baseley could be overbearing, blunt, and bluff. In private, though, as host, husband, and father, he was genial and surprisingly benign. He relished the fact that he was known by the first syllable of his second name (he never used his first name); and the title 'creator' pleased him. On his death certificate he is described as 'Broadcaster and Writer. Creator of 'The Archers' (retired)'. 
Baseley was undeniably the programme's prime mover, advocate, defender, and apologist. Undoubtedly he depended on the contribution of the talented writers, actors, directors, and technicians who worked under his editorial control. Yet without Baseley 'The Archers' would almost certainly never have existed. He died on 2 February 1997 at the Princess of Wales Community Hospital, Bromsgrove, and his remains were afterwards cremated. 


@@@@@


doc= 47837


Morland, Egbert Coleby (1874-1955), physician and writer on medicine, was born in Croydon on 3 September 1874, the seventh of the fourteen children of Charles Coleby Morland JP (1839-1908), an umbrella maker, and his wife, Jane, 'nee' Fryer (1843-1923). Of a Quaker family Morland was sent in 1889 to Bootham School, the Friends' institution at York, where he distinguished himself in science, languages, and mathematics. He enrolled at Owens College, Manchester, and gained a London BSc degree in zoology (first-class honours); he was then old enough to study medicine at St Bartholomew's Hospital, London, whence he graduated in 1898 with the gold medal in physiology. 
In his working life Morland suffered two serious reverses. At first he seemed destined for a career in London medicine, but the usual succession of junior hospital appointments was interrupted after three years when he developed tuberculosis. Recovering after lengthy treatment in Switzerland under the devoted eye of his fiancee, Mary Windsor Latchmore (1873-1948), he decided to remain in that country and become a specialist in tuberculosis. He married Mary in 1903 and returned to student life, and received an MD degree (Bern) in 1907. The Morlands then moved to the isolated mountain resort of Arosa, Switzerland, where he built up a sizeable practice, mainly of British patients. They adopted the first of their three children in 1912. Then, two years later, came the second blow: the beginning of the First World War caused Morland's British clientele to melt away, and in 1915 he returned to England, pausing for a few months to assist the Friends' war victims' relief committee on the Marne. While in Arosa he had made several contributions to 'The Lancet'; so, once in London, he called on the editorial office. The editor, Squire Sprigge, was short-handed and invited him to stay and help. 
The editor of a general medical journal, it might be thought, should be a good communicator with a broad vision of medicine and a strong commitment to scientific truth. Whatever his character in 1915, Morland diverged increasingly from this model as his 'Lancet' years went by. Though skilful in stripping the work of others to its essentials, his own conversation and writing displayed an enigmatic quality that continually perplexed his acquaintances. His reasoning was characterized by alarming leaps -- the knight's move in thought. His most lucid pronouncements were to be found on postcards and on the edge of office documents. Colleagues were sometimes dismayed by his habit of adding creative touches to the work of others -- especially when coupled with the dictum, 'Better be wrong than dull' ('The Lancet', 1955, 974-6). Morland always needed someone on hand to say, 'think again'. Abjuring anything in the nature of an editorial mission or policy, he was himself a mass of contradictions -- a pacifist who favoured conscription; an idealist deeply tinged with cynicism; and a man of high intelligence who was often content to indulge in wishful thinking. These characteristics were apt to frighten and exasperate people who did not know him well, and some who did. A fellow Quaker confessed that he seldom knew whether Morland's words were intended in jest or in earnest (Braithwaite, 475-6). 
Before and after taking the chair as editor Morland's work depended inseparably on the efforts of others. Under Sprigge his oblique way of thinking was catalytic: 'At the central table sat Sir Squire, small, urbane, aquiline, in black coat and striped trousers; a cultivated man of his world; beloved but irascible. Behind a vast mahogany desk was Morland, tall, solemn, gaunt, with noble brow, in a grey tweed morning coat like a coachman's; surer of his worth than his welcome; overworked and often maddening. ('The Lancet', 1955, 974-6)' For all the friction between them, Morland and Sprigge made a good partnership, the latter preserving continuity and good sense while Morland gave the journal life. But by the time Morland took the chair his eccentricities, coupled with a sharpening tongue, were less of an asset. Closer to 'Old Testament' prophet than to commander, he inspired fear as well as affection, and loyal assistants were needed to preserve continuity and balance. They were hard-pressed. Morland's editorship, if ever there had been a right time for it, had come too late. 
The Morlands spent much of their later years in Wooldale, Yorkshire, where they lived at Pellcroft, beside the ancient Friends' meeting-house. Mary died in 1948, and Egbert Morland died at Nunthorpe Nursing Home, York, on 26 April 1955. In the annals of medical editing, what was his special contribution? In the years of his editorship his personal enthusiasms are reflected in a notable emphasis on maternal and child health and the new subject of social medicine. But his best work was done earlier. For the editors who followed, his most lasting bequest was a tradition of good writing and gentle wit. The editor of 'Nature' remarked, 'Having found 'The Lancet' humane, he left it human' ('The Lancet', 1944, 633-4). 


@@@@@


doc= 47838


Gray, William (c.1388-1436), diplomat and bishop of Lincoln, obtained letters dimissory for the priesthood in 1414, and was therefore probably born about 1388 or shortly thereafter. The papal registers describe him as 'by both parents of a noble race of earls and barons' ('CEPR letters', 7.283). However, his precise origins have been disputed, there being a number of baronial families of that name. One possibility was the Greys of Ruthin, notably represented by Sir Reynold [iii] Grey, who in 1410 successfully concluded a lengthy lawsuit in the court of chivalry that established his right to bear the arms of the Hastings family. Confusingly, one of William's earliest benefices was Bedale in Yorkshire, where in 1388 Robert Grey of Rotherfield, Oxfordshire, died seized of a moiety of the manor. However, his nephew and namesake William Grey, or Gray, bishop of Ely (1454-78), once thought to be a Gray of Codnor, is now known to have been a son of Sir Thomas Grey or Gray of Heaton, Northumberland, who did have noble and royal antecedents. 
Gray studied at Oxford, and was a bachelor of civil law by 1414 and of civil and canon law in the following year. By 1421 he had incepted as DCL and is recorded as having rented Deep Hall in High Street. As an unbeneficed king's clerk he was awarded a pension from Whitby Abbey in November 1413. Two years later he was at the Council of Siena with Richard Fleming, whom he was to succeed as bishop of Lincoln. Fleming dispatched him to Pope Martin V to explain the difficulties he was encountering in support of the papal position. Gray was still abroad in November during the second session of the council. Consequently, being by then dean of York, he was absent from the chapter for the disputed election of Philip Morgan early in 1424, following the death of Archbishop Bowet the previous October. 
Meanwhile he had acquired a number of benefices, among them Swanscombe in Kent and Pimperne in Dorset, and received papal dispensation to farm their fruits while engaged in study, resident in the Roman curia or in the deanery of York, to which he had been elected in December 1420 and admitted on 4 April following. He held the deanery until his promotion to the episcopate, with the prebend of Botevant and for a brief time, by royal grant, that of Ulleskelf. Martin V, who had reserved the bishopric of London, provided him to that see by a bull of 20 July 1425. This was one of a series of promotions arising from compromise between the English council and the pope. In the following January Henry VI formally licensed his acceptance, and the temporalities were restored on 6 May 1426. Consecration by Archbishop Chichele followed on the 26th at Newarke College, Leicester, and the next day he made his profession of obedience to pope and archbishop. Gray's London register comprises a mere ninety-nine folios, over half of which record ordinations and institutions to benefices. Out of some twenty-three ordinations, nine were undertaken by his suffragan the Benedictine bishop of Dromore, John Chourles. In August 1427 Archbishop John Kemp of York claimed that during the recent vacancy Gray, as dean of York, together with the chapter, had applied certain issues to their own use that they subsequently refused to surrender. Conceivably this included income from the Ulleskelf prebend, which he may have held until his temporalities were restored. 
In common with other bishops of London at this time, Gray regularly served on commissions of the peace in counties neighbouring the city, as well as being a conservator of the River Lea between Ware and its confluence with the Thames. He carried out a visitation of St Mary's Hospital in Bishopsgate, and in 1431 was responsible for the transfer of endowments from the impoverished college of Thele or Stanstead St Margaret's, Hertfordshire, to St Mary within Cripplegate, London, commonly known as Elsing Spital. He attended the convocation of 1428-9 at St Paul's, London, which considered a papal plea for a subsidy to finance a crusade against the Bohemians, various cases of heresy, and a royal request for money. He was there on 6 July, but on the 13th was deputed as an envoy to the papal curia. He was still abroad in December. His task was to arrange alliances with the king of Aragon, Alfonso V, and with Sigismund, king of the Romans. During his absence five criminous clerks escaped from his prison at Bishop's Stortford, taking their gaoler with them. For this he was amerced of a total of $426 13's'. 4died, but in April 1429 the king respited payment for ten years. Early in 1431 Gray was again at a convocation in St Paul's, partly concerned with the examination of the heretical opinions held by Thomas Bagley, whom he had earlier caused to be arrested. Shortly thereafter he was translated to Lincoln by a bull of 30 April 1431, his temporalities being restored on 4 August. 
Gray's Lincoln register, comprising some 221 folios, is understandably much more informative than his London register. He held a visitation of his cathedral chapter on 28 April 1432 and there are sporadic details of his having followed this up. Certainly his register includes a notable series of visitation injunctions for religious houses, which throw considerable light on the state of monastic observance at the time. To what extent this is an indication of particular diligence on his part is a matter of opinion, since the bulk of the work was carried out by commissaries. He attended the provincial convocation of 1432, which among other matters considered an increase in the delegation to be sent to the council at Basel, the support that should be given to voting there by 'nations' rather than by 'deputations', and the raising of a subsidy for the English delegates. He was also at the following year's convocation, which debated the dissension between Pope Eugenius IV and the Council of Basel. The convocation of 1434 was adjourned due to the plague in London, where, on 19 October, Gray was one of four bishops who assented to the celebration throughout the province, with nine lessons according to the Sarum use, of the feast of St Frideswide, the particular patron of Oxford University. 
At Lincoln Gray was again personally involved with cases of heresy arising from the spread of Lollard opinions as well as with monastic apostasy. In addition there was a long-standing quarrel between the residentiary canons of Lincoln and the arrogant and largely non-resident dean, John Mackworth, which despite efforts by Bishop Fleming had remained unresolved. The canons presented forty-one 'gravamina' for Gray's mediation. His award required the dean to amend his defaults. But on 28 July, the eve of the feast of St Peter in whose honour the cathedral was dedicated, Mackworth arrived at vespers with a band of armed men who attacked the chancellor, Peter Partwich. Before he could deal with this outrage the bishop had died. In the following year Mackworth avoided further repercussions by exchanging the deanery for Tredington rectory in Worcester diocese. It may be an indication of Gray's expertise and trustworthiness that Philip Morgan, bishop of Ely, who made his will in October 1435, named him first among his executors. 
Gray's own will is dated 11 February 1436 from his bed of sickness in the great chamber of his manor of Buckden, Huntingdonshire. He must have died shortly afterwards, since the latest entry in his register is dated 14 February. Probate ensued on 9 March. His wish was to be buried in the lady chapel of his cathedral church, between the entry and the great lectern. To that church he bequeathed a large frontal with an image of the Virgin, his patron, in its centre, together with a small one emblazoned with his own arms. These and other ecclesiastical ornaments and vestments were to be distributed in accordance with the discretion of his executors. Legacies of $20 each were allotted to William Bothe, a canon of Lincoln, his chancellor Richard Moresby, and Thomas Dunkan, in compensation for their labours on his behalf. His residual legatee was his brother, Henry. 
Politically a supporter of John, duke of Bedford, and of Cardinal Henry Beaufort, Gray was a regular member of the king's council -- at the end of 1433, at a time of financial crisis, he and two other bishops were persuaded to attend without payment during term-time -- and also sometimes went on embassies, for instance to Scotland in 1427. In 1433 he was one of a number of councillors who crossed to Calais for discussions of the situation in France. But, perhaps partly because he was frequently absent on royal business, it cannot be said that Gray was particularly distinguished as a diocesan bishop. Indeed, like many fifteenth-century bishops, his character is hard to determine. A. H. Thompson, in the course of editing the Lincoln visitations, concluded that his episcopate marked 'no important era in the history of the see' of Lincoln (Thompson, 'Visitations', 1.xvii). 


@@@@@


doc= 47839


Gilbert, Robert (d. 1448), bishop of London, is of obscure origins, and all that can be said of his family is that he had a brother named John. His date of birth is unknown, but the course of his university career suggests that he was born no later than 1382. First recorded in 1398 as a fellow of Merton College, Oxford, he vacated his fellowship in 1402, but in the same year received a licence to study for three years, and was probably living in Oxford between 1402 and 1404, when he rented a room at Exeter College. He was also a commoner of Oriel for six months in 1411 and 1412. He was ordained subdeacon on 15 February 1402 and priest on 31 March 1403. He had obtained a master's degree by 1405 and a doctorate in theology by 1413. He was several times involved in proceedings against heresy. About 1409 Oxford University named Gilbert to the committee of twelve scholars appointed to examine the works of John Wyclif and prepare a list of his errors. In 1414, together with Edmund Lacy (later successively bishop of Hereford and Exeter), he was appointed the bishop of Lincoln's commissary for a proposed visitation of Oxford directed against Lollardy. And in August 1415 books found on the convicted London heretic John Claydon were handed over to Gilbert and others for inspection. 
Gilbert's obscure and presumably humble origins did not prevent his securing ecclesiastical preferment, starting with the Cheshire rectory of Mottram, to which he was presented in 1402. In the thirty-four years that followed before he became a bishop, he acquired another six rectories, seven prebends, and a number of substantial offices, starting with the precentorship of Lincoln in 1411 and that of Salisbury in 1418. In May 1417, during his absence at the Council of Constance, Gilbert was chosen by Archbishop Chichele to be warden of Merton College, Oxford, an office he held until 1421, and in November 1417 he attended Canterbury convocation and made a speech notable for its eloquence and clarity of argument in support of benefices for university graduates. 
By 1416 or 1417 Gilbert had come to the attention of the king, for Henry V appointed him dean of the Chapel Royal. Having returned from Constance (where he spoke warmly in favour of the council's empowerment to undertake the reform of the church), later in 1417 he accompanied the king's army to Normandy, witnessing several battles -- he was later troubled in conscience over his wholehearted support for the English forces. The value that Henry V placed on Gilbert's services can be seen in the efforts the king was prepared to make to secure the archdeaconry of Durham for him, lasting for over a year in 1419-20 -- three royal mandates and a commission to establish Henry's right to present proved necessary. Continuing in royal service after the king's death, on 22 February 1423 Gilbert was appointed one of the English ambassadors to the Council of Pavia, and he received further important ecclesiastical preferment -- the treasurership of York in 1425, when the archiepiscopal see was vacant, the deanship of that cathedral in 1426 on the nomination of his friend Archbishop Kemp, and the deanship in 1430 of the royal free chapel of Tickhill, whose warden was another friend, Cardinal Henry Beaufort. 
Until this point Gilbert's varied career had been one of steady advancement, but in March 1432 he suffered a serious setback, when Humphrey, duke of Gloucester, had him replaced as dean of the Chapel Royal. The change was one of several made in the royal household at this time, as the duke tried to bring the king's entourage under his own control, and Gilbert was clearly regarded as a supporter of Cardinal Beaufort with too much influence over the young Henry VI. Perhaps he did not expect to receive any further promotion, for in January 1433 he was admitted a residentiary canon of York -- 'perhaps the single most distinguished residentiary at fifteenth-century York' (Dobson, 207). But his fortunes soon revived. Between 1433 and 1437 Cardinal Beaufort's influence determined every promotion to the episcopal bench. On 15 January 1436 Robert Fitzhugh, bishop of London, died, and on 23 February following Beaufort used his control of the royal council to ensure the Gilbert was appointed to the see; he was consecrated bishop in the conventual church of the London Carmelites on 28 October. 
Men advanced to the episcopal bench at this time were usually royal clerks who continued to serve the king thereafter. For at least a century all his predecessors as bishop of London had acted thus. However, Gilbert is not known to have held any office of state or to have gone on any diplomatic mission after he became a bishop, but confined his involvement in the processes of central government to attendance at meetings of parliaments and great councils -- he was a trier of petitions at the first four of the five parliaments held during his episcopate, and attended meetings of the great council in 1436, 1437, and 1443. In 1441 Archbishop Chichele named him to the tribunal set up to try Eleanor, duchess of Gloucester, who had been accused of witchcraft. His appointment is not surprising in view of his expertise in matters of theology and heresy. Gilbert's participation in local government was hardly more extensive. He was appointed a justice of the peace in Essex on three occasions, in Hertfordshire twice, and in Middlesex five times. He was twice appointed to raise loans in Essex, and himself lent the king a total of $383 6's'. 8died And as bishop he used the patronage at his disposal for the benefit of royal clerks: sixteen of the thirty-one clerks whom he collated to dignities and prebends in St Paul's were in some way engaged in the service of the crown. 
Gilbert is known to have spent at least a part of every month of his twelve-year episcopate in his diocese, and appears to have conducted its affairs personally, despite advancing years and illness. Entries in his register show him carrying out such routine business as collations and institutions to benefices, and attempting to deal with the financial and disciplinary problems of his clergy. Harmony and co-operation characterized his relations with the chapter of St Paul's, notwithstanding visitations in 1437 and 1443. On 20 October 1438, acting at the request of a group of non-resident canons, Gilbert settled a dispute over the distribution of bread and beer. It is not known exactly when he died. He was still alive on 14 July 1448, when his will was drawn up, but had died by 27 July, when the dean and chapter of St Paul's notified Archbishop John Stafford of his death. His testament does not suggest great personal wealth. He made a modest number of cash bequests, including gifts of money to every house of friars in his diocese and $40 for distribution among the poorer churches of the diocese to provide them with ornaments, but more often he left pieces of plate, books, and -- to his servants -- bedding. He bequeathed to St Paul's his pastoral staff, his pontifical books, and his mitre, bought from the executors of his predecessor, Robert Fitzhugh. He left the choice of his place of burial to his executors, specifying only that the funeral expenses should be modest, but it is not surprising that he was buried in St Paul's Cathedral, on 31 July 1448. 


@@@@@


doc= 47842


Johnson, Ralph (bap. 1629, d. 1695), naturalist, was born at Earby near Newsham, Richmondshire, North Riding of Yorkshire, and baptized on 15 November 1629. He was one of four sons of William Johnson (1600?-1677?), husbandman. In 1652 he married Anne (1623-1695), daughter of Henry Pinkney of East Hope; they had five children, of whom the three sons died young. Johnson attended Sedbergh School, and then St John's College, Cambridge, from 1648 to 1652. From 1652 until 1656 he was master of Darlington grammar school. He was presented to the vicarage of Brignall, very near his birth place, on 6 December 1656, and ordained on 8 August 1661. He remained the resident incumbent for the rest of his life. He was styled MA in his lifetime but it is not known if he was ever given this degree. 
In his younger days Johnson had an ideal botanical mentor in Walter Stonehouse, rector of Darfield in south Yorkshire. Stonehouse had helped with the production of the first British flora, Thomas Johnson's 'Mercurius botanicus' (1634 and 1641). He also knew both John Tradescants, elder and younger, and many of the plants in his herbarium came from the Tradescants' famous garden in south Lambeth, Surrey. 
John Ray who was a 'great friend' of Johnson's (Ray, 'Synopsis', preface), described him as 'a Person of singular skill in Zoology, especially the History of Birds, who communicated to us [at my request] his Method of Birds... his judgement concurring with ours in the divisions and characteristic notes of the Genera' (Willughby and Ray, 'Ornithology', preface). Johnson made a significant contribution to 'Ornithology' by Willughby and Ray, which marks the start of scientific ornithology. Ray also described Johnson as 'a man most expert... in all branches of Natural History' (Willughby and Ray, 'Piscium', preface). 
Johnson suggested to Ray that in the next edition of his 'Catalogus plantarum Angliae' (1670) he should arrange the plants in natural rather than alphabetical order (Ray, 'Synopsis', preface). Ray taught Johnson scientific botany, at Brignall, and Johnson became the pioneer botanist of upper Teesdale. Johnson died on 7 May 1695 at Brignall, probably of gout; he had survived his wife by only eighteen days. He was buried two days later in the graveyard of his church, St Mary's, which is now in ruins. 


@@@@@


doc= 47845


Cattell, (Fanny) Maud (1857-1947), nurse, was born on 23 April 1857 at Sheldon, Warwickshire, the second of the ten children of John Cattell ('bap'. 1828, died 1921), farmer, and his wife, Fanny Mary ('bap'. 1832, died 1908), daughter of William Pate, farmer, of Haddenham, Cambridgeshire, and his wife, Mary. Known as Maud, she was probably educated at home by a governess. She learned housekeeping and cookery, and nursed family and friends, including her sister Emma Maria (1862-1932), who fell off a donkey, permanently injuring her leg. 
In September 1886, aged twenty-nine, Cattell joined the Anglican evangelical Mildmay Mission and was trained as a deaconess by Mrs Pennefather at Mildmay Park, London. After several months at the Caledonian Road Mission, she went to the old Mildmay Mission Hospital, Turville Street, Bethnal Green. She was sent to train at the Middlesex Hospital for a year from September 1888 to take charge of a ward, and was considered 'excellent in every way and a most efficient nurse' (Middlesex Hospital, register of lady probationers, 1878-1905, 32). She returned to the old Mildmay Hospital, which was replaced in November 1892 by a new one with fifty beds, in Austin Street, Bethnal Green. She served as sister of the women's ward briefly, before becoming 'helper', and 'second in the staff' to the matron, Miss Goodwyn, whom she succeeded in November 1896, retaining this post until her retirement in 1919. 
An able administrator and meticulous record-keeper, Cattell was responsible, under the medical superintendent, for her nurses and for the day-to-day running of the hospital, which provided patient services for the surrounding impoverished areas, and trained nurses for missionary work. It depended on charity and Maud recognized the importance of careful financial management. In her last years there she witnessed the decline of the Mildmay Mission through shortage of income. Only the mission's two hospitals survived, managed independently of the Mildmay Trust. 
Maud's final years proved the most difficult. Staff shortages caused by the war effort were followed by problems with the drains, which closed the hospital in 1916. She helped to negotiate medical cover with the Elizabeth Garrett Anderson Hospital, to enable its partial reopening in 1917, and sought suitable hospitals to continue probationer training. During an air raid in 1917 the hospital received thirty-six casualties caused by the bombing. The closure of the trustees' offices in Mildmay Park in 1917 created extra administrative work. Cattell undertook the cooking, when there was no cook, for two months in 1918. When the war ended the hospital returned to full working order. Cattell felt that it needed a 'younger woman' to carry on the work (Mildmay Mission Hospital, council minute book, MM/A/2/1, 43). She stayed on to train Dora Woodhouse, who took up her duties on 12 August 1919. 
Maud had an imposing and dignified presence. She was fairly tall and always slim, walking straight and upright. Her hair was originally dark, and she had a round face. As she got older, she wore glasses. 'During her thirty three years of service... she worked unremittingly for the good of all, and to the many who were privileged to serve under her she was not only 'Matron', but 'Mother' and friend. Her loving consideration for everyone under her care was a marked characteristic and the verse which constantly comes to mind in reference to her is, 'I am among you as he that serveth.'... She passed on to her nurses the habit of care over detail. For many years she [kept]... the accounts of the Hospital... most beautifully. It is impossible to estimate how much the Hospital owes to her guidance and to the faithful Christian witness of her life. ('Mildmay Mission Hospital Magazine', 1)' In retirement Maud lived at Sheldon with her father and her sisters Clara and Emma. Latterly her married sister Hannah May Kemp (1866-1955) cared for her. She died on 25 June 1947 at home, at South Bank, Sheldon, Birmingham, and was buried at St Giles's Church, Sheldon, three days later. 
Maud was assisted by her sister 


@@@@@


doc= 47846


Lumley, Jane, Lady Lumley (1537-1578), translator, was the eldest child of Henry Fitzalan, twelfth earl of Arundel (1512-1580), and his first wife, Katherine (died 1542), daughter of Thomas Grey, second marquess of Dorset, and his second wife, Margaret. She had two siblings: Henry, Lord Maltravers (1538-1556), and Mary Howard, duchess of Norfolk (1539/40-1557); and one stepbrother, John, son of her father's second wife, Mary, and her first husband, Robert Radcliffe, earl of Sussex. She married, as his first wife, John Lumley, first Baron Lumley (c.1533-1609), a university friend of her brother, probably by 1550 and certainly before 1553, when she attended Queen Mary's coronation as his wife. The couple then spent some time at Lumley's ancestral home, Lumley Castle in co. Durham, before joining Arundel's household at Nonsuch Palace in Surrey, where Jane nursed her father through considerable illness following the deaths of her brother in 1556, and both her sister and stepmother in 1557. Jane died at Arundel Place in London, predeceasing her father on 27 July 1578. Her funeral took place at St Clement Danes, the Strand, on 19 August. Her body was presumably reinterred by Lumley when he erected her tomb at Cheam in Surrey in 1596. Jane had two sons and one daughter, who all died in childhood. 
Jane Lumley's considerable learning was made possible by her father's particular care to educate all of his children, allowing his daughters to continue their studies at home when, unlike their brother, they could not pursue them at university. Partly to this end, the twelfth earl of Arundel built up an impressive library and offered patronage to scholars and practitioners of the arts. His library, which passed to Jane's husband on Arundel's death and is therefore known as the Lumley Library, was the means by which Jane's work was preserved. As well as housing the books that she collected, it was the repository for her manuscript translations. When the library passed into royal ownership in 1609, Jane's work became part of what is now the British Library. BL, Royal MS 15 A. i and ii are Latin translations selected from the orations of Isocrates, as are folios 2-62 of Royal MS 15 A. ix, with the exception of two Latin dedications to her father on folios 4 and 23. Most significant, however, are folios 63-97, which contain 'Iphigenia at Aulis', her English translation from Euripides. This work has the distinction of being both the first translation of one of Euripides' plays into English, and also the earliest piece of extant English drama by a woman. 


@@@@@


doc= 47847


Howard, Mary, duchess of Norfolk (1539/40-1557), noblewoman, was the third child of Henry Fitzalan, twelfth earl of Arundel (1512-1580), and his first wife, Katherine, daughter of Thomas Grey, second marquess of Dorset. Jane Lumley (1537-1578) was her sister and Henry, Lord Maltravers (1538-1556), was her brother. In or about 1554 Mary married, as his first wife, Thomas Howard, fourth duke of Norfolk (1538-1572), and in June 1557 she gave birth to their only son, Philip Howard (d. 1595), who succeeded in her right to the earldom of Arundel. She died, probably at Arundel House, London, from complications arising from the labour on 25 August, and was buried in St Clements without Temple Bar on 1 September 1557. Mary is mainly remembered for her classical learning, the result of her father's care to educate all of his children. Arundel's impressive library was the means by which some examples of Mary's work were preserved, as they (together with the works of her siblings) were kept together with the main collection, which passed into royal ownership in 1609 and now forms part of the British Library. BL, Royal MSS 12 A.i-iv, comprise four collections of 'sententiae', from Greek and English sources, translated by Mary into Latin and dedicated as new year's gifts to her father. Two were written before her marriage and two afterwards, the final one being a joint effort with her stepbrother John Ratcliffe; these works evidence an enduring personal and intellectual relationship with the highly cultured family circle into which she was born. 


@@@@@


doc= 47849


White, Eric Milner- (1884-1963), dean of York, was born on 23 April 1884 at Langholm, The Avenue, Southampton, the eldest son and first child of Henry Milner-White, barrister and chairman of Edwin Jones & Co. of Southhampton, and his wife, Kathleen Lucy Meeres. From Harrow School, Milner-White went up to King's College, Cambridge, in 1903 to read history, and was awarded first-class honours in both parts of the historical tripos in 1905 and 1907. In 1906 he was the university's Lightfoot scholar. Following a year at Cuddesdon Theological College in 1907 Milner-White was ordained deacon in 1908 and priest in 1909 at Southwark. He served as curate at St Paul's, Newington, from 1908 to 1909 and St Mary Magdalene, Woolwich, from 1909 to 1912, when he was appointed chaplain of King's College, Cambridge, and lecturer in history at Corpus Christi College, Cambridge. 
During the First World War Milner-White was chaplain to the forces at the western front and in Italy and was awarded the DSO for his service as senior chaplain and combatant officer in the 7th division in 1917. As army chaplain he contributed an essay, 'Worship and services', to 'The Church in the Furnace' (1918); this reflected his belief that the ministry of army chaplains provided by the established church did not meet the needs of the troops in the trenches. In 1918 he was appointed fellow and dean of King's College, Cambridge. Milner-White enjoyed the freedom to experiment in order to find liturgical forms suitable for the particular context of King's College. In memory of those who had fallen in the war, and of his own delivery from death when under fire as an army chaplain, Milner-White transformed one of the side chapels of King's College chapel into a memorial chapel. In 1918 he instituted the annual service of nine lessons and carols, building on a form devised by G. H. S. Walpole in 1880 at Truro Cathedral, and this was first broadcast by the BBC in 1928. The service has been transmitted annually by the BBC (with the exception of 1930) ever since, and rapidly became a major national event. By the early 1930s the BBC was also broadcasting the service on overseas programmes. In 1934 Milner-White introduced the processional Advent carol service at King's College chapel. He was a founder member of the Oratory of the Good Shepherd and its superior from 1923 to 1938; from 1936 to 1941 he was a canon of Lincoln Cathedral. In 1937 he published a novel, 'The Book of Hugh and Nancy', originating in his experiences at summer camps with King's College choristers. 
In 1941 the archbishop of York, William Temple, installed Milner-White as dean of York. He took a great interest in education and in Anglo-Catholic public schools in particular. In 1945 he became provost of the northern division of the Woodard Corporation. He was a patron of the arts with a strong interest in restoring and preserving the stained glass both in King's College chapel and in York Minster. Milner-White regarded stained glass as one of the chief media of teaching for the church. In 1948 he was made an honorary member of the Worshipful Company of Glaziers with freedom of the City of London. From 1944 to 1959 Milner-White was a member of the advisory council of the Victoria and Albert Museum. He was one of two vice-chairmen of the Advisory Council for the Care of Churches. He owned a large collection of modern ceramics, much of which he donated to Southampton Art Gallery, the City of York Art Gallery, and the Fitzwilliam Museum in Cambridge. As dean of York, Milner-White established the Borthwick Institute of Historical Research and the York Institute of Architectural Study. He enlarged the minster library and created a library endowment to ensure that it kept up with new publications. From 1948 to 1962 he was on the literary panel of the committee that produced the 'New English Bible'. Milner-White was awarded a Lambeth DD in 1952 and made an honorary doctor of letters by the University of Leeds in 1962. In 1952 he was also awarded a CBE. A founder member of York Civic Trust, Milner-White was also involved with the founding of the University of York. 
As dean Milner-White devised a number of services for special occasions in York Minster, such as an improved service for the enthronement of new archbishops and the wedding of the duke of Kent. He was a member of the liturgical commission of the Church of England from 1955 to 1962 and chairman of the commission on the recognition of saints. He published several liturgical source books, building on his experience of creating liturgies for regular and special occasions. These include 'Memorials upon Several Occasions: Prayers and Thanksgivings for Use in Public Worship' (1933) and 'My God, my Glory: Aspirations, Acts and Prayers on the Desire for God' (1954). The aim of liturgy, he wrote: 'is not to evoke the interest of the passer-by, but to achieve a common prayer before God of which the worshipping Church cannot tire... Thus gradually, inevitably the quality of prayer rises; its range widens; and liturgy continues to make its silent and immense contribution to the fullest worship of God, and thereby to the movement, along the deepest channels of all, to Christian unity. (Milner-White, 760-62)' Eric Milner-White died of cancer on 15 June 1963 at the deanery, York, and was cremated. His ashes were interred in York Minster. He never married. 


@@@@@


doc= 47850


Crackanthorpe, Montague Hughes (1832-1913), barrister and eugenicist, was born on 24 February 1832, the sixth son of Christopher Cookson (1791-1834), a cousin of William Wordsworth, of Nowers, near Wellington, Somerset, and Jane (died 1871), daughter of John Strother Ancrum. He was educated at Merchant Taylors' School, London, where he obtained a scholarship to study at St John's College, Oxford. He had a brilliant academic career, securing a double first in classical moderations and mathematics in 1852 and again in final schools in 1854, and won two university scholarships. He was a fellow of his college from 1850 until his marriage in 1869. 
In 1859 Cookson was called to the bar by Lincoln's Inn, and worked for a while with such future judicial luminaries as Farrer Herschell and Horace Davey. He attached himself to the equity court of Mr Justice Fry, where he acquired a leading position, before moving to the court of Mr Justice North. Towards the end of his life he mainly concentrated on cases coming before the House of Lords and the judicial committee. On 6 April 1869 Cookson married Blanche Althea Elizabeth (died 4 June 1928), the younger daughter of the Revd Eardley Chauncy Holt, a cousin of the liberal politician Hugh Childers. The marriage produced three sons, the author Hubert Montague Crackanthorpe (1870-1896), Dayrell Eardley Montague (1871-1950), who became a diplomat, and the youngest, Oliver Montague (1876-1934), who became an army officer. 
Cookson became a QC in 1875, but promotion to the bench eluded him, somewhat to the surprise of those who had once assumed that so brilliant a man would reach the very top of his profession. His obituarist in 'The Times' attributes this failure to the impression he gave of not taking the law with the wholehearted seriousness shown by some of his competitors, coupled with the distraction of his many outside interests. Nevertheless Cookson was a respected figure in the legal world. He joined the Council of Legal Education and served as chairman of the Council of Law Reporting. He represented the general council of the bar at the International Congress of Advocates at Brussels in 1897 and at the International Congress of the Society of Comparative Legislation in Paris in 1900, where he was nominated for membership of the International Commission on Criminal Sentences. 
In 1888 Cookson assumed the name of Crackanthorpe by royal licence upon succeeding to the landed estate of his cousin William Crackanthorpe (1790-1888), who had died unmarried. This bequest brought him the ownership of some 6000 acres at Newbiggin in Westmorland, along with the patronage of its parish. Crackanthorpe enjoyed the traditional life of a landed squire, but on rainy days he would while away the hours wrestling with abstruse mathematical problems, in which he retained an abiding interest. He also kept abreast of contemporary scientific work, about which he was remarkably well informed. Above all, Crackanthorpe relished the role of critic and journalist. He frequently wrote letters on topics of public concern to 'The Times' and placed a succession of articles in the 'Nineteenth Century', 'Fortnightly Review', and 'Contemporary Review', some of which were later brought together in a book entitled 'Population and Progress' (1907). 
Crackanthorpe's political interests led him to seek a seat in parliament. He stood unsuccessfully for Kensington South in the 1885 general election and for Brixton in the 1886 general election, on both occasions as a Gladstonian, before breaking decisively with the Liberals over the merits of Irish home rule. But Crackanthorpe had a cross-bench mentality which ill fitted him for conventional political life, as had become apparent as early as 1879, when, writing in the 'Nineteenth Century', he had advocated the formation of a national party, a theme to which he was to return in the late 1880s. 
Crackanthorpe's main claim on posterity lies in his courageous -- some contemporaries thought foolhardy -- advocacy of the practice of family limitation. This was the theme of one of his most influential articles, 'The morality of married life', published in the 'Fortnightly Review' in 1872, an article which earned him a reputation as a Malthusian and was later used against him by his political opponents. In retrospect the furore is difficult to understand, since Crackanthorpe always took care to put distance between himself and the controversial Malthusian League, and was simply presenting the case, humanitarian, social, and economic, for a restraint of population growth. In 'The morality of married life', and later, he confined practical information to the recommending of the rhythm method of contraception -- in an obscurely worded footnote which cited the works of various medical experts, all of them written in German! 
By the start of the twentieth century Crackanthorpe's involvement in population questions was further stimulated by his encounter with the researches of Jacques Bertillon, who had demonstrated that in the urban areas of several European cities a relationship existed between poverty and high fertility. Crackanthorpe concluded that contraception was what he called the 'D. E.', the determining element, in the falling birth-rate among the affluent. He also came under the influence of Sir Francis Galton, the founder of eugenics, who happened to be his London neighbour. 
In 1907 the Eugenics Education Society was established, and, following the unexpected resignation in May 1909 of its first president, James Crichton-Browne, it was to Crackanthorpe that its council turned for a successor, in accordance with Galton's expressed wish. Crackanthorpe accepted the offer because he believed that eugenics should be taken out of the scientist's laboratory and publicized more widely, even at the risk of some trivialization. Galton thereupon agreed to associate himself with the society as an honorary president. However, Crackanthorpe was already seventy-seven years of age when he assumed the society's presidency, and he held the post only until 1911. In any case, he was never in the mainstream of Edwardian eugenics. Prior to 1914 most eugenicists rejected all forms of birth control, partly on traditional moral grounds but also out of a belief that restraint was already taking place at the 'wrong end of the social scale', a process which they assumed was leading to the 'multiplication of the unfit' and therefore to racial deterioration. Crackanthorpe shared many of these fears, but argued that if the educated classes set a sound example in the responsible control of their own fertility, their social inferiors would quickly follow suit. He also blamed population growth for many of the social problems of the day -- overcrowding, unemployment, and the like -- and explained Germany's restless ambition on the world stage as the result of its rapid demographic expansion. 
Thus, though holding highly conservative views on most political issues, Crackanthorpe is often labelled a reform eugenicist, because he combined eugenic beliefs with a commitment to the traditional liberal causes of peace and progress. He even took a mildly progressive line on female emancipation: 'Woman is now wide awake, her long slumber ended; to put her to sleep again is beyond human power', he proclaimed in 1907 ('Population and Progress', 114-15). Crackanthorpe died at home at 20 Rutland Gate, Knightsbridge, London, as a result of longstanding emphysema and chronic bronchitis on 16 November 1913, shortly before the outbreak of the major war whose advent he had so dreaded. He was buried at All Saints, Ennismore Gardens, London. A close friend described Crackanthorpe as 'a man of wide and varied culture and reading, and of a genial temperament', 'a pleasant companion and a most gracious host'. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 47851


Donisthorpe, Wordsworth (1847-1914), political activist and pioneer of cinematography, was born on 24 March 1847 at Springfield Mount, Leeds, the only son (there were also four daughters) of George Edmund Donisthorpe (1809-1875), a worsted manufacturer, wool merchant, and later colliery proprietor, who in the 1840s had invented a wool combing machine, and his wife, Elizabeth Wordsworth (1821-1881). He was educated at Leeds grammar school and Trinity College, Cambridge, where in 1869 he took a first in the moral sciences tripos. A year later he was admitted to the Inner Temple, but he was not called to the bar until 1879. In the interim he had been arrested in Strasbourg for taking part in a republican demonstration, and married (on 17 December 1873) Ann Maria, daughter of Henry Anderson, a York solicitor; they had two sons and two daughters. In 1876 he published 'The Principles of Plutology', a work that endeavoured to develop a science of wealth on the same principles as Herbert Spencer's science of society. 
Donisthorpe was a leading figure in a variety of organizations on the margins of late Victorian politics that had as their common purpose opposition to the growing role of the state. He was an early member of the Personal Rights Association, founded in 1871 to fight the 'Contagious Diseases Acts', which had empowered the police to compel women suspected of prostitution to undergo a medical examination. In 1873 he joined with his cousin William Carr Crofts (1846-1894) to found the Political Evolution Society, the aim of which was to warn of 'the dangerous principle underlying measures of a repressive or paternal character', and which had as its instrument the abortive journal 'Let Be'. In 1880 the society was renamed the State Resistance Union in response to Lord Elcho's advocacy, in a letter to the 'St James's Gazette', of a cross-party grouping to uphold personal liberty and freedom of contract. Two years later, after the publication in the 'Pall Mall Gazette' of a further appeal by Elcho (soon to be the earl of Wemyss), and on the advice of Herbert Spencer, Donisthorpe took part in a meeting at Elcho's London home which led to the State Resistance Union being transformed into the Liberty and Property Defence League. 
The league remained the chief campaigning group for the principles of 'laissez-faire' liberalism for the rest of the nineteenth century. Its membership comprised a loose coalition of landed and commercial interests, while figures such as Auberon Herbert, Thomas Mackay, Frederick Millar, as well as Donisthorpe himself provided the league with polemical and theoretical support. In 1884 Donisthorpe published the pamphlet 'Liberty or Law?', effectively the league's manifesto, which argued for a realignment of the political parties to bring together all those individualists who were opposed to 'socialism' (meaning any extension of the state's role beyond the nightwatchman minimum). Donisthorpe served on the league's council until 1888, and in 1887-8 edited a journal, 'Jus', subsidized by the league. His final break with Wemyss occurred as a result of the latter's failure to campaign for church disestablishment. 
The most sophisticated statement of Donisthorpe's political creed is his 'Individualism: a System of Politics' (1889). His theory owed a great deal to that of Herbert Spencer, and borrowed in particular the idea that society was an organism which develops according to scientific laws of evolution. These laws, discovered by a science Donisthorpe termed 'nomology', reveal that only an ever-decreasing amount of state interference is consistent with social welfare, and that the ultimate goal of the evolutionary process is an anarchistic utopia (Donisthorpe occasionally referred to himself as a 'philosophic anarchist'). While incorporating some aspects of Spencer's thought, however, Donisthorpe repudiated his 'metaphysical' doctrine of natural rights, and drew on the positivistic conception of law associated with Hobbes and John Austin. A vigorous controversialist, his energies were as often expended in argument with fellow individualists, especially Auberon Herbert, as they were in combating what he saw as the iniquities of socialism. 
Of Donisthorpe's other publications, the chapter he contributed to 'A Plea for Liberty' (ed. T. Mackay, 1891) contains the most succinct statement of his political views. His 'Law in a Free State' (1895) collects some of his articles and occasional pieces. In 'Labour Capitalisation' (1887) Donisthorpe advanced the case for a form of profit-sharing and in 'Uropa' (1913) he projected a 'philosophically-constructed' international language based on Latin. As president of the Legitimation League, which sought to remove the legal disadvantages of illegitimate children, he published a pamphlet entitled 'Law and Love: an Essay on Marriage' (1894), which considered how concepts of individual freedom might be applied to marriage, arguing against the intervention of the state to enforce the continuance of marriages. By 1891 he was separated from his wife and about 1911 had a daughter with Edith Georgina Fleming, whom he described as his second wife. He died of heart failure on 30 January 1914, at Shottermill, near Farnham, Surrey. 
Donisthorpe's other interests included chess. He was on the sub-committee that drew up the rules of the London chess tournament of 1883, and as a member of the British Chess Club he took part in the international match against the Cercle des Echecs in Paris in May 1885. His posthumous reputation increasingly rested on his contribution to early cinematography. In 1876 he applied for a patent for an apparatus to take photographs at rapid intervals, to record the movement of the object being photographed. In a letter to 'Nature' (24 Jan 1878, 242), prompted by a report of Thomas Edison's phonograph, he described how his kinesigraph (as his motion picture apparatus was called) could produce moving pictures: the paper prints of each image would be fixed to a long strip of paper wound from a cylinder, and as each individual picture was unwound it would be illuminated by an electric spark. In 1889, jointly with William Carr Crofts, he took out a patent for a film camera and projector, whose mechanism was possibly inspired by that of his father's wool combing machine and which utilized the new technology of celluloid film. Ten frames survive from their successful attempt, about 1890, to use the kinesigraph to expose a series of frames from a vantage point overlooking Trafalgar Square. They encountered problems in developing a workable projector, and failed to find a sponsor; after his cousin's death, in 1894, Donisthorpe seems to have dropped the project. His contribution to cinematography went largely forgotten, though his and Carr's relatives recalled their invention when the early history of the cinema was first being chronicled (see 'The Times', 6 Aug, 9 Aug 1923) and subsequent work by film historians has shed more light on Donisthorpe's work in the field. 


@@@@@


doc= 47852


Mackay, Thomas (1849-1912), social theorist, was born in Edinburgh on 10 December 1849, the eldest son of Aeneas John Mackay, a former major in the 16th regiment Bengal native infantry, and his wife, Eleanor Roberts. Mackay's mother died in 1855, leaving one brother, James. In 1864 both brothers were sent to Trinity College, Glenalmond, from where Thomas went in 1868 to New College, Oxford, where he took thirds in classical moderations and 'literae humaniores'. He was admitted to the Inner Temple in 1871. In 1874, the same year in which he was called to the bar, he became engaged to Beatrice Baillie (died 1899), the daughter of the Hon. and Revd John Baillie, canon of York. His prospective father-in-law appears to have doubted Mackay's ability to support a wife and family as a young barrister, and instead persuaded him to go into business. He thus became a partner in the wine business of Charles Kinloch, a first cousin of his father. 
The offices of Kinloch and Mackay were situated in London's East End, a location that gave a practical stimulus to Mackay's interest in social and economic questions. He became a member, and then secretary, of the local committee of the Charity Organization Society (COS), an office he retained for twenty-five years; he also served as vice-chairman of the COS national council for eleven years. The COS worked to supplement the basic relief provided by the 1834 poor law with organized, charitable giving to the 'deserving' poor, and Mackay's leading role in the society provided the bedrock for his subsequent investigations into the principles and methods of poor relief. 
In 1885 Mackay's partnership with Kinloch ended, but he had acquired a sufficiently large fortune to enable him to devote his energies to a study of social problems. His first work, 'The English Poor', was published in 1889; its argument for the strict application of the 1834 poor law draws heavily upon the writings of Herbert Spencer, especially in support of the view that poor relief is the cause rather than the cure of social problems. Like Spencer, Mackay was committed to the principles of individualism, the doctrine which resisted the extension of the activities of the state beyond those necessary to protect liberty and property, and he became a member of the Liberty and Property Defence League. In 1891 he edited 'A Plea for Liberty', intended as the league's riposte to the 'Fabian Essays in Socialism'. Mackay himself contributed the chapter on 'Investment', and Auberon Herbert and Wordsworth Donisthorpe also provided chapters. Herbert Spencer wrote the introduction. Three years later this volume was followed by another, also edited by Mackay, under the title of 'A Policy of Free Exchange'. 
Mackay continued to publish on social topics throughout the 1890s. An anonymous pamphlet, 'The Great Coalition: an Adventure in Statecraft' (1893), satirized the efforts of social reformers. More substantial was 'Methods of Social Reform' (1896), a collection of review articles, and 'The State and Charity' (1898), which appeared in the 'English Citizen' series. In 1899 Mackay published his chief work, 'A History of the English Poor Law from 1834 to the Present Day', which was technically a continuation of the 'History' begun by Sir George Nicholl. In all these writings Mackay emphasized the debilitating effects on the character of the poor of state benefits and indiscriminate charity, and argued that the solution to social problems must reside in self-help and voluntary action. 
Mackay edited the autobiography of Samuel Smiles (1905) and was also the author of biographies of the engineer Sir John Fowler (1900) and of Albert Pell (1908), a friend who shared many of his social views. He contributed frequently to the leading reviews and to 'The Spectator'. In 1894 he was awarded an honorary degree by the University of St Andrews. 
Mackay's first wife died in 1899, leaving him childless, and in 1905 he remarried, his second wife being the eldest daughter of James Augustus Grant, the African explorer. She died in 1907, leaving an infant son who did not long survive her. Mackay himself died at his London home, 89 Iverna Court, Kensington, of heart failure on 23 February 1912. 


@@@@@


doc= 47853


Coit, Stanton George (1857-1944), ethical reformer, was born on 11 August 1857 in Columbus, Ohio, the fourth of the eight children of Harvey Coit and Elizabeth Greer. He was educated at Amherst College, Massachusetts, where he graduated in 1879. Rejecting both his mother's spiritualism and conventional theocratic Christianity, he joined the Society for Ethical Culture, New York city, of Felix Adler, who offered a heady mixture of Kantian idealism, Emersonian transcendentalism, and traditional Jewish emphasis on conduct. Coit committed himself to faith in ethical value unsupported by theological sanctions. After courses at Columbia College, New York, in 1881-2, he took his doctorate at Berlin University (1885), where, shocked by the militarism of Heinrich von Treitschke, he became a socialist. The theme of Coit's dissertation, 'The inner sanction as final purpose for moral action', became the guiding principle of his life. In London, which he visited in 1885, he learned of social work settlements at Toynbee Hall, where educated young people lived with and worked for slum dwellers. Coit introduced the concept to Adler's working men's school in New York, and worked for the New York University Settlement. 
On returning to London, Coit opened a neighbourhood guild in Kentish Town, the practice of which he explained in 'Neighbourhood Guilds: an Instrument of Social Reform' (1891). In 1888 he was invited to become 'minister' at an old established freethinking community, South Place Religious Society, at its chapel in Finsbury. Coit's appointment was due to enthusiastic support from the outgoing minister, Moncure Daniel Conway, an American author, journalist, and humanist. The society agreed to Coit's demand that the chapel be known as South Place Ethical Society. Coit was minister from 1888 to 1891 but he was forced to resign because the independent and largely non-socialist members believed he was coercing them into the new British ethical movement. Coit founded in 1894 the West London Ethical Society, the Moral Instruction League, and a socialist journal, 'The Ethical World' (later 'Democracy'). J. Ramsay MacDonald and J. A. Hobson were prolific contributors. It kept up a high standard of commentary, especially on ethical issues in politics. Coit also inspired the formation of several ethical societies, which proliferated into a modest but none the less national network. The Union of Ethical Societies (formed in 1896) was the germ of the British Humanist Association. On 21 December 1898 Coit married Fanny Adela Wetzlar, daughter of a Frankfurt industrialist, who helped her husband fund the radiation (as he called it) of ethical societies. They had three daughters. 
In 1903 Coit received naturalization as a British subject, joined the Independent Labour Party, and was adopted as parliamentary candidate for Wakefield. He participated in local affairs, and purchased the 'Wakefield Echo'. He fought a vigorous campaign at the general election of 1906, but was defeated by the Conservative candidate by 217 votes. He was again defeated at Wakefield in January 1910. Coit's politics had a religious complexion: he was impressed by the ideas of J. R. Seeley on the social and psychological function of religion, expressed in 'Natural Religion' (1882). The West London Ethical Society experimented with ethical worship. In 1909 Coit purchased a Methodist church in Bayswater, London, which he named the 'Ethical church'; the society itself was also given this name in 1914. Stained-glass windows showed Elizabeth Fry, Bernard Shaw, and Saint Joan; from 1923 there was a white column inscribed 'An Altar to the Ideal, the True, the Beautiful and the Good'. Coit prepared an elaborate service book, 'Social Worship: for Use in Families, Schools and Churches' (1913), with musical arrangements by Charles Kennedy Scott. Coit's principles were expressed in 'National Idealism and a State Church: a Constructive Essay in Religion' (1907), revised for American publication as 'The Soul of America: a Constructive Essay in the Sociology of Religion' (1914), and 'National Idealism: and the Book of Common Prayer: an Essay in Re-Interpretation and Revision' (1908). He hoped the Church of England would adopt some of his practices. Coit's ideas of the social, as opposed to supernatural, nature of religion were invigorated from 1923 by a study of Emile Durkheim's work and from 1930 by the 'Ethics' of the German phenomenologist Nicolai von Hartmann, of which Coit, in his seventies, produced an esteemed English translation. Following Hartmann, he considered himself to be a Platonist. After the death of his wife he retired to Birling Gap, near Eastbourne, in 1933, and died there on 15 February 1944. In youth Coit was red-headed and of fiery temperament, which he retained in later years. He is vividly described in a novel, 'The Prophet's Wife' (1929) by R. O. Prowse, a member of the Ethical church. 


@@@@@


doc= 47854


Saleeby, Caleb Williams Elijah (1878-1940), writer and eugenist, was born on 3 May 1878 at 1 Bedford Row, Worthing, Sussex, the only son of Elijah George Saleeby, the founder of the Mount Lebanon schools, and his wife, Frances Maria, daughter of the pioneering alienist Dr Caleb Williams of York. He was educated by his mother and then studied at the Royal High School in Edinburgh, after which he read medicine at Edinburgh University, where he was first in first-class honours for his MB ChB (1901). Saleeby briefly practised in Edinburgh as resident physician in the maternity hospital and in the Royal Infirmary, and then as a resident officer at the York City Dispensary, before moving to London in 1901 to work under Sir Jonathan Hutchinson (who had once been apprenticed to his maternal grandfather) at the Polyclinic, a postgraduate medical college in Chenies Street. On 24 June 1903 Saleeby married Monica Mary ('b'. 1880), eldest daughter of Wilfrid John Meynell and Alice Christiana Meynell, the poet. Monica's father was related to Saleeby, being the nephew of Caleb Williams, while her brother was the poet and publisher Sir Francis Meynell. The couple had two daughters. 
Saleeby soon abandoned clinical practice for the life of a freelance writer and journalist, applying his knowledge and experience to a wide range of social issues. A turning point in his career came in May 1904 when he attended the meeting of the Sociological Society at which Francis Galton delivered his famous lecture on eugenics. Saleeby set out to popularize this new creed, and played an influential role in the launching of the Eugenics Education Society, founded in 1907. However, Saleeby was soon at odds with the society's officers: in 1913 its council even declined his offer to lecture to the organization. The main quarrel centred around Saleeby's increasingly outspoken attacks on what he called the 'better dead' school of eugenists, whom he accused of discrediting the movement with their reactionary class prejudices. Saleeby also differed from most eugenists in combining a concern for heredity with an interest in post-natal care (the result of his training as an obstetrician) and with a desire to combat what he dubbed the 'racial poisons': venereal disease, insanity, and, in particular, alcohol. From 1907 to 1923 Saleeby regularly lectured on eugenics at the Royal Institution. But, although still playing his self-appointed role as 'counsel for the unborn', he gradually moderated his earlier confident belief in eugenics as the 'religion' upon which depended the salvation of the world. Saleeby's interest in population questions never abated, but it is significant that when, during the First World War, he became chairman of the national birth-rate commission he seemed less concerned to emphasize the need for qualitative racial improvements, the main theme in his earlier writings, than to advocate policies designed to arrest population decline. The First World War provided other outlets for Saleeby's reforming energies. He acted as an unpaid adviser to Lord Rhondda, the minister of food, and vigorously argued the case for the establishment of a ministry of health as a national war priority. In addition, Saleeby developed an expertise in the design of protective body armour, and contributed to the invention of the steel helmet. 
After the war Saleeby threw himself into the campaign for clean air and heliotherapy, or helio-hygiene, drawing his inspiration and many of his ideas from Dr A. Rollier's sanatorium at Leysin, Switzerland. In 1924 he founded the Sunlight League, of which he became chairman, and preached the gospel of sun worship in his regular column in the 'New Statesman', written under the 'nom de plume' Lens. A keen temperance reformer, Saleeby continued his lifelong attacks on alcohol, which he dubbed the 'most mortal abomination of our time' (Saleeby, 'Modern Surgery', 275), and in a stream of articles and pamphlets he also argued the case for smoke abatement, rational clothing, improved diets, and healthy exercise. 
Saleeby's marriage to Monica had broken down by 1911. On 30 July 1929 he married Muriel Gordon ('b'. 1879/80), elder daughter of the Revd Robert Burland Billinge; the couple shared many interests, especially a love of music -- though, characteristically, he was keen to distinguish between 'healthy' and 'morbid' musical compositions (Saleeby, 'Health', 372-4). The couple were married by W. R. Inge, dean of St Paul's, who was himself a eugenist. At the start of the Second World War Saleeby moved his home from St John's Wood, London, to Appletree, Aldbury, near Tring, Hertfordshire, where he did unpaid consulting work in the local ante-natal clinic. He died from heart failure at his home on 9 December 1940. He was survived by his wife. 
Throughout his life Saleeby waged war tirelessly against what he called the diseases of darkness, true to his family name, which in Arabic means 'crusader'. He was a tireless committee man, serving, 'inter alia', as vice-president of the Divorce Law Reform Union, the National Temperance League, and the National Council of Public Morals. Saleeby's handsome appearance and commanding manner made him an effective lecturer, and he addressed audiences all round the world in support of his favourite causes. He was equally fluent with his pen, contributing articles to a wide variety of coterie journals and popular newspapers as well as to the medical press. All his writings bear the same hallmarks: clarity of expression, polemical vigour, and the happy knack of supporting an argument with homely but apt illustrations. 
It was perhaps as a pioneering eugenist that Saleeby exercised greatest influence, making that creed known to thousands who might otherwise never have heard of it. He boasted that he had invented the phrases 'positive' and 'negative eugenics' and 'racial poisons'. Yet even in this field he managed to fall out with many would-be collaborators. Karl Pearson was furious at Saleeby's habit of referring to Galton as 'My Master', and Galton himself came to feel that Saleeby's occasional outbursts of silliness made him more of a liability than an asset. Yet Saleeby was important, not just as a popularizer of science, but for his role in dissociating population questions from the prevalent conservative orthodoxy. Saleeby joined the Fabian Society in 1910, advocated the emancipation of women, and never tired of proclaiming his belief in the compatibility between eugenics and social and political progress. In so doing, he became a leading spokesman for what scholars later called 'reform eugenics'. 
Although his name is not linked to any one outstanding work, Saleeby wrote over a dozen books and pamphlets, as well as innumerable articles. His earliest publications, 'The Cycle of Life' (1904) and 'Evolution: the Master-Key' (1905), are expositions of the cosmology of Herbert Spencer. His next book, 'Health, Strength and Happiness' (1908), is very different in tone, demonstrating its author's skill at making scientific research relevant to the problems of everyday life. Saleeby then went on to write four of the most widely read popular expositions of eugenics, 'Parenthood and Race-Culture' (1909), 'The Methods of Race-Regeneration' (1911), 'The Progress of Eugenics' (1914), and 'The Eugenic Prospect' (1921). Among his other books are 'Modern Surgery and its Making' (1912), 'Woman and Womanhood' (1912), 'The Whole Armour of Man' (1919), and 'Sunlight and Health' (1923). 
Particularly in the earlier stages of his career, Saleeby struck unsympathetic contemporaries as a crank, but many of the causes he espoused had become widely accepted by the time of his death: for example, his advocacy of clean air legislation, his warnings of the dangers of tobacco, his commitment to preventive medicine, and his calls for the training of parenthood. As his obituarist in 'The Times' observed, if people had heard little of Saleeby in his latter years, that was because so many of his crusades had succeeded. 


@@@@@


doc= 47855


Shaw, Frederick John (1863-1939), socialist and author, was born on 15 November 1863 at 1 Hawthorn Terrace, Newcastle upon Tyne, the eldest child of Frederick Shaw, merchant, and his wife, Elizabeth Foster. He had four sisters, and two of his cousins also lived with the family. His grandfather Thomas Shaw and his father had done well as seed cutters with the colour manufacturers Hoyle and Robson, and the family was comfortably off (it employed several servants throughout Shaw's childhood). Until 1908 he was engaged in business, except for an interval as joint editor of the 'Newcastle Evening News' and 'Morning Mail'. He moved around the north-east, and lived in South Shields, Gateshead, and then Heaton. During this time he wrote a volume of poems, 'Past and Future', published locally in 1898. 
Shaw joined the Fabian Society in 1890 and the Independent Labour Party in 1894, and he played an active role with his wife, Margaret Dorothy Shaw, in promoting the socialist and labour movements in the north-east. He wrote penny tracts on 'Canny Newcastle and her Corporations' and 'Socialism for the North' for local branches of the Independent Labour Party. At the turn of the century he joined the Newcastle and district Labour Representation Committee, for whom he again wrote a tract, this time on 'Facts for Newcastle'. In 1907 he accepted a post with the Free Trade Union which took him first to Bradford and then to Glasgow. In 1912 he moved to London on being appointed secretary of the Cobden Club, and soon afterwards also became secretary of the international committee to promote universal free trade. It was in the former capacity that he collaborated with Cobden's daughter to produce 'The Land Hunger' as a tribute to her father. 
Shaw wrote a number of studies of the Liberal, socialist, and suffrage movements in Britain, almost always using the pseudonym Brougham Villiers. His main ideas remained fairly constant, though the First World War, not surprisingly, altered his view of the immediate tasks before society. Before the war his main works were 'The Opportunity of Liberalism' (1904), 'The Socialist Movement in England' (1908), and 'Modern Democracy' (1912). He adopted a sociological approach rather than a more ethical or polemical one, arguing that the viability of a policy depends less on ideas than social and economic forces, but he readily drew political conclusions from his sociology. He thought the mutual dependence of humans implies that society necessarily evolves towards ever greater solidarity, with a reasoned organization replacing an instinctive individualism. The new Liberalism and socialism were manifestations of this evolutionary process; they represented the moment of democracy conceived as the will of the average person. The way to discover the implications of this democratic moment is not to listen to politicians but to investigate the concerns of the average. Because the average constantly face the threat of poverty, the social question will dominate; because they meet this threat with trade unions and the co-operative movement, the state will respond by promoting co-operation to provide a minimum standard of life; and because they deal with poverty as a practical problem, the state will introduce this minimum standard by rule of thumb methods. 
Shaw supported the suffragettes out of principle -- he edited 'The Case for Women's Suffrage' (1907) -- but also because of the effect votes for women would have on national politics. Women would not stand for tariffs on foodstuffs, while their caring role made their political participation especially necessary at a time when the state was taking on welfare functions. After 1914 Shaw's main works were 'Britain after the Peace' (1918) and 'England and the New Era' (1920), the latter being his last important work. He argued the war had entailed a high level of expenditure, much geographical displacement of people, and other social changes, all of which inaugurated a revolutionary era. Whereas collectivists of the 1890s had championed an evolutionary approach to change, they now had to concentrate on the peaceful, orderly management of a revolution. In particular, he advocated a capital levy so as to restore the finances of the state, and a League of Nations overseeing demilitarization and free trade so as to ensure peace. Shaw died at his home, 18 Sudbury Court Drive, Wembley, Middlesex, on 26 June 1939; his wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 47856


Turquand, William (1818/19-1894), accountant, was born in either 1818 or 1819. His father is thought to have belonged to a family of French emigres who fled from the French Revolution, but no records of his early life have survived. The elder Turquand was one of the first official assignees to be appointed under the 'Bankruptcy Act' of 1831 (before that he had been a City stockbroker). William also held the post of assignee in 1846-7, at 13 Old Jewry in the City of London, but soon afterwards he set up in private practice. The insolvency connection no doubt continued to be a source of profitable work for his business. 
By 1852 Turquand was running a firm of 'accountants, arbitrators and referees' ('Post Office London Directory', 1035) in partnership with a Mr Edwards. This may have been William Edwards (died 1884), who from 1843 undertook the training of a number of accountants who were later to achieve success in the City. The partnership was short-lived, as about 1856 Turquand merged his share of the practice with that of Youngs & Co. The latter had been established in 1840 by John Young (died 1888), the son of a farmer of Windmill, near Gordonstown, who had been joined in London by his brother Alexander Young (died 1907). In 1857 the new firm of Turquand, Youngs & Co. amalgamated with J. E. Coleman & Co. During the 1840s James Edward Coleman had established a considerable reputation as a City accountant and was often appointed by the Bank of England to investigate the solvency of suspect businesses, including Trueman and Cook, colonial brokers. When giving evidence to the select committee on the 'Bank Acts' (1857-8), Coleman calculated that his twelve largest insolvency assignments in 1857 had liabilities totalling $6,726,840. 
The union of the three practices created a firm of considerable eminence under the style Coleman, Turquand, Youngs & Co., with offices in Tokenhouse Yard in the City of London. In 1861-4 Edwin Waterhouse worked as a clerk in their offices to gain experience of accountancy, and recalled how he had initially called 'at Mr Turquand's private house in Mansfield Street where I found him busy on some important railway work which had taken one of his partners to America' ('Memoirs', 71). In an era before the establishment of professional qualifications for accountants, the partnership established a reputation for probity and, as Waterhouse wrote, gained a number of important clients: 'I was occasionally sent to the offices of the London & North Western Railway to assist in Mr Coleman's work as a public accountant in the service of the auditors. Mr Coleman was connected also with the London, Chatham & Dover Railway, then carrying out its metropolitan extensions, and I gained not a little experience in examining into the trade claims for loss of business on change of premises. (ibid., 74)' When Coleman retired, shortly after the merger, Turquand became the senior partner; expansion resulted in a new style, Turquand, Youngs, Weise, Bishop, and Clarke, which led 'The Accountant' (15 December 1888) to comment that this was 'one of the largest firms of its kind in London, indeed the world'. 
Turquand rose to prominence because of his abilities as a liquidator, a fact recognized in his appointment, in 1866, as joint liquidator of Overend, Gurney & Co. The 1867 report from the select committee on 'Limited Liability Acts' calculated that Coleman, Turquand, Youngs & Co. were currently winding up twenty-nine of the 259 companies then in liquidation and that this represented $18.4 million of the $92.1 million involved. In 1877 Turquand observed that he personally had been responsible for the liquidation of sixty-two businesses, among which were the West of England Bank, London and Colonial Bank, London and Scottish Bank, British Provident Insurance Company, Commercial and General Assurance Company, Defender Assurance Company, and Leeds Banking Company, while his firm had administered a further 140. These included the Albert Insurance Company, Collies of London, and the European Insurance Company, which took more than twenty clerks and assistants five years to complete. 
The firm prospered under Turquand's leadership and its fee income rose from $19,627 in 1859 to $36,072 in 1873, although the importance of the Overend Gurney assignment revealed itself in a peak of $90,287 in 1868. The partnership was not so successful during the 1880s, when its fee income levelled at about $27,000-$28,000 per annum. By this time auditing was assuming a greater importance, but Turquand was reluctant to undertake this work and left most audit appointments to his fellow partners. John Young, for example, audited the Caledonian Railway, the Cambrian Railways, and the Great Western Railway of Canada. 
In 1855 Turquand took part in an important legal case, 'Royal British Bank v. Turquand', which helped to establish the principle that a third party in dealing with a company need not examine its internal organizational rules in order to ensure that officers have authority for such dealings. Based upon his commercial standing in the City, Turquand assumed a leading position in the accountancy profession, and became the first president of the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales upon its formation in 1880. He had been a leading member of the Institute of Accountants in London from its foundation in 1870, when he was elected its vice-president. On the retirement of William Quilter in 1877, Turquand succeeded him as president. He gave evidence to the 1877 select committee on the 'Companies Acts' of 1862 and 1867, but during the 1880s took a lesser role in the profession's affairs. 'The Accountant' (31 March 1894, 291) described him as 'a perfect gentleman, with not only the best reputation out of his office, but... in it'. 
Turquand had a wife called Ada, but nothing else is known about his domestic life. He died aged seventy-five, on 20 March 1894, at his home, 20 Norfolk Street, Park Lane, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 47857


Tyndall, Onesiphorus (bap. 1689, d. 1757), banker and merchant, was baptized on 28 May 1689 at Lewins Mead, Bristol, the eldest son of Onesiphorus Tyndall (1657-1748), merchant, and his wife, Elizabeth Hopper ('b'. 1661) of Loxley, Warwickshire. His father went to Bristol in 1674 from Melksham Court, Gloucestershire, and was for many years a partner in the leading Bristol merchant house of Isaac Hobhouse & Co., engaged in the West Indies trade in slaves, sugar, and tobacco. Early in the eighteenth century, Tyndall was probably apprenticed to his father in the trade of grocer and dry salter. On 6 November 1717 he married Elizabeth Cowles (1696-1730) of Bristol, and together they had four children -- two sons and two daughters. The marriage ended with Elizabeth's death in December 1730, Tyndall remaining thereafter a widower. He lived for many years in the parish of Christchurch in Bristol, though in 1743 he inherited from his brother John a house in the Royal Fort, then on the northern fringes of the city, consolidating the family's close connection with the area. 
Tyndall was notable for his role in the formation of the Old Bank, Bristol's first bona fide banking house, which commenced business on 1 August 1750. The date is significant, making it one of the earliest such private banks to be established in England and Wales outside London. As senior partner, Tyndall's business experience and extensive contacts, both within the Bristol region and beyond, were of great importance in securing the success of the new enterprise. Many of the early customers of the bank were drawn from the same mercantile, professional, and civic elite to which Tyndall himself belonged. 
However, banking interests came to Tyndall relatively late in life, after a long and varied association with the trading activities of the port of Bristol. Widely recognized as an eminent dry salter, he also followed his father into the West Indies trade and was still listed as trading to Africa in 1755, just two years before his death. Though not especially noted for his involvement in civic duties, Tyndall, a freeman of the city of Bristol, was none the less appointed verderer and chief ranger of the forest of Kingswood, in November 1734. Like many of the eighteenth-century merchants and bankers of Bristol's emerging business class, he was also actively involved in the city's nonconformist religious society. 
Tyndall died in Bristol on 30 May 1757, aged sixty-eight. He was buried at Christchurch parish church, in the same ground as his wife, on 3 June 1757. The chief beneficiary of his considerable legacy was his youngest son, Thomas Tyndall (1723-1794), who also succeeded him as a partner in the Old Bank. 


@@@@@


doc= 47858


Dickenson, Sarah (1868-1954), trade unionist and suffragist, was born on 28 March 1868 in Borsall Road, Hulme, Manchester, the second of five children of Scot John Welsh, enameller and coach-painter, and his wife, Jane Ferguson. From 1879, when she was eleven years old, until 1895, Sarah Welsh worked in Howarth's mill, a cotton mill in Salford. During these years she became involved in the efforts of the Manchester and Salford Trades Council to organize women workers and by 1889 had become secretary of the small Manchester and Salford Association of Machine, Electrical, and Other Women Workers. When the Manchester and Salford Women's Trade Union Council was set up in 1895, as one of the few working women involved in its launch, Sarah Welsh was appointed one of two full-time organizers. The aims of the council were to work for improved wages and working conditions by encouraging women to join unions which would be able to negotiate on their behalf. In 1896 Sarah married William Roger Dickenson, an iron enameller who had his own bicycle workshop; they had no children. 
Sarah Dickenson firmly believed that no improvement in women's working conditions would take place until women, as voters, could influence legislation. This belief was shared by other women textile workers who related their commitment to the extension of the franchise to women to the situation of working women and the wider labour movement. Accordingly she resigned from the Women's Trade Union Council in 1904, when the council decided that support of women's suffrage was outside its remit. As an alternative, Sarah Dickenson and Eva Gore Booth set up the Manchester and Salford Women's Trade and Labour Council with a clear commitment to women's suffrage. 
Sarah Dickenson's involvement in the issue of women's suffrage dates from the late 1890s when she became a member of the North of England Society for Women's Suffrage (NESWS), an organization modelled closely on the National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies (NUWSS) set up in 1897 with Millicent Fawcett as its president. Sarah Dickenson took a leading part in its activities, and was closely involved in the 1900-01 campaign to petition women factory workers in support of women's suffrage. When this petition, with almost 30,000 signatures, was presented to the Lancashire MPs at the House of Commons on 8 March 1901, Sarah Dickenson was among the speakers. In 1903 she was a founder member of the Lancashire and Cheshire Women Textile and Other Workers Representation Committee, formed to select and support a parliamentary candidate who would campaign for women's suffrage. The NESWS split in 1905 over the issue of targeting factory workers and a number of the executive committee members, including Sarah Dickenson, resigned to set up an alternative society, the National Industrial and Professional Women's Suffrage Society. 
Sarah Dickenson worked for women's suffrage at a national as well as a local level. She was employed periodically as a salaried organizer for the NUWSS and took part in several major demonstrations on behalf of women's suffrage. In 1906 she spoke during a large deputation to the prime minister, Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman, on the right of women wage-earners to political enfranchisement. 
In 1918 when a limited number of women were granted the vote, the Women's Trade Union Council and the Women's Trade and Labour Council merged to form the women's group of the Manchester and Salford Trades Council. Sarah Dickenson continued to play an active role in the work of the trades council: from 1920 to 1925 she was a member of the council's executive committee, and secretary of the women's group; in 1925 and 1926 she served on the employment exchange committee and the women's housing advisory committee; and she was a member of the war pensions committee and the children's subcommittee. She remained a delegate to the council until 1930, representing the small union of the Machine, Electrical, and other Women Workers. 
Sarah Dickenson lived throughout her life in and around Manchester, and in 1931 she was appointed MBE for her services to the city. In 1923 she was appointed a JP, a post she held until 1939. She died on 26 December 1954 at her home, 107 Birch Hall Lane, Rusholme, Manchester, and was cremated at Manchester southern cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 47859


Leach, James (c.1806-1869), Chartist, was born in Wigan, Lancashire. His family origins and early years are entirely unknown, although it may be that he was an Anglican and that he had worked as a hand-loom weaver. He moved to Manchester in 1826; and in 1839, when he led the resistance to a cut in wages, he was sacked as a power-loom weaver after twelve years in the same employment. According to Friedrich Engels, however, who described him as 'my good friend', Leach had 'worked in various branches of industry both in factories and coalmines' (Engels, 151-2, 342). 
Leach was to claim in 1851 that he had been politically active for twenty years. By 1836 he was chairing meetings of the Manchester Radical Association, in 1838 he was elected to the council of the Manchester Political Union, and during the following year he began to represent Manchester at regional Chartist meetings. Given this local radical prominence, it made excellent sense for him, on losing his job, to set up as a bookseller and printer in Oak Street, Manchester. It was at this time, however, that his Chartist career moved on to the national level. In July 1840 he chaired the delegate conference in Manchester at which the key organization of Chartism, the National Charter Association, was established. He was subsequently appointed provisional president and in both 1841 and 1842 came second only to Peter Murray M'Douall in the national elections to the executive. He sat as a delegate in the 1842 convention, of which he acted as vice-chairman. 
According to Gammage, the Chartist activist and historian, Leach 'never attempted to play the orator. In addressing a public meeting he was just as free and easy as in a private conversation; but for fact and argument there were but few of the speakers at that period who excelled him. (Gammage, 211)' His reputation was as a 'terror, not only to the cotton lords, but every other humbug' (Pickering, 199). To O'Connor he was a 'plain blunt man' (ibid.); and Engels considered him 'upright, trustworthy and capable' (Engels, 152) and drew extensively upon his 84-page pamphlet 'Stubborn Facts from the Factories by a Manchester Operative' (1844) in 'The Condition of the Working Class in England'. 
Leach played a prominent part in bringing Chartism and the trade unions together, notably in support for the general strike movement of August 1842, and was one of the fifty-nine defendants in the mass trial at Lancaster in March 1843, although, like the others found guilty of conspiracy, he was not sentenced. He continued as a leading Chartist throughout the 1840s, but was also active in the co-operative movement (while not an Owenite) and in the agitation for a ten-hour limit on the working day. It had been in a series of open letters to Leach that O'Connor had, during his imprisonment of 1840-41, begun to develop his ideas about the centrality of land ownership to the emancipation of the working class, and in due course Leach too became an enthusiastic advocate of the Chartist Land Company, serving from 1845 as one of seven trustees. In 1848 he was a member of both the national convention of April and the national assembly of May, and the latter appointed him to the militant provisional executive. A committed supporter of collaboration between English Chartists and Irish confederates, he had represented the Chartists in Dublin on 12 January at the first meeting between the two movements. From July 1848 he was printer, publisher, and co-editor of the 'English Patriot and Irish Repealer', which was terminated by his prosecution in December on another charge of conspiracy, for which he was sentenced to nine months' imprisonment in Kirkdale gaol. 
After his release, from late 1851 Leach came to favour an alliance with the middle-class radicals, a startling volte-face for one who had displayed unremitting personal and ideological hostility towards the Anti-Corn Law League. This phase was short-lived as he soon retired from politics and returned to the obscurity from which Chartism had lifted him. His wife, Hannah, who died on 17 August 1865, may have been the Hannah Hurst who married a James Leach in Burnley, Lancashire, on 4 September 1826. It is known that they had five children, of whom the first son was named Alexander. Leach gave up his printing and bookselling business to manufacture soft drinks, and on his death at Eagle Street, Hulme, Manchester, on 4 July 1869 his occupation was given as ginger beer maker. 


@@@@@


doc= 47860


Urwick, Lyndall Fownes (1891-1983), management consultant, was born on 3 March 1891 at Northwood, north Malvern, Leigh, Worcestershire, the only child of Henry Urwick (1859-1931) and his wife, Annis (1862-1948), daughter of Elias Lyndall Whitby (1833-1911), glove manufacturer and leather dresser of Yeovil. His father was a partner in the Malvern and Worcester glove-making firm of Fownes Brothers, which had been founded by an ancestor in 1777; as a Liberal Party fund-raiser he was knighted in 1915. Through his mother Lyndall Urwick was first cousin of Sir Lionel Whitby. 
Initially schooled locally in Malvern, Urwick went on to Boxgrove School, Guildford, and then to Repton School, from where he gained an open history exhibition to New College, Oxford, in 1910. After graduating he joined Fownes Brothers in 1913 and was a partner between 1916 and 1920. Having volunteered for military service in 1914, he became an administrative staff officer and reached the rank of major in 1918, when he received the MC and was appointed OBE. He afterwards felt that he had survived the trenches for a purpose, and was disappointed when other people did not recognize this. While serving in Belgium he read 'Shop Management' (1903) by Frederick W. Taylor, the American who first systematically formulated and applied the principles of scientific management. Although Urwick had reservations about the ruthless application of Taylor's ideas in Britain, he became the leading European proponent of Taylorism, and was ultimately its historian. Later he was employers' secretary of the joint industrial council of the glove-making industry (1919-20) and a volunteer with the Schools and Services Co-operative Supply Association; he also joined the National Institute of Industrial Psychology. 
In 1922 Urwick was recruited by Seebohm Rowntree to improve the organization of Rowntree's confectionery business in York. His textbook 'Organising a Sales Office' (1928) is an account of his managerial reforms at Rowntrees. He lectured at the management conferences sponsored by Rowntree at Oxford, and became the first honorary secretary (1926-8) of the management research groups intended by Rowntree to be a national forum for business managers to discuss their work. Many businessmen doubted that management could be taught as a subject, and Urwick endured widespread suspicion of his pioneering ideas. He was a forceful, attractive public speaker (he shared his father's gift in amateur theatricals) and he wrote in a lucid prose. 
In 'The Meaning of Rationalisation' (1929) Urwick advocated the industrial rationalization movement as a means of applying scientific method to economic life and thus of raising human productive efficiency. Urwick believed in the inter-war period that the greatest failure of contemporary management was in distribution, and in 1931 he published a study of European and American practice in this area. Another work, 'The Management of Tomorrow' (1933), was more philosophical in presentation than his specialized textbooks, but it had a long-term influence on British managerial thinking. His ideas about organization and leadership were deeply influenced by his early soldiering. In the 1920s he urged the need for a college of managerial education which was equivalent to the staff colleges of the fighting services. Significantly his idea resulted in the Administrative Staff College when it came to fruition in 1948. 
In 1928 Urwick was appointed director of the International Management Institute at Geneva (partly financed by the International Labour Office and the Twentieth Century Fund, USA). Established to promote the principles of scientific management, this institute was the first international management body and it involved Urwick in innumerable meetings in Europe and the USA. He was rapporteur general of the International Distribution Commission (1932) and general secretary of the International Committee of Scientific Management (1932-5). After the institute's funding collapsed, he founded in 1934 the management consultancy Urwick, Orr, & Partners -- only the fourth consultancy of its kind in Britain. Hitherto the rigid, peremptory attitudes of American management consultants operating in Britain had been provocative in some workplaces. Urwick tempered Taylorism to British susceptibilities and adjusted his advice to the needs of individual client companies. Indeed he desired major social adjustments so that workers and managers could accommodate the demands of mechanization, and he favoured joint consultation, profit-sharing, and a formal reapportioning of authority between managers and staff. Urwick Orr commanded a worldwide reputation and for many years was unequalled among British consultancies. Urwick was its chairman (1934-61), managing partner (1945-51), and president (1963-83). 
Taylorite principles of organization and methods were crucial to Urwick's faith that, with scrupulously defined procedures, management techniques could be refined almost to scientific exactitude. During 1940-42 Urwick advised the Treasury on the application of organization and methods. Often abrasive when he felt he was being frustrated, he clashed with Sir Horace Wilson, head of the civil service, over civil service reforms. Some of his ideas on improving governmental efficiency by management specialization were implemented by Sir Derek Rayner after 1979. Urwick, who was commissioned in 1942 as a lieutenant-colonel and who retained his military title in civilian life, was deputy director of the petroleum warfare department (1942-4) and chairman of the departmental committee on education for management (1945). 
Together with Edward Brech, Urwick compiled three authoritative volumes entitled 'The Making of Scientific Management' (1945-8). Among other public work, Urwick was a council member of the British Institute of Management (1947-52), chairman of the Anglo-American productivity team on education for management (1951), and master of the Glovers' Company. He was honoured with professional medals and honorary degrees, chiefly in countries other than his own; universities in Canada, the USA, and Australia invited him as a visiting professor in business administration. He published prolifically during this period. 
On 31 March 1923 Urwick married a medical student, Joan Wilhelmina (1901-1984), daughter of James Pirch Bedford, of the Indian Civil Service. From this marriage, which was dissolved in 1938, there was a son and a daughter. Urwick married second, on 27 September 1941, Beatrice Helen Fitzhardinge ('b'. 1908), daughter of Major Hugh Munro Warrand, army officer, and sister of Sir Hugh Munro-Lucas-Tooth of Teananich, first baronet. They adopted a son and a daughter. Beatrice Urwick had Australian connections, and after Urwick relinquished the chairmanship of his consultancy they emigrated to Sydney. Urwick died in Australia on 5 December 1983 at Longueville, Sydney, New South Wales, and was cremated there shortly afterwards. 


@@@@@


doc= 47861


Lloyd, John (1833-1915), municipal reformer and antiquary, was born at Dinas, Brecon, on 3 September 1833, the youngest of the three sons of John Lloyd (1797-1875), landowner, local historian, and poet, and his first wife, Mary Anne, 'nee' Yeats. He was educated at Brecon College School -- 'at that time practically in ruins', as he later recalled ('South Wales Daily News') -- and at Bridgnorth grammar school under the headmastership of Thomas Rowley. In 1851 he was admitted to St John's College, Oxford, with a view to his entering the church, but he left without a degree, returning to Wales to act as agent for his father's estates. He spent his early adulthood in estate management, planting extensive woodlands on his father's Llanwrtyd Wells land and 'cultivating' the Usk to turn it into a fertile salmon fishing river. In 1865 he married Elizabeth Anna (1836/7-1915), daughter of Charles Griffiths, rector of Talach-ddu, Brecknockshire. They settled at Huntington Court in Herefordshire. 
Lloyd's life changed with the death of his father in 1875, after which his eldest brother took over the management of the family estate and Lloyd moved to London to study law at the Middle Temple, being called to the bar in 1877. London was new to him: he had visited the capital only for the duke of Wellington's funeral in 1852 and, occasionally, to play cricket (a sport at which Lloyd was more than proficient, once scoring 86 in a day-long partnership with W. G. Grace, when the latter scored his first century), but, as he later remembered, 'during my progress at the bar I found time to study the history of London'. Lloyd had been sensitized by his father to a mode of history which emphasized the ceaseless struggle of the people to assert their rights and liberties against the depredations of privilege. He considered his father's 'heroic' poem on the death of John Hampden to be 'one of the best... he ever wrote' ('Brecon and Radnor Express', 23 August 1913). His self-immersion in London's past alerted him to intrusions upon Londoners' civic rights less dramatic, perhaps, than those against which Hampden had fought, but irksome none the less. 
Lloyd made himself the campaigning adversary of the City of London corporation, the monopoly public utility companies of London, and, above all, the capital's ground landlords. His resentment of the denial of access to Lincoln's Inn Fields to the general public prompted him to place an advertisement in 'The Times' in October 1880 calling for the formation of an association to lobby for London's municipal emancipation. The London Municipal Reform League was formed in March 1881 and, under the direction of Joseph Firth, galvanized the movement for metropolitan reform. The league succeeded in pushing its cause up the agenda of the second Gladstone government, which introduced an unsuccessful bill for a metropolitan municipality in 1884, though its claims to have influenced the eventual county government reform passed by Salisbury's Unionist government in 1888 carry less weight. The league did, though, provide several members of the Progressive (liberal-radical) majority on the new London county council in January 1889: Lloyd claimed that two-thirds of the members of the first council were members of his league or 'in close touch and sympathy with the movement' (J. Lloyd, 'London Municipal Government: History of a Great Reform, 1880-1888', 1910, 72). They included Lloyd himself, elected as councillor for North Kensington. His programme illustrated Sidney Webb's dictum that a course of lessons in the law of rent would turn a mere radical into something like a socialist. 
Lloyd translated his inherited rural radicalism into a comprehensive hostility towards all who stood between the Londoner and his civic entitlement. He advocated municipal control of gas and water, reform of the City corporation and guilds, improved working-class housing, pensions for the aged poor, reform of the poor law and hospitals, and licensing reform. His advocacy of pensions reflected his involvement, since 1880, with the National Provident Association (Lloyd had been an early supporter of Canon William Blackley's old-age pension proposals), but the remainder of his programme embodied the core principles of London Progressive policy. Lloyd proved to be an assiduous councillor, claiming to have missed only four of 242 meetings of the second council (1892-5), and to have endured over 1000 committee meetings in that period ('Paddington, Kensington and Bayswater Chronicle'). He was apparently, though, not an easy colleague. Sir Harry Haward, appointed comptroller of the council in 1893, remembered Lloyd as 'a tough fighter with a not too pleasant tongue' and 'a cantankerous disposition' (Haward, 13, 80). 
Whether or not for this reason, Lloyd never really figured in the council's ruling inner circle. He remained instead an awkward back-bencher, making life difficult for the patrician first chairman of the finance committee, Lord Lingen, and continuing his own private conflict with London's landlords. The most durable product of that conflict was his success in initiating, and inducing the council to continue, a survey of London's ground landlords. He began work on this in 1892 by marking out the larger estates on a 25 inch Ordnance Survey map of London, and the council eventually completed it in 1910. He became, also, something of a brake on the Progressive wheel, in his repeated attempts to delay municipal expenditure until rating reform transferred some of the burden of local taxation to the ground landlord, notably in the case of his attempt to impede the acquisition of Hackney Marshes. He was in fact in full sympathy with Progressive objectives, but he began to fear that the council's enhanced radicalism might lose him support in a West End constituency, albeit one with a large working-class component. In 1895 he campaigned disingenuously on the claim that he was 'entirely independent of imperial party politics' (election addresses, National Liberal Club collection) and called for only judicious use of direct labour in the council's operations, but this did not save him from defeat in that year's elections, which saw a strong Conservative swing. He just failed to benefit from the strong swing to the Progressives in 1898, falling only twenty-eight votes short of the second Conservative candidate, a defeat that marked the end of his municipal career. 
Lloyd continued to live in North Kensington, with two servants from Brecknockshire, but the remainder of his life was devoted to the study of his Welsh roots. He became, as Edwin Davies of Brecon recounted after his death, 'a diligent student at the [Public] Record Office, the British Museum, and at other places where papers relating to Breconshire were stored' ('Brecon and Radnor Express', 24 June 1915). He published 'Historical Memoranda of Breconshire' in two volumes in 1903 and 1904, and 'The Great Forest of Breconshire' in 1905. Lloyd collated the papers of Henry Maybery, the Brecon attorney engaged by several of the early south Welsh ironmasters, and published 'The Early History of the Old South Wales Ironworks' in 1906. He applied his antiquarianism, characteristically, to protect 600 acres of common land on the Buckland estate from enclosure, proving 'from a document in his possession that the steward of the manor was steward under the Crown 100 years previously and that the land in question was therefore clearly common land' ('Brecon and Radnor Express', 17 June 1915). He inferred from such triumphs that 'the Welsh people [should] not remain in ignorance. They did not know their own rights and privileges and yet the information was all before them in the old documents' ('Brecon and Radnor Express', 6 November 1913). His last project was to raise funds for a public library in Brecon, which he envisaged as 'a place where the young men could meet who were found in such numbers in the streets' (letter from Francis Draper, 'Star', 12 June 1915). It remained unrealized at the time of his death, in a nursing home at 4 and 5 Dorset Square, London, on 6 June 1915. He was buried at Talach-ddu on 10 June. 


@@@@@


doc= 47864


Tuke, Anthony William (1897-1975), banker, was born on 24 February 1897 at Saffron Walden, Essex, the son of William Favill Tuke, a banker, and his wife, Eva Marian, 'nee' Nockolds. The Tukes were a Quaker family, originally from York, where they were prominent tea and cocoa merchants. Anthony's grandfather William Murray Tuke left this family business and joined his brother-in-law as a partner in the Saffron Walden and North Essex Bank, one of the banks that in 1896 formed Barclay & Co. Ltd, for which William Murray Tuke served as a local director. 
Tuke attended Winchester College, and throughout his life always valued the classical education he received there. During the First World War he served with the Cameronians (Scottish Rifles). In 1919 he married (Agnes) Edna Gannaway (died 1966), with whom he shared a love of gardening and the arts, especially the theatre; they had three sons, two of whom predeceased him. He joined Barclays in the same year and rose rapidly through the senior positions, being appointed a local director at Luton in 1923, and a London-based general manager in 1931, working with successive chairmen, including his own father. In 1946 he was elected a vice-chairman, and in 1947 he was deputy chairman. In that capacity he worked with the chairman, Sir William Goodenough, whose manifold activities led to his death in 1951. Tuke succeeded him as chairman, a position he held until 1962. 
Although shy and somewhat reserved, Tuke was dubbed the Iron Tuke by a financial journalist and the nickname stuck, reflecting both his reserved manner (which sprang from shyness) and his high standards. 'His directives were unambiguous and urgent, his memory infallible, and woe betide the careless or the dilatory in executing his instructions' (Lambert). He was the product of Barclays' decentralized structure, with the principal office-holders appointed largely from family members. He saw nothing wrong in this, provided that family entrants who did not prove satisfactory were quietly eased out of the bank, and that talented outsiders were not barred from promotion. 
During Tuke's ten years as chairman bank lending was restricted by government and Bank of England pressures. Nevertheless by the time he retired Barclays had become the largest of the clearing banks. He presided over the beginnings of computerization, and in spite of restrictions the bank's deposits increased from just over $300 million to $3000 million. However, as he grew older he became more wary of innovation, being careful, for instance, to distance Barclays from the moral hazards of hire purchase, even while acquiring a quarter of United Dominions Trust, a major hire-purchase company. He saw Barclays as trustees of the national good and was ready to conform with Bank of England restrictions on lending, though very willing also to forge ahead with export guarantee loans when the signal was given. 
In Tuke's view, as custodians of other people's money and providers of credit, and a formative influence in the economy, bankers had wide obligations, not only to their shareholders but also to society. Thus, in addition to committee membership and office-holding for the British Bankers' Association and the Bank Clerks Orphans fund, he served on the committee of the Historic Churches Preservation Trust. He was also a director of Yorkshire Insurance and of the Reinsurance Corporation, and was twice a fellow of Winchester College and in 1962 its warden. 
Within Barclays, Tuke resigned his directorships of subsidiaries on becoming chairman, being advised by the board of Barclays not to take on as much as his predecessor had done. He wanted to see Barclays advance overseas, particularly in the Commonwealth, and as its chairman was rather surprised when his strategy of buying into Commonwealth banks was viewed with some suspicion, even hostility, by those increasingly nationalistic bodies. He had naively thought that he was doing them a favour: putting Barclays' name behind them. His pride in Barclays was also shown in his joint authorship of two histories of the bank: the 'History of Barclays Bank Limited' (1926) and 'Barclays Bank Limited, 1926-1969' (1972), written after his retirement as chairman. The first is an invaluable (though not entirely accurate) record of the constituent partnerships from which Barclays was formed, and of its early years; the second, a briefer but more analytical account. After retirement as chairman, Tuke became a local director (in Southampton) again, for ten years. He also remained a main board director, his presence accepted with equanimity by John Thomson, his successor. Tuke died peacefully at his home, Freelands, Wherwell, near Andover, Hampshire, on 12 June 1975. His son, Sir Anthony Favill Tuke (1920-2001), also made a career with Barclays, serving as chairman from 1973 to 1981. 


@@@@@


doc= 47865


Starr, Richard Benjamin (1813-1892), building society promoter, was born on 2 March 1813, probably in London, of unknown parents. His early life is also obscure, but he gained wide business experience (including bankruptcy in 1870) in a variety of trades: as hatter, bootmaker, auctioneer, coffee-house keeper, coal merchant, omnibus operator, and hotelier. He was married, and he and his wife, Caroline, had at least one son and a daughter. 
Starr was to make his name as a promoter of Starr-Bowkett building societies. Dr T. E. Bowkett was a general practitioner in Poplar, east London, dedicated to improving the condition of the poor. In 1843 he devised a scheme to bring the benefits of owner-occupation to those of modest means. One hundred members subscribed 91/2 died per week. After one year, $200 was available for an interest-free loan, to be allocated by ballot. The loan was repaid at 8's'. per week and this, with the continuing subscriptions, enabled a second ballot to be held after forty-six weeks. So the pace accelerated, and after thirty-one years everyone would have had an interest-free loan and subscriptions would cease. Ten years later, with the last loan repaid, subscriptions would be returned to members. Such an interest-free loan was a valuable asset which could be sold (for $40 or more, depending on market conditions) and this attracted a gambling element to these societies, a source of instability. In 1853 Starr became acquainted with Bowkett when he joined the Second Clerkenwell Bowkett Society. By 1857 Starr was assisting Bowkett in forming new societies and two years later Starr was operating independently. 
Starr made some changes in Bowkett's scheme, aimed at making the benefits of membership more equal, as between those successful in early ballots and those who waited many years. He copyrighted these new rules and subsequent amendments. For his services in starting new societies Starr charged 10 guineas, and he received a further 33 guineas from the solicitor, surveyor, and secretary when these were appointed. Starr-Bowkett Society no. 14 was formed in 1863, no. 130 in 1868, no. 300 in 1879, and no. 1000 in 1891. Not all societies allocated a number were successfully launched; 800 would be a realistic estimate of the successes. From the late 1870s a number of supporting enterprises were started: the London and Metropolitan Printing Company; the London Trading Bank; the Starr-Bowkett Insurance Company; and a monthly publication, the 'Starr-Bowkett Journal and Building Society News'. 
By 1886 Starr had fifteen paid agents assisting him, but success attracted imitators. Between 1883 and 1891 795 similar societies were formed, mostly by promoters who had been officers in Starr-Bowkett societies. Despite their long prospective life, the Starr-Bowkett societies survived the long depression of the 1880s at least as well as newly formed permanent societies or other sorts of terminating societies. Migrants took the Starr-Bowkett idea to Australia, where it flourished. In Britain the 1894 'Building Societies Act' put an end to these promotions, when it outlawed balloting for advances by newly formed societies. 
Starr was a man of enormous energy. He estimated that in 1881, in his roles as promoter, adviser, and adjudicator of his rule book, he travelled 40,000 miles, wrote 5000 letters, and spent 121 nights away from his home. He was then sixty-eight years old and, even allowing a considerable margin for exaggeration, such a routine shows both energy and devotion to his work. This pattern continued through the 1880s, despite a serious accident in 1882 that left him lame. He was a total abstainer and non-smoker, habits which he commended to his audiences. He was a formidable public speaker, with a keen memory for dates and detail, as well as being sharp in handling figures. His first response to any criticism was to issue a challenge to a public debate. 
In 1890 there was a proposal to float a company to take over Starr's promotional activities, paying him $3000 plus a share in the company. The precise structure of the company is uncertain, but the select committee on building society bills was told in 1893 that it had a capital of $8000. However, by that time Starr was already dead. He died on 22 January 1892 at his home, 17 Baalbeck Road, Highbury, London. He was survived by his wife, to whom he bequeathed an estate of $168. 


@@@@@


doc= 47866


Szarvasy, Frederick Alexander (1875-1948), financier, was Hungarian by extraction, and was probably born in Hungary, the son of Alexander Szarvasy, a banker. Little is known of his early years. After spending some time in South America he went to London around 1901. There he joined a discount house, and later the stockbrokers Montagu Oppenheimer, where he became a close friend and colleague of Lord Charles Montagu (1860-1931) and Baron Springer of Vienna. He then decided to move into the new issue and company promotion business, first buying the Cornhill Contract Corporation, and in 1913 joining Springer on the board of the British Foreign and Colonial Corporation (BFCC), whose chairman he became in 1923. The BFCC was recognized as a major issuing house during the 1920s. H. C. Clifford-Turner, a London solicitor active in many company flotations, considered Szarvasy to be one of the leading financiers in the City between the wars. 
One flotation with which Szarvasy's name was particularly linked was that of Imperial Airways in 1924. In 1920, through BFCC, he proposed the establishment of a monopoly airline to bring together several small carriers. There was opposition, but in 1923 the Air Ministry reached agreement with BFCC for a public flotation, Szarvasy having settled terms with the various companies and persuaded Sir Eric Geddes to become chairman. BFCC handled the flotation for out-of-pocket expenses only, 'in view of the national importance of the business' ('The Times', 5 June 1924). 
Szarvasy knew Geddes well, as both had worked together at the Dunlop Rubber Company. In 1920 Dunlop had been brought to the brink of collapse by the speculative activities of the former chairman, Sir Arthur du Cros. Szarvasy was brought in as chairman in 1920 and cleared out many of the existing board members, introduced new capital to tide the company over its crisis, and put proper accounting procedures in place. By the time he handed over to Sir Eric Geddes in 1922 the immediate crisis was over; he remained on the Dunlop board until his death. Dunlop's accounts later became known as a model of information and clarity through the influence of Frederic de Paula, who joined the company in 1929. 
During the 1920s Szarvasy was called in to several other companies where poor financial management threatened their survival. These included Marconi's Wireless Telegraph Company and William Beardmore & Co., among others. He was involved with Alfred Mond, Lord Melchett, in the restructuring of the south Wales anthracite industry, and on Mond's death succeeded to the chairmanship of Amalgamated Anthracite Collieries, which controlled around 80 per cent of Welsh anthracite production; he retained this post until his own death. In addition he was on the boards of several other finance houses, including the Anglo-French Banking Corporation, Martins Bank, Guardian Assurance, and the Daily Mail Trust. He was keen to develop opportunities for investment in European companies, and in 1931 he spoke out against impediments placed by governments in the way of free movement of goods, labour, and capital. In his financial dealings he was very secretive; when he died his safe was found to be empty of records. 
In December 1921 Szarvasy married Kate Muriel Rhona (died 1924), the daughter of Augusto Saavedra, who was in the French consular service; they had one daughter. Szarvasy was deeply interested in music and art. He was chairman of the Covent Garden opera syndicate and was a generous patron of young musicians; he played the violin well himself. He died at his London home, 74 Portland Place, on 3 July 1948. 


@@@@@


doc= 47867


Trinder, Arthur William (1901-1959), bond dealer, was born on 11 August 1901 in Reading, the son of Arthur Trinder, sergeant-major, Royal Berkshire regiment, and his wife, Louisa Jane, 'nee' Taylor. He was educated at Christ's Hospital from January 1912 until July 1918, having won a place there as a West's scholar in open competition. On leaving school he found employment as a clerk with the Union Discount Company of London Ltd, then the leading house in the discount market. 
Trinder took his first step to high office in the 1920s when R. C. Wyse, manager from 1922 to 1940, appointed him as his 'boy' or assistant to the manager. In 1930 he was made assistant manager and when in the following year he was promoted to sub-manager, a contemporary described him as 'the eyes, and ears and often the mouthpiece of the management' (private information). He was deputy manager under E. C. Ellen from 1940 and when Ellen retired in January 1947 Trinder was the natural choice to succeed him. 
The sheer size of the Union Discount's operations meant that its managers tended to be the most prominent market experts of their day. This was certainly true of Trinder, who was the acknowledged leader of the discount market in the late 1940s and the 1950s. Between 1953 and 1955 he served as chairman of the London Discount Market Association. Trinder's forte was the bond market: he had an unmatched reputation as an astute and skilful dealer, and from the early days Union Discount had been the market's largest operator. Now it was to bonds rather than bills that the houses had to look for their chief hope of profit; and there was renewed encouragement from the Bank of England for the houses to develop their role, acquired during wartime, of making a market in short-dated government bonds. 
Trinder's importance as a bond dealer led to his appearance, in December 1957, before the Parker tribunal, set up to investigate an alleged leakage of information regarding the raising of the bank rate. Trinder argued, in words that lived after him, that prior information would have been of no value, because the size of his bond-holding left no room for manoeuvre: 'I am the market in certain short bonds, so therefore I have to sit tight and do nothing' ('DBB', 5.555). A few weeks later, in January 1958, he provided further valuable insights into discount market operations, when he gave evidence to the committee on the working of the monetary system (the Radcliffe committee). 
'Trin', as he was universally known, was a much loved figure in the discount market, which looked to him as a source of wisdom in all business matters. Trinder with his quick, dry wit would often oblige with an apposite and humorous aphorism known as a 'Trinderism'. He attributed his own success in the bond market, for example, to the possession of 'a long pocket and strong nerves' (private information). His business style was a successful combination of flamboyance and shrewd calculation. It was not, however, beyond criticism. He had learned management from the autocratic and dictatorial Wyse and he kept too much in his own hands and failed to bring on his management team. His last years were marred by losses in bond dealing, owing to his failure to heed advice; moreover, because Union Discount had a non-executive board he was never made a director of the company. 
Little is known about Trinder's private life, including the name of his wife; but they had a daughter and two sons, both of whom followed him into the City. Trinder apparently lived for his work and he was, he always said, 'wedded to Union Discount' (private information). His company's fortunes were at a peak when he retired in 1958, but retirement left him bereft of purpose. Less than eleven months later, he died from gastric haemorrhage and hepatitis at the London Clinic, 20 Devonshire Place, Marylebone, London, on 28 July 1959. 


@@@@@


doc= 47871


Macdonald, Ian Wilson (1907-1989), accountant and banker, was born on 28 May 1907 at Cumnock, Ayrshire, the son of Alexander Buchanan Macdonald, minister of religion, and Mary Bowman Wilson, doctor of medicine. His only brother died in infancy. His very early childhood was spent in Ayrshire, but the family soon moved to Perthshire, where his mother was medical officer for Perthshire schools during the First World War. Macdonald's school education was begun at Perth Academy and completed at Edinburgh Academy. To complete the triangle he went to Glasgow University. Thereafter he served his apprenticeship as a chartered accountant with the Glasgow firm of Kerr, Macleod, and Macfarlan, and qualified in 1930. Three years later his firm assumed him as a partner; and it was then that he married Helen, daughter of James Nicholson, a Glasgow rubber and paint manufacturer. They had three children. 
Macdonald's busy career in professional practice brought him into contact with a wide range of businesses and business people. Yet he also kept his academic contacts, and in 1938 he was appointed to the part-time chair in accountancy at Glasgow University. He held this post until 1950. In 1945 he became joint auditor of the Commercial Bank of Scotland, and two years later he joined the bank's board as non-executive director. A failure in planned succession led him to be offered the general manager's job in 1953. The appointment of a chartered accountant to the top job in a bank was somewhat controversial. 
Macdonald was 'an energetic man of progressive views', who 'thrived on change' ('The Times', 16 Jan 1989). He devised a three-point strategy for the future of the bank, which included growth by diversification of the business, amalgamation, and the development of a merchant bank. In 1954 Macdonald became the first British banker to acquire a hire-purchase company. He had not thought it necessary to consult the Bank of England, who were somewhat lukewarm to the idea of banks diversifying in this way. However, four years later, in under three months, all the English and Scottish clearing banks purchased stakes in finance houses dealing in hire purchase. Another progressive idea, which came to fruition in Edinburgh only in 1964, was for a ladies' branch. 
It took a little longer for Macdonald to achieve his second objective, amalgamation, but in 1959 the Commercial Bank of Scotland acquired the National Bank of Scotland in a share exchange deal with its owner, Lloyds Bank, who retained 36 per cent in the new National Commercial Bank of Scotland. The sizeable hire-purchase interests of the National Commercial and Lloyds were combined and traded for many years as Lloyds and Scottish. Macdonald became chairman not only of the National Commercial Bank, but also of Lloyds and Scottish. The youngest bank chairman in Britain, his progression from general manager to chairman was 'unique in the field of British banking' ('The Times', 16 Jan 1989). Macdonald also became a director of Lloyds Bank. By the late 1960s the growth of industry and commerce dictated the logic of further mergers among the banks, and Macdonald worked hard to secure a merger with one of Scotland's oldest, but smaller banks, the Royal Bank of Scotland. The Royal Bank name was used for the operating arm of the merged bank, and Macdonald served as chairman from the date of the merger in 1969 until 1972. The holding company from 1969 to 1979 was the National Commercial Bank of Scotland Group Ltd, and Macdonald was deputy chairman from 1969 until 1978. 
Macdonald was less successful in his third aim of building a merchant bank. In 1964 National Commercial and Schroeders Ltd was set up, with Macdonald as chairman, but its growth was modest and Macdonald himself considered this venture something of a black mark on his career. Despite an exceptionally busy life with the Commercial Bank, Macdonald was able to serve on other boards including that of United Biscuits. His public service included membership of a number of government committees, including the committees of investigation and courts of inquiry into port transport (1945), shipbuilding (1947), fishing (1957-60), and ports and harbours (1961-2). He was also on the General Claims Tribunal (1943-58), the South of Scotland Electricity Board (1956-61), and the Civil Aviation Authority (1972-5). Macdonald retired from the boards of public companies at the age of seventy, and pursued his retirement interests as chairman of the Scottish Hospitals Endowment Research Trust, and as a member of the review body on doctors' and dentists' remuneration. 
Described in the 'Times' obituary as 'modest and unpretentious', Macdonald had 'a dour style, alleviated by dry humour' ('The Times', 16 Jan 1989). As a son of the manse he retained his membership of the Church of Scotland, and was for many years an elder in the kirk session of St Giles's Cathedral, Edinburgh, where he also served as church treasurer. His recreational interests included shooting, fishing, and golf; he was a member of the Honourable Company of Edinburgh Golfers at Muirfield, and the Caledonian Club (London). 
Macdonald played a leading role in the transformation of Scottish banking. Although his wide-ranging policies often made him seem an 'enfant terrible', they had a lasting influence at a time when post-war financial controls were yielding to competitive and rationalized banking. Macdonald died at Edington Cottage Hospital, North Berwick, on 8 January 1989. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 47872


Jamieson, George Auldjo (1828-1900), accountant, was born at Castle Hill, Aberdeen, on 1 May 1828, the son of James Jamieson MD, a former naval surgeon. He was educated at Aberdeen grammar school and he graduated from Aberdeen University in 1846. After working in an Aberdeen law firm, he moved to Edinburgh, around 1849, to join his uncle, George Auldjo Esson, in the accountancy firm Lindsay and Esson. Jamieson was soon made a partner and his rapid progress was confirmed when, in 1854, he became a founder member of the Society of Accountants in Edinburgh. In 1879 he was appointed judicial factor in the Orr-Ewing case, notable for its resolution of conflicts between Scots and English law. Jamieson's adept handling of the issues, as well as his appointment as one of the liquidators of the City of Glasgow Bank in 1878, enhanced his growing reputation as one of Scotland's leading chartered accountants. 
During the 1880s and 1890s, with Edinburgh maturing as an international financial centre, Jamieson and many of his fellow chartered accountants led the way in directing Scottish capital abroad. Jamieson's personal involvement in foreign investment also grew at this time, and by his death he owned shares in overseas enterprises probated at $51,500. 
A significant aspect of Jamieson's business career was his involvement with the Arizona Copper Company, formed in 1882 to purchase mines in a desolate part of the south-western United States. Despite initial optimism, difficulties mounted, and amid rumours of share-rigging by the original board, calls for a man of proven integrity to head the firm led to Jamieson being appointed chairman in November 1883. He guided the firm through a major financial reconstruction and modernization programme, and by 1892, when he toured America, it was firmly set on a course of rising profitability, with accumulated dividends amounting to more than $6 million by 1918. 
Jamieson was undoubtedly one of the most successful and influential Scottish chartered accountants in the late nineteenth century. He was a director of numerous companies by the late 1890s, including the Royal Bank of Scotland and the North British and Mercantile Insurance Company, both at the heart of Scotland's close-knit financial community, and was president of the Society of Accountants in Edinburgh, 1882-8. He appears to have been conservative in many respects, and deliberated long over complex issues, but he was also capable of great energy and acumen, as displayed in his overseas investment activities. 
A wide knowledge of financial affairs brought him on to a number of royal commissions, including those on mining royalties (1889) and on company law (1895). In 1860 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, and in 1887 he attended the Manchester meeting of the British Association, contributing two papers on finance. 
Jamieson was for a long period chairman of Edinburgh West Conservative Association, and in 1885 unsuccessfully stood as parliamentary candidate for Edinburgh West. In 1889 he entered Edinburgh city council as member for St Luke's ward, a seat he held until his death, and at various times was chairman of the council's law committee. He was also a commissioner of supply for the city and county of Edinburgh, in which capacity he was an ardent opponent of the municipal takeover of gas, tramway, and electric lighting operations. 
Jamieson was married twice -- to Mary Jane Souter Robertson, and afterwards to Susan Helena Oliphant. He had five sons (one of whom died in the South African War) and two daughters. Religion played a strong part in his life and he was a member and office bearer of St John's Episcopal Church, Edinburgh, as well as chancellor of the episcopal diocese of Aberdeen. He also supported a number of charitable organizations such as the Edinburgh Association for Incurables. 
Jamieson died suddenly at the New Club, Edinburgh, on the evening of 18 July 1900, following an influenza attack. He was buried on 21 July at Dean cemetery, Edinburgh, in a ceremony attended by the earls of Aberdeen and Haddington, and the municipal corporation of Edinburgh. He was survived by his second wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 47873


Waterhouse, Edwin (1841-1917), accountant, was born on 4 June 1841 at Oakfield, Aigburth, Liverpool, the seventh and youngest child of Alfred Waterhouse senior (1798-1873), a partner in the firm of Nicholas Waterhouse & Sons, merchants and brokers of Liverpool, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Bevan (1805-1880). He spent most of his childhood in the south of England at several family homes, including Sneyd Park, near Bristol, and various addresses in central London. 
Having been taught by private tutors, and because his parents were committed members of the Society of Friends, in September 1855 Waterhouse entered University College School, a leading academy for dissenters. A diligent student, he won prizes in French and geometry, and two years later joined his elder brother Theodore (1838-1891) at University College, London, where he attended classes in mathematics, Greek, Latin, and English. He graduated in 1860 with second-class honours, but had made no decision about a future career. His elder brother Alfred Waterhouse (1830-1905) was already established as an architect, Theodore was to take articles as a solicitor, and Edwin, as he later recalled, 'had allowed this important matter to be in abeyance. I knew nothing of business, and felt a dislike of the 'city' and... the pale and anxious faces which I saw on my infrequent visits there. A doctor's career might have suited me, but I had no special bent in that way, and I feared a failure. ('Memoirs', 68)' A chance introduction to William Turquand, a leading accountant, led to Waterhouse being articled to the City firm of Coleman, Turquand, Youngs & Co. in January 1861. There he learned the rudiments of bookkeeping and assisted with insolvencies and audits, but after three years of what he described as an 'apprenticeship' decided to set up on his own account. In February 1864 he took two rooms at 11 Old Jewry Chambers and wrote to business acquaintances of his father in order to seek employment. A major source of income during his first year in practice was the reorganization of the accounts of his brother, then a prominent architect in Manchester. While undertaking a cost-accounting assignment at John Fowler's steam plough works in Leeds, Waterhouse met William Holyland (1807-1882), a principal clerk of Turquand, who informed him that he was about to form a partnership with Samuel Lowell Price (1821-1887). Holyland suggested that he join them and, as Waterhouse wrote, 'I had been doing very well for myself during the last few months, but the offer seemed to open out chances of quickly attaining a wider experience, whilst ensuring a more steady practice and affording me the advantages of assistance should I need it. ('Memoirs', 81)' Thus, the firm of Price, Holyland, and Waterhouse was formed on 1 May 1865; Edwin, the youngest and least experienced, took a quarter-share in the profits. 
Having leased prestigious offices in the Queens Assurance Company building at the corner of Gresham Street (no. 13, later 44) and King Street, the firm flourished from the outset. Unlike the first generation of accountancy firms which prospered as insolvency specialists, Price, Holyland, and Waterhouse gained a reputation as auditors largely as a result of Waterhouse's work for railway companies, banks, and financial institutions. His probity and insistence upon prudent conventions won him important audits, including the London and North Western, South Eastern, Metropolitan, and London, Brighton and South Coast railways. Waterhouse was so busy with these tasks that in 1883 he declined to serve as the auditor of the Midland Railway. In addition, he was appointed joint auditor of the National Provincial Bank of England (from 1880) and of the London and Westminster Bank, while the firm audited Lloyds Bank, the Gresham Life Assurance Society, Atlas Assurance, the Equity and Law Life Assurance Company, and the Foreign and Colonial Government Trust Company from its foundation in 1868. The rising fee income of the partnership was a measure of its commercial success. In the first year of operation it earned $9138, increasing to an average of $14,450 between 1870 and 1885, with peaks in 1870 ($18,070), 1876 ($17,135), and 1877 ($17,749). Fees rose appreciably after 1889 and during the following decade were in excess of $40,000 per annum. In 1887, on the death of Price, Edwin Waterhouse became senior partner (Holyland having retired in 1874) and, as was customary, took a lion's share of the profits. In 1896-7, for example, when $35,897 was available for distribution among the four partners, he received $21,000 (59 per cent). This level of income enabled him to build a substantial home in the country, Feldemore, at Holmbury St Mary, Abinger, near Dorking, Surrey, which was designed by his brother-in-law George Redmayne, the Manchester architect; he occupied the house from 1880 and progressively extended it during the 1890s. At his death he left an estate worth $257,780 gross, and it appeared that the greater part of his fortune had been earned from professional fees rather than share dealing or other forms of financial speculation. 
Waterhouse was also called upon to undertake a number of investigations by companies, institutions, and government bodies. In 1877 he devised a sliding scale for the Consett Iron Company, by which wages could be related to the sale price of iron; in 1889 he assisted Lancashire county council in allocating receipts and expenditure between boroughs and urban districts under the new 'Local Government Act'; and in 1908 he reorganized the finances of the Underground Electric Railway of London. In 1887-8 Waterhouse, together with Frederick Whinney (1829-1916), produced a report on the accounting organization of the Woolwich arsenal for a parliamentary committee chaired by Lord Randolph Churchill. He was subsequently asked to conduct similar investigations into the Admiralty's dockyards (1888-9) and the Royal Ordnance factories (1901). A member of the 1894-5 Davey departmental committee on joint-stock companies, he was responsible for representing the profession's views, and the report which followed formed the basis for the 'Companies Act' of 1900. When further change was considered, Waterhouse was invited to serve on the 1905-6 (Loreburn) committee, which, in turn, led to the 'Companies Act' of 1907. However, despite these achievements, it would be wrong to view Waterhouse as one of the outstanding original thinkers of the profession. His talents lay not so much with the introduction of radical ideas as in the practical organization and running of a major City partnership. He had the social contacts to attract new clients, the ability to maintain established connections, and the judgement to select staff of youthful promise (he introduced a policy of recruiting prizewinners from the institute examinations). 
Having been a founder member of the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales (ICAEW) on its foundation in 1880, Waterhouse became active in its organization. Although he failed at the first attempt to be elected to the council, in 1887 he took the place formerly occupied by Price. In 1892, without having held the customary post of vice-president, he was elected president and served for two years. Not all of his presidential initiatives were successful, and his campaign to establish a professional monopoly, as exercised by legal and medical practitioners, did not meet with government approval. His presidency corresponded with the opening in 1893 of the ICAEW's purpose-built hall in Moorgate. He retired from the council in July 1915 after twenty-eight years' service. 
Ernest Cooper (1848-1926), another eminent City accountant, reported that Waterhouse 'always showed me rather more courtesy than I deserved' (Cooper, 49), while Nicholas Waterhouse, Waterhouse's youngest son by his first marriage, observed that 'he never suffered a fool gladly but had a wonderful insight into character, and those who really knew him held him in the highest respect and affection' (Waterhouse, 'Reminiscences', 3). An inability to tolerate any behaviour that might pass for slackness and his ingrained Quaker mores led to a prohibition of smoking. If Waterhouse 'found a pipe or pouch lying around in the office or in the audit room of a client, he thought nothing of throwing them on the fire but, then relenting, would compensate the offender with the price of a new outfit' (ibid., 102). He periodically suffered from the depression that had afflicted his mother in her later life, and a devotion to Christianity, together with a thorough commitment to his professional duties, may have served as defence against its onset. 
In 1868 Waterhouse married Georgina, 'nee' Thol (1848-1896); they had four daughters and two sons, William and Nicholas. Both boys joined Price Waterhouse as articled clerks, but William died suddenly of pneumonia in 1900 before taking his final examination; Nicholas qualified, was admitted to the partnership in 1906 on his father's retirement, and became the senior partner in 1945. In 1898, two years after the death of his first wife, Waterhouse married Helen Caroline, 'nee' Weber (1855-1941); they had one son, Theodore (1907-1976), who also worked for Price Waterhouse. Edwin Waterhouse died, aged seventy-six, at Feldemore, on 17 September 1917 and was buried in the parish churchyard at Holmbury St Mary. 


@@@@@


doc= 47874


Webb, Arthur (1868-1952), building society manager, was born on 8 July 1868 at Battersea, London, the son of Thomas Burgess Webb and his wife, Christine, 'nee' Young. Thomas Webb had worked at Price's candle factory, Battersea, and was a founder of the Battersea Co-operative Society, a director of the Co-operative Wholesale Society, and president from its foundation in 1884 of the Southern Co-operative Building Society. When Arthur Webb left the local Sir Walter St John School, he became a clerk with the Battersea Co-operative Society and a collector for the Southern Co-operative Building Society. In 1892 he was appointed secretary of the building society, which then had assets of $24,000, at a salary of $120 per year. He married Mabel Elizabeth, daughter of George Benjamin Edwards, an auctioneer, in 1898. She was a journalist, broadcaster, and author of works on domestic economy. They had two sons and two daughters. 
Webb proved to be an able and vigorous leader who took full advantage of the building society's co-operative connections to give it wide publicity. His insistence, in 1894, that 'Southern' be eliminated from the title showed his ambitions. He tirelessly addressed co-operative gatherings, especially meetings of local retail societies. Innovation and awareness of members' needs characterized Webb's administration. A triplicate slip was devised so that mortgage instalments or investments could be made at the branches of many retail societies. 'Home safes' in a variety of styles were soon made available. Mortgages backed by endowment assurance policies were introduced. Retail societies could borrow to finance new shops. An insurance policy was negotiated covering all the properties mortgaged to the society, giving savings both to the members and to the society. The need for appropriate office space both for mechanization and the expansion of business was promptly dealt with. Webb encouraged his staff with an independent superannuation scheme, professional education and sports facilities. He supported attempts to create a professional staff organization and, when the Building Societies Institute was formed in 1934, Webb was a foundation council member, president (1939-41), and one of its first fellows. He was also a fellow of the Chartered Institute of Secretaries. The assets of the Co-operative Building Society grew steadily until 1914, and spectacularly after 1918. Webb joined the board in 1927, and in 1928 became the society's first managing director. He resigned that post in 1939 to serve as president (1939-41) and continued as a director until 1951. When he resigned in 1939 the society had a network of thirty-five branches and 576 agencies; it was the country's sixth largest society. 
Webb was elected to the executive committee of the National Association of Building Societies in 1903, holding office continuously until increasing deafness led him to resign in 1945; he then became a vice-president. He served as chairman both of the parliamentary and of the finance committees. In 1916 he sought direct involvement for societies in the post-war design of houses and the development of estates, but gained little support. In the 1930s he correctly judged that collective voluntary action by societies could not successfully restrain their cut-throat competition to lend, which threatened their financial stability. For Webb the solution lay in legislation, and he welcomed the 1939 'Building Societies Act'. In 1943 he published 'Signposts of Building Finance', where he questioned the long-run viability of the large number of small societies, and they were offered a merger with the Cooperative Society. His view met general resistance and the offer was withdrawn, although there were fifteen such mergers between 1943 and 1947. However, subsequent events confirmed his judgement. 
Webb lived in Wimbledon, and was elected to the local urban district council, and later to the Surrey county council. Education was his strong interest, particularly the establishment of secondary schools under the 1902 'Education Act'. He served as chairman of the Wimbledon Higher Education Committee, of the School of Art, and of the Technical College, and was a governor of Wimbledon Girls' High School. Appointed a magistrate in 1915, he was vice-chairman of the Wimbledon bench and chairman of the juvenile court; he retired in 1941. Webb died at his home, 6 Blenheim Road, Grand Drive, Wimbledon, on 16 October 1952, and was cremated five days later at the South London crematorium, Streatham Vale. He was survived by his wife and four children. 


@@@@@


doc= 47875


Whinney, Frederick (1829-1916), accountant, was born on 6 October 1829 in London, the son of Thomas Whinney (1793-1853), a licensed victualler turned livery stable keeper, and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Friberg, of German parentage. Little is known of his early life except that he appears to have assisted with the preparation of the stable's accounts during the 1850s, while an entry in a London trade directory for 1856 recorded a Frederick Whinney who advertised as a ship and insurance broker -- a possible connection which may have arisen from the fact that his grandfather had been a shipbroker in South Shields and his uncle continued in this business. 
From December 1849 Whinney was employed as a clerk by Harding and Pullein, a City firm of accountants founded in 1848 by Robert Palmer Harding and Edmund Pullein. In November 1857 Whinney, then the senior clerk, was admitted to the partnership, and two years later the style was altered to include his name, as Harding, Pullein, Whinney, and Gibbons. When in 1883 Harding left the practice to take the post of chief official receiver, Whinney became the senior partner. At this time there were four partners (the other three being William Hurlbatt, John Smith, and Stanley Harding) and a possible amalgamation with Quilter, Ball & Co. was discussed in December 1883, partly to prevent the latter from merging with their rivals, Turquand, Youngs & Co., although in the event no union materialized. 
'Joining the profession at a very favourable time, Mr Whinney soon made a great reputation both as a liquidator and an auditor, and his practice was certainly one of the largest in his day' ('The Accountant', 582). As a liquidator, Whinney could boast thirty appointments in 1866, and when Harding retired he completed the winding-up of Overend, Gurney & Co., a task not completed until 1893. Unlike the pioneers of the accountancy profession, who prospered almost exclusively as insolvency experts, Whinney found that he was increasingly called upon to perform audit work. The Birmingham and Midland Bank (1885), Equitable Life Assurance Society (1894), Union of London and Smith's Bank (both 1883), and the Union Bank of Australia (1880) were among Whinney's audit clients. The fee income of his firm did not fluctuate greatly during the period of his senior partnership (rising from $12,470 in 1883 to $15,015 in 1900 and $16,864 in 1904), as the era of great insolvency assignments was largely at an end and regular audit fees had come to constitute a higher proportion of earnings, increasing from 20 per cent in 1884 to 53 per cent by 1900. 
It was common at this time for leading accountants to be appointed to the boards of major companies, and Whinney became a director of the London, Tilbury and Southend Railway (the firm acted as its auditors from 1892). He was deputed by the English Institute of Chartered Accountants in 1898 to give evidence for the 'Companies Bill' then in committee with the House of Lords. In 1877 he had served on the parliamentary commission to inquire into the parlous state of Oxford University's finances, which prompted the invitation to audit the accounts of All Souls College, followed by those of the Oxford University Fund, the Randolph Hotel, and the Oxford Electric Lighting Company. 
Whinney was involved in the efforts to establish accountancy as a recognized profession and became a leading member of the Institute of Accountants in London. William Turquand proposed him for its council in April 1877 as part of a more forceful policy designed to counter the rival Society of Accountants in England. In the event, the two bodies combined their campaign and were granted a royal charter in May 1880. Whinney followed Arthur Cooper as the third president in 1884 and held that office for four years. In 1896 he proposed that the institute sponsor a bill to create a monopoly for the profession. Under its terms, the right to practise as an accountant was to be limited to members of the Institute of Chartered Accountants and the Society of Accountants and Auditors, together with all those at the time of the legislation who had been in business for three years. The scheme was defeated by 1046 to 433 votes. 
For three years Whinney acted as treasurer of the London chamber of commerce; he also served as an officer in the 3rd volunteer battalion of the Middlesex regiment, and rose to the rank of major. Ernest Cooper recalled him as a man of strong character and dignified bearing: 'he showed me much kindness... He was, I think, proud of the commanding position his services to our profession had brought him. There was in him a touch of hauteur derived perhaps from his military service' (Cooper, 48). 
Whinney was twice married. His first wife, whom he married in 1854, was Sarah Elizabeth Saltmarsh; they had four children before her death from cholera in 1860. His second marriage was to Emma Sophia Morley (died 1891); of their ten children, Arthur (1861-1927) and Frank Toller both entered the firm, and the former became its senior partner. Frederick Whinney died, aged eighty-six, on 15 May 1916 at his home, 85 Avenue Road, Regent's Park, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 47876


White, James (1877-1927), property developer and speculator, was born on 17 May 1877 at 16A Sun Place, Rochdale, the son of Thomas White, bricklayer, and his wife, Catherine Mullroy. He was educated at St John's Roman Catholic School, Rochdale. At the age of ten he began working half-time in a cotton mill, and at nineteen he allegedly bought a Rochdale circus, disposing of it after two years for a theatre in Matlock. In 1899, at the age of twenty-one, he married Annie Fetton, a woollen operative, daughter of Edward Fetton, a bricklayer. White also described himself as a bricklayer at this time. In 1900 he emigrated to become a navvy on the South African railways, but was home within a year. He became a speculative builder and later an estate agent and mortgage broker; in 1908 he went bankrupt, but eventually repaid his creditors in full. It is not known when his wife Annie died, but White appears to have married a second wife, Doris, with whom he had a son and three daughters. 
Having moved to London, White gained notoriety when in 1911 a boxing match he had organized at Earls Court was banned by the authorities, fearful of disorder as one of the contestants was black. This and other boxing promotions brought White to the attention of the business community. White possessed the kind of charisma that disarmed critics. With deep-blue eyes, an engaging smile, and a Lancastrian breeziness, he impressed those willing to fall under his spell. All sorts of people, from politicians and newspaper proprietors to sporting types, passed through his office in the Grand Hotel, Trafalgar Square, or repaid his hospitality after work with useful commercial information. 
An early client was the pill magnate Sir Joseph Beecham. In 1914 White persuaded him to underwrite the purchase of the Covent Garden estate and market in London. Beecham had to bear the entire financial responsibility when the First World War broke out in 1914 and public share issues for non-essential purposes were prohibited. In the autumn of 1916 White produced an interim arrangement, which collapsed when Beecham died suddenly before its signature. The conductor Sir Thomas Beecham was the dead man's elder son, and he became directly involved in the affair. Beecham later recalled that White was bold and dashing in the opening moves of a financial venture, but liable to panic when things started to go wrong. White lacked the tenacity to see through the problems of the Beecham estate to a successful resolution, and it led to a complex chancery case. Others, notably the financier Philip Ernest Hill, finally untangled the estate. However, White remained chairman of the Beecham Trust Ltd, a private Beecham family estate company; and he continued to benefit from his association with the family name. 
White was acquainted with Sir Arthur Du Cros, the managing director of the Dunlop Rubber Company, and in 1913 he was appointed the company's financial adviser. Having obtained control of the firm, he subsequently attempted to establish a manufacturing subsidiary in the United States and to extend some affiliates at home. Both projects disintegrated when the post-war recession began in 1920; later White narrowly avoided being sued for his financial miscalculations in Dunlop. His bids to exploit the short-lived cotton boom in Lancashire after 1918 failed to benefit the industry. 
White was more successful with his property deals. He bought, for rapid resale, a large urban site in Shaftesbury in Dorset, and prime sites in London's Strand, Bloomsbury, and St Martin's-le-Grand, as well as Selfridge's store in Oxford Street. He also bought a controlling interest in Daly's Theatre, Soho, but had to lease it out after a succession of flops. White sank much money in racing, from his stables at Foxhill, Wanborough, near Swindon, and had some successful horses, especially those ridden by Stephen Donoghue. However, he failed to win admission to the royal enclosure at Ascot. 
In 1927 White began to purchase the shares of British Controlled Oilfields, planning to unload them in the United States at a handsome profit. Unfortunately, on the stock exchange's account day, he lacked a considerable sum to pay for shares he was committed to buy. To compound his problems, he was expected within days to find $300,000 for the Wembley exhibition centre, which he was also purchasing. His balance of mind disturbed, no doubt because of these financial embarrassments, White poisoned himself with prussic acid and chloroform at his home, King Edward's Place, Foxhill, Wanborough, on 29 June 1927. He was buried in Wanborough churchyard on 4 July. 
White's life was, it was said, 'a glorious speculation, his death the gambler's price of failure' (Meredith, 296). To Sir Thomas Beecham he seemed to be 'one of the group of financial wizards who appeared and vanished like comets in the sky of the business world during the period' (Beecham, 197). Friends from every walk of life regretted his passing. Yet White's recklessness blighted the lives of many, including his wife, Doris, and their son and daughters, about whom nothing further is publicly known. 


@@@@@


doc= 47877


Wood, Edward (1846-1930), building society manager, was born on 8 September 1846 at Baddesley Ensor, Warwickshire, the son of Edward Wood, a collier, later a colliery under-manager, and his wife, Eleanor, 'nee' Atkins. His father was illiterate in 1846 and could only make his mark when registering his son's birth. 
Wood started work in the colliery's counting house and became its London agent when he was twenty-five. In September 1870 he married Elizabeth, the daughter of Robert Heuchan, a tea dealer; the couple had one son and three daughters. After moving to Battersea in 1871, Wood was active in local government as a Liberal and also became a prominent temperance campaigner. 
The temperance cause was his lifetime passion, and this connection led to his election to the board of the Temperance Building Society in 1882. Founded in 1854, the Temperance flourished and in 1880 was the sixth largest building society. In 1887 the society's founder secretary died and Wood was appointed to replace him; he proved to be an able manager, paying meticulous attention to detail and keeping all aspects of the business under his close personal control. 
In 1892 the collapse of the country's largest building society, the Liberator, faced all societies with a crisis, but especially the Temperance, since its investors were drawn from exactly the same nonconformist circles that had fuelled the Liberator's rapid growth. Wood acted swiftly and decisively. A letter sent to all members detailed the strength of the Temperance Society's balance sheet. Investors' fears were allayed by the waiving of the usual notice of one month for withdrawals; payment would be on demand. By 1896 the Temperance had resumed steady growth and by 1906 it was the largest society. 
Early in his building society career Wood took a number of innovative steps. In 1895 he was one of the first managers to pay commission to builders developing estates for introducing borrowers to the building society. Assets reached a peak in 1909. Later the Temperance Society's relative position declined, especially after 1918. While other large societies had growing branch networks, the Temperance had none. Changes after 1918, such as mortgages for bigger proportions of the house price, for longer terms, and to less wealthy buyers, were seen as risking the huge reserves that the Temperance had built up, and it is clear that Wood's very conservative attitude to risk and delegation, although financially prudent, inhibited the long-term growth of the society. Wood had outside business interests as a board member (later chairman) of the Sceptre Assurance Company and the Artisans' General Dwelling Company, which owned more than 7000 houses. 
In the aftermath of the collapse of the Liberator, Wood became more prominent in the National Association of Building Societies, whose executive committee he joined in 1887. He campaigned for increased powers for the registrar of building societies and for the annual publication of much detail from individual societies, especially concerning loans in arrears and properties in possession. The 1894 'Building Societies Act' largely reflected these views. Wood served as the association's chairman from 1903 to 1913, and continued on the executive until 1923. He ended London domination of the executive and made the association truly national. An excellent public speaker, he was adept in presenting statistical information. During his chairmanship government proposals increasingly impinged on building society territory, and Wood was a formidable leader of the association's delegations to ministers. He was a member of the 1908 royal commission on the Land Transfer Acts and was one of a group of financial specialists advising Lloyd George on the 1909 'Finance Act'. 
An active figure in local government, Wood served as chairman of Battersea vestry and was its representative on the Wandsworth board of works. In 1886 he became Wandworth representative on the Metropolitan Board of Works -- the forerunner of the London county council. He was prominent in the movement which achieved borough status for Battersea in 1888. He was a JP first for Surrey and then for London county, and was chairman of the Wandsworth bench from 1900 to 1926. Wood was a Wesleyan Methodist (a member of Bromwood Wesleyan Church, Clapham) and held high office in many temperance organizations: the Band of Hope, the United Kingdom Temperance Alliance, the Good Templars order, and the Temperance Orphanage (chairman, 1884-1930). In 1916 he published 'The Nationalization of the Liquor Traffic'. He was a freemason and past master of a temperance lodge. 
Wood died at his home, 58 Nightingale Lane, Clapham, London, on 20 September 1930, following a stroke at his diamond wedding celebration. He was cremated, and his ashes were interred at St Mary's Church cemetery, Battersea. 


@@@@@


doc= 47878


Wycherley, Sir Robert Bruce (1894-1965), building society manager, was born on 5 April 1894 at Newtown, Montgomeryshire, the son of the Revd Richard Wycherley, a Primitive Methodist minister, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Bruce. He was educated in schools at Oakengates, Shropshire, and Scorton, Yorkshire, and first worked as a clerk in the West Riding education department. In the First World War he spent four years in the army, mostly in France; he was decorated with the Military Cross and bar and was a captain when demobilized. Following a brief return to the education department he became secretary of the West Yorkshire pensions committee and then, in 1921, of the Halifax Engineering Employers Association. 
In 1929 Wycherley moved to London and joined the National Building Society, which had enjoyed very rapid growth since 1918. Its board felt that the administration had not adjusted to the size of the business and recruited Wycherley to take over the administration in due course. Starting as assistant secretary, he became secretary (1931), general manager (1933), and managing director (1937), having joined the board in 1936. He tightened and mechanized the administration, enjoying the advantage of a purpose-built head office in Moorgate opened in 1930. 
The National had long been established in the heart of the City. Provided competitive interest rates were offered, there was no shortage of funds; with no branch offices, however, finding borrowers was more of a problem for the National. The solution was the employment of full-time representatives, mostly in the south-east, whose job it was to contact builders developing estates. Somewhat controversially, finance for house building was then advanced by the building society on the security of the land, and the developers were paid commission for any borrowers they introduced to the National. The builder could stimulate sales by giving, without informing the buyer, a guarantee to the building society where a loan in excess of the usual percentage of the purchase price was made. The precise details of these arrangements became the focus of increasingly intense competition between societies. The National Association of Building Societies, with Wycherley as a council member from 1934, struggled throughout the 1930s to agree and enforce a restraining code of conduct. Although the National Association was replaced in 1936 by the Building Societies Association, with support for a code a condition of membership, the forces of competition continued unchecked until restraint was imposed by the 'Building Societies Act' 1939. 
With the outbreak of war the new association appointed a committee of five to safeguard the interests of societies. This committee included Wycherley and Sir Harold Bellman of the Abbey Road Society. One consequence was the merger of their two societies in 1944 to form the Abbey National. Wycherley and Bellman were joint managing directors until 1948, after which Wycherley acted alone, although with Bellman continuing as chairman. Wycherley served as chairman of the association from 1943 to 1946 -- difficult years, as the prominent post-war part that societies had seen for themselves was at odds with the modest role that the government allowed. Wycherley managed to sustain reasonable co-operation between them. His condemnation of the excesses of the 1950s, with some societies making large loans to speculative property companies, made his an influential voice when new legislation to restrain these excesses was passed in 1960. Severe illness in 1962 forced Wycherley to leave the association's council in 1964 after thirty years; he was made a vice-president. 
An early associate member of the Building Society Institute (the professional staff association), Wycherley became a fellow in 1939. He was a member of its council from 1935 to 1947 and chaired the superannuation and benevolent committees. He played a part in the re-establishment of the International Association of Building Societies. Other business interests were the deputy chairmanship of the Royal Insurance Company and directorships of both the Globe and the Liverpool and Lancashire insurance companies and of the South Essex Water Board. He was a fellow of the Chartered Institute of Secretaries from 1924, treasurer in 1950, and president in 1954. He received a knighthood in 1953. 
Wycherley's recreations included music, as he had long been an accomplished organist, and also gardening and golf. He was a freeman of the City of London, president of the City Livery Club, and a member of the court of the Innholders' Company. A freemason, he was accorded 'grand rank' for his services, including grand deacon of England. He married twice: in 1920 Winifred (died 1942), the daughter of Edward Land Harrison, an ironmonger of Wakefield, and in 1943 Margaret, the daughter of William L. Morton, an engineer of Forfar. He had two daughters, one from each marriage. Wycherley died from cancer on 17 March 1965 at his Kent home, High Timber, Chislehurst Road, Chislehurst, survived by his second wife. He was cremated after a funeral service at Christ Church, Chislehurst. 


@@@@@


doc= 47882


Sir Alfred David McAlpine (1881-1944), who was born at Bothwell Street, Hamilton, on 6 November 1881. Malcolm returned to work with the firm in 1899, and became a partner that year. Alfred became a partner in 1902. Granville McAlpine (1883-1928), Robert's youngest surviving son by his first marriage, became a partner in 1905 but left in 1910; he worked only periodically for the firm thereafter, as a salaried agent and, after 1924, as a junior partner. 
Agnes McAlpine died in childbirth in April 1888. On 21 August of the following year, Robert married Florence Margaret (died 1910), the daughter of William Palmer, a doctor of Roxburgh, Newtonhamilton; they had three children. On 22 December 1896 Robert McAlpine junior married Lillias Cooper Bishop (1876-1948), daughter of Thomas G. Bishop, the founder of Cooper & Co. They had one son and two daughters. William McAlpine married Lillias's younger sister, Margaret Donnison Bishop (died 1970) on 6 April 1898; they had three sons and two daughters. Malcolm McAlpine married Maud, daughter of James Gibson Dees of Whitehaven, on 2 September 1903; the couple had three sons. Alfred McAlpine married Ethel May (died 1961), daughter of James Williams, in 1907; they had one son, Alfred James (Jimmie) McAlpine (1908-1991), and two daughters. 
Robert McAlpine senior ceased to take charge of individual contracts after 1898, and after 1906 he delegated the task of making up tenders for major contracts to his sons and their staff. He continued to be involved in the firm, however, negotiating with clients and touring worksites. He became particularly interested in the concept of garden cities, and he ensured that many of the ideas of the movement were adopted in the development of the Holy City, a large tenement housing estate which the firm built during 1904-10 in Radnor Park, near the Singer factory in Kilbowie. The estate was devastated during a German bombing raid in 1941, and was acquired from McAlpines by Clydebank burgh council after the war. 
In 1900 McAlpines won its first contract in England, for the construction of a graving dock at Hebburn, on the Tyne. In 1905 Malcolm McAlpine set up the Victoria Agency in London as part of a plan to win contracts for the firm in England, and by 1914 McAlpines had worked successfully on a number of reservoir and railway contracts south of the border. The volume of work in England increased dramatically during the First World War, when the firm was engaged to build army camps, munitions factories, and aerodromes. 
Malcolm McAlpine moved his family home to Northwood in 1909, and in 1917 bought Fairmile Court in Cobham, Surrey. His father moved to Hertfordshire in 1912, and then to Knott Park, in Oxshott, Surrey, in 1916. The head office was transferred to London in 1916, and Robert junior (in 1917), and finally William (in 1920), settled in England shortly afterwards. In 1918 Alfred, who had lived in Wales since 1911, settled at Marchwiel Hall, near Wrexham in Wales. 
Robert McAlpine's political sympathies switched from the Liberals to the Conservative Party at some time in the early 1900s, but he had no objection when, in April 1918, his daughter Roberta ('b'. 1898) married Richard Lloyd George, eldest son of the prime minister. In June that year McAlpine was created a baronet. He celebrated the honour by donating $15,000 to help set up the Institute of Agricultural Botany at Cambridge. In 1921 Malcolm McAlpine was made KBE for services rendered to the Ministry of Munitions -- largely for his role in ensuring completion of the controversial motor transport depot at Slough in 1919. Alfred, who was chairman of the Wrexham division of the Conservative Party in 1921-8, became high sheriff of Denbighshire in 1923, and a life governor of Wrexham War Memorial Infirmary. He was knighted in 1932 in recognition of his public service. 
During the 1920s McAlpines built many new council house estates, such as Bellingham for London county council and Wilbraham for Manchester corporation; won road contracts such as those for the construction of the Birmingham to Wolverhampton road and the reconstruction of a section of Watling Street; and was engaged by the crown agents for the colonies to build Takoradi harbour on the Gold Coast. The company's reputation as a pioneer of concrete construction techniques was instrumental in winning its most prestigious contract of the decade, for the construction of Wembley stadium and the British Empire Exhibition buildings. The chief architects, John Simpson and Maxwell Ayrton, and the consulting engineer Evan Owen Williams (1890-1969), were determined to use ferroconcrete extensively in the work, because of its relative cheapness as a building material, and in order to dispel a common belief that concrete was an ugly material which should be hidden away behind facing bricks, stone cladding, or some other disguise. Wembley stadium was begun in 1922 and completed in time to host the Football Association cup final on 28 April 1923. The massive palaces of industry and engineering, and the other exhibition buildings, were completed at the end of the year. Sir Robert McAlpine senior believed that the exhibition buildings offered final proof that a British dislike and suspicion of concrete construction was finally being overcome, and he proclaimed to a reporter from the 'Glasgow Herald' that 'we have now definitely entered the concrete age' (12 Nov 1923). 
McAlpines followed up its success at Wembley by building the critically acclaimed Black Cat factory in Camden and the Firestone Tyre and Rubber Company's factory at Brentford. In 1929 the firm began work on the Dorchester Hotel in London's Park Lane, and the hotel opened in 1931. McAlpines, which was a member of the syndicate that financed the venture, bought out the sole remaining partner in 1937 and the Dorchester was run by the McAlpine family, through Dorchester Hotel Ltd, until 1976. 
In 1925 the McAlpines became involved in the sugar-beet industry, building a factory at Wissington for British Sugar Manufacturers and subsequently building others at Peterborough, Selby, Bardney, and Brigg. William McAlpine was convinced by optimistic forecasts about the industry's future, and the firm accepted shares and debenture stock in British Sugar and the Central Sugar, Lincolnshire Beet Sugar, Second Lincolnshire Beet Sugar, and Yorkshire Sugar companies, after building factories in partnership with the Dyer Company of Cleveland, Ohio. 
After the First World War, the semi-retired Sir Robert continued in his role of elder statesman of the firm, touring sites and offering advice to his sons and interviews to the press, when they were sought. Robert junior, too, took a back seat during the 1920s, leaving William in charge of central financial and administrative matters. Sir Malcolm and Alfred, with an army of trusted managers, remained in charge of important sites and project management, although William was sometimes called upon to return to site management -- most notably when he took charge of contracts, each worth over $2 million, for the enlargement of Tilbury docks, 1926-9, and Southampton docks, 1927-35. The three brothers shared the responsibility for the strategic direction of the business. 
Sir Robert McAlpine died at his home, Knott Park, Oxshott, on 3 November 1934. Robert junior inherited his title, but died just thirteen days later, on 16 November, during a sea voyage 'en route' for Cape Town. His son, (Alfred) Robert, inherited the baronetcy from his father, but he took no part in the affairs of the firm, and William was made chairman of McAlpines. William died on 20 February 1950 at his home, Badgemore House, Badgemore, Henley-on-Thames, and was succeeded at the head of the company by Sir Malcolm. 
During the late 1920s and early 1930s McAlpines created a number of limited companies to complete large contracts, or take responsibility for contracts undertaken in a geographical area -- Sir Robert McAlpine (London) Ltd, for example, was engaged on major dock construction and extension contracts in London during the late 1920s. McAlpine (Midland) was set up in 1930, and in 1934 the other partners agreed that the subsidiary should be run by Sir Alfred alone, as his own business. In 1940 Sir Alfred and his son Jimmie formed a new company, Sir Alfred McAlpine & Son, to acquire the business of McAlpine (Midland), thus ending their formal ties with McAlpines. 
The McAlpines were a family of keen sportsmen. Sir Robert and Robert junior were enthusiastic sailors, and the latter regularly participated in Cowes week in his schooner 'Suzanne'. The four eldest sons owned racehorses, and Sir Malcolm (who set up his own stable with Pat Hartigan in 1913) achieved the greatest successes in 1921, when Shaun Spadah won the Grand National, and in 1952, when Zabara won the Thousand Guineas at Newmarket. Sir Alfred was active in promoting county cricket in north Wales, serving as president of the North Wales Cricket Association, and he was also an enthusiastic supporter of both Manchester City and Wrexham football clubs. Sir Alfred died at Marchwiel Hall on 25 May 1944. 
Sir Malcolm, who had served as chairman of the home ores committee during the First World War, and as chairman and then vice-president of the Federation of Civil Engineering Contractors during the 1930s, became chairman of the Committee of Engineers and Contractors and of the Opencast Coal Technical Advisory Organisation during the Second World War. He was most proud of his role in designing the concrete breakwaters built by McAlpines and other firms for the Mulberry harbours, deployed in France after D-day in 1944. McAlpines continued to rank as one of Britain's leading firms of contractors after 1945. William's and Sir Malcolm's sons, who had begun working for McAlpines in the 1920s and 1930s, played an increasingly active role in the firm's activities after the war, and ensured that it remained a family firm. Sir Malcolm died at North Foreland Hall, Cliff Road, Broadstairs, Kent, on 12 April 1967. 
From the First World War, Sir Robert McAlpine & Sons was recognized as one of Britain's leading public works contractors. Significantly, the most famous British folk-song celebrating the life of the itinerant construction site worker, or 'navvy', written during the early 1950s by Dominic Behan, was entitled 'McAlpine's Fusiliers'. The company, trading in the early twenty-first century as Sir Robert McAlpine, remains a leading building and civil engineering contractor in the UK. 


@@@@@


doc= 47883


McCrindle, John Ronald (1894-1977), lawyer and airline executive, was born on 29 November 1894 at The Grange, Middlesbrough, the only child of James Ronald McCrindle MB CM, physician and surgeon, and his wife, Elizabeth Pullan Kealabow, both of Scots descent. He was brought up in Kingston, Jamaica, where his father was in practice. Following early education at Jamaica College, he went on to Glasgow University to study medicine. In August 1914 -- not yet qualified -- he was gazetted a second lieutenant in the territorial brigade of the Gordon Highlanders, and seconded to the Royal Flying Corps in November 1914. For the next four years, as a pilot in France, Mesopotamia, Egypt, and Palestine, he was three times mentioned in dispatches, awarded a Military Cross in 1917, and ended the war as a major in the Royal Air Force. 
In December 1918 McCrindle was posted to command 1 (communications) flight, RAF, formed on 13 December to operate regular, daily, air services between London and Paris for the peace conference at Versailles. Appointed OBE in November 1919 and fluent in French, he was posted for special duties with the British delegation on the council of ambassadors in Paris. On 26 December 1921 he married in New York, Odette, the daughter of Joseph Fuller Feder. Early the following year he retired from the RAF, and joined the Harvard business school, from where he graduated in 1924. Called to the bar at Lincoln's Inn in 1927, McCrindle practised at the chancery bar until 1934. He kept his links with aviation through the London Aeroplane Club at Stag Lane, where he owned and flew a DH Cirrus Moth. He returned to work in aviation in 1932 as legal adviser to the small, independent Hillman bus company at Romford, Essex, from where in April 1933 he and Edward Hillman initiated a London (Maylands) to Paris (Le Bourget) air service with the first DH Dragon aircraft, at fares of $3 10's'. single and $5 10's'. return. When Edward Hillman died, aged only forty-five, on 31 December 1934, McCrindle became managing director of Hillman's Airways and, supported by his second wife (the writer Susan Ertz, whom he had married on 6 August 1932, following his divorce from Odette), he negotiated the absorption by Hillman's Airways of three other small airlines, Spartan, United, and British Continental, forming a new company known as British Airways, to compete with Imperial Airways on the London to Paris and Brussels air routes, and on to Cologne, Hanover, Stockholm, and the Western Isles in 1936. 
In April 1937 the enterprising British Airways began fast (one hour twenty minutes) services between London and Paris, flying new American Lockheed Electra monoplanes, in competition with the two and a quarter hours of Imperial Airways. Following the 1938 Cadman inquiry into the operation of British air transport, the airline was granted increased services into Europe, and the pioneering of scheduled British air services to South America. 
Operating the advanced American Lockheed aircraft, British Airways was chosen in September 1938 to fly the prime minister to and from the Munich meetings with Hitler. In April 1940 it merged with Imperial Airways to form the state-owned British Overseas Airways Corporation (BOAC), with Sir John Reith as chairman, and McCrindle as deputy director-general. Already, in 1945, he had been in the lead in forming the post-war International Air Transport Association in which, with BOAC, for the next twelve years he was an active and respected representative in London, Montreal, Chicago, and Bermuda. 
McCrindle retired in 1969, but continued to enjoy contacts with his wide circle of friends throughout the world of air transport. He and his wife entertained with flair and enjoyment at their country house, Lossenham Manor, near Hawkhurst in Kent, where McCrindle was described by a leading American diplomat as, 'A British gentleman of the first order'. In addition to his Military Cross and OBE, McCrindle became a CMG in 1948, and received numerous honours from abroad. He suffered a stroke and died at his home on 12 March 1977. 


@@@@@


doc= 47884


Mackie, James (1864-1943), manufacturer of textile machinery, was born on 6 October 1864 at Belfast, the eldest of the four children of James Mackie (died 1887), a manufacturer of linen machinery, and his wife, Mary ('nee' Millar). His father was Scottish, his mother Irish. James senior had come to Ireland from Forfar in 1845 to install a steam engine in a linen mill in Drogheda. His work impressed the foreman, James Scrimgeour, and when the latter established a foundry and engineering works in Belfast, Mackie became manager. Later Scrimgeour offered him a partnership, which he declined, deciding simply to invest money in the business; so when the firm went bankrupt in 1858 Mackie was not liable for its debts. Although he lost money, he managed to purchase the company's Albert Street premises and some of its equipment and began repairing machinery. With the cotton famine of the 1860s there was an increase in linen production and a consequent rise in demand for new machines and for the servicing of existing stock. Thus when the younger James was born his father's business was expanding. However, when the boom ended in the 1870s, the firm survived only by rigid economies. 
James Mackie received only an elementary education, at Belfast model school on the Falls Road. He entered the business in 1874, and continued his education at Queen Street Mechanics' Institute (later to become Belfast College of Technology). The firm remained small, specializing in mill machinery renovations and accepting contracts for dismantling and re-erecting textile plants. In 1884 James became a junior partner in the business and, when his father died in 1887, he succeeded in partnership with his younger brother Thomas (1870-1956). Shortly afterwards James married Elizabeth Pringle (died 1940); they had five sons and a daughter. In the business, Thomas supervised the production side, while James was responsible for sales. He travelled widely in central and eastern Europe gaining orders and in 1895 established contacts in Russia. Increasingly the Mackies moved from repair work towards the manufacture of a wide range of linen machinery. In 1893 the company acquired a site on Belfast's Springfield Road, which, although greatly enlarged after 1919, remained its location until 1992. The business expanded steadily, producing wet-spinning frames and flax-preparing machinery. In 1897 Mackies became a limited company and in 1902 it took over Clonard foundry, bringing in John Horner, the previous owner, to the board. Together Mackies and Horner developed a revolutionary hackling machine, embodying a differential drive and grouping of metal pins to comb the flax. 
In the pre-war boom the company expanded rapidly. In 1907 it was one of the first firms in the city to electrify and in 1911, together with Sir Otto Jaffe, linen merchant and former lord mayor of Belfast, diversified by acquiring McTears' spinning works in east Belfast. Later, as the Strand Spinning Company, this became wholly owned by Mackies. At this time the firm employed around 350 men. After 1914 the company went over to making munitions; its labour force rose to 650 and its premises were extended. From 1920 the linen industry declined and the business looked to other markets. It experimented in producing jute machinery, building a mill on its Springfield site to test the products; this also provided additional income as the resulting yarn was exported. By 1929 jute equipment was Mackies' most important product. 
The business was highly export-orientated; by the end of the 1930s its overseas staff totalled 110 in a workforce of 2000, and covered 52 countries. This complex operation was headed by James Mackie. The firm became one of the world's leading suppliers of sisal and hard-fibre spinning machinery, and were pioneers in developing a complete range of products for processing jute. It was among the first to adopt package arrangements for establishing factories overseas, taking responsibility for planning, supplying, and installing equipment, and starting up production. 
After 1939 the firm moved again into munitions, such as armour-piercing shells, hand grenades, and aircraft parts. In certain specialized projectiles, nine per cent of national requirements came from Mackies. The firm expanded dramatically. By 1944 the labour force, hitherto almost exclusively male, had increased to 12,000, 7200 of them women; another 8000 worked in associated Mackie organizations. That year the company's nominal capital was still $156,000, a figure bearing no relation to the firm's true value. 
Throughout its development Mackies remained a private family controlled company. James continued as managing director until his death, although by 1939 Thomas Mackie (appointed CBE in 1942) was primarily responsible for the day-to-day running of the firm. Mackies' success was based on both technical awareness, prudent finance, and the reinvestment of profits. The brothers lived frugally (their sons, for example, received further education at Belfast Technical College rather than at university). The company's finances also benefited greatly from the two wars. After 1945 the business continued to prosper, with markets in both eastern and western Europe moving from jute towards machinery for wool and man-made fibres. 
James Mackie had many outside business interests, particularly through directorships in the linen industry, in firms such as the Ulster Spinning Company and the Rosebank Weaving Company. His public offices were few: deputy lieutenant for Belfast, JP for co. Antrim, and for six years a member of Belfast Harbour Board. He died at a nursing home, The Retreat, Armagh, on 12 April 1943, and was buried at Belfast city cemetery on the 14th. He was succeeded as managing director by his brother Thomas, and by his sons James and John. 


@@@@@


doc= 47892


Archibald [i] Hope (1664-1743). The son of Henry [i] Hope (1630-1688), a merchant of Rotterdam and London, Archibald was baptized in 1664 at the Scottish church in Rotterdam in the Netherlands. Although based in Amsterdam he and his family were of Scottish origin and claimed ancestral links to Sir Thomas [i] Hope ['see 'Hope, Sir Thomas, of Craighall (1573-1646)], lord advocate, and the earls of Hopetoun, and were connected through business to the City of London. In the second half of the eighteenth century their merchant bank of Hope & Co. emerged as Europe's most powerful, in particular raising huge sums for kings and governments throughout Europe and beyond to the United States. 
Archibald [i] continued his father's business, but experienced greater success. In 1694 he married Anna Claus (died 1752), daughter of an Amsterdam button maker, and they had at least eight sons and two daughters. In due course Archibald was succeeded in business by his sons Isaac (died 1766) and Zachary (1711-1770). However, it was his second son, 


@@@@@


doc= 47893


Manfield, Sir Moses Philip (1819-1899), shoe manufacturer and politician, was born on 26 July 1819 in Bristol, son of Moses Philip Manfield, a shoemaker. He came from a poor working-class household, and was supported by his mother after his father was paralysed. Unitarian in religion, his mother educated him herself until he was apprenticed at the age of twelve as a boot closer in a shoe manufacturing business, rising to become a manager. 
In 1843 Manfield moved to Northampton as a manager but the business failed. With the help of local Unitarians in 1844 he established himself in business, specializing at this stage in the lower end of the market and government contracts. In 1845 he married Elizabeth Cambridge Newman (1819-1852); they had one child who did not survive. Elizabeth died in 1852 and in 1854 he married Margaret Milne ('c'.1821-1899), with whom he had two sons. In 1856 Manfield opened a large new warehouse to serve his outworkers but more work was gradually done indoors as the mechanization of the industry proceeded. However, even in the early 1890s the 630 indoor workers were outnumbered by outdoor workers employed by the firm. Under Manfield's chairmanship the firm of Manfield & Sons became one of the leading Northampton shoe manufacturing companies and an important influence on the wider development of the town and industry. In 1892 industry attention was attracted when he opened a large purpose-built factory capable of producing some 350,000 pairs of shoes a year. At that point Manfield relinquished day-to-day control of the firm to his sons, who had already established themselves as a key part of the family management team. 
The firm remained at the forefront of technical change during Manfield's period of control. He saw both the productivity potential of new technology and its advantage in allowing closer workforce supervision within the factory. He was also a marketing innovator, seeing the value of branded goods and pioneering a chain of shops which numbered thirty at his death. The protracted mechanization of the industry, along with pressure on wages, created periodic labour discontent and as the leading Northampton manufacturer Manfield played a key role in organizing local producers in a Northampton chamber of commerce and then the Boot and Shoe Manufacturers' Association. After some bitter disputes, he encouraged union recognition and arbitration machinery which he later helped to develop elsewhere. 
Manfield played an influential political role in a Liberal revival in Northampton and the wider county. He was a member of the Northampton Reform League in the late 1860s. Manfield initially opposed the official Liberal candidature of Charles Bradlaugh in Northampton, but supported him in his fight for his parliamentary seat; he subsequently succeeded Bradlaugh, serving with Henry Labouchere as one of the MPs for the town between 13 February 1891 and 8 July 1895. Manfield made a limited impact on parliament, but saw himself as a representative of a 'working class constituency' and a radical Liberal supporting Gladstone on home rule. He was far more influential in local politics, serving as a councillor from 1866 to 1877 before losing his seat as a result of divisions caused by the radical candidature of Bradlaugh. He served again as a councillor from 1882 to 1892 and as mayor from 1883 to 1884. He was then involved in a dispute between the town and the government over the latter's refusal to accept a Liberal list for magistrates, but eventually was himself appointed to the bench. 
Although Manfield was kindly regarded in his final years as the 'Grand Old Man', his brand of unevenly radical Liberalism was being undercut by the growth of a local socialist movement which was critical of the role of local employers as a class. He was knighted on 18 July 1894 and made a freeman of Northampton shortly before his death. With his wife he patronized many local causes, including the building of a new Unitarian church and school, which they financed shortly before their deaths. He was also involved in the National Educational Association. 
Manfield died at his home, Redlands, Cliftonville, Northampton, on 31 July 1899 and was buried on 3 August at Northampton general cemetery. His wife died shortly before him on 12 July 1899. 


@@@@@


doc= 47896


Marcroft, William (1822-1894), co-operative movement activist and company promoter, was born on 15 July 1822 at Box Cottage, Fog Lane, Middleton, Lancashire, the illegitimate son of Sally Marcroft (1801-1841), a farm servant, and Richard Howarth, a weaver. Shortly after his birth he and his mother moved to Heywood, where she eventually married Jacob Aspinal, a weaver. William Marcroft was put to work at the age of six gathering dung on the local turnpike road. Eighteen months later he became a piecer at a Heywood cotton mill, where he remained until he was twelve. He was then apprenticed to a fustian cutter, but left after three years to work as a piecer again before joining Charles Mills's machine-making works in Heywood, where he became a grinder. Shortly after his marriage on 3 March 1844 to Jane Smith, daughter of David Smith, a local brewer, he moved to Oldham, where he worked in Hibbert and Platt's great machine-making works, eventually being promoted to foreman. 
Marcroft appears to have had no formal education and his early attempts to educate himself (he attended John Plant's night school in Heywood about 1837) were frustrated by the need to nurse his mother, whose health had collapsed as a result of constant childbearing and poverty. After her death in 1841 he attended night school at the Heywood Mechanics' Institute, where for a time he was an assistant teacher. On arriving in Oldham, he joined the Oddfellows, Rechabites, and the Machine Grinders' Society (of which he was local secretary), attended Chartist meetings, and became an active supporter of W. J. Fox, the radical MP for Oldham between 1847 and 1863. He later wrote of this period that 'my doings in life were become loose' (Marcroft, 'Inner Circle', 15), but after hearing a temperance lecturer he became an ardent teetotaller for the remainder of his life. His earnings at Hibbert and Platt were about $2 a week, and he was determined to save half of this until he had $1000; he would then retire from an arduous and unhealthy occupation. He refused to lend money to neighbours and discouraged the visits of former friends to his house, which behaviour made him so unpopular that he was forced to move home several times. 
The collapse of Chartism in 1848 and the defeat of the Amalgamated Society of Engineers in the 1852 lock-out convinced him that the co-operative movement offered the best hope for the working classes. He was accordingly a promoter of the Oldham Industrial Co-operative Society in 1850, and sat on the board of the Co-operative Wholesale Society in 1865, and 1867-71. Above all, however, he was a vigorous advocate of co-operative production, whereby the workers in an establishment held the share capital and received a bonus on profits. In 1857 he helped to promote the Oldham Building and Manufacturing Company Ltd, and when it appeared on the point of failure suggested that it should build the Sun Mill, which eventually would have 90,000 self-acting mule spindles, an extremely large number for that period. While the mill was being built he served as clerk of works and treasurer, having left Hibbert and Platt in 1861 with his $1000 saved, though for a time he may also have practised as a dentist, a profession he had taught himself to supplement his wages. He served as a director of the company in 1859-61, 1862-4, 1865-71, and 1875-7, and as chairman in 1866-7. More than anybody he was responsible for what, as the Sun Mill Company Ltd, was a brilliant success and a model for the Oldham cotton industry. His years with the company, however, were marked by frequent clashes with the other directors, principal servants, and shareholders. In part this was because they increasingly regarded the company as an ordinary commercial concern (in 1867 only four out of over 1000 shareholders worked there). But it was also a consequence of Marcroft's difficult personality. Blunt of speech and contemptuous of anyone who did not share his ideals, he became obsessed with plots against him. Nevertheless his contribution to the co-operative movement was remarkable for he also helped to promote the Oldham Co-operative Insurance Society (1867), the Oldham House and Mill Company Ltd (1867), the Star Corn Mill (1868), the Central Mill Company Ltd (1871), the Federative Insurance Company Ltd (1875), the Oldham Limited Liability Association (1875), and the Cotton Buying Company Ltd (1881). He also became a prolific author, producing several autobiographical works, a history of the Sun Mill Company, and large numbers of pamphlets and articles on co-operative production. 
Marcroft had four sons and two daughters (one of whom died aged four in 1862). His considerable business acumen and thrift allowed him and his family to live in some comfort, despite simple food and home-made clothing, and to travel widely throughout the British Isles, the continent, and the USA. The death of his wife on 18 April 1882, shortly after that of his surviving daughter, Emma, in childbirth, clearly unnerved him. He abandoned plans to establish a co-operative village with a cotton mill, sold off his property and shares, and retired for a time to Southport. He died at his home, 85 Roman Road, Failsworth, Lancashire, on 8 September 1894, and was buried in Oldham on 14 September. By then he was very much an anachronism, not only in his old-fashioned forms of speech, but also in his belief in the principles of co-operative production. 


@@@@@


doc= 47898


Marks, Harry Hananel (1855-1916), journalist, newspaper proprietor, and politician, was born on 9 April 1855 in London, the fifth of six children of David Woolf Marks (1811-1909), eminent Hebrew scholar and chief rabbi of the West London Synagogue, and his wife, Cecilia (died 1882), daughter of Moseley Woolf of Birmingham and his wife. 
Marks attended University College School, London, from 1864 to 1868, before completing his formal education at the Athenee Royale, Brussels. At the age of sixteen he travelled to New Orleans, where his father had friends, and remained in the United States until 1883. These were truly formative years. To the end of his life he admired American 'know-how'. Marks married Annie Estelle Benjamin of Montreal in 1884; they had a son and a daughter. 
After a spell selling sewing machines Marks entered journalism on the strength of 'previous experience' -- of which he had none. 'Chutzpah' he had in abundance. He learned his trade on various Texas newspapers, 'the roughest and most thorough literary training that America offered' ('Financial News', 27 Dec 1916). Marks moved to New York, working for the 'New York World' from 1873 to 1878, and editing the 'Daily Mining News' after 1880. A selection of his articles, published in 1882, included reflections on the 'precarious and Bohemian sort of existence' of the American newspaper reporter. 'My own experience', he wrote, 'is that a gentleman can be a reporter, and still be a gentleman. But it is difficult' (Marks, 'Small Change', 10-11). A master of irony, in 1879 Marks wrote and published himself 'Down with the Jews! Meeting of the Society for Suppressing the Jewish Race'. This savaged those American politicians who sought to whip up hostility towards Jews. 
While in New York, Marks combined journalism with speculation in mining and oil shares. Rumours of sharp practice followed him back to London in 1883; so too did the malicious accusation that he had defrauded and deserted the widow of a business associate with whom he had been intimate. Later, Marks sought to clear his name by suing George Butterfield, an aggrieved company promoter, who had published particulars of his alleged New York indiscretions. Marks failed to convince an Old Bailey jury, which found against him, though the judge made it clear that he regarded the verdict as perverse ('Financial News', 18 Dec 1890). Thereafter Marks never quite shook off the suspicion that he was rather shady. 
By this time Marks had established himself as the chief proprietor and editor of the 'Financial and Mining News', London's first financial daily. Its debut, on 23 January 1884, predated the 'Financial Times' (with which it merged in 1945) by four years. The 'News' initiated a transformation in the British financial press, which had acquired a reputation for dullness. Marks imported cross-headings, short paragraphs, and a breezy style which irritated competitors but appealed to financial sector professionals and their clerks. The 'News' also sold among the wider investing public whose interest it claimed to serve. It quickly developed into a crusading journal with a strong line in investigative company reporting. Exposing a vein of corruption in the Metropolitan Board of Works in 1888 was a major journalistic 'coup'. 
'Yankee bounce' triumphed over 'eighteen-hundred-and-fast-asleep conservatism of the old school' ('Financial News', 29 April 1884). The 'News' became the flagship of the new financial journalism, accessible as well as authoritative, which characterized the money pages of most London newspapers by 1900. There was, however, a darker side. Corruption was endemic in the largely unregulated financial sector and Marks was sorely tempted. In the late 1880s he appears to have used his newspaper to create a market for shares in the Rae (Transvaal) goldmine, unloading his holding through dummy vendors before the price collapsed. It also seems that Marks could be 'squared' by company promoters anxious to secure a favourable reception for a new issue. Edward Hooley's explanation, in 1898, that he had given Marks $17,000 prior to the flotation of the New Beeston Cycle Company because he was 'a friend' failed to convince sceptics (Porter, 8-10). Such abuses were not uncommon among financial journalists at the time. 
Marks entered politics in 1889 as a member of the first London county council. A Conservative with progressive inclinations, Marks was an unsuccessful parliamentary candidate at Bethnal Green in 1892. Three years later he gained a narrow victory at St George-in-the-East, another East End constituency, subsequently reinforcing his position when charges relating to corrupt electoral practices were not upheld in court. Although he stood down in 1900, Marks was later praised for his political work in London by Akers-Douglas, Conservative chief whip, who recalled 'a regular attendant and constant supporter of the Government, and a first-rate speaker' (Akers-Douglas to Cobb, 6 Feb 1904, Chilston MSS). In 1904 he re-entered parliament, winning a by-election at Thanet where he had built his principal residence, Callis Court, near Broadstairs. Opinion about Marks among Thanet Conservatives was divided: some of them believed that he was a 'dishonest rogue' and unfit to sit in parliament, but he was popular among local working men, winning again in 1906 despite the intervention of a second Conservative candidate. He retired undefeated in 1910. 
Marks suffered a stroke in 1909 and was thereafter in poor health. He retained, as editor-in-chief, a connection with the 'Financial News', interfering in its affairs to the intense irritation of Ellis Powell, who had succeeded him as editor. Powell's revenge, exacted posthumously, was to allege that Marks had tried to sell the paper to a German agent in 1915 (Kynaston, 78-81). Marks died from complications of diabetes at 119A Mount Street, Mayfair, London, on 21 December 1916. His wife also died in 1916. 


@@@@@


doc= 47903


Martin, Sir James (1893-1981), ejector seat designer and manufacturer, was born on 11 September 1893 at Killinchy Woods, Crossgar, co. Down, Ireland. His father, Thomas, a farmer and inventor, died when James was two, leaving his mother, Sarah, to bring up Martin and his only sister. He had designed a three-wheel motorcar before preparing to go to university. A visit to Queen's in Belfast convinced him that he already had more practical knowledge than he was likely to learn there, so he joined his sister in London. By 1925 he was manufacturing his own vehicles in Acton, and at the same time he raced cars. 
In 1929 Martin established his Martin Aircraft Company at Denham, where the business remained until his death. His goal, with the help of two boy mechanics, was a simpler and safer aircraft, then very much on aeronautical minds. Though in the next seventeen years he built five prototypes, including very fast modern fighters, he was regarded as too radical and unorthodox by the rather stuffy bureaucracies of the day. In 1934 Captain Valentine Henry Baker, a well-known flying instructor whom Martin had met some years previously, joined him in forming the Martin-Baker Aircraft Company. His experience and skill contributed to the design and development of the MB 1 and later prototypes. Their fighter, the fixed-undercarriaged MB 2 of 1937, which contained many advanced features for simplicity of construction and operation, was not ordered in 1939 in spite of laudatory reports. In 1942 the formidable MB 3 exceeded the Air Ministry's specification F.18/39, but Baker was killed in a crash of the prototype. The MB 4 was abandoned in design, but in May 1944 the first flight of the prototype of the 'magnificent' MB 5 took place. It was too late in the Second World War and none was ever ordered. The MB 5 was the last of Martin's aircraft designs to fly. He developed a single-engined jet design, the MB 6, but it never went beyond the drawing board. 
After the loss of his partner and flying instructor, Martin became much concerned with how to save the lives of pilots. With the arrival of the much more expensive jet aircraft, which were entering new aerodynamic territory including very serious problems for pilots trying to bail out, Martin entered the field for which he was best known -- ejector seats. In early 1944 at an Air Ministry suggestion he began work on the idea, although the concept dated back to 1940, when Martin-Baker had begun to provide the RAF with explosive balloon-cable cutters, while at the same time Martin had developed a small, simple mechanism to jettison Spitfire canopies. After tests with dummies, the first live ejection took place from a Gloster Meteor jet in 1946, and Martin was on the road to developing the world's standards in such work. Shortly after the successful test, representatives from the United States Navy visited Denham and by late 1946 had ordered ejector seats for its aircraft. In June 1947 the British followed suit and at last Martin-Baker had real production orders. 
The first models simply ejected the pilot, who had then to release the seat and pull the ripcord of his parachute. Soon realizing that this was unacceptable, especially in view of data acquired on the vertical forces on the human body, by 3 September 1953 Martin had perfected the system which allowed a live ejection while the aircraft was still on the runway. In the meantime both British aircraft manufacturers and the RAF and Fleet Air Arm pilots had opposed the whole idea of ejector seats. Still not satisfied with a 12 per cent fatality rate, mainly occurring when pilots ejected close to the ground, Martin increased the explosive charge to send the seat higher and thus allow more time for the automatic opening of the parachute. He also added an explosive to jettison the canopy, further speeding up the ejection procedure. By 1966 MB seats had saved 1165 lives, and many more have been saved since. 
A friendly and forthright managing director who got on well with his workforce because he was actively involved with their work and concerned to save lives, Martin lived close to his work and never took a holiday. Though not a church-goer, he frequently quoted the 'Bible' and was generous. In 1942 he married Muriel Haines. They had two sons and two daughters, to whom he was devoted. 
At the end of his work he was well honoured as one of the leaders of the second generation of British aviation entrepreneurs. He received the Wakefield gold medal of the Royal Aeronautical Society in 1951, the Laura Taber Barbour air safety award (USA) in 1958, the Cumberbatch safety trophy in 1959, and the Royal Aero Club gold medal in 1964. Among other honours he was made OBE in 1950, CBE in 1957, and knighted in 1965. He died at his home, Southlands Manor, Denham, on 5 January 1981, survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 47904


Martin, Percy (1871-1958), engineer and motor vehicle manufacturer, was born in Columbus, Ohio, USA, on 19 June 1871. He graduated as a mechanical engineer (in electrical engineering) at Ohio State University, Columbus, in 1892. His involvement in the British motor industry, which occupied the greater part of his working life, began with a chance meeting in London in 1901 while on holiday in England after working as an engineer in Milan and Berlin for General Electric, the dominant American company in the developing worldwide electrical industry. Martin met H. F. L. Orcutt, who had been asked by the chairman of Daimler, the motor manufacturers, to look for a successor to J. S. Critchley as works manager at Coventry. After an interview, Martin was appointed in October 1901, continuing with Daimler and the amalgamated Daimler/BSA group until his retirement in 1934. He became a naturalized British citizen. 
Despite the involvement of the financier H. J. Lawson in its origins, Daimler had already gained the cachet of royal patronage, but it needed technical and managerial skill to consolidate its position. As an engineer/businessman, Martin's contribution to Daimler was immediate: within a year of his appointment a more rational model policy had been adopted and he had designed and built new 12 and 22 hp cars. Managerial control over design, operations, and materials was combined with improved incentive payments, notably the contentious premium bonus system. This was seen by Martin as the carrot rather than the stick to move productive effort along lines laid down by management (Lewchuk, 140-42). 
Martin's long-term career with Daimler was associated with two major technical developments, based on acquired technical rights: the Silent Knight engine, marketed in 1909, and the fluid flywheel, based on the Fottinger hydraulic coupling, and introduced in 1930. The Silent Knight was a sliding- or sleeve-valve engine, developed by F. W. Lanchester from the designs of Charles Y. Knight of Wisconsin. Daimler acquired exclusive manufacturing rights in the UK, with permission to export. The advantages of smoother and quieter operation than the poppet-valve engine remained until overtaken by engine design and fuel improvements in the early 1930s. Silent Knight was, however, a more expensive engine to build, and opinions differ as to whether Daimler merged with the Birmingham Small Arms Company (BSA) in 1910 from a position of strength or weakness. On balance, Martin's appointment as managing director of the reconstituted Daimler concern and as one of three Daimler directors on the BSA board suggest that his skills and value to the new group were fully recognized. The BSA had been founded in 1861 and had added cycle components, cycles, and motorcycles to its range of products, but its diversification into car manufacture, from 1907, had proved disappointing. It is therefore certain that Daimler had something to offer BSA as car (and subsequently commercial vehicle) manufacturers. That the BSA group remained something of an agglomeration, rather than becoming an integrated structure, can hardly be laid at Martin's door. 
Martin's experience came into its own during the First World War, when the group's factories were devoted to military production, in particular staff cars, lorries, tank and aero-engines, and aeroplanes. In addition, Martin was made deputy controller of petrol engine supply at the Ministry of Munitions in February 1917 and given a seat on the Air Board. Also in February he was appointed controller of mechanical transport, a position he held until departmental reorganization in November. 
In the early post-war period Martin entered into what has been described as a 'reckless deal' with George Holt Thomas, the aviation pioneer, to acquire his Airco group, which included the engine manufacturer Peter Hooker. This acquisition, at the outset of a period of recession, involved unwarranted expenditure and expansion. From 1926 to 1929 Daimler and the commercial vehicle manufacturers AEC were involved in a joint venture, the Associated Daimler Company, but it did not live up to Martin's hopes, AEC proving the dominant partner. Meanwhile, in 1927, Martin had approached Louis Coatalen to propose a merger between Sunbeam and Daimler, but this came to nothing. However, the acquisition by the BSA group of the ailing Lanchester Motor Company at the end of 1930 was rightly seen as industrial rationalization and may be regarded as the culmination of Martin's links with the remarkable Lanchester brothers. 
Towards the end of his career Martin was closely involved in the development and introduction of the Daimler fluid flywheel, having acquired manufacturing rights in the Fottinger hydraulic coupling in 1929. The introduction of the epicyclic (Wilson) gearbox in conjunction with the fluid flywheel is credited to Martin, who apparently was particularly proud of his part in the development of this technical improvement. He was chairman of Daimler from January 1934 to October 1935, having retained his seat on the board after retirement. Changes at Daimler, probably overdue, followed Martin's retirement; these included the establishment of a separate bus division, Transport Vehicles (Daimler) Ltd, in 1936 and extensive development of the works, to speed production, in 1937-8. 
Martin married, in July 1902, a fellow American, Alice Helen Heublein (died July 1958) of Hartford, Connecticut, whom he had met in Berlin while she was on holiday. They had a son, John, and a daughter, Helen. Like a number of other midland industrialists, Martin settled in Kenilworth, where he bought Spring Farm, later extended by the purchase of the adjoining Camp Farm. He died, following a heart attack, at The Spring, Kenilworth, on 10 November 1958. His son subsequently pursued a business career in the USA and his daughter, who did not marry, managed The Spring estate after her father's death and became a great benefactor of the nearby University of Warwick. 


@@@@@


doc= 47905


Mason, Hugh (1817-1886), mill owner and philanthropist, was born at Stalybridge on 30 January 1817, the third and youngest son of Thomas Mason (1782-1868) and his wife, Mary Woolley ('nee' Holden). His father was a joiner, his mother kept a smallware shop, where she sold tapes and gingerbread. During the boom of 1822-5, Thomas Mason moved to nearby Ashton under Lyne, where he became a cotton spinner with three jennies; his son went to school at Stamford Academy in the town. Thomas had first entered the mill at the age of eight, his son Hugh did so at the age of ten, working a 72-hour week for seven years. He then spent the years 1834-8 in a local bank. At the age of twenty-one he entered the mill for a second time but as a partner, and the same year was elected a member of the Manchester exchange. He rapidly became the driving force within the business, and took over its reins from his brothers and his father, who retired in 1862. He extended his horizons beyond the confines of the counting-house, and followed the example set by his father, an ardent advocate of education and social reform. He became an active supporter of the Ashton Mechanics' Institute established in 1839, funding lectures out of his own pocket, and a founder member in 1847, with other radical dissenters and ex-Leaguers, of the Lancashire Public Schools Association. 
Mason's greatest achievement was to transform the two Oxford mills, built in 1845 and 1851, into the nucleus of the 'Oxford Colony' of his workfolk. Not merely did Mason treble employment from 200 in 1840 to 620 in 1861, but he also became a convinced and thoroughgoing paternalist, dedicated to improving the welfare of his employees. He came to view himself as simply the steward of his own wealth and his employees as his own brothers and sisters. He built 150 houses with four or six rooms apiece, in the interests of morality and decency. He actively discouraged the employment in the mill of mothers of families. The colonists established their own clutch of associations: a burial club, a friendly society, a band, a choir, and a gardeners' society. Mason sought to provide alternative attractions to the 'man traps' of public houses. He provided in 1861 a library, lecture hall, reading-room, and smoking-room. In 1868 he inaugurated the Oxford Institute with an enlarged lecture hall, picture gallery, and baths, supplemented in 1870 by a recreation ground. During the winter season a course of lectures was organized, concluding with a tea party. Mason 'gathered round him a band of the elite of the working classes' ('Ashton Reporter', 28 April 1866, 4, vi), for whom he acquired a profound respect. He received their tributes in the form of a series of addresses and testimonials. He also earned the praise of two factory inspectors for the 'noble example' he set to his fellow employers ('Factory Inspectors' Reports', 31 Oct 1862, 26; 'Ashton Reporter', 18 April 1868, 7, vi). He resigned from the local employers' association and denounced trade unions, whether of masters or men, as pernicious to commerce. The contrast between the success of the Oxford Colony and the failure of the Owenite 'villages of co-operation' remains noteworthy. 
Mason became a town councillor in 1856, a magistrate in 1857, a deputy lieutenant of Lancashire by 1864 and, finally, an alderman in 1866. He served as the mayor of Ashton for three terms of office (1858-60), and proved to be more effective than any of his predecessors. He rooted out bribery, set officials to rights, and infused a new public spirit into the life of the town. He built a new market place, helped to establish the Ashton Penny Bank, and enforced the proper administration of the burial laws. As chairman of the governors of Ashton Infirmary he introduced a more economical system of bookkeeping. He also forced down the price of the gas supplied by the Ashton Gas Company, to the benefit of all consumers. 
In 1861 Mason warned, with remarkable prescience, that 'a time of trial for both masters and workpeople seems to be approaching us' ('Ashton Reporter', 29 June 1861, 4, iii). During the subsequent cotton famine he achieved national eminence by his untiring philanthropy. First, he remained a strenuous supporter of the cause of the North in the American Civil War, a leading spirit of the Union and Emancipation League, and a fearless critic of those hotheads who favoured armed intervention to end the blockade of the cotton ports. Second, he continued to run his own mills full time throughout; only ten other millowners out of two thousand did so. Thereby he maintained both employment and wages, enabling his own operatives to contribute in their turn to the relief of the unemployed. Immediately trade recovered he raised wages by 10 per cent without any solicitation and so confirmed his position 'in the front rank of those who have acknowledged the rights and claims of the working classes' ('Ashton Reporter', 28 April 1866, 7, i). Third, he became the prime mover in relieving distress throughout Ashton. That borough was more afflicted by the shortage of cotton than any other in the whole region, and it had almost no middle class to fund the relief of distress. Political and religious feelings ran so high that two separate relief committees were established, representing respectively the Anglican-Conservative interest and the Liberal dissenting interest. It was Mason's achievement to reconstitute his own committee, the Borough Committee, upon a broader basis, and to secure its recognition as the sole responsible agency. At first Mason had thought that relief should be given in the form of food and fuel rather than in money or clothing, because money might be used for gambling and clothes might be pawned. He quickly changed his opinion and favoured the payment of relief in money rather than in kind as being more acceptable to working people. He admired the independence of character of those workmen who disdained to seek relief. He strove to secure increases in the scale of relief, and set an example to other employers by conceding a moratorium upon the payment of cottage rents. He disapproved of both the workhouse test and the labour test. He presided over the rapid construction of the Albion Sunday school in 1861-2, and used the new building to house sewing and reading classes for the unemployed. Fourth, Mason prevented the riots in Stalybridge from spreading to Ashton by his courage and his promptness on 23 March 1863 in reading the 'Riot Act', a service he repeated during the Murphy riots of 1868. Fifth, he served on the central executive committee in Manchester (1862-9), first deploring any appeal for aid to London, and then in 1864 urging the government to invest $500,000 in a programme of public works. Finally, he sought to extend the sources of cotton supply so as to avert any recurrence of similar distress in the future. 
Mason had been a far-sighted founder in 1857 of the Cotton Supply Association, becoming a member of its executive committee. He also became chairman of the executive committee of the Manchester Cotton Association established in 1860. On 23 September 1862 he boldly called in public for the impeachment of Sir Charles Wood, secretary of state for India, for his consistent obstruction of the efforts made by Lancashire to develop the supply of cotton from India. To the same end he rebuked the government in 1871 for failing to admit the 'commercial element' to membership of the Council of India. He also became disturbed by the incidence of speculation in the Liverpool cotton market. He was elected president of the Cotton Spinners' Association, established in 1861 in self-defence against the merchants of Liverpool. He supported the passage of the 'Cotton Statistics Act' of 1868, and sought in 1871 to improve its administration, so as to reduce the violent fluctuations in the price of cotton. 
Hugh Mason devoted his great abilities, and his leisure hours, to the service of his fellows, identifying himself fully with the great movements of the age. His natural capacities were those of a leader of men. He was 'an exceedingly strong man', 'a man of inflexible will and unswerving integrity' (I. Petrie, 'From Tinder-Box to the 'Larger' Light: Threads from the Life of John Mills, Banker', 1899, 88), 'a man of great intensity, fixed in his convictions, indomitable in spirit, untiring in energy' ('The Congregationalist', 227). As a Sunday school teacher he early mastered the art of public speaking and he honed it to perfection as a temperance advocate. He developed an early preference for the public meeting to the private canvass in order 'to get at the working man'. Lacking in suavity of manner, he preserved an abiding love of plain speech and secured an appreciative response from his audiences. He was elected to the Society of Arts in 1861; he established his own newspaper, the 'Ashton News' (1868-74) and proposed in 1870 the local adoption of the 'Public Libraries Act', donating 1000 volumes to the library when it opened in 1882. He nevertheless remained an apostle of the spoken word and always had a long speech ready for any occasion. Sometimes he spent every evening of the week in chairing a local meeting. In Manchester in the 1870s he would be greeted by audiences of working men with tempestuous cheers and deafening applause. 
In the sphere of religion he embodied the best elements of the puritan tradition of the seventeenth century and incarnated 'the dissidence of Dissent' from the Anglican church. 'In many points he was a nineteenth-century edition of the finest type of the old Puritanism' ('The Congregationalist', 229). He remained a devout worshipper, attending church upon week nights as well as twice on Sundays. Born and bred within the Methodist New Connexion, he transferred his loyalty to the leading Congregational church of the region. He became a member of Albion Congregational Church in 1846, its treasurer in 1858, and a deacon in 1860. He presided at the bi-centenary conference held in Manchester on 13 January 1862, which decided to commemorate the expulsions of 1662 by the erection, in association with the English Congregational Chapel Building Society, of thirty memorial chapels and schools in Lancashire, as well as the restoration of the Independent chapel in Dukinfield, the oldest in the region. As a true nonconformist he became an ardent member of the Liberation Society, and a keen supporter of the British and Foreign Bible Society and the London Missionary Society. In 1863 he chaired a public meeting of the Liberation Society, and in 1873 he opened the restored chapel at Dukinfield. 
As a Liberal and a Cobdenite, Mason became in 1866 a founder both of the Cobden Club and of the Manchester Reform Club. In 1871 he reduced the working week at the Oxford mills by two hours, generalizing the Saturday half-holiday throughout Tameside and anticipating the 'Factory Act' of 1874. He became a director of the Manchester chamber of commerce in 1864, a vice-president in 1871, and its president for three terms in 1871-4. Thereby he became the spokesman for the country's staple trade, with its 2 million dependants, as Thomas Bazley had been in the 1850s, and Charles Macara was to be in the 1890s. Mason, however, became the chief executive of the Manchester trade at the period of its greatest importance in the supply of the world market. He infused new spirit into the chamber, extending its remit over the whole sphere of British commerce, reporting to regular quarterly meetings and drafting detailed annual reports. He travelled to Paris as well as to London as the representative of the chamber, sponsored a drive to extend membership, and was honoured by a double vote of thanks on his retirement from office. Three speeches proved highly effective. First, he reproved the banks in 1873 for their reckless competition for business. Second, he boosted in 1873 the campaign against the Indian import duties on Lancashire goods. Third, he criticized in 1875 the mania in Oldham for floating limited companies. Those speeches led to the suspension of mill building in Bombay in 1874 and of company flotation in Oldham in 1875. Mason was appointed by the government in 1872 as a member of the Mersey Docks and Harbour Board, the first member recruited from outside Liverpool. His interests in the Liverpool-Manchester traffic secured his election to the boards of the Bridgewater Navigation and the Midland Railway. When the Manchester Ship Canal was projected, he foretold in 1883 that it would prove to be a ruinous failure. 
Mason was removed from the bench of aldermen in 1874 by his political opponents and withdrew thereafter from local politics. A typical Manchester man and a representative Lancashire radical, his interests extended to embrace the dialect literature of Waugh, Brierley, and Laycock. His zeal, courage, and sagacity enabled him to become a leader of the region's Liberals and nonconformists, and to reach the heights of his fame as a speaker. He served the Liberal Party well as vice-chairman from 1861 of the South Lancashire Registration Association. He secured the holding in Ashton in 1882 of the annual conference of the National Liberal Federation, founded in 1877 by the Birmingham radicals. He had served the Steam Users' Association as a vice-president since 1864, and he became its president in 1875. He also became president of the Society for the Promotion of Scientific Industry in 1875. He was appointed a life governor of Owens College in 1875 and endowed it with a scholarship. Above all, he devoted himself to the temperance agitation, having become a teetotaller in 1870 and a vice-president of the United Kingdom Alliance in 1875. He became president of the Manchester and Salford Temperance Union and of the Band of Hope Union. His crusade against smoking generated his first printed speech, 'On the Use of Tobacco' (Manchester Anti-Narcotic League, 1885). As the Liberal MP for Ashton (1880-85) he secured the passage of the 'Local Option Bill' in 1880 and of a 'Boiler Explosions Bill' in 1882, but failed in an 1883 bid to enfranchise women; he was narrowly defeated in the general election of 1885. 
Mason died at his home, Groby Lodge, Jowetts Walk, off Manchester Road, Ashton under Lyne, at the age of sixty-nine on 2 February 1886; he was buried in Dukinfield cemetery on the 6th. His estate of nearly $290,000 may be compared with that of his father, who left less than $20,000. He was married three times: in 1846 to Sarah Buckley; probably in 1853 to Betsey Buckley; and in 1864 to Anne Ashworth. His third wife, two sons, and two daughters survived him. He was commemorated by the erection in 1887 of the first public statue in Ashton. The Oxford Colony survived the demise in 1955 of the firm of Thomas Mason & Son; the Oxford Mills Institute and Social Club bought in 1956 the premises which it had previously leased. 


@@@@@


doc= 47906


Matheson, Hugh Mackay (1821-1898), overseas trader and Presbyterian lay supporter, was born on 23 April 1821 in Edinburgh, son of Duncan Matheson (1784-1838), advocate and afterwards presiding magistrate of Edinburgh, and his wife, Annabella (1796x9-1829), daughter of Thomas Farquharson of Howden. He had an elder brother and two sisters. He was educated in Leith, in Edinburgh at the high school, and at Cunningham's academy, and later in part-time classes in logic and moral philosophy at Glasgow University. He had a devout upbringing and was convinced from an early age of his need to seek God's guidance in all matters by Christian prayer and scriptural readings. 
Matheson became a clerk in the Glasgow merchant house of James Ewing in 1836, and in 1843 he was invited to join the Hong Kong trading firm of Jardine Matheson, in which his uncle, afterwards Sir James Matheson, was a partner. He declined, apparently out of scruples at the firm's involvement in the Chinese opium trade, but accepted a post with their London correspondents, Magniac, Jardine & Co. In an attempt to improve his health he took leave of absence in 1845, and spent eighteen months touring the Orient and studying British trade there. His meetings with both merchants and missionaries convinced him that Christianity must be the salvation of the East: Europeans were superior in civilization to oriental people (so he concluded) because of their Christian faith. He returned to Britain fired with an ardour to spread biblical teachings; for the rest of his life he was committed to the Presbyterian church's China mission, of which he was successively treasurer and convenor. 
Magniac Jardine was reconstituted as Matheson & Co. in 1848 with Hugh Matheson as managing partner. Based in Lombard Street, its chief business initially was importing China tea and silks on Jardine Matheson's behalf, but in the 1850s the firm began exporting Lancashire cotton piece-goods and other commodities to China as well as importing Indian commodities to Britain. During the 1860s the firm managed Indian tea estates, and was involved with Jardine Matheson in promoting railways and cotton mills in China. It indirectly profited from the opium trade which Matheson had publicly indicated that he found 'objectionable' ('The Times', 3 Feb 1870). 
After the shah of Persia in 1872 granted an exclusive concession to Baron Julius de Reuter to build and operate all Persian railways, tramways, and canals, and to exploit natural resources, Matheson attempted to raise the finance to exploit this concession. He was more successful in 1873 when he formed an international consortium to buy from the Spanish republican government the state-owned pyrites mines at Rio Tinto. Having paid $3.68 million, the Rio Tinto Company began working the concession in 1874 with Matheson as its first chairman. Under Matheson's leadership the company surmounted various financial, marketing, and political obstacles to become the world's largest supplier of sulphur and copper. The Rio Tinto mines were technologically advanced and well-managed (mainly by Scots; these expatriate managers were also responsible for introducing soccer to Spain). 
As a businessman Matheson was shrewd at appraising risks and bold at hazardous moments. He was a hard negotiator who could be ruthless in pressing his advantages and was adept at winning the confidence of others. As a Christian, Matheson was protective of his Spanish employees, and provided houses, churches, stores, medical services, and schools (he was personally involved in the curriculum). However, his concern for the spiritual and economic welfare of his workers did not prevent him from justifying the use of Spanish troops to repress their political aspirations. 
In the 1840s Matheson was shocked by the decline of Presbyterianism in England and as soon as he had the means dedicated himself to its revival. At the time of his death he was acknowledged as Presbyterianism's leading lay advocate south of the Tweed. He financed Presbyterian newspapers, educational initiatives, church building, and doctrinal work. Holy Trinity Church, near his home in Hampstead, was erected with his money. For many years, when in London, he went from his City office to Whitechapel or Spitalfields at the end of his working day to rescue prostitutes and drunkards. He was a strict sabbatarian. His religion was bigoted: he was an entrenched opponent of Roman Catholicism, and had an even more violent antagonism against ritualism and Anglo-Catholicism. Although given to many private charities he was thought harsh and offensively righteous even by some fellow Presbyterians. He was exceedingly conservative in his domestic arrangements and social attitudes but was president of the Hampstead Liberal and Radical Association and was much besought as a radical parliamentary candidate. He supported Irish home rule and the widening of electoral suffrage. Notwithstanding his commercial interests he hated the jingo policies of the Conservatives and was never a business imperialist. He enjoyed high standing in the City of London but pointedly did not join its hierarchy. Though a deputy lieutenant and magistrate in the City, and chairman of the committee of London merchants during the Anglo-Chinese negotiations of 1870, he desired neither the lord mayorship nor the accompanying baronetcy. He was, unusually for a Liberal, a bimetallist. 
In 1855 Matheson married Agnes Ann (1830-1900), daughter of David McFarlen of the Indian Civil Service. They had a son and two daughters. In 1858 he bought an estate in the Scottish highlands, Elswick House, near Strathpeffer, in Ross-shire, along with nearby property at Lower Scatwell. King Alfonso XII of Spain invested him as a knight grand cross of the order of Isabella the Catholic in 1882. He died of heart disease on 8 February 1898, at Heathlands, Hampstead. His widow published the 'Memorials of Hugh M. Matheson' in 1899. 


@@@@@


doc= 47907


Matthey, George (1825-1913), refiner and metallurgist, was born on 8 May 1825, the fourth son of John Matthey, a stockbroker and foreign-exchange dealer, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Green. George was educated at Arragon House in Twickenham, but his career was determined by an agreement between his father and Percival Norton Johnson, a family friend and business client. This allowed for two sons of the former to enter Johnson's business in Hatton Garden, London, in return for the injection of new capital, believed to be about $10,000. Thus in 1838 Johnson, who at this time was refining gold, silver, and platinum on a modest scale, took on George Matthey as an apprentice. 
Initially working in the assay laboratory, Matthey benefited from the knowledge and experience of Johnson and had William John Cock (1813-1892) as his mentor. In 1845 Matthey was put in charge of platinum refining, and it was due mainly to his persistent scientific endeavour over many years that the refining and fabrication of platinum was developed from a laboratory activity into a successful industrial enterprise. He persuaded Johnson to participate in the Great Exhibition in 1851; his display of platinum received a prize, but was outshone by a French competitor, who exhibited a large platinum still, used for the concentration of sulphuric acid. This spurred Matthey into deciding to become pre-eminent in the platinum business. 
The first source of natural platinum was the Choco region of South America. Then, in the 1820s, significant platinum was found in the Ural Mountains in Russia; to begin with, this was subjected to an imperial monopoly, but in 1850 some mine owners there appointed George Matthey as their refiner and selling agent. Almost immediately, in 1851, he was taken into partnership by Johnson, and the firm became Johnson and Matthey. From then on Johnson began to relinquish control of the company's affairs, and on his retirement in 1860 Matthey became senior partner, the other two partners being Matthey's younger brother, Edward, and John Scudamore Sellon, a nephew of Mrs Percival Norton Johnson. The former concentrated on the gold- and silver-refining side of the business, while Sellon was largely responsible for commercial affairs. In 1891 George Matthey became the first chairman of Johnson Matthey & Co., a position he held until his retirement in 1909. 
Until the early 1900s an important use of platinum was for the manufacture of boilers in which the relatively dilute sulphuric acid produced by the chamber process could be concentrated up to about 95 per cent, or even higher. Originally this was done in small glass retorts, but their fragile nature resulted in many accidents and significant losses. Early platinum vessels were operated on a batch principle, the weak acid being boiled down to the required specific gravity before being poured or siphoned out and the operation repeated. However, at the Paris Universal Exhibition of 1855 Johnson and Matthey exhibited a platinum boiler designed for continuous operation. This had been developed in collaboration with William Petrie (1821-1908), one of the earliest chemical engineers, and was more economical to operate. Later, Matthey's invention of platinum fusion welding, using a blowpipe flame, was to reduce the cost and greatly improve the quality of such boilers. The 1855 exhibition was particularly significant, for there Matthey became friendly with Paul Francois Morin, an associate of Professor Henri Sainte-Claire Deville and Jules Henri Debray. In 1857 Deville and Debray devised a lime-block furnace in which platinum could be melted and refined on a large scale for the first time; the British patent rights to the process were taken up by Matthey. 
At the Universal Exhibition in Paris in 1867, Johnson Matthey displayed some 15,000-20,000 ounces of manufactured platinum. A gold medal was awarded for the exhibit, and George Matthey became a chevalier of the Legion d'honneur. Discussions held at this exhibition led to the formation of the international metric commission. Platinum with 10 per cent iridium was selected for the fabrication of standard metres and kilograms, and over many years Matthey played an important part in the production of such standards. Crucially, he refined the constituents by a new method which he described in a paper to the Royal Society in 1879. In the same year he was elected FRS. Over the years, his acute business sense enabled him to see opportunities for the expansion of the platinum business and these he developed until both technical and commercial success were achieved. With the platinum business firmly established, Matthey maintained mutually beneficial contacts with the scientific community. An eminent member of several scientific and technical bodies, he was active in the establishment of the City and Guilds colleges at South Kensington and Finsbury. At times he held directorships in a variety of companies. Elected to the Goldsmiths' Company in 1853, he became a member of its court in 1853, and served as prime warden in 1872 and 1894. 
In 1853 Matthey married Charlotte Ann Davies (died 1919), daughter of Richard Davies of South Hackney. They had eleven children, of whom Richard Davies Matthey (1858-1929) and Percy St Clair Matthey (1863-1928) subsequently entered the family business. George Matthey died at Rosemount, his Eastbourne residence, on 14 February 1913. 
Almost 150 years later Johnson Matthey was still successfully engaged in the refining, fabrication, and marketing of gold and silver, and the platinum metals; in 1994-5 the company was the largest gold refiner in the world, and the sole marketing agent and joint refiner for Rustenburg Platinum Mines, the world's largest source of the platinum metals. 


@@@@@


doc= 47908


Molesworth, Andalusia Grant, Lady Molesworth (c.1809-1888), society hostess, was the daughter of James Bruce Carstairs ('c'.1770-1845) and his wife, Andalusia. Her family background remains obscure, although she was later to assert a connection with the extinct Bruce of Kinross baronetcy. In June 1824 she passed the entrance examination for the newly founded Royal Academy of Music: as Miss Grant she made her first public appearance at the academy's concert in the Hanover Square Rooms on 5 June 1826. She made her stage debut at Covent Garden on 2 June 1827, when her 'remarkably powerful and sweet' soprano voice was favourably received. Further performances as Diana Vernon in 'Rob Roy Macgregor', Lucy Bertram in 'Guy Mannering', and Estelle in 'Isidore de Merida' (in which she sang a duet with the celebrated tenor John Braham), and an unsuccessful production of 'Edward the Black Prince' with W. C. Macready went to confirm the opinion that, talent as a singer notwithstanding, she was no actress. Singing with Braham in Bath in the winter season of 1830-31, she accepted a proposal of marriage from one of the earliest subscribers to the Royal Academy of Music, Temple West ('c'.1770-1839), a Worcestershire landowner. The wedding took place in London at St George's, Hanover Square, on 2 June 1831. 
Andalusia West made her entry into respectable society; she retired from the stage and concert platform, and lived with her ageing husband at his house, Mathon Lodge, Malvern, and in Bath. By his death on 13 April 1839 she inherited all his property outright, and set herself up at 29 Half Moon Street, Mayfair. She made the acquaintance of Sir William Molesworth (1810-1855), the radical politician, to whom she became engaged on 10 June and married on 9 July 1844. The marriage met with family opposition on account of Sir William's frail health and Andalusia's age -- childless in her first marriage, she had few childbearing years before her. Her dubious antecedents and past life, and her social ambitions, caused unfavourable comment in society, and occasioned a permanent breach between her husband and his friend Mrs Harriet Grote. 
Molesworth was returned to parliament in the autumn of 1844 after an absence of three years, and his new wife began her career as a hostess in earnest. Sometimes at their Pencarrow estate in Cornwall, but more frequently in their London house (1 Lowndes Square until 1848, thereafter at 87 Eaton Place), Lady Molesworth set out systematically to conquer the prejudices of the social and political elite. During the first years of her marriage her guests included the literary lions W. M. Thackeray, T. B. Macaulay, and Charles Dickens (whose sister Fanny had been a friend at the Royal Academy of Music); by 1850 the political world had given its seal of approval in the presence of Lord Palmerston, Lord Lansdowne, and Lord Granville, and the editor of 'The Times', J. T. Delane, at her dinner table. By the time of Molesworth's death on 22 October 1855 the social world had given its approval also, with some of the grandest of the 'grandes dames', Lady Londonderry and Lady Palmerston, paying their arrears of civility. Of those who did not succumb to her charms her husband's family were the most prominent; indeed, his mother and sister considered that the social whirl in which Lady Molesworth preferred to live, of 'continual excitement for the last year and a half without an hour's repose has destroyed him' (Adburgham, 183). 
The breach between the two parts of the Molesworth family was nowhere more clearly visible than in Andalusia Molesworth's will, by which she left everything in her power to leave -- and she had inherited from her husband all that was not tied up in trust -- to the nephew and heir of the man who became her constant companion after Molesworth's death, George Byng, seventh Viscount Torrington (1811-1885). Within a year of her husband's death the entertainments in Eaton Place had resumed, and they were to be maintained for the following thirty years until her own death, which took place on 16 May 1888 at her London home. She was buried at Kensal Green cemetery. 
Making a virtue of her musical background, Lady Molesworth's parties were distinguished for the quality of the musical entertainments she provided, but it was to her dinners, both to intimate groups of six or eight guests and to larger gatherings, that 'Moley' owed her reputation as one of the foremost hostesses in London. Lady Dorothy Nevill recalled that 'although by no means brilliantly intellectual herself, [Lady Molesworth] possessed a mysterious power of drawing out clever people and making them talk' ('Reminiscences', 146). Like Frances, Countess Waldegrave, the other great hostess of their generation, who was herself the daughter of that John Braham with whom Miss Grant had sung in the 1820s, Andalusia Molesworth overcame the prejudices of the day against obscure birth, poverty, and the stage to end her life as one of the most successful hostesses. Samuel Wilberforce was heard to remark 'I believe if the King of the Cannibal Islands were to come to England, within twenty-four hours he would be dining with Lady Molesworth' (ibid., 147). 


@@@@@


doc= 47909


Mattison, Francis Charles (1860-1944), businessman, was born on 6 May 1860 in Alnwick, Northumberland, the son of a house painter, John Mattison, and his wife, Mary Ann, 'nee' Alder. The community into which he was born was part of the estates of the duke of Northumberland, a member of the Percys, one of the great landowning families of England, who had owned Alnwick Castle since 1309. Although his family was of modest means, young Francis was born at a time when the resident duke was taking a particular interest in the welfare of the county and making great efforts to improve the conditions of the poor, and it is likely that the boy received decent basic schooling. Little is known of his upbringing, but a sound education and a good brain he must have had for he went into banking and eventually became manager of a Liverpool and Martins branch bank in Bexleyheath, Kent, an impressive achievement for the son of a house painter. In 1892 he married Annie Maude, daughter of Julius Hewett, civil engineer; they lived for several years at Blackheath, and raised at least two children. 
In his capacity as bank manager Mattison met Andrew Pringle, a customer who was also a director of the newly formed photographic manufacturing company, Kodak Limited. The recent death of Kodak's joint managing director, George Dickman, had left a vacancy for a managerial assistant with a financial background, and Pringle asked the bank manager if he could advise; to his surprise, Mattison suggested himself. After further discussions to establish whether Mattison was serious, he was offered the post and joined Kodak in March 1899. His bank was astonished that he should desert banking for trade and promised Mattison that should he reconsider before the end of the year they would find a job for him. In his early years with Kodak there were times when Mattison regretted not taking advantage of this offer but he persevered and promotion to company secretary in 1903 extinguished any lingering doubts. Thereafter he steadily progressed. In 1909 he became deputy managing director and in May 1911 was appointed to the board as a director in place of the recently deceased Sir G. W. des Voux GCMG. In January 1920 he was appointed managing director and became chairman of the board in 1927. 
Mattison joined Kodak during an eventful period in the company's history. Although built on products marketed by the American entrepreneur George Eastman, Kodak Limited was registered in November 1898 as a British company. In 1901, however, soon after Mattison joined, a proposal by the Treasury to tax company profits to help pay for the South African War prompted Eastman to set up the Eastman Kodak Company of New Jersey. Eastman's new company immediately acquired the stock of Kodak Limited and associated companies in Europe and America, and overall control reverted to the United States. 
Mattison's first post at Kodak was as assistant to the deputy managing director, George Davison, a distinguished landscape photographer who had been associated with the company from its earliest days. Davison was an active left-wing socialist with a reputation for being impulsive in business and cold and impersonal with his staff. He had little in common with the conservative Mattison, a precise, dignified man whose hobby was church-bell ringing. Eastman gradually lost confidence in the controversial Davison and in 1908 replaced him with an American, Charles Gifford, a man much more to Mattison's liking. Mattison was being groomed for the future and began to carry an increasing burden of the company's business, particularly during the First World War when Gifford was often away. Gifford retired in 1919 and a year later Mattison was appointed managing director. He began to assume wider responsibilities but his health failed when he developed pernicious anaemia. Although warned by colleagues that Mattison might not recover, Eastman had great respect for his abilities and to give the invalid the opportunity to regain his health, temporarily appointed the British scientist, C. E. K. Mees, in his place. The arrangement was successful; to the surprise of many, Mattison made a complete recovery and Mees was able to return to his laboratory within a year. Working closely with Eastman, Mattison played a prominent part in promoting Kodak's fortunes in Europe. Particularly important was the take-over of Charles Pathe's film company in 1927. By the end of the 1930s Kodak dominated the European motion picture market and was winning an ever increasing share of the amateur materials and equipment market. 
Mattison was unusual in showing little interest in the manufacturing or scientific side of Kodak's business and he is said rarely to have visited the Harrow factory unless accompanied by Eastman. Yet he played a critical role in helping to develop Kodak into a multinational concern and the foremost photographic manufacturing company in the world. By 1943, although still in post as chairman, he was a sick man and confined to a wheelchair. He resigned at the end of the year and died at his home, Bridge House, West Overcliffe Drive, Westbourne, Bournemouth, on 14 December 1944. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 47910


Maudslay, Reginald Walter (1871-1934), motor vehicle manufacturer, was born on 1 September 1871 at 14 Oxford Square, Paddington, the son of Athol Edward Maudslay, gentleman, and his wife, Kate, daughter of Sir Thomas Lucas, founder of a large firm of building contractors. His great-grandfather was Henry Maudslay, pioneer of marine engine building. Reginald Maudslay was educated at St David's School in Moffat, Scotland, and Marlborough College. He then secured an apprenticeship, and later an assistantship, with Sir John Wolfe Barry's London firm of civil engineers. During this period Maudslay became involved in a number of major engineering projects, from the planning and construction of Barry Dock to a survey of the West Highland Railway. 
In 1902 Maudslay abandoned his civil engineering career and, with financial support from Wolfe Barry and others, moved to Coventry where he leased a small workshop for experimental purposes. In the following year he established the Standard Motor Company in larger premises in Much Park Street from where he was able to indulge his long-time passion of motor cars. Reginald's cousin, Cyril Maudslay, was at this time managing director of the nearby Maudslay Motor Company and it may have been this family link which precipitated the move from London. The title of his cousin's firm prevented Maudslay from using the family name to identify his own vehicles. The adoption of the Standard marque appears to have been influenced by the Roman standard which adorned the lounge of Maudslay's house. Standard became a public limited company in 1914, but for most of the period from its establishment to Maudslay's death in 1934 the company was under the control of its founder. 
By 1913 Standard was one of Coventry's largest motor manufacturers with an output of some 750 vehicles per annum. During the First World War the company responded to government overtures by diversifying into airframes and aero-engines, producing in particular the Bristol Sopwith Pup fighter. This expansion of activities necessitated the purchase of 30 acres of land at nearby Canley in 1915, with a further 110 acres being acquired in 1918. Standard experienced a number of problems in the 1920s with some serious financial setbacks and a six-year period without dividends. The situation was reversed in the 1930s, partly as a result of the reorganization of production initiated by Maudslay's successor as managing director, John Paul Black, so that by 1939 Standard was responsible for almost 13 per cent of the total output of the 'Big Six' motor manufacturers, compared with 5.1 per cent at the start of the decade. 
Maudslay married on 30 January 1908 Susan Gwendolen ('b'. 1881/2), 'nee' Herbert; they had two sons and a daughter. Little is known about his private life, but he acquired the reputation of a country gentleman and was fond of inspecting the shop floor wearing a deerstalker hat and matching overcoat. Maudslay's particular contribution to motor vehicle engineering and design is also little known, though he is credited with inventing the side-entry car body in place of the tonneau, as well as the all-weather body and the Starlite sliding roof. Standard's recurring financial problems suggest that Maudslay's business judgement was sometimes at fault. In 1927, for example, he allowed the company to become over-committed in the Australian market which led eventually to the firm sustaining heavy losses. However, he also had the foresight to purchase the Canley properties, begin the move into volume production and, crucially, to recognize the talent of John Black. His other important legacy to the firm was a paternalistic and welfarist style of management which included the creation of a hardship fund for Standard workers and the provision of numerous recreational facilities at the Canley works. 
After a short illness, Maudslay died at Beaumont House, Beaumont Street, Marylebone, London, on 14 December 1934, survived by his wife. He was buried at Sherbourne. 


@@@@@


doc= 47911


Maxwell, John (1877-1940), film financier and cinema owner, was born in Scotland. He trained as a solicitor and practised in Glasgow. In 1912 he acquired an interest in a Glasgow cinema and over the next ten years built up a circuit of twenty cinemas and set up Waverley Films as the regional distributor for a London-based company, Wardour Films. In 1923 Maxwell took over Wardour and in 1925 he moved to London. Wishing to take advantage of the 'Cinematograph Films Act' of 1927, he expanded into the production side of the industry, buying out the troubled consortium responsible for building Elstree Studios, and establishing British International Pictures (BIP) in April 1927. True to its name, BIP recruited prestigious figures such as the German director E. A. Dupont, the American director Harry Lachman, and a promising young English director, Alfred Hitchcock, and attempted to make films for the international market. Maxwell was married, and he and his wife, Catherine (died 1951), had one son and six daughters. 
Unfortunately Maxwell's bold attempt to make ambitious British silent films coincided with the arrival of the 'talkies'. Maxwell responded rapidly to the change, installing American RCA sound equipment at Elstree and announcing plans for multilingual production. But when Hitchcock's modestly budgeted 'Blackmail' (1929), Britain's first talkie, proved more popular with audiences than ambitious epics such as Dupont's 'Atlantic' (1929) -- a slow-moving account of the 'Titanic' disaster made separately in English, French, and German -- Maxwell reversed his policy and began making low-budget films for the domestic market. To ensure that his films had an outlet, he began to buy up cinemas. In November 1928 he registered Associated British Cinemas (ABC) as a public company with capital of $1 million. In July 1929 it had a circuit of 80 cinemas, and by the end of 1931 this had grown to 160. In September 1933 ABC, BIP, and Wardour Films were consolidated into a single company, the Associated British Picture Corporation (ABPC). 
A year later in 1934 Maxwell made a bid for his only serious rival in the British film industry, the Ostrer brothers' Gaumont-British Picture Corporation. The bid was unsuccessful, but in October 1936 Maxwell announced that he was to acquire a majority interest in Metropolis and Bradford, the holding company which controlled Gaumont-British. However, his option on the voting shares was blocked by Twentieth Century Fox, which also had shares in and aspired to control Gaumont-British. Deadlock resulted in a court case and a Board of Trade inquiry, but Maxwell had to admit defeat and abandon his dream of dominating the British film industry. Although the Gaumont-British deal failed (it was J. Arthur Rank who finally, in 1941, gained control over the Gaumont-British empire), ABPC continued to expand. In October 1937 Maxwell acquired the 168 cinemas of the Union circuit, merging them into his ABC circuit, which with a total of 493 cinemas was now the biggest in the country. 
Some significant films emerged from Elstree but the studio never acquired the prestige of Alexander Korda's Denham, nor the popular identity of Michael Balcon's Ealing. John Maxwell was always more of a businessman than an impresario. But in the British film industry of the 1930s, plagued by alarming booms and slumps, Maxwell's achievement in building up a major cinema circuit, supplying it with a steady output of British films, and providing his shareholders with regular, if unspectacular, dividends, was a rare and considerable one. 
Maxwell was a diabetic and had been in poor health since 1937. He died on 2 October 1940 at his home, Rockwood, Brook, Witley, Surrey, aged sixty-three. The Second World War had led to the requisitioning of Elstree Studios and at the time of Maxwell's death the blitz was threatening the prospect of cinema-going in Britain. Two years later, however, cinema attendance had risen above its pre-war peak and the ABC cinema chain was making record-breaking profits. 
An appreciative, if somewhat over-laudatory, obituarist in 'The Times' noted Maxwell's 'deservedly high reputation for sound financial insight', adding that he had given the public the best pictures available, together with comfort and luxury (4 Oct 1940). 


@@@@@


doc= 47913


Bald, Robert (1776-1861), mining engineer, was born at Culross, Perthshire, one of two sons of Alexander Bald (died 1823) and his wife, Jane Christie. Alexander Bald (1783-1859) was his younger brother. The father was then colliery manager for the earl of Dundonald, and from about 1777 until his death he was employed in a similar capacity by the earl of Mar at his collieries in and around Alloa, Clackmannanshire, one of a number of rapidly growing coal-producing districts in central Scotland. 
Bald served an apprenticeship in colliery management under his father, enhancing his surveying and engineering skills under the guidance of Thomas Telford, civil engineer, whom he accompanied to Sweden to assist in surveying the route of the proposed Gotha Canal. He succeeded his father as manager of the Mar collieries in 1824. Sharing responsibility with Robert Jameson, factor for the Mar estate, and initially encouraged by Francis Miller Erskine, twenty-fifth earl of Mar ('b'. 1795), Bald embarked on an expansionary strategy for the mines he managed. This involved productivity improvements, to be achieved both by the introduction of new technology and also by more efficient labour management. Convinced that the dissipated habits of the colliers were adversely affecting labour productivity, Bald instituted a vigorous programme of social reform, which included the improvement of the colliers' accommodation. Moral reform too was attempted, with the introduction in the main mining communities of prayer meetings, which were run on lines similar to the Scottish kirk sessions, and based on the communal 'colliery court' established on the Mar estate in the mid-eighteenth century; among other duties the 'brethren' were responsible for chastising those who were drunk or profane. A paternalistic employer with radical inclinations, Bald was also heavily involved in the campaign for parliamentary reform in 1831-2. 
Labour disputes and the financial costs of Bald's programme apparently led to a breach between Bald and the trustees of the Mar estate in 1835, even though a year earlier it had been reported that under Bald's management the coal workers at Alloa colliery were 'the most orderly and well disposed class of men in Scotland' (NA Scot., GD 124/11/592/3). Similar problems led to the premature ending of a partnership Bald had joined as a lessee of collieries at Collyland, Woodlands, and Devonside. Freed of some of those ties, Bald then established himself as a full-time consultant mining engineer, based in Edinburgh from 1835, although he had been called as an expert witness during legal actions concerning coal rights as early as 1805. 
Bald was Scotland's most respected mining engineer and coal 'viewer' in the first half of the nineteenth century, and surveyed and reported on most of the country's major colliery enterprises, including those of the Bairds, the Dixons, and the Dunlops in the west of Scotland. He had an intimate knowledge of the coal industry, based on first-hand experience, and a considerable reputation, which extended to mainland Europe in both coalmining and land surveying. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1817, and was also an honorary member of the Institution of Civil Engineers, as well as of the Geological Society of London. 
Less well known is Bald's concern about female coal 'bearers', whose employment underground was a striking feature of the coal industry in the east of Scotland. He first drew attention to their condition in his invaluable 'General View of the Coal Trade in Scotland' (1808), the most accessible account of the coal industry in Scotland for this period; and he is credited with assisting in the campaign to reform employment abuses in coalmines promoted by Lord Ashley, later seventh earl of Shaftesbury. The employment of women and young children underground at Alloa colliery ceased some time before the legislation of 1842 which abolished the practice. Bald is not known to have married; he died, aged eighty-six, at his home in Alloa, on 28 December 1861. 


@@@@@


doc= 47915


Beaumont, Huntingdon (1561-1624), coal owner, was born probably at Coleorton, Leicestershire, the fourth and youngest son of Nicholas Beaumont (died 1585), and Anne (died 1581), daughter of William Saunders, of Welford, Northamptonshire. He had three brothers, the second of whom died in infancy, and two sisters. His father owned the Coleorton estate, and by exploiting its extensive coal reserves had become the largest colliery owner in the county. Described as unmarried in 1616, Beaumont must have wed shortly afterwards since he was survived by a wife, Joan, and three small children. Nothing is known of his early education, though he received a thorough training in the management of the family business: he was described in 1622 as 'a man reputed to be very skyllful in Coalworkes, having spent a great part of his life and tyme in suchlyke works' (Smith, 'Early Coal-Mining', 66). It has also been suggested that he obtained his knowledge of advanced mining technology from a visit to Germany in his youth; but it is more likely that this was acquired through a familiarity both with Agricola's renowned mining text, 'De re metallica', and with English metal-mining practices, which had been introduced into the midland coalmines from Cornwall and Derbyshire. 
The landed gentry played a key role in the rapid development of the coal industry in the sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries. Sufficient profits could be made to attract investment, but it was one of the most risky of industries. Management of profitable family mines at Coleorton and at Bedworth in Warwickshire encouraged Beaumont to seek a personal fortune, first in the larger Nottinghamshire coalfield and ultimately in the north-east, the heart of the industry. Beaumont was an ambitious gentry businessman who attempted to overcome the formidable challenges of the coal industry with boldness and flair -- to the point of recklessness, according to his critics. 
For an individual colliery owner one of the chief obstacles to business advancement in the late 1500s was that the market for coal suffered both from severe economic fluctuations and from a longer-term tendency to over-production and excessive competition. Beaumont attempted to overcome this obstacle by a variety of techniques. In the east midlands he created a local monopoly, and when this failed he attempted to tap a national market. In the north-east, however, he introduced new technology which he hoped would give the business a cost advantage over its rivals, in the short term at least. He also tried to eliminate competition and create a monopoly either by paying rivals to cease production or by buying them out. In 1599 Sir Percy Willoughby was paid $100 a year to close Foleshill colliery, which was competing with Bedworth (mined by Beaumont jointly with his brother Thomas ['see below']). As a result Bedworth dominated the Warwickshire coal market with an annual output of about 20,000 tons a year. In 1601 Beaumont took over control of Wollaton colliery in Nottinghamshire. He paid the same gentry rival 2's'. a rook on sales and two years later gained control of the neighbouring and competing Strelley mines by leasing them from Sir John Byron. In 1604, in an attempt to maintain prices and profitability in the face of trade depression, Wollaton colliery was closed and production became concentrated at Strelley. Consideration was then given to the possibility of purchasing and 'laying down' four other competing mines. However, the plan to 'ingrosse or overthrowe most of the best coalmines in the countree' (Smith, 'Early Coal-Mining', 68) was not implemented, probably because of insufficient capital, and was soon superseded by an attempt to break through the ceiling on regional sales by entering the largest single market, that of the metropolis, which was dominated by its coastal trade with the north-east. Coal was to be shipped down the River Trent to Hull and thence, like Newcastle coal, down the coast to London. In July 1604 Beaumont entered into partnership with Sir Percival Willoughby, London merchant John Bate, and Hugh Lenton, a Newark merchant, to deliver 7000 loads each year to Nottingham Bridges for transportation down the Trent to London. A number of boats were purchased for the purpose, but the scheme was defeated by the cost of trans-shipment from the land-locked Strelley colliery; coal from Strelley could not profitably be sold for less than $1 a ton in London, which compared unfavourably with Newcastle coal at 15's'. Even after the construction of Britain's first wagon way, for 2 miles of the journey to the Trent (from Strelley through Wollaton to Wollaton Lane, Lenton), the price differential remained. 
Following the failure of these marketing strategies in Nottinghamshire, Beaumont determined in 1605 to exploit the London market by the alternative method of becoming one of the foremost colliery owners in the north-east. As William Gray in his 'Chorographia' of 1649 put it: 'Master Beaumont, a gentleman of great ingenuity and rare parts, adventured into our mines with his twenty thousand pounds; who brought with him many rare engines, not known then in these parts, as the art to boore with iron rods to try the deepnes and thickness of the cole, rare engines to draw water out of the pits; waggons with one horse to carry down water from the pits to the staithes to the river etc. ('History of Northumberland', p. 228)' Beaumont acquired the leases of mines at Bedlington and also of mines and salt pans at Cowpen and Bebside, in partnership with three London merchants, Robert and William Angell, and Robert Bowyer, and he took up residence at Bebside Hall. By 1609 the partnership had expanded to include Edward Rotherham, a London draper, and John Bate. The partners invested $1000 each, but Beaumont, despite his expertise and talent for technological innovation, 'could not bring the workes to any perfection' (Smith, 'Early Coal-Mining', 70). In 1612 Beaumont and his nephew-in-law, Sir John Ashburnham (died 1620), purchased the partnership by agreeing to pay the others $1050 a year for the remaining term of the leases. They defaulted on the first payment and the enterprise was abandoned altogether in 1614 as a total loss. 
Beaumont the innovator now sought to overcome the limitations of the market by the use of economies of scale to increase production at the Strelley mine. He determined to capture as large a slice of the Nottinghamshire, east Leicestershire, and Trent valley markets as possible by introducing round-the-clock working; double shifts and double corfs replaced the twelve-hour single-shift, single-corf system, which had been the traditional practice at the coalfield. This new system meant that four times as much coal per day could be produced, and an unprecedented annual output of over 20,000 tons was achieved. Despite its competitive price, depressed trading conditions prevented all the coal from being sold, and profits were insufficient to keep Beaumont's creditors at bay indefinitely. In the spring of 1618, the partners in the northern venture took action against Beaumont and Ashburnham for failing to pay their instalments, and they seized control of Strelley to work the mine for their own profit. In October 1618 Beaumont was committed to Nottingham prison until his debts should be paid, and he died from an unknown illness, without gaining his freedom from captivity, on 17 March 1624. He died a bankrupt, and was buried at the expense of his former business partner, Sir Percy Willoughby, at Bilborough, Nottingham, where he had been latterly residing. 
Huntingdon Beaumont has been characterized, perhaps unjustly, as a reckless adventurer who squandered the family fortune on desperate business gambles. Yet he should be seen rather as an ambitious younger son of a gentry family who, since he would not inherit the estate, acted entrepreneurially. He deployed impressive technical and managerial skills, which were used to the utmost in a hazardous industry that was subject to the twin dangers of the physical exhaustion of the product and of market instability. These ultimately defeated Beaumont's expertise and drive, particularly in the north-eastern venture in which he and Sir John Ashburnham 'were utterly overthrown and in a manner whooly buried the estate in the said coalmynes' (Smith, 'Early Coal-Mining', 80). 
Huntingdon's brother, 
The brothers' joint business activity commenced in 1597 when coal was leased from the crown at Bedworth and Griff, Warwickshire, at which time a large mine was opened at Bedworth. To guarantee the profitability of their heavy investment the brothers began purchasing coal reserves in adjoining estates, and by 1602 they had 'engrossed all the mynes neere thereunto adjoyning, six myles compas on everye side' (Nef, 1.15). With a virtual monopoly of the north Warwickshire market, the mine made a profit of at least $3000 a year, but it was abandoned following extensive flooding in 1610. By then, $10,000 had been invested in the mine, much of it borrowed from other members of the family, including the third brother, Francis. None the less, Sir Thomas continued to support Huntingdon's mining activities. In 1610 he took over the lease of the coal at Strelley, to work it for his own profit until the $2000 which he had lent Huntingdon (probably for his Bedlington enterprise) had been repaid. Sir Thomas made strenuous efforts to increase output and profits by expanding the market in the Trent valley, but the loan had still not been repaid in full by the time of his death on 27 November 1614. He was succeeded by his eldest son and heir, Sir Henry Beaumont, who was never able to recover the debt. Sir Thomas had found, like his brother, that investment in coalmining ultimately meant that 'Instead of dreining the water, ther pockets are dreined' (Stone, 340). 


@@@@@


doc= 47916


Beck, Simon Adams (1803-1883), gas industrialist and lawyer, was baptized at Condover, Shropshire, on 25 July 1803, the son of James Beck of Allesley Park, Warwickshire, and his wife, Sarah Coker. He trained as a lawyer and in 1829 married Sarah Ann, second daughter of Ralph Price (1780-1860) of Sydenham. Beck was elected clerk and solicitor of the Ironmongers' Company in 1834, the same year that Price became master. Beck brought capable management skills to bear on the affairs of the company, dealing with its charitable work, watching over its property holdings, which were increasing greatly in value, and also dealing with the various commissions, boards, and departments interested in the affairs of the old London livery companies. 
In 1848 Beck added to his duties those of a director of the Gas Light and Coke Company, which served parts of the cities of London and Westminster. It seems probable that Beck owed his election to the desire of the company to disarm criticism by appointing a respected City figure to the board; just as later, when parliament made difficulties with private bills put forward by Gas Light and Coke, two MPs were elected to the board. At that time gas companies were very unpopular. They were seen as exploiting their position by providing inadequate supplies of poor-quality gas at excessive prices and creating a nuisance with their gasworks. In 1848 the frustration of the corporation of the City of London was such that it considered seeking compulsory powers to municipalize gas supply. Beck was closely involved in negotiations with other London gas companies to present a common front in opposition to this threat. Rather than proceeding with municipalization, the corporation settled for encouraging the formation of a competing company, the Great Central, the effect of whose inauguration was to bring prices down from 7's'. per 1000 cubic feet to 4's'. within a few years. 
Beck became deputy governor of the Gas Light and Coke Company in 1852 and governor in 1860. He gave considerable impetus to rationalizing both its commercial and its engineering activities. Its three small works, two in the City and a third at Westminster, were without access to cheap, water-borne coal supplies, and Beck inspired the drive to concentrate production on a riverside site at which colliers could unload directly. After considering various options, including that of the old Millbank prison (where the Tate Gallery was subsequently erected) the company settled on a 150 acre site owned by the Ironmongers' Company on the Thames at Barking, Essex. The huge new Beckton works, which began production there in 1870, not only resolved Gas Light and Coke's production difficulties, but also enabled the company to offer bulk supplies to other operations with similar problems. 
The offer of a secure gas supply proved an irresistible lure when Gas Light and Coke offered full amalgamation to neighbouring companies. In 1869 the company provided only a seventh of London's gas, but this increased to two-thirds after a series of takeovers, including that of the Imperial company, which in 1869 was twice as large as Gas Light and Coke itself. The takeover of Imperial in 1876 provided the occasion for Beck's retirement. His leadership was sorely missed, however, as his successors mishandled a proposed amalgamation with the south London gas companies. These opted to merge instead with the South Metropolitan Gas Company, under the leadership of its formidable chief engineer, George Livesey. This engendered a rivalry between the two large London gas-producing companies that persisted until nationalization in 1949. 
Beck had the reputation of being a benevolent and fair employer, but only among compliant workers. Following a strike in 1859 he refused to take back any union members. After another strike in 1872, the protest leaders were convicted of conspiracy and sentenced to twelve months' imprisonment; none of the strikers was re-employed. In organizational matters Beck achieved results through patient negotiation, and the short obituary notice in the 'Journal of Gas Lighting' (6 March 1883) that described his governorship as 'a period of inaction' was wide of the mark. His metier was that of a manager rather than an entrepreneur. 
After his retirement from Gas Light and Coke Beck remained clerk to the Ironmongers' Company until shortly before his death on 26 February 1883, at Cheam in Surrey; this position passed to his son, Ralph Coker Adams Beck, and thereafter to two further generations of Becks. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 47917


Beddington, John Louis (1893-1959), publicity manager, was born on 30 January 1893, at Barkston Gardens, South Kensington, London, one of three sons of Charles Lindsay Beddington ('b'. 1866), barrister, and his wife, Stella Goldschmidt de Libantia. His family were Jewish and came originally from Alsace, but they made a great deal of money out of the 'rag trade' in London. Their surname was Moses, but in the mid-1850s Jack's grandfather changed it to Beddington. The family firm of H. E. and M. Moses was wound up in the 1880s, and later generations of the family had no connection with the clothing industry. 
Jack Beddington was educated at Wellington College and at Balliol College, Oxford, where he did no work but was 'ecstatically happy' (Ullstein, 15-17) and was ploughed in Greats. He enlisted in the King's Own Yorkshire light infantry at the outbreak of the First World War and served until 1919, though severely wounded at Ypres. On 31 January 1918, at Holy Trinity, Brompton, Beddington married Olivia Margaret, daughter of Arthur Newton Streatfeild, and they had a son and a daughter. 
After the war Beddington worked for the Asiatic Petroleum Company (the Far Eastern arm of Royal Dutch-Shell) in Shanghai, until he was invalided home in 1928. In London, on his complaining of the poor standard of advertising, he was promptly given the job of publicity manager under the general manager, F. L. Halford, taking on the same role in Shell-Mex and BP Ltd when that joint company was set up in 1932 to market petrol and other oil products for Shell and BP (though the BP advertising was never as successful as that produced for Shell). Continuing in the pioneering tradition of Frank Pick at London Transport, Beddington became famous for the posters and press campaigns created under his aegis. 
Advertising posters had from the early 1920s been fixed onto Shell lorries, and Beddington made this 'lorrybill' series his own, creating for Shell a strong identity both with art and with the countryside. Fine artists as well as graphic designers were used, unknown as well as established. In 1932 Beddington gave Graham Sutherland his first commission. Other artists included Paul Nash and Ben Nicholson. His experimental approach traded uniformity for the spontaneous individuality of numerous artists. An exhibition catalogue later described the Shell and London Transport posters as 'glittering islands in a becalmed sea of unrelieved banality' (Guyatt, foreword). Beddington was also responsible for the injection of wit and humour into the company's press campaigns, using artists such as Rex Whistler and Edward Bawden. He was receptive to new ideas and, as a result of an approach by John Betjeman, the 'Shell County Guides' were published, the first of which appeared in 1934. 
The advertising could be self-indulgent, Beddington himself even appearing in one press advertisement -- one of a series advertising the advertising. However, his judgement though shrewd was not condescending, and it was perhaps in this ability to combine quality with popular appeal that his supreme talent lay. His policies gained for Shell-Mex and BP a reputation for enlightened patronage and sophisticated advertising, the lorrybills idea in particular provoking much praise for not cluttering the countryside with hoardings, a contemporary obsession. Beddington was influential in breathing vitality and vision into the British advertising and design world, where art and commerce were seldom seen to mix. 
Flamboyant, dapper, and with a keen wit, Beddington was businesslike and brusque. However, he appreciated talent, and his kindness and encouragement to young painters and writers were well known. In 1936 he was appointed assistant general manager of Shell-Mex and BP Ltd, keeping his position as publicity manager but taking on some responsibility for staff matters, and when the Second World War began he was appointed joint manager of the staff department of the Petroleum Board. In April 1940 he was appointed director of the films division at the Ministry of Information, where he remained until 1946. Among the documentaries produced in his time there were 'Desert Victory' (1943) and 'The True Glory' (1945). Beddington also coined the anti-gossip slogan, 'Be like Dad: keep Mum'. He was made a CBE in 1943. 
After the war Beddington joined Colman Prentis and Varley Ltd, an advertising agency, and became deputy chairman, a post he held until his death. An honorary fellow of the Society of Industrial Artists and of the Royal Society of Arts, and a governor of the Foundation for Visual Education, he was also a member of the National Advisory Council on Art Education, and of the council of the Royal College of Art. 
Jack Beddington died suddenly of a heart attack on 13 April 1959, aged sixty-six, at 22 Knightsbridge Court, London. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 47920


Bradshaigh, Sir Roger, first baronet (1628-1684), politician and colliery owner, was born at Haigh Hall, Haigh near Wigan in Lancashire, on 13 January 1628, the eldest surviving son of James Bradshaigh (1598-1631) of Haigh and his wife, Ann, fourth daughter of Sir William Norris of Speke. James Bradshaigh died before his father, whose estate was taken into crown wardship on his death in 1641, passing to Roger in 1649. The Bradshaighs were adamant Roman Catholics: four of Roger Bradshaigh's uncles were Jesuits in the English mission, and a fifth was a Carmelite; two aunts and a sister were nuns at Gravelines and Rouen. However the court of wards and liveries put Roger under the guardianship of protestants John Fleetwood of Penwortham and William Radcliffe of Manchester, and in 1641 he became an Anglican 'by his choice, not by his chance' (HoP, 'Commons'). He was entrusted to the earl of Derby, with whose son he was educated in the Isle of Man during the first civil war, when the parliamentarian sympathy of Radcliffe combined with the Bradshaighs' royalism to secure Haigh from any intrusion. In 1647 Bradshaigh married Elizabeth (died 1695), daughter of William Pennington of Muncaster. They were to have seven children, two of whom survived, including his heir, Sir Roger Bradshaigh, second baronet (1649-1686). Bradshaigh's wife was devoutly Anglican, and 'his own religion is such that he is no friend at all to us [Roman Catholics]' (Nicholas Blundell, quoted in Hawkes, 39), but he was imprisoned at Chester on suspicion of royalist sympathies in 1651. Assurances given to secure his release prevented his joining the earl of Derby's support of the Pretender's invasion, crushed by Lilburne at the battle of Wigan Lane (on the Haigh estate) on 25 August 1651. 
Bradshaigh was heavily engaged with the Lancashire commission of forfeited estates on behalf of kinsmen and other local families in the 1650s. Seven of his relatives or wards were threatened with or suffered dispossession, and Bradshaigh organized purchases for some of the latter. In 1660 he was elected to the pre-Restoration parliament, knighted on the accession of Charles II, and appointed a deputy to the earl of Derby as lord lieutenant of Lancashire. A fine soldier, he was an energetic captain of a troop of horse and responsible for reorganizing the county militia. His assiduity in pursuit of 'phanaticks' and conventicles balanced Derby's firm action against papists, whom Derby accused Bradshaigh of protecting. Certainly he remained a close friend of a number of prominent Roman Catholics, including Viscount Molyneux of Croxteth, the 'popish recusant convict' created lord lieutenant of Lancashire by James II in 1687, appointing twelve 'convicted papists' as deputies (Kenyon MS 611). The duplicity of the Lancashire lieutenancy in the 1660s and 1670s ensured reasonable order in a disaffected county renowned for extreme Catholic and puritan sympathies, continually unsettled by rumoured rebellions and plots. Bradshaigh's role in post-Restoration government was acknowledged in his appointment as high sheriff of Lancashire and to a baronetcy, pursued to indulge his courtier son, in 1679. He was MP for Lancashire from 1660 to 1678, and also served as mayor of Wigan in 1661 and 1681. 
Bradshaigh's forebears included notable scholars, poets, and divines. However, although he had a good library and was an enthusiastic correspondent of Lancastrian friends in London, who sent him the latest fashions in books and clothes, Sir Roger was businesslike and practical. He leased a glassworks to John Blackburne of Westby; he had a pottery where John Dwight, who patented porcelain-making processes at the Fulham pottery in 1671 and 1684, worked for a time; and he built the forge and slitting mill which were the embryo of the Haigh ironworks (which, with the colliery, formed the nucleus of the gigantic Wigan Coal and Iron Company in the nineteenth century). 
The colliery was the basis of Haigh's other industries and of the estate's fortunes. It was renowned for fuel from the cannel seam, which carried a high premium in the market. The seam was deep, given the current mining technology, and plagued by water and gas. Sir Roger was responsible for bringing it into secure and continuous heavy production, and for establishing Haigh colliery as one of the largest and the longest-worked in Lancashire. He formulated the Haigh colliery orders, which ensured that operations could be systematically supervised and developed and, according to subsequent testimony by the third baronet, he spent 'every shilling he could lay his hands on' on the great Haigh sough, which he surveyed and engineered personally (quoted in Cox, 124). Two-thirds of a mile long and 147 feet below ground at its deepest, this tunnel of 6 feet x 4 feet with ten ventilation pits took from 1652 to 1670 to construct and cost a great deal of money. It drained vast coal reserves and provided knowledge (meticulously recorded 'for my posterity' in the orders) about many coal seams, including the cannel, 'the root, basis and stamina' of Haigh (earl of Crawford and Balcarres, 19). 
Bradshaigh died at Chester on 31 March 1684, and was buried at Wigan. His wife survived him. His heir, the second baronet, died three years later. Despite Sir Roger's heavy capital investment, income from the colliery carried the estate through the deaths without financial jeopardy. Widows' jointures amounting to $660 per annum were paid for many years by his grandson, who by 1729 was drawing an income of $1900 a year from the Haigh estate, over half of which came from the cannel. The sough which made this possible was 'the greatest engineering achievement in England down to the building of the Eddystone lighthouse', according to the twenty-eighth earl of Crawford (Hawkes, 19). It served collieries in Haigh and Aspull for 300 years until mining ceased, and still runs freely. The three generations of Bradshaighs who followed Sir Roger spent most of their time at court. The male line failed in 1770, when the Haigh estates and businesses passed through an heiress to Alexander Lindsay, sixth earl of Balcarres, in 1780. 


@@@@@


doc= 47921


Bridgeman, Sir Maurice Richard (1904-1980), oil industrialist, was born at 13 Mansfield Street, Marylebone, London, on 26 January 1904, the third son of William Clive Bridgeman (1864-1935), a Conservative politician who was created Viscount Bridgeman in 1929, and his wife, Caroline Beatrix Bridgeman (1873-1961), a political activist and churchwoman, and elder daughter of the Hon. Cecil Thomas Parker. Robert Clive Bridgeman was his elder brother. Both parents were of aristocratic birth, W. C. Bridgeman's grandfather being the second earl of Bradford and his wife's grandfather being the sixth earl of Macclesfield. 
Maurice Bridgeman was educated at Eton College, where he was captain of the oppidans, captain of the eleven, and president of Pop. He followed in his father's footsteps in going to Trinity College, Cambridge, but where the father had been a classical scholar the son read science and, despite his considerable intellectual ability, left without taking a degree. Eager to join the world of commerce and industry, in 1926 he accepted an offer of employment (at a salary of $5 a week, then the best on offer) with the Anglo-Persian Oil Company (renamed the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company in 1935 and the British Petroleum Company in 1954). At that time the company (established in 1909) owned the concession for oil exploration and production in most of Persia and was expanding its operations rapidly. 
Bridgeman's first assignment was to accompany as secretary the deputy chairman, Sir John Cadman, to Persia for the shah's coronation. Afterwards he was posted to Persia and spent some time there before recurrent jaundice forced his return to Britannic House, the company's head office in London. In 1933 he married Diana Mary Erica Wilson (died 1979), younger daughter of Humphrey Minto Wilson. The Bridgemans had a family of four daughters. 
Luck and coincidence, Bridgeman said, had twice played an important role in his career, firstly in 1926 when he deputized for Cadman's usual secretary, and secondly in 1934 when he was unexpectedly sent to take charge of the company's New York office. Both appointments brought him, early in his corporate life, close to the centre of events and power. He served in New York for three years and the knowledge of and contacts in the American oil industry that he acquired then were to be immensely useful. 
The government controlled the oil industry during the Second World War and from 1939 to 1946 Bridgeman occupied a succession of government posts: in 1939 he was petroleum adviser to the Ministry of Economic Warfare; he was assistant secretary in the petroleum department and joint secretary to the Oil Control Board from 1940 to 1942; a two-year spell as petroleum adviser to the government of India followed; and finally he served from 1944 to 1946 as principal assistant secretary to the petroleum division of the Ministry of Fuel and Power. He was honoured in 1946 when he was made CBE. 
Resuming his career with the company after the war, in 1952 Bridgeman was appointed managing director of the company's exploration subsidiary, D'Arcy Exploration Company. He was thus in a most significant position at a critical time in the company's affairs when, in 1951, it lost its concessionary position in Iran, forcing a radical review of the direction of exploration effort. Bridgeman believed that the company must diversify its sources of oil and he was instrumental in directing exploration to other areas, resulting in discoveries in Libya, Nigeria, the North Sea, and Alaska. 
Bridgeman was appointed to the main board of British Petroleum (BP) in 1956; he became deputy chairman in 1957 and chairman in July 1960. During his nine years as chairman the company made considerable progress in diversifying its activities, a strategy close to Bridgeman's heart. BP had started to manufacture chemicals in a joint venture with the Distillers Company soon after the end of the war, and in 1967 it bought out Distillers's share; British Petroleum Chemicals then became a wholly owned subsidiary, the second largest chemicals business in the UK. The company also discovered and developed a process which converted oil to protein, forming the basis for a nutrition business. In the USA it began the negotiations which would lead to a considerable presence for BP in that continent, through the acquisition of the Standard Oil Company of Ohio (Sohio) -- completed in the time of Bridgeman's successor. 
Bridgeman was a consistent and fierce critic of British governments' taxation policies 'vis-a-vis' both the oil companies and the individual. His aloof manner concealed a keen business sense and he was a tough negotiator. He travelled widely throughout the 1960s, visiting all parts of the company regularly; his kindliness and concern for people won him great respect. Bridgeman's commitment to BP, however, left him little time to pursue his other interests of fishing, gardening, shooting, ornithology, and the arts. Moreover, he considered the chairmanship of BP to be a full-time job and took on relatively few other responsibilities. His long-term interest in the Middle East was reflected in his membership of the Advisory Council on Middle East Trade from 1958 to 1963 and in his acting as president of the Middle East Association from 1956 to 1976. He was chairman of the public appeal to fund the creation of Fitzwilliam College, Cambridge, in 1962, and the college made him an honorary fellow in 1967; Leeds University made him an honorary LLD in 1969. 
Bridgeman was knighted in 1964; he was made a knight of St John in 1961, a knight grand cross of the Italian Republic in 1966, and grand officer, order of Orange Nassau, in 1968. He received the Iranian order of Homayun in 1968 and the Cadman memorial medal in 1969. He retired from BP in 1969 and spent the next two years as a member of the Industrial Reorganization Corporation. After suffering from Parkinson's disease Sir Maurice Bridgeman died of heart failure on 18 June 1980 at 4 Lansdowne Crescent, Kensington, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 47923


Bruce, Sir George (c.1550-1625), mining industrialist and landowner, was probably born about 1550, the youngest of the three sons of Sir Edward Bruce (1505-1565) of Blairhall near Culross, in Perthshire, and Alison Reid of Aitkenhead, a sister of the bishop of Orkney. Sometimes described in documents as a 'merchant' or 'burgess of Culross', Bruce came from an established and well-connected landed family. His brother Edward Bruce was a senior figure in the Scottish legal and political establishment, ennobled as Lord Kinloss for his part in securing the throne of England for James VI in 1603. Both brothers were privy councillors. George himself filled a number of important offices, including member of the Scottish parliament for Culross from 1593. He married Margaret, daughter of Archibald Primrose, of Burnbrae, and Margaret Blaw, and they had three sons and five daughters. 
In 1575 Bruce was allowed to become the lessee of the former monastic coalworks at Culross on the shore of the Firth of Forth, west of Dunfermline, 'for his great knowledge and skill in machinery such like as no other man has in these days; and for his being the likeliest person to re-establish again the Colliery of Culross' (Cunningham, 53). Bruce used innovative mechanical drainage, ventilation, and haulage techniques -- notably an 'Egyptian wheel' -- to solve the problems of exploiting deep and under-sea coalmines. In addition he ran saltworks which burned coal to evaporate sea water. In their day, Bruce's mines and saltworks were a tourist attraction, probably the largest and certainly the most technically advanced such enterprise in Scotland. John Taylor, 'the water poet', penned an epic poem about their operation in 1618. James VI knighted Bruce, probably in 1610, and visited his house and industrial businesses in 1617. Bruce's house or 'great lodging', and several other buildings in the picturesque burgh of Culross, were subsequently acquired by the National Trust for Scotland and opened to the public. 
While no commercial records survive, Bruce's business was clearly profitable, to judge from his sprawling, attractive mansion (built in stages between 1597 and 1611) and from the impressive tomb in the Culross Abbey church: testaments to the benefits enjoyed by a successful industrialist even in an age when most wealth came from agriculture. George Bruce was also a shipowner and merchant, as well as a substantial landowner or 'laird'. His principal lands, purchased in 1602, were at nearby Carnock. With Bruce's help Culross became an important trading community and was elevated to the status of a royal burgh in 1588. Shortly before his death there in 1625 Bruce's showpiece enterprise was largely destroyed by a great storm, but Culross enjoyed commercial and industrial significance for a further century before the baton of economic development passed elsewhere in Scotland. 


@@@@@


doc= 47927


Clerk, Sir John, of Penicuik, first baronet (1649/50-1722), landowner and coal owner, was born probably at Penicuik in Edinburghshire, the son of John Clerk (1611-1674), merchant and art collector, and Mary ('bap'. 1630, died in or before 1668), the daughter of Sir William Gray of Pittendrum. Clerk's father traded profitably as a merchant in Paris between 1634 and 1646, when he returned to Scotland and lived as a country gentleman. In 1646 he bought the barony of Penicuik, and had his son educated at home to prevent him acquiring immoral or profligate habits. Clerk succeeded his father as laird of Penicuik in 1674, and it was in that year that he married his first wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Henry Hendersone of Elvingston (Haddingtonshire), a doctor of physic. Clerk subsequently extended his estates in Edinburghshire by purchasing further land, including the barony of Lasswade (adjacent to Penicuik) from Sir John Nicolson in 1696. He was a member of the Scottish parliament (separate from that of England until 1707) for Edinburghshire from 1690 to 1702, served as a lieutenant-colonel in the militia, and (after 1707) was a justice of the peace for the shire. He was created a baronet on 24 March 1679. 
Clerk was a traditional landowner, but he was also an exponent of new agricultural organization and techniques, notably the consolidation of landholdings, soil improvements, and the commutation of payments in kind to money rents. To pay off the large debt incurred to buy the Lasswade estate, he began more systematically to exploit its extensive coal deposits. In consequence of dealing with the technical problems of extraction he also sought to increase output in an uncertain and competitive industry through new patterns of work discipline. In response to shortages of skilled labour in the coal and salt industries, a statute of 1606 (not repealed until 1799) had bound Scottish colliers for life to the owner of the coal, giving them the legal status of serfs but at the same time making them difficult to control by purely economic means such as wages. The special status of the colliers, and certain prominent cultural features such as shared leisure, contributed to their strong sense of identity. 
As a coal owner Clerk treated his workers well in spite of their servile position. He insisted that his overseers and other tenants dealt fairly with the colliers and he provided housing for the workers and education for their children. Relations between Clerk and his employees were a good deal more amicable than those which obtained under the second baronet. However, in return Clerk demanded regular hard work coupled with adherence to strict Calvinist tenets of sobriety and morality. Himself an ardent Calvinist, apparently untroubled by doubt about his own rectitude, he waged a tireless campaign with the help of the local church against what he saw as the colliers' wanton idleness, their fondness for drink, their profane and brutal behaviour, and their dishonesty in exploiting the perquisites of their employment. One of his first acts as the new feudal lord of Lasswade was to proscribe sabbath breaking, profanity, and drunkenness among all his workers and tenants. He himself gave up alcohol around 1710 to help his gout and other ailments. Clerk took a close personal interest in mineral exploitation and was a source of advice to fellow coal owners in the Forth basin where most contemporary pits were located. 
Clerk and his wife, Elizabeth, had seven children, including his heir, the second baronet, Sir John Clerk of Penicuik (1676-1755). After Elizabeth's early death at the age of twenty-five he remained a widower for nearly a decade. He then married Christian, daughter of the Revd James Kilpatrick of Carrington (Edinburghshire), with whom he had nine more children. Having managed his affairs with great frugality, on his death he was a substantial landowner in the richest part of Scotland and had provided well for his surviving children. 
In his 'Memoirs' the second baronet wrote that his father had 'left a great many journals and writings under his hand which will, I hope, bear testimony to the regard he always had for religion, vertue and honesty' ('Memoirs', 8). Although a man with 'no great humour of talking', these manuscripts reveal that, in Clerk's desire systematically to generate profits and regenerate men, he combined different strands of early modern Scottish life. A product of his age in his religious and moral outlook, he was also an important transitional figure in terms of the regulatory framework that he sought to impose on his labour force (and akin to the iron manufacturer Abraham Crowley (1658-1713)). A small but well-built man, Sir John Clerk died peacefully at Penicuik House in March 1722, aged seventy-two. 


@@@@@


doc= 47930


Dagnall, Charles (d. 1774?), colliery owner and ivory comb maker, is a figure about whom biographical details are sparse. He lived at Eccleston on the edge of what became the industrial town of St Helens in Lancashire. Many people with the name of Dagnall made hair combs throughout the eighteenth century both in Liverpool and inland around Prescot, first using horn and then ivory imported from Africa. The comb maker Samuel Dagnall was often registered in St Helens chapelry, as were his sons James and Thomas, and Henry Dagnall, a contemporary of Samuel. The only entries at St Helens for Charles Dagnall, ivory comb maker, record the births of his daughters Ann and Margaret in 1736 and 1737. Marriages of Charles Dagnall to Hannah Tickle, registered in Huyton parish in 1724, and to Alice Hill, registered in Liverpool in 1735, were both within the area of the comb-making trade, and may refer to the same person; but his birth and death, the birth of his daughter Rachel, and the birth and death of his son James (who died in 1772 after inheriting $350 from John Tickle) went unregistered. Knowledge of Dagnall depends largely on ten letters written between 1 June 1754 and 9 May 1763, which give a vignette of the vicissitudes and personality of an irascible early modern manufacturer. 
In 1746 Dagnall leased the coal beneath land owned by George Rice, Henry Seddon, and Basil Thomas Eccleston, from whom he also leased a 23 acre pastoral holding with a comb shop. The lease provided full rights to enter farm tenants' land in the furtherance of mining (but not, as in later leases, with specified recompense for or restitution after damage). The first recorded steam engine in what was to become St Helens was installed by Dagnall, and things went smoothly until 1753, when he sought to renew the lease. A higher rent was asked, which Dagnall refused. He continued mining at the old rent, but raised the price of his coal from 2died to 3died per hundredweight. The colliery's water problems increased costs, took power from the miller, who 'plagued' Dagnall in consequence, and flooded and spoiled farmland; the tenants responded by filling pits and interfering with colliery drainage works when damages were refused. 
A new lease was drawn up at the higher rent in 1755, but Dagnall still did not sign, and in 1757 he stopped all payment, though he continued to mine and neglected to fill abandoned pits. In his letters Dagnall protested against 'ill youmered' third parties, the state of the comb trade and water problems, and blustered that it was unwise to pursue claims against him. Although he had 'often wondered that God suffers them so long' that opposed him, he pointed out that Richard Farrar 'never dode well after' meddling with his drainage works, and that 'God took away his life in a little time after'; John Willcock had 'not prospered very well since [abusing me] for he had liked a suffer death'; and of both Mr Chaddock and Mr Deane, who made the same error, Dagnall noted that 'death was his End' (Wrightington MSS, D/D Wr 2755). 
Basil Eccleston's initial tolerance of Dagnall may have been because they were both Roman Catholic non-jurors. Attempts to arrange meetings were frustrated, and proposed arbitrators (prominent Roman Catholics among them) refused to act, perhaps because they already knew something about Dagnall. He demurred at one such suggestion because 'as to chuseing atorneys I think the writeings between you & me mentions onest men to chuse [and] I heard Late Mr. Geo. Potter say he thought it was nex to imposable for a torney to be onest' (ibid.). Dagnall did not pay the $185 for which Eccleston sued him in the palatinate court in 1760, disagreed with the $154 13's'. fixed by further arbitration in 1762, and was offered a settlement at $125 15's'. 6died in 1763 (TNA: PRO, PL 6/82/27). It is unlikely that Dagnall paid the debt. 
By 1759 Dagnall had opened two other collieries, one with a steam engine, but they both failed. By 1766 his affairs were in the hands of assignees, and he was declared bankrupt with debts of $2000 in 1770. Dagnall's death probably occurred at Eccleston in 1774, the year in which a law suit was brought against his heirs by his bankruptcy trustees, from whom Dagnall had withheld his late son's inheritance. 


@@@@@


doc= 47931


Dent, Frederick James (1905-1973), research chemist, was born on 12 October 1905 at Horbury in Yorkshire, the son of Frederick Dent and his wife, Sarah Liddle Pearson. His father had been a talented and inventive professional photographer who, after his business failed, became an engineer supervising the installation of telephone exchanges; later he was an engineering inspector in the civil service based in Leeds. Dent's mother came from a seafaring family; she won a scholarship and became a teacher. 
Dent had an outstanding school career at the Leeds Boys' Modern School, where he became head boy. He had intended to follow an artistic career, but towards the end of his time at school he was persuaded to turn towards science with such good effect that he was awarded two scholarships, enabling him to enter the department of fuel at Leeds University. In 1927 he obtained first-class honours, the LeBlanc medal, and a postgraduate scholarship. As there had been close links between the university and the gas industry since the early years of the century, it was natural that Dent should undertake research on carbonization for his PhD, which was awarded in 1929. 
Following this, Dent was appointed research chemist by the joint research board of Leeds University and the Institution of Gas Engineers. He spent several years investigating the cyclical water-gas process of making gas from coke. Hearing in 1935 of the new German Lurgi process for gasification of lignite, Dent turned his attention to the direct gasification of coal under high pressure. This work progressed well but was interrupted by the war and he had to turn his attention to the synthesis of methane. On 1 January 1942 he married Jean Marie Macvean, and they had one son and one daughter. 
Dent's prospects were transformed by the nationalization of the gas industry in 1949. He was appointed head of one of the industry's research stations, with both staff and resources, and was responsible for work on high-pressure gasification. This was the start of an extremely fruitful period of research under his inspiration, at first into coal gasification and later, when oil supplies became widely available, into the direct conversion of oil into gas. Processes developed under his leadership include the catalytic rich gas (CRG) process, using naphtha, and the gas recycle hydrogenator (GRH), which could use other oil fractions. These processes were flexible and cheap and could produce either a coal-gas equivalent or a substitute natural gas (SNG). They were therefore of great interest wherever gas was supplied. At the time of his death, Dent's CRG process was being used widely in the USA, Japan, and South America, as well as in the UK, incidentally earning substantial royalties for the British gas industry. Dent and his team, to whom he gave generous credit, were responsible for numerous scientific papers and patent specifications for gas-making processes. 
Dent was notable for his ability not only to visualize chemical processes but also to design the hardware to transform them into process technology on an industrial scale. He was a prodigious worker and hard taskmaster who nevertheless managed to endue his colleagues with his own unbounded enthusiasm for the tasks in hand. Despite having spent much of his life working on coal, in his fifties he had the vision to be able to turn with equal success to oil gasification, producing results that were of even greater significance to the industry. By nature a hands-on researcher, he was less at home with the routines of managing a large research establishment. He was appointed OBE in 1958 and was elected FRS in 1967, the year of his retirement. 
Dent's enthusiastic nature was manifested not only in his work but also in the leisure activities into which he threw himself. He was an accomplished photographer, and gained an abiding love of the sea after he was introduced to sailing by a colleague at Poole during the war. Family holidays were spent in his 'Blue Jay', a cutter built in 1926, exploring the south coast and, later, Normandy and Brittany. After his retirement he severed all connections with the gas industry. He left Britain and sailed past Gibraltar into the Mediterranean, to Malta, where he set up home, and to the Greek islands. He returned only briefly in 1971 to receive the prestigious MacRobert award from Prince Philip at Buckingham Palace. He died on 5 October 1973 at his home, 13 Valley View Court, Zaccheus Street, Maida, Malta, shortly after being taken ill while cruising round Greece. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 47932


Deterding, Henri Wilhelm August (1866-1939), oil industrialist, was born in Amsterdam on 19 April 1866, the youngest but one of the five children of Philip Jacob Deterding, captain in the merchant navy, and his wife, Catherina Adolphina Geertruida Kayser. Deterding's father died at sea in 1870, leaving the family in financial straits. His education at the Higher Citizens' School in Amsterdam ceased in 1882, when he was sixteen. He then joined the Twentsche Bank as its youngest employee, where he developed a skill in figures and in reading balance sheets which served him throughout his life. After enduring the tedium of this job for six years, he sat a competitive examination for posts in the Dutch East Indies. 
Having come top in this examination, Deterding went east as an employee of the Netherlands Trading Company. He made his mark by disentangling the confused accounts of a branch which was in difficulties; he was later appointed sub-agent in the important Penang branch. More significantly for the future, he became involved in the affairs of the Royal Dutch Petroleum Company, gaining its directors' goodwill by granting it a loan after all other sources had refused one. 
In 1894 Deterding married Catherina Louisa Neubronner (died 1916); they were to have two sons and a daughter. Three years later he accepted a management post with Royal Dutch, and he and his family moved to The Hague. In 1900, when only thirty-four, he was appointed the company's managing director. 
Since the output of Royal Dutch then accounted for only about 2 per cent of the world's oil production, Deterding at once evolved a strategy for building the company up into a major oil enterprise. This meant arriving at understandings with rival companies, on the proverbial principle that 'unity gives strength'. He therefore made overtures to Marcus Samuel (first Viscount Bearsted), founder of Shell Transport and Trading which also owned substantial oilfields in the Far East. In 1903 the two men agreed to set up -- together with the Rothschilds, who had oil interests in Russia -- a joint distribution organization for their eastern output, to be named the Asiatic Petroleum Company. Appointed the first managing director of the London-based Asiatic, he took up residence in England and acquired a country house, Kelling Hall, in Norfolk. 
Owing to Samuel's multifarious outside interests and to poor corporate management, Shell a little later ran into grave financial problems, and in 1907 Deterding compelled him to merge Shell into the newly created Royal Dutch-Shell group. Samuel had to accept a minority stake of 40 per cent and the non-executive chairmanship. Deterding held the reins of power with 60 per cent of the shares and the post of managing director; his chief assistant was the very able Robert Waley Cohen. The commercial side of the business was situated in London and the technical side in The Hague. 
Although Deterding maintained a very clear vision of striving for global co-operation over oil, so as to avoid price wars, he was not so successful with his American rival, the Standard Oil Company of New Jersey. He sought understandings over security of supply, and for Asiatic to have a half-share in all oil product markets outside the United States. Standard Oil responded to this audacious proposal by launching a sequence of price wars; in retaliation Deterding acquired a number of oilfields in the western hemisphere, including in California (1913), Venezuela (1913), and Mexico (1918). 
Deterding reached an agreement with the Burmah Oil Company, based in Britain, about oil sales in India. In 1909, the year after oil was discovered in Persia, the Anglo-Persian Oil Company -- the future British Petroleum -- was floated in London, and Deterding undertook the marketing of its products. He was therefore incensed when in 1914 the British government acquired a controlling interest in Anglo-Persian. Meanwhile, he had secured for the Shell group a quarter share in the consortium prospecting for oil in Mesopotamia (later Iraq). 
Notwithstanding these events, on the outbreak of the First World War, Deterding unreservedly placed the group's oil and tanker fleet at Britain's disposal. From 1916 onwards he worked hard to create an all-British oil combine, to be made up of (British) Shell, Anglo-Persian, and Burmah Oil, as a counterweight to Standard Oil. In 1920 his public wartime service to the allied cause was recognized when he was created an honorary KBE. He thereafter used the title Sir Henri in Britain, though not entitled to do so as he never became a British citizen. Soon afterwards, as his scheme for an oil combine unravelled in the face of widespread hostility in the UK, and with ministers having second thoughts, Deterding suffered a nervous breakdown and lost some of his entrepreneurial dynamism. 
Deterding's first wife had died in 1916, and in 1924 he married Lidiya Pavlovna, daughter of the tsarist general Pavel Kudoyarov; they had two daughters. He then bought a residence in Ascot. As a White Russian emigree, Lidiya helped to fuel his intense anti-communism, caused in large part by the company's loss of its Russian oilfields because of the Russian Revolution. However, that did not deter the company from later buying up large quantities of Soviet oil, which were used to destabilize the Americans' efforts in the Far East. 
During much of the inter-war period, the global oil industry was in constant travail, with growth in demand held back by economic depressions and with supplies rising as new oilfields came on stream. To curb the resulting beggar-my-neighbour rivalry, in 1928 Deterding invited the chairmen of Anglo-Persian and Standard Oil of New Jersey to join him at Achnacarry Castle in Scotland. There the 'big three' in world oil hammered out a secret 'as is' agreement that froze the oil market as it then stood; this laid down a global price structure and encouraged co-operation where appropriate to minimize costs. The cartel agreed at Achnacarry was the last great 'coup' of Deterding's career, and by the 1930s he appeared to have lost the sense of direction that had earlier led John, first Baron Fisher, to refer to him as 'Napoleonic in his audacity; Cromwellian in his thoroughness' (R. S. Churchill, p. 1951). To his cost, Deterding possessed no political antennae; his only declared aim was to make money. 
Deterding at this time was progressively coming under the influence of his German personal assistant, Charlotte Minna Knaak, and in 1936 he divorced Lidiya and married Charlotte; they had two daughters. After retiring from Royal Dutch-Shell at the end of 1936, he then spent much time at his new residence in Mecklenburg, Germany. Although the evidence is weak that he actively supported the Nazi regime, he did propose certain schemes which conveyed that impression -- for instance, that the group should aid the German economy by providing a year's supply of oil on credit. Whether or not he had the power to make such arrangements, consternation ensued in both The Hague and Whitehall; in fact, Deterding's attitude to the German authorities cooled when he discovered that they were buying from Mexico oil that he regarded as 'stolen' from the group (Shell had earlier seen its Mexican oilfields nationalized). 
Deterding was remembered as a mercurial man, his flashing smile turning in an instant into violent temper. Of no more than average height, he put great faith in physical fitness, regularly swimming in cold water before breakfast and enjoying long walks and skiing. Deterding died suddenly of angina pectoris while wintering at the Villa Olga, St Moritz, in Switzerland, on 4 February 1939, and was buried a week later in Mecklenburg; he was survived by his wife. The British Foreign Office became agitated in case his company shares might fall into German hands, but the fear proved groundless. 


@@@@@


doc= 47934


Dunn, Matthias (bap. 1788, d. 1869), mining engineer and inspector of mines, was baptized at St Joseph's Roman Catholic Church, Birtley, co. Durham, on 10 December 1788, the son of Robert Dunn ('c'.1729-1822) and his second wife, Agatha (Agnes), possibly 'nee' Hunter (died 1790). His father was a coal viewer at Lumley colliery near Chester-le-Street. Little else is known about his parents and childhood, and historians have frequently confused him with his father's brother, Matthias Dunn of Stella Hall, and the latter's son, Matthias William Dunn ('c'.1781-1858). The Dunns, a Roman Catholic family, were largely resident in Ryton and Blaydon-on-Tyne. Several generations had been involved in coal mining and associated commercial interests and the family were related by marriage to the Silvertop family, who were prominent in the coal and lead industries and occupied Stella Hall during the eighteenth century. 
In 1804 Matthias Dunn was apprenticed to Thomas Smith, colliery viewer of Lambton colliery, Durham. In 1810 he was appointed assistant viewer at Hebburn colliery, also in Durham, under the supervision of John Buddle, where he oversaw the day-to-day running of the colliery. In 1813 he became resident viewer at Hebburn. There, on 9 January 1816, Dunn and the Revd John Hodgson, vicar of Jarrow with Hebburn, tested Sir Humphry Davy's wire-gauze safety lamp for the first time. Both men were active members of the Society for Preventing Accidents in Coal Mines (known as the Sunderland Society), which had been formed on 1 October 1813, following the explosion at Felling colliery in 1812. 
By 1824 Dunn was undertaking freelance contract work at other collieries throughout the United Kingdom. He leased and became a partner in several collieries including Prestongrange colliery, East Lothian, where, in 1830, he sank a new shaft. At 420 feet this was the first deep shaft in Scotland. Here he introduced the system of cast-iron tubbing, first developed by John Buddle, and never before used in Scotland. He also applied this method in Ireland for the first time, in the sinking of one of the Castle Comer pits in Kilkenny. The Society for the Encouragement of the Useful Arts in Scotland subsequently awarded Dunn its first honorary medal for his work at Prestongrange. 
During his time working in Scotland in the late 1820s Dunn had met Margaret Warden Hill Rennie (1794-1869), daughter of Captain Archibald Hill Rennie (1767-1832), of Balliliesk, high sheriff of Clackmannanshire, and his wife, Isabella Mortimer (1772-1853). They were married on 19 January 1829 at Alloa, Clackmannanshire, and had four children: Isabella Agnes (1830-1907), Robert (1831-1840), Archibald Matthias (1832-1917) ['see below'], and Margaret Mortimer (1836-1875). 
In 1831 Dunn was appointed viewer by the Hetton Coal Company, Durham, but he preferred to combine this post with other freelance contracts, which led to tensions with management. His perceived lenient handling of striking miners at the colliery between April and September 1832 further strained relationships, and he was dismissed at the end of 1832. As viewer of the St Lawrence main and Shield Field collieries he gave evidence on child labour to the children's employment commission (1842). 
Throughout his career Dunn demonstrated a concern for mine safety and was particularly interested in improvements to mine ventilation and flood prevention. He was confident that the application of science and technology would help to diminish danger in pits. As a prolific author on mining and engineering, he produced books, pamphlets, and scholarly papers. He consistently highlighted the significance of maintaining an adequate underground air-flow rate to neutralize gases, recommending a minimum of 8000-10,000 cubic feet per minute; the use of barometers to monitor changes; and the need for additional shafts. He applauded those collieries that embraced technology by introducing new techniques and modern equipment, and encouraged other collieries to follow suit. He welcomed the introduction of cast-iron equipment; the replacement of baskets with cages and slides; improved boiler safety valves; wire rope; innovative safety equipment such as Sir Goldsworthy Gurney's steam jet for extinguishing underground fires; and resuscitation equipment for injured miners. But he also stressed the importance of development and experimentation. Along with others, he was aware that the Davy lamp was not foolproof and so championed the work of those who strove for further improvements and refinements -- such as Dr William Reid Clanny. He advocated the need for education for those who managed and worked in the mines. But he emphasized that instruction should focus on technology and science, so that all mine employees -- managers and pitmen alike -- were not only alive to the dangers of their working environment, but also had sufficient relevant knowledge to help minimize incidents arising from those dangers. In 1849 he was an expert witness before the select committee into the means of preventing the occurrence of dangerous accidents in coal mines, where he pressed for compulsory government inspection, one of the few managers and owners/lessees to do so. 
Dunn was appointed one of the first government mines inspectors under the 'Inspection of Mines Act' (1850). Initially he had responsibility for Northumberland, Durham, Cumberland, and Scotland. His workload was excessive and he was relatively poorly paid ($400 per annum plus travelling expenses) when compared with government inspectors in other fields. His powers were limited; his main responsibilities were to investigate and report. He was directed to 'abstain from any dictation or any unauthorized interference' (letter of appointment, Waddington to Dunn, 21 Nov 1850, TNA: PRO, HO 87/2). As a result, his influence was limited to recommendation and admonition. He expressed his frustration at not being called in to mines by either management or workers and urged miners to contact him if they were anxious about the condition of their pits, stressing that he did not have the power to enter and inspect mines uninvited. His position as government inspector nevertheless enhanced and strengthened his reputation as a mining engineer. Several of the recommendations in his authoritative work 'A Practical Treatise upon the Best Means of Preventing Accidents in Coal Mines' (1855) were introduced in subsequent mining legislation. He was a founding member of the North East Institute of Mining Engineers, which was established on 23 June 1852, and vice-president of the Literary, Scientific and Mechanical institutions of Newcastle upon Tyne. 
Dunn was one of the founder members of the management committee of the Newcastle upon Tyne Joint Stock Banking Company. In 1835 he produced a pamphlet in association with the engineer Robert Hawthorn setting out the advantages of a railway between Newcastle and Morpeth, intended to form the first phase of a rail link with Edinburgh. Eighteen months later, along with John Dobson and George Stephenson, he produced a plan for a railway from Newcastle to Edinburgh. By 1841 this was part of a more ambitious plan to link London by rail with Dublin, Edinburgh, and Glasgow. He was also a leading member of the Roman Catholic community in the north east. He was one of the chief lay mourners at the funeral of Newcastle's Roman Catholic Bishop Riddell in November 1847, and attended the 'Great Meeting of Catholics' at Ushaw College in July 1858. 
In 1866, owing to ill health, Dunn retired from his inspectorship with a pension. He died on 10 October 1869, just a few months after his wife, at Whitecliffe, Caterham, Surrey, where he had moved from Newcastle to be near his daughter. 
His second son 
The firm became the leading Roman Catholic architects in the north of England and were particularly noted for their work on churches. They received several prestigious commissions including Ushaw College, Stonyhurst College, and Downside Abbey. Dunn and Hansom were strongly influenced by the Gothic revival architect A. W. N. Pugin, and their first commission, in 1871, was the design of a tower and spire for St Mary's Roman Catholic Cathedral, Newcastle, which had been designed by Pugin. In 1872 they undertook the design of Neville Hall, the library hall for the headquarters of the North of England Institute of Mining and Mechanical Engineers. 
Archibald Dunn was an enthusiastic traveller and from the 1850s onwards he undertook several architectural trips to Europe and the Far East; after his marriage, he was often accompanied by his wife. In 1886, based on these travels, he published 'Notes and Sketches of an Architect'. He had never taken professional qualifications, but, on his retirement in 1917, he was elected an honorary ARIBA. Having moved to Bournemouth in 1901, he died at The Wood House, The Avenue, Branksome Park, on 17 January 1917. His wife died later that year, on 28 September 1917. Under the names Sara H. Dunn and Mrs Archibald Dunn she wrote three travel books, 'The World's Highway' (1894), 'Sunny Memories of an Indian Winter' (1898), and 'The Land of the Rosary' (1904). 


@@@@@


doc= 47935


Dunstan, Albert Ernest (1878-1964), research chemist and petroleum technologist, was born on 25 January 1878 at 69 Washington Road, Sheffield, the only son of Arthur Dunstan (died 1896), a workshop manager, and Mary Ann Wainwright (died 1897). His father was shop manager for an old-established firm (Edward Greaves & Son) which manufactured cabinet cases and fitted containers for fine cutlery. Dunstan had four sisters, all younger than himself. He was educated in Sheffield, first at Sharrow Lane board school and then, from the age of twelve, at the Royal Grammar School. 
In 1895 Dunstan gained a scholarship for intending teachers from the College of Preceptors and for the next two years he combined studies at Firth College with teaching at a preparatory school. Initially a keen classics scholar, he now turned his interest to science, but the death of his parents meant that by 1897 continued education had to yield priority to earning a living. Thus in April 1898 he took up an appointment as junior master at Clifton House School, Eastbourne. In October 1900 he was able to resume his studies, this time at the Royal College of Science in London, and these resulted in a BSc degree. This was followed by a teaching appointment at Dame Alice Owen's School, Islington. 
In 1905 Dunstan obtained the post of lecturer in chemistry and physics at the newly built East Ham Technical College and secondary day school. Here he took advantage of good laboratory facilities to explore what was becoming a major interest, namely viscosity. His first paper on the viscosity of liquids had in fact already been published in the 'Transactions' of the Chemical Society in 1904. By 1910 he had written several chemistry textbooks and his output of published papers on viscosity had risen to over twenty. In addition, despite his busy teaching schedule at East Ham both during the day and in the evenings, he carried out experimental work on viscosity at University College, London, under Professor Trouton. This led to a DSc in 1910. In 1911 Dunstan married one of his students, Louisa Cleaverley (died 1963). They had a daughter and a son, Bernard, an artist and member of the Royal Academy. 
By early 1913 the refinery at Abadan of the young Anglo-Persian Oil Company (to become Anglo-Iranian Oil in 1937, and British Petroleum in 1954) was in full operation. A prime function of this refinery was to supply fuel oil to the British navy, but it was soon found that the Admiralty fuel oil made from Persian crude could sometimes undergo an increase in viscosity in ships' bunkers. This often meant handling problems under cold weather conditions, as in the North Sea, and was a matter of much concern to the navy, especially following the outbreak of war in 1914. The Admiralty therefore asked their specialist adviser on petroleum matters, Sir Boverton Redwood, for expert assistance in view of his proven knowledge of viscosity phenomena; Dunstan was recommended early in 1915 as the man to tackle the problem. Dunstan took with him Dr F. B. Thole, one of his teaching colleagues, and these two, initially working for the Admiralty, soon officially joined Anglo-Persian, carrying out their investigations in the laboratories at East Ham. They also worked on other interests of Anglo-Persian -- for example the refining of motor spirit and kerosene from Persian crude, and the potential manufacture of toluene (for TNT) from petroleum. This latter interest was studied by Dunstan through his activities at a large experimental plant at Thameshaven. 
In November 1916 Dunstan was asked by his directors to go out to Persia. He accepted with alacrity, and once there he made a study of refinery operations at Abadan and visited the oilfield at Maidan-i-Naftun. He returned to Britain in April 1917 and reported to Charles Greenway, chairman of Anglo-Persian, that the company possessed a crude oil of vast potentialities, but that little was yet known of its actual composition. The result of this meeting was an instruction to set up a research organization coupled with the offer of the post of research chemist (at a salary of $750 per annum). 
A research laboratory was established in September 1917 at Meadhurst, a dilapidated Georgian mansion in Sunbury-on-Thames. This building had a large cellar (initially flooded), which was converted, despite wartime shortages, into a laboratory. Thus was established, with Dunstan and Thole as the only staff, the nucleus of what was later to become the vast Sunbury Research Centre of British Petroleum. In 1919 adjacent land was purchased for the erection of a properly designed new laboratory block complete with workshops, a canteen, and other amenities. Occupation of these new buildings began in 1921, and with the extra space and staff available Dunstan was able adequately to carry out research into the chemistry of crude oil. 
One legacy from the war was a shortage of liquid fuels and Dunstan became a chemical adviser to a committee on the production of oil from cannel coal and allied minerals which had been set up by the Institution of Petroleum Technologists (later the Institute of Petroleum) in 1918. In 1921 he visited an experimental plant at Rheinau in Germany, to examine the possibility of producing oil from coal using a high-pressure hydrogenation process developed by Bergius. 
During the early 1920s many investigations were in progress at Sunbury, priority being given to processes for the desulphurization of light distillate fractions, one using sodium hypochlorite as the reagent, and the other using selective adsorption over bauxite. These processes were successfully brought into operation during 1921 and 1922 at Abadan and at the company's new refinery at Llandarcy, near Swansea. Many other petroleum products such as fuel oil, lubricating oil, diesel oil, and aviation spirit were investigated by Dunstan and his team, and the decisions concerning which projects to work on were largely taken by Dunstan himself, without interference from head office. Dunstan also developed an intense interest in cracking processes, and was sent to Detroit in 1922 to study an American cracking process (Ramage process). This became the start of a long programme of work on cracking reactions at Sunbury, which by 1924 had led to the development of a new cracking process, the 'A-D-H' process, named after the individuals concerned, Auld, Dunstan, and Herring. 
In the autumn of 1924 Dunstan was transferred to head office in London as chief chemist of the company, with overall responsibility for laboratory matters not only at Sunbury but also in the Persian oilfield, and at the Abadan and Llandarcy refineries. He was already a member of the Institution of Petroleum Technologists, and indeed had been elected in 1919 to its council, on which he remained until 1958 -- a record period. He became vice-president of the institution for the period 1928-9, and president for the sessions 1929-30 and 1930-31. He was also honorary editor of its publications, a duty which he undertook for twenty-five years. In 1938 he was awarded the institute's Redwood medal for his outstanding services to petroleum technology. 
Over the years Dunstan participated with similar energy in the affairs of many other learned societies, and his offices included being the chairman of the education committee of the Royal Institute of Chemistry, a member of council of the Chemical Society and of the Society of Chemical Industry, treasurer of the Chemical Council, a member of council of the Institute of Fuel, a member of the Faraday Society, president of the British Association of Chemists, and a member of the parliamentary and scientific committee of the House of Commons. He was also associated with various government departmental committees: he was a member of the fuel efficiency committee and chaired both the liquid fuel committee and the creosote-pitch committee of the Ministry of Fuel and Power; he was a member of the Home Office committee on smoke screens and of the mixtures committee of the petroleum warfare department; he was a board member of HM fuel research station; and he was a general council member of the British Standards Institution. Furthermore he maintained close contact with many universities. 
Dunstan travelled widely, on company business, on lecture tours, and to attend international conferences such as the World Power Conference in Berlin in 1930 and the World Petroleum Congress in London in 1933 (for which he was a convenor of papers). He had many valuable friends among outstanding petroleum technologists in America, and in 1929 the American Society for Testing Materials (ASTM) elected him chairman of the ASTM committee for testing petroleum and its products -- a tribute to his continuing efforts to promote co-operation between the ASTM and the Institute of Petroleum in developing standardized test procedures for use on both sides of the Atlantic. In all such activities Dunstan assumed the role of unofficial ambassador not only for his company but also for the petroleum industry as a whole, both nationally and internationally. His drive, enthusiasm, and breezy, extrovert manner endeared him to all he met. 
Dunstan retired from Anglo-Iranian Oil at the end of 1946 with some 35 patents to his name and over 120 technical papers, as well as several textbooks. Perhaps his greatest achievement in regard to publications was as managing editor for the four massive volumes of 'The Science of Petroleum', published in 1938 and followed by three parts of a fifth volume during the period 1950-55. He spent his latter years in a house in Cambridge. His wife died in 1963, and he died in the following year, on 6 January 1964, at Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge. On 22 September 1965 a new four-storey laboratory block housing 130 staff was formally opened at the Sunbury Research Centre. This new building was named the Dunstan Laboratory, a fitting memorial to the man who had made it all possible. 


@@@@@


doc= 47938


Fyfe, John (1830-1906), granite quarry master, was born at Goodhope, Bucksburn, Aberdeenshire, the eldest son of James Fyfe (died 1846), quarry master, and his wife, Elizabeth Strachan. The region had for over two centuries been associated with the extraction of granite, and quarrying reached its peak in the latter half of the nineteenth century, when John Fyfe was the dominant figure. Fyfe was educated at the local school until he was sixteen, when he had to take over the family business following the death of his father. He continued operations at Newhills until 1857 when he moved to Kemnay and opened two adjacent workings on Paradise Hill, on land belonging to John Burnett. It had long been known that good surface deposits of granite abounded in the Kemnay area, but until the advent of the Great North of Scotland Railway into the Alford valley, the cost of extracting this stone and then transporting it by cart or even canal to Aberdeen made it uneconomic to quarry so far from an immediate market. Fyfe quickly secured an agreement with the railway company for transporting stone to Aberdeen, and, as the railway extended its network further into the Alford valley, he subsequently opened workings at Tom's Forest, Tillyfourie, and Corrennie on the outlying hills of the Grampians. 
Fyfe's quarrying empire grew quickly and, while continuing to exert a high level of managerial control over his business, he was nevertheless forced to delegate the daily operations of his workings to foremen and quarry managers, the latter being recruited from the former. Fyfe's primary contribution to quarrying lay in developing the technology involved. Efficiency in granite quarrying depends very much on the speed at which stone can be blasted from the master joints, broken down, and then lifted to the quarry surface. Delays at any of these stages could (and still does) hinder a working's productivity. Fyfe's innovations had a positive impact on all these processes. Until the 1860s it was normal to drill blast-holes using hand drills -- a long, slow, physically laborious process; rock penetration would typically average 4 feet a day. Fyfe replaced hand drilling with steam-power drilling both for boring the blast-holes and for breaking up large blocks of stone. Once broken, the granite was raised to the quarry loading banks with steam-powered cranes but, because of their fixed jibs, their range and lifting power were limited. This problem was partially overcome by Fyfe through the introduction of the Scotch steam derrick with its movable jib, but the need for greater speed still remained. It was said that after watching a display of tight-rope walking by the most famous of all tight-rope walkers, Charles Blondin (1824-1897), in 1872, Fyfe invented the 'Blondin', a suspension cableway with a travelling carriage that could be lowered to any part of the quarry from a fixed position. This new machine quickly proved its worth as the quarries became deeper, as it reduced the time taken to raise stone from the quarry floors from as much as an hour to a matter of minutes. 
An equally important contribution to the growth of his operations was Fyfe's ability to attract and retain his labourers. Besides recruiting workers from the local agricultural labour force, he enticed skilled men from Aberdeen by offering them high wages and cheap building stone to enable them to build their own houses in Kemnay village. At the more distant Corrennie quarries he built blocks of tenement flats, known as barracks. As an employer he was generally regarded as being firm but approachable. By the end of the century, Fyfe ran the largest single firm in the industry, employing almost 600 men, and producing almost 100,000 tons of stone per annum. Fyfe was also extremely active within the industry as a whole, serving on the committees of both the Aberdeen Granite Quarrymasters' Association and the Aberdeen Granite Manufacturers' Association. He became a director of the Aberdeen Lime Company and the local branch of the London and Lancashire Insurance Company, and was a partner in another nineteen firms in the north-east. 
Fyfe was married to Barbara Stevenson, daughter of the grocer in Dalmadilly, Aberdeenshire; they had two sons and eight daughters. In his public life he served as a magistrate, and was a member of Aberdeen University's building committee as well as being a significant figure in the city's business life. An 'In memoriam' in the 'Aberdeen Free Press' said after Fyfe's death: 'Aberdeen itself owes Mr Fyfe a lasting debt of gratitude, not only for the distinct lead he has consistently given in fostering the artistic development of architecture in granite work, but for his public-spirited generosity in making it possible on more than one occasion to retain inviolate the most striking aspect of Aberdeen as the Granite City. ('John Fyfe', not paginated)' Fyfe died of heart failure and Bright's disease at his home, Beechgrove House, King's Gate, Aberdeen, on 18 July 1906; his wife had predeceased him. His business was continued by his two sons. 


@@@@@


doc= 47940


Goodenough, Sir Francis William (1872-1940), sales executive and educationist, son of Henry Goodenough, currier, and his wife, Louisa Hatchwell, was born in East Street, Newton Abbot, Devon, on 9 September 1872, and was educated at Torquay Public College. At the age of sixteen he joined the Gas Light and Coke Company as an office boy. Although it was at that time the largest gas company in Britain, Gas Light and Coke had no sales organization to face the incipient challenge from electricity; only in 1903 was a department separate from engineering established for selling and customer service. Goodenough's talents for marketing were quickly recognized, and in 1902 he was sent to Berlin to report on gas street lighting. In the following year he was appointed the company's first controller of gas sales, a position he retained until his retirement in 1931. As early as 1907 he was publicly arguing that gas utility managers should regard sales promotion as part of their normal duties. 
One of Goodenough's responsibilities was the placing of advertisements. At that time the industry was highly fragmented with no central body to encourage co-operation: in 1912 there were over 800 independent authorized gas companies, more than a third of which were municipally owned. In consequence, many of the advertisements placed by the Gas Light and Coke Company were seen by customers of other gas companies, whose policies and terms of trade were different, and much of their impact was therefore wasted, as far as the Gas Light and Coke Company was concerned. In discussion with the head of his advertising agency Goodenough conceived the idea of an industry-wide body to promote co-operative advertising. Under his leadership, the British Commercial Gas Association was set up in 1911. Some gas companies resented the leading role played by Gas Light and Coke in the affairs of the association, and others -- especially municipal undertakings -- saw no need for co-operative advertising. Gradually, however, Goodenough won over virtually the whole industry. The success of the advertising association opened the way for the creation by Sir David Milne-Watson in 1919 of the National Gas Council, a forum to improve co-operation within the industry and to allow it to speak with a common voice. 
Goodenough's preference was for scrupulous factual advertising. There was some feeling in the gas industry during the 1930s that the association's promotional efforts were being outclassed by the aggressive advertising of electrical goods, but the pattern he established was maintained. Goodenough was elected a member of the Incorporated Sales Managers' Association in 1921, its chairman in 1926 (when he was also made a CBE) and its president from 1929 to 1934. For three years he was also president of the Incorporated Society of British Advertisers. 
In the early 1920s Goodenough turned his attention to educational schemes for technical and commercial staff, in conjunction with the Institution of Gas Engineers and the Board of Education. In his view the development of scientific skills in management and selling, especially in export markets, was perhaps even more important for the future of the nation than developing manufacturing capability. Such views led to his acting as chairman of a government committee on education for salesmanship between 1928 and 1931. This provided him with a platform to promote his views; he addressed among others the British Association for the Advancement of Science and the Headmasters' Conference. Goodenough was a council member of the Federation of British Industry, and received a knighthood in 1930. He retired from the Gas Light and Coke Company in 1931, but remained chairman of the British Commercial Gas Association until 1936. 
In 1900 Goodenough married Ellen, daughter of William Rees of Dolgellau and Chelsea; they had no children. An enthusiast for fly-fishing and golf in his spare time, he also worked for social and charitable organizations, notably as chairman of the Princess Beatrice Hospital. He never entirely lost his Devon accent. The last few years of his life were dogged by poor health, and he died at his home, 39 Holland Street, London, on 11 January 1940. He was survived by his wife, and left estate valued at $4409 15's'. 9died 


@@@@@


doc= 47943


Horne, Benjamin (1698-1766), coal factor, was born on 8 September 1698 at Arundel, Sussex, the ninth of ten children of Thomas Horne (died 1718), a glover of that town, and his wife, Susannah (died 1734), both Quakers. In 1719 he set up in business in London as a coal factor -- buying coal by the chaldron or by the entire cargo from the northern colliers, and selling it into the City and suburbs. At first he operated from wharves east of the Tower; later he transferred to Billingsgate. At this time the Quakers were no longer being persecuted and Horne was among those who were able to prosper in business. About 1724 he married Mary ('c'.1707-1782), daughter of Simeon Warner of Bermondsey, where they soon settled and raised seven children. 
When the lightermen who brought the coal from ship to shore combined to demand premiums from the shipmasters, which greatly increased the price of coal to consumers, Horne and several other factors set up an office in the Dog tavern, Billingsgate, in 1728, to act as agents for the masters and evade these extra charges. Objections to the high price of coal by the principal industrial consumers -- brewers, soapboilers, and dyers -- led to the passing of an act in 1729 allowing any coal trader to maintain his own wharves, lighters, and other craft. This licence was of considerable benefit to such as Horne. When he gave evidence to a House of Commons inquiry in 1730 he claimed that with others he had a concern in over forty collieries to the value in 1727 of $48,262. He also held a joint interest in collieries at West Denton, Northumberland, which he leased to a local operating miner. 
In 1742 the customs department uncovered a huge fraud which had continued since 1724. It transpired that shipmasters left bonds with the factors to pay the customs duty when their deliveries had been assessed, so that they were not delayed from returning north. In fact many of these duties had never been paid, the factors having retained the bonds. Horne was one of those found to be owing considerable sums, though he was able to pay when charged. Horne later retired to High Cross, Tottenham, where he died on 25 May 1766. He was interred at the Quaker burial-ground, Long Lane, Bermondsey, leaving, it was said, an estate said to be worth over $70,000 ('GM', 439). 
Horne's eldest son, Thomas (1725-1802), was apprenticed to his father's friend Caleb Smith, coal merchant of Bankside and his partner in the colliery venture. Smith was in the Clothworkers' Company and Thomas took his freedom by serviture in 1753, the first of a long line of Hornes to serve on the livery of that company; succeeding generations entered into various partnerships with other coal companies, and eventually became part of the Charrington group. 


@@@@@


doc= 47945


Johnson, Percival Norton (1792-1866), metallurgist, was born on 29 September 1792 at 6-7 Maiden Lane, in the City of London, the third of the ten children of John Johnson (1765-1831), assayer of ores and metals, and his wife, Mary ('nee' Wight) (1766-1863). Percival was Johnson's only Christian name in the baptismal register and it is not known when he acquired the additional name of Norton. Furthermore, nothing is known of his early life and education. He was apprenticed to his father in the Worshipful Company of Goldsmiths, obtaining the freedom of the company on 2 March 1814 and becoming a liveryman on 24 April 1816. On 1 January 1817 he married Elizabeth Lydia Smith (1794-1857), fourth daughter of Thomas Smith, receiver-general to the dean and chapter of St Paul's Cathedral; they were to have no children. 
At about the same time as his marriage, Johnson set up on his own, first in the City and from 1822 in Hatton Garden, Holborn. His friend and brother-in-law, Thomas Cock, who had evolved a process for making platinum malleable, assisted in the early development of the business, which included assaying and refining, and the preparation of colours for the decoration of pottery and glass. In time Johnson perfected a number of pottery colours, including a much sought-after rose pink, and a range of yellows and oranges based on uranium oxide. Following a visit to Germany, Johnson commenced production of an alloy containing nickel, copper, and zinc, which was known by various names including nickel silver, German silver and British plate. During preparation of this alloy, used largely for the manufacture of spoons, forks, and candlesticks, he refined nickel for the first time in England. 
The first of many publications by Percival appeared in the 'Philosophical Magazine' in July 1812 and concerned the parting of platinum from gold. A footnote initialled by both him and his father reported an original observation, that Brazilian gold could be discoloured by the presence of palladium. Some twenty years later Percival successfully refined crude gold from the Gongo Soco mines in Brazil, which had defeated other refiners because of the presence of palladium and tellurium. Rapid expansion of his firm followed, funded in part by Captain W. R. B. Sellon (formerly Smith) another brother-in-law. Johnson was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1846. 
In 1838 Johnson implemented an agreement with John Matthey, a stockbroker, whereby, in return for the injection of new capital, the latter's sons, George and Edward, should enter the business. The company became Johnson and Matthey in September 1851 when George Matthey was taken into full partnership. By persistent scientific endeavour and acute business sense, Matthey was to transform the refining and fabrication of platinum from a laboratory activity into a successful industrial operation, making platinum available for use throughout the world. The firm's assaying expertise was recognized in 1852 when the company was appointed assayers to the Bank of England. 
Johnson's scientific work brought him into contact with numerous mining enterprises, especially in Devon and Cornwall, though he also advised governments and mining companies in many parts of the world. This led him to become involved, in a managerial capacity and financially, in both mining and smelting. As a result, from 1854 he lived mainly in Devon. In addition to introducing many pioneering technical practices, he worked to improve the social conditions of the miners and their families. For instance, at great expense to himself he had schools erected in the neighbourhood of the mines, and he took an active part in their supervision. In this he was supported by his wife, Elizabeth, who did much charitable work. She was also the prime mover in the formation of the London Society for Teaching the Blind to Read (later the Royal London Society for the Blind). 
Elizabeth Johnson died on 8 September 1857; fourteen months later, on 25 November 1858, Percival Johnson married Georgina Elizabeth Ellis, daughter of George Stevenson Ellis, formerly head of the bullion office at the Bank of England. Since 1852 Johnson had gradually withdrawn from his mining activities; he retired from Johnson and Matthey on 31 March 1860 and died of a stroke at his home, Stoke House, Stoke Fleming, Devon, on 1 June 1866, at the age of seventy-three. He was buried in a vault under the chancel of St Peter's Church, Stoke Fleming, where a stained-glass memorial window was later placed by his widow (in this the year of his birth was given incorrectly as 1793). The business that Johnson founded was eventually to become Johnson Matthey plc, a world leader in the refining, marketing, and fabrication of precious metals and raw materials. 


@@@@@


doc= 47949


Glyn, Sir Richard, first baronet (bap. 1711, d. 1773), drysalter and banker, was baptized on 13 June 1711 at the church of St Andrew, Holborn, London, the second son of Robert Glyn (1673-1746), an oilman and drysalter of Hatton Garden, London, and his wife, Ann, 'nee' Maynard. He was educated at Westminster School before joining his father in his business as a wholesaler of the salt and chemicals used as preservatives and dyestuffs. He took his freedom by patrimony in the Salters' Company on 31 May 1733, and assumed control of the business in the following month, continuing after his father's death with Thomas Baskerfield as his partner. 
Glyn married on 8 June 1736 Susannah (died 1751), the only child and heir of George Lewen of Ewell, Surrey, former MP for Wallingford, Berkshire, to whom he was distantly related. They had three sons, Robert (1737-1743), George (1739-1814), and Richard (died 1741). Susannah died on 5 February 1751, and he married secondly, on 23 March 1754, Elizabeth, the daughter of Robert Carr of Hampton, Middlesex, a silk mercer of Ludgate in the City, and an important connection for Glyn's trade in dyestuffs. Their two sons, Richard Carr Glyn (b. 1755) and Thomas Glyn ('b'. 1757), both followed him as bankers. By the time of his second marriage Glyn was rising to modest prominence in the City; he later bought a country seat at Gaunts House, near Wimborne, Dorset. He was master of the Salters' Company in 1751, alderman for Dowgate ward from 1750 to 1772, and sheriff jointly with Charles Asgill in 1752-3. After delivering a loyal address to George II on his return from Hanover, he and Asgill were knighted in 1752. He was lord mayor in 1758. 
This relationship with Asgill probably introduced Glyn to Joseph Vere, Asgill's banking partner. In December 1753 Vere and Glyn formed a partnership with Thomas Hallifax, chief clerk at Martin's Bank, and in January 1754 opened in Lombard Street, as Vere, Glyn, and Hallifax, bankers. Glyn provided $10,000 of the total capital of $24,000, and remained a partner, in what was to become one of London's most successful private banks, until his death in 1773. He had no previous banking experience, but was able to introduce custom from the many rich silk merchants trading nearby. By 1757 the bank had prospered sufficiently to move into larger premises in Birchin Lane. During its early years the bank was hardly troubled by bad debt. It was the extension of trading on borrowed capital, linked to the geographical expansion of business into the provincial silk districts of Coventry and Derby, and particularly its involvement with the Scottish iron-foundry of Carron, that brought Glyn and Hallifax (Vere having died in 1766) to the brink of disaster. 
In 1754 Glyn unsuccessfully contested parliamentary elections for one of the four City of London seats, but in 1758 was elected as MP for the City of London, which he represented for ten years. A moderate tory, opposed to John Wilkes during the 1760s, in 1768 he was defeated in London and, after a controversial campaign, elected as MP for Coventry. He was created baronet on 25 September 1759. In addition he served as president of Bethlem and Bridewell hospitals (1755-73); vice-president (1762-4) and president (1764-8) of the Equitable Life Assurance Society; colonel of the Orange regiment of the city militia (1762-73); and treasurer (1763-70) and vice-president (1770-73) of the Honourable Artillery Company. He was fervently anti-French, being a prominent member of an Anti-Gallican Society, and was awarded an honorary degree by Oxford University in July 1759. 
Glyn died on 1 January 1773 of a slow fever. However, since his death followed so quickly after a disastrous few weeks in the summer of 1772 when Glyn and Hallifax's bank stopped payment, his doctor was obliged to issue a public statement to scotch rumours of suicide. Sir Richard's second son by his first marriage, George Glyn, succeeded as second baronet. 


@@@@@


doc= 47951


Llewellyn, Sir David Richard, first baronet (1879-1940), coal owner and financier, was born on 9 March 1879 at Bwllfa House, Aberdar, the eldest son of Alderman Rees Llewellyn of Bwllfa House, and his wife, Elizabeth. The father was a renowned mining engineer, who had successfully reorganized the Bwllfa colliery; together with two other sons he later joined forces with David in a number of coal ventures. 'D. R.', as Llewellyn was often called, was educated at Aberdar higher grade school and Llandovery College. In 1900 he enrolled in a course for mining engineers at University College, Cardiff, and qualified in 1903. After two years in the USA studying mechanical mining he started the Windber colliery in 1905, aiming to work its thin seams -- on which he became something of an expert -- with electrically driven cutters. Between 1914 and 1916 he acquired four additional collieries, all drift mines, around Aberdar. These became the nucleus of the company of D. R. Llewellyn & Sons Ltd, which was registered in 1920. 
These initial business interests were small-scale and (relatively) mundane. What really launched Llewellyn and made him a major force in coal production in south Wales for nearly a quarter century was his involvement, especially between 1916 and the early 1920s, in a frenzy of mergers and acquisitions. Initially the central figure was D. A. Thomas, Lord Rhondda (1856-1918), but his removal by war service and his subsequent death left control increasingly with his right-hand man, H. Seymour Berry (later Lord Buckland). It was the Aberdar connection with Berry (one of the extraordinary Berry brothers: the two others became Lord Camborne and Lord Kemsley) which brought in Llewellyn. In 1916, after Berry negotiated the purchase of the Gwaun-Cae-Gurwen Colliery Company for D. A. Thomas, Llewellyn was made chairman of this subsidiary enterprise. 
The two young men (assisted by H. H. Merrett) took over a range of companies across the south Wales coalfields. Llewellyn or Berry were frequently designated chairman. The companies they controlled included Bwllfa and Merthyr Dare; D. R. Llewellyn & Sons; Graigola Merthyr Company; Gwaen-Cae-Gurwen; Cambrian Collieries; Celtic Collieries; North's Navigation; D. Davis & Son; and Welsh Navigation. One of their most spectacular acquisitions took place in 1919, when they took a controlling interest, for $4.5 million, of John Lysaght Ltd. A few months later the business was sold on to Guest, Keen and Nettlefolds (GKN) with Llewellyn becoming chairman of GKN's colliery committee. 
In 1930 the most important of the south Wales coal companies, namely GKN, D. R. Llewellyn & Sons, and Gueret, Llewellyn, and Merrett, collaborated to form Welsh Associated Collieries Ltd, and Llewellyn was elected chairman. In 1935 this group fused with the Powell Duffryn Steam Coal Company Ltd. The resulting group controlled some ninety pits, produced over 20 million tons of coal, and employed over 37,000 people. Llewellyn served as vice-chairman. If much of this was essentially financial engineering, the more constructive aspect of these amalgamations and rationalizations was seen in the marketing and distribution of the group's coal output. Thus when Llewellyn joined the board of Lord Melchett's Amalgamated Anthracite Company, he secured efficiencies by pooling wagons, centralizing purchases of stores, and introducing uniform systems of accounting. In much of this Llewellyn's main adviser and associate was H. H. Merrett, who in the early 1930s published a plan for the total co-ordination of selling and transport in the industry. 
In 1905 Llewellyn married Magdalene Anne (died 1966), the daughter of the Revd Henry Harries; they had four sons and four daughters. He and his family lived at The Court, St Fagans, Glamorgan; and there was also a London residence at 3 Whitehall Court. Despite his strong roots in south Wales, Llewellyn's involvement in local affairs was limited, especially during his last two decades. In 1920 he was (like his father before him, and his brother afterwards) chairman of Aberdar district council and high constable of Miskin Higher. He was created a baronet in 1922. He became treasurer and, in 1924, president of University College, Cardiff, to which he had given $30,000 in 1922. He was awarded an honorary LLD by the University of Wales in 1929. He was active in the Coalowners' Association (serving as chairman in 1929), but this was more to extend his business interests. 
D. R. Llewellyn died on 15 December 1940 at Ty Newydd, Penderyn, Brecknockshire, the home of his brother, W. M. Llewellyn. 


@@@@@


doc= 47953


Backhouse, Jonathan (1779-1842), banker and financier, was born in Darlington, co. Durham, the eldest son of Jonathan Backhouse (1747-1826), banker, and his wife, Ann (died 1826), the second daughter of Edward Pease of Darlington. Jonathan senior was the eldest of three sons of James Backhouse of Westmorland, a yarn and wool dealer, who had moved to Darlington during the 1750s to establish a flax-dressing and linen-manufacturing business ['see 'Backhouse family (per. c.1770-1945)]. This was the precursor to the foundation, in 1774, of J. and J. Backhouse banking, a partnership shared by James, with his son Jonathan and later also with his nephew James junior. The family had earlier indicated its interest in wider commercial affairs by taking on the local agency of the Royal Exchange Assurance in 1759. 
As private bankers, the Backhouses were not untypical of numerous entrepreneurs in the eighteenth-century economy who combined manufacturing ventures with the financing of trade generally. The Quaker Lloyds of Birmingham and the Gibbons family of Wolverhampton provide excellent illustrations in the metallurgical trades, while in mining there are several cases in the north-east of England. In textiles, the best-known example is provided by the Gurneys of Norwich, a Quaker family with a banking tradition going back to the later seventeenth century, but which also developed a thriving trade in woollen yarns in the first half of the eighteenth century. By integrating banking with manufacturing, these family concerns could both advance credit to customers and receive it from suppliers and so more easily sustain the expansion of business. Like the Gurneys, however, the Backhouses were to abandon manufacturing in favour of full banking, a move which had been accomplished by the end of the eighteenth century. At that time J. and J. Backhouse possessed an extensive agency network in co. Durham, underpinned by a considerable note issue payable at sight, and fourteen days after sight, in London. 
In 1798, following the death of James senior, the title of the bank was changed to Jonathan Backhouse & Co. It was in this form that it became involved in the financing and projection of the pioneering Stockton and Darlington Railway, the first public railway to be empowered to use steam locomotives. The possibility of improving the transport infrastructure of south Durham and north-east Yorkshire had been discussed intermittently throughout the latter half of the eighteenth century, when attention was invariably focused on the construction of a canal linking the Auckland coalfield to the estuary of the River Tees. The capital cost, however, was viewed as prohibitive, and real progress had to await the development of a capital network spreading beyond the limited confines of co. Durham. In this respect, the Backhouses were well placed. As prosperous Quakers, they proved to be entirely typical of their religious sect in developing marital ties which facilitated substantial financial inflows from other parts of the country. 
Of crucial importance was the marriage in 1811 of Jonathan Backhouse junior to Hannah Chapman (died 1850), the elder daughter and coheir of Joseph Gurney, a private banker of Norwich; the couple had two daughters and a son. This dynastic alliance in itself transformed the prospects for transport improvement, especially when the Backhouses allied themselves with the Quaker Pease family of Darlington in the raising of capital. As woollen manufacturers and private bankers themselves, the Peases were related by marriage to the Backhouses, and developed their own ties with the Gurneys when Joseph Pease married Emma Gurney in 1826. It was thus the Backhouse-Pease alliance which emerged as the principal underwriters of the Stockton and Darlington Railway, authorized by parliament in 1821 and opened formally in September 1825. The early records of the company are illustrative of the strength of Quaker financial networks in mobilizing capital resources. This fact was reflected in Backhouse's appointment as first treasurer to the company, a position which he held until 1833, by which time the railway was well established as a conveyor of coal and other industrial raw materials along the lower Tees valley. 
During the first three decades of the nineteenth century Backhouse proved to be the dominant partner in the bank, and he presided over a process of expansion which was to consolidate its position in the commercial infrastructure of co. Durham. In 1805 a branch was opened at Durham and in the following year at Sunderland. In the mid-1820s the network was extended to Newcastle upon Tyne, South Shields, and Stockton-on-Tees. In conformity with the evolution of the banking system in the country as a whole at this time, the north-east of England was afflicted periodically by phases of instability in response to the overextension of credit. Local banking crises occurred in the late 1790s, in 1803, 1815, 1819, 1823, and 1825. Jonathan Backhouse & Co. weathered all of these vicissitudes without difficulty. 
The crisis of 1819 was particularly noteworthy insofar as it was the product of a crude attempt by the earl of Darlington to bankrupt the concern. At that time the Backhouses were busily projecting the Stockton and Darlington Railway with a proposed route to the Auckland coalfield through Lord Darlington's Raby estate. Incensed by the potential threat to his fox coverts, the earl attempted to accumulate the bank's paper notes to the point when their value exceeded the gold stock. The apocryphal-sounding but nevertheless true story is told that Backhouse became acquainted with Lord Darlington's plot and frustrated it by posting to London to obtain extra bullion stocks. His coach lost a wheel on the return journey, but the chaise was balanced by his placing the gold at an appropriate point over the rear axle. 
Backhouse resigned as treasurer to the Stockton and Darlington Railway in 1833 in order to embark upon full-time ministry on behalf of the Society of Friends. He retained his partnership in the family bank, but bequeathed his authority to his son, Edmund (1824-1906). Jonathan Backhouse died at Darlington on 7 October 1842. 
The family bank experienced mixed fortunes under later generations. Edmund Backhouse was followed as senior partner by his son, Jonathan Edmund (1849-1918). The latter was rewarded with a baronetcy in 1893 and presided over the merger in 1896 of the bank with Gurneys of Norwich and Barclays of London to form Barclay & Co. of Lombard Street, destined to become one of the 'big five' clearing banks after the First World War. Sir Jonathan was appointed local director of the new company and was to prove instrumental in precipitating the absorption of the Pease family's private bank, J. and J. W. Pease, in 1902, but in circumstances which led to the financial ruin of the senior partner, Sir Joseph Whitwell Pease, and his sons Alfred and Joseph. 


@@@@@


doc= 47956


Ridley, Sir Matthew White, second baronet (1745-1813), land and coal owner and politician, was born on 28 October 1745 in Newcastle upon Tyne, the second of the twelve children of Matthew Ridley (1711-1778) of Heaton Hall and Newcastle, a landowner, coal magnate, and MP, though the eldest of Ridley's second wife, his first cousin Elizabeth (1722-1764), the daughter of Matthew White (1690-1750) of Blagdon. He had seven brothers and four sisters. He was educated at Newcastle Free School and Westminster School, and then went to Christ Church, Oxford, where he matriculated on 27 February 1764. At the age of seventeen he succeeded to the baronetcy of his maternal uncle, Sir Matthew White (1727-1763) of Blagdon. 
Ridley was born into one of the dominant families of north-east England, and inherited a substantial landed estate in the south-east of Northumberland, lucrative investments in the coal, glass, and brewing industries, and an unassailable electoral interest in Newcastle upon Tyne. His family's pre-eminence dated from the later seventeenth century, when two Newcastle merchants, Nicholas Ridley (died 1712) and Matthew White (died 1716), began to invest heavily in the coal trade on the north bank of the Tyne, opening up collieries at Blaydon, Willington, Benton, Byker, Heaton, and Jesmond. Their effective business partnership was strengthened by the marriage of Nicholas Ridley's eldest son, Richard (1677-1739), to Matthew White's daughter Margaret, the first of a series of marriage alliances that left Sir Matthew White Ridley as the eventual heir to both families and both fortunes. 
The steady growth of these fortunes was marked by the extension of their landed interests. Matthew White acquired the Blagdon estate to the north of the city in the 1690s, while his successors were able to take advantage of the forfeitures that followed the 1715 rebellion by purchasing the Heaton estate in 1719, followed in 1723 by the Newsham and Plessey estates further north on the Northumberland coast, which brought them effective control of the port of Blyth. These joint purchases allowed both families to construct substantial country seats, but their main importance lay in the commercial benefits to be gained from the valuable coal reserves that lay beneath the surface. In these early stages at least, agricultural rents made a relatively small contribution to the Ridleys' wealth: in fact both Matthew Ridley and Matthew White were chronically short of money in the 1740s, and borrowed heavily on the security of their land in order to develop their mining interests. It was the coal trade that supported their other business ventures, just as it supported the Ridleys' growing political influence. 
This influence owed a great deal to Sir Matthew White Ridley's grandfather, Richard Ridley, who had built up a powerful body of support within Newcastle's entrenched and increasingly exclusive magistracy. Successive royal charters had contributed to placing complete control of the town in the hands of an oligarchy drawn from the Merchant Adventurers' Company, an oligarchy which safeguarded its members' economic interests by a virtual monopoly of places on the aldermanic bench. In a town which depended so completely on the coal trade, economic power and political influence went hand in hand: thus a politician who could summon sixty men on horseback and more than 300 on foot from among his own workforce to quell a demonstration against high food prices, as Matthew Ridley (Matthew White Ridley's father) did in 1740, was bound to win the support of his fellow magistrates. He was equally likely, however, to provoke hostility among the wider freeman electorate, and it took some time for Matthew Ridley to live down his father's reputation as 'the Terror of the Town' (Chicken, 4) and to build up a more broadly based electoral interest. 
Although Sir Matthew White Ridley had been elected as MP for Morpeth in 1768, his political career began in earnest in 1774 when his father's declining health propelled him on to Newcastle's aldermanic bench and thence into the mayoralty and the parliamentary seat which his father had held unopposed since 1747, and which he was to hand on to his eldest son in 1812. In 1778 he succeeded his father as governor of the Merchant Adventurers' Company, another nominally elective position which in practice had become part of his family's patrimony, having been held by successive generations since 1715. In all these offices he followed family tradition by consistently representing the interests of the town's ruling oligarchy against those of 'the leather aprons' or 'raggamuffins', and he was equally consistent in his opposition to parliamentary reform. His electoral appeal outside the charmed circle of Newcastle's magistracy seems to have rested partly on tradition but mainly on his dominant position in the constituency's staple industry: an election song dating from 1784 made this abundantly clear by its crude but effective coupling of '
Brandling for ever and Ridley for aye, 

There's plenty of coals on our waggon way. 
(Knox, 'Peace', 19)' In the Commons Ridley frequently voted with the whig opposition, but is best described as an independent; he took his own line on the main issues of the day, and intervened mainly to represent what he regarded as the best interests of his constituents. 
Ridley portrayed himself in his correspondence and relatively infrequent speeches as a typical, plain-spoken, independent-minded country gentleman, and in some senses his background and education had prepared him for a conventional role in the landed gentry. Few county families, however, combined the quasi-feudal power of the Ridleys over their Newcastle fiefdom with the shrewd business sense that allowed each successive generation not simply to maintain their industrial inheritance but also to move into new and potentially lucrative areas of enterprise. Just as his father had reacted to the gradual decline of the Tyneside salt industry by diversifying into glass making, brewing, and tile making, so Ridley gradually extended his business interests into banking, insurance, and public utilities. In 1787, on the retirement of Ralph Carr, he became the leading partner in Newcastle's Old Bank, an investment which was not only profitable in itself but which allowed him to channel his own business through the bank free of charge. Within a few years the Old Bank had combined with one of its local rivals to establish an insurance company, the Newcastle Fire Office, which in 1797 acquired and extended the city's original waterworks, mainly in the interests of providing an adequate supply of water to protect the properties which it insured. In 1805 Ridley became a director of the Globe Insurance Company, drawing a salary of $150 a year, and in the later years of his life he acquired a portfolio of minor investments in transport improvements and government securities. His main sources of income, however, were still derived from the White and Ridley families' extensive holdings in the coal industry, from his partnership in the Northumberland Broad and Crown Glass Company, and from the Heaton and Blagdon estates. 
Ridley married Sarah Colborne (died 1806), the daughter and eventual heir of Benjamin Colborne of Bath, on 12 July 1777; they had five sons and one daughter. Sarah was described in 1778 as 'not the Pink of Gentility but very good humoured' (Elwin, 119), and it is to be hoped that she was also tolerant, since her husband was allegedly irresistible to women. In 1793 he was ordered to pay $400 in damages to one of his constituents after being caught 'in flagrante delicto' with the latter's wife on the staircase of their house in Newcastle, a misfortune which seems to have had little effect on his local reputation for 'urbanity of manners and a most endearing condescension in his general intercourse with society' (Northumberland Record Office, ZRI 52/6). He died on 9 April 1813 in Portland Place, London, after a long illness, and was succeeded as third baronet by his eldest son, also Matthew White Ridley (1778-1836). 


@@@@@


doc= 47960


Sir Roger Mostyn (1567/8-1642). Roger Mostyn's relations with his father were particularly bad. There is no explanation of the estrangement but it may have been connected with the son's marriage in 1596 to Mary (1581-1653), daughter of John Wynn of Gwydir, with whom Sir Thomas Mostyn was at odds. Even before Roger Mostyn inherited the estate, he was buying land; he added to the estate itself, and his will shows his determination to provide for his younger sons. His activity in the land market during his father's lifetime may have been financed by the exploitation of the Mostyn coal measures, which he seems to have put on a proper commercial footing; he was certainly independent of his father for many years before he inherited the estate. Mostyn never seems to have been short of ready cash and in 1619, soon after he succeeded, his lands, including the coalmines, were valued at $3275, his annual income being estimated at $1678. He represented Flintshire in parliament from 1621 to 1622, but this was the only occasion on which he did so. There was a convention that the county seat went around the four leading families there in turn, and London seems, in any case, to have had little attraction for Mostyn, although his surviving letters show him to have been well informed about public affairs. When a new parliament was in the offing in 1624 he stated that he did not wish his eldest son, Thomas Mostyn (died 1642), to stand for Flintshire. In the first place it was the turn of another family to represent the county and in the second place he did not wish to see the young man living apart from his wife in the capital, where he might be drawn into bad company. Like his father, Mostyn was sheriff of Flintshire and a JP in that county and in Caernarvonshire, as well as being a deputy lieutenant; in 1617 he was appointed to James I's council in the marches of Wales. 
Although Mostyn had no patron in high places, he was on friendly terms with the leading figure from north Wales, John Williams, bishop of Lincoln and keeper of the great seal. His second son, John Mostyn, was in Williams's service. Roger Mostyn was the first of the family to attend university, matriculating at Brasenose College, Oxford, on 8 May 1584 and entering Lincoln's Inn in 1588. He was on friendly terms with his father-in-law; more is known about him than about any of his predecessors because of the voluminous Gwydir correspondence, which reveals that Wynn had a great respect for his judgement. His connection with the Gwydir interest predated his marriage and may possibly have helped to bring it about. From 1593 Mostyn was one of the trustees under the will of Sir John Wynn's uncle, Robert Wynn, the builder of Plas Mawr in Conwy, Caernarvonshire, being the cousin of Robert Wynn's second wife. This trusteeship was to lead to considerable ill feeling and litigation after Robert Wynn's death in 1598, with Mostyn's integrity being called in question. Sir John Wynn may have been instrumental in securing Mostyn's knighthood on 23 May 1606; he also obtained the manor of Mostyn, previously leased by the family, for him. Sir Roger Mostyn died on 18 August 1642 and was buried at Whitford. His eldest son predeceased him some months earlier and the estate was therefore inherited by his grandson Roger Mostyn. He left four other surviving sons, all of whom, together with two daughters, were provided for in his will. 
The fact that the Mostyn estate was spread over four counties meant that the family, despite its wealth, never exercised the concentrated local power and influence that some of the leading north Wales families enjoyed. William, Sir Thomas (died 1618), and Sir Roger Mostyn all sat in parliament, but it was local office and the authority that went with it that was important to them, and none of them had any desire to cut a figure at Westminster. However, they were among the leading patrons of the Welsh cultural tradition, the first Thomas Mostyn being the first to enjoy the close relationship with the bardic order that distinguished the family in the sixteenth century. The origins of this relationship are unclear, but William Mostyn was responsible for organizing the eisteddfod at Caerwys, Flintshire, in 1567, which was intended as a public examination of the poets' professional skills. His grandfather Richard ap Hywel was similarly involved in the first Caerwys eisteddfod in 1523. 


@@@@@


doc= 47961


Newdigate, Sir Richard, second baronet (1644-1710), landowner and mining entrepreneur, was born on 5 May 1644, the eighth child and third (but first surviving) son of Richard Newdigate (1602-1678) and his wife, Juliana ('c'.1610-1685), sister of Sir Francis Leigh, Baron Dunsmore, later earl of Chichester. He claimed William Fuller (1608-1675) as his old schoolmaster, and was admitted to Gray's Inn in 1654 when his father was created sergeant. Matriculating at Christ Church, Oxford, on 21 March 1661, he was still in residence in 1662, but left without a degree. However, he retained lasting links with Oxford, especially through correspondence with the dean of Christ Church, John Fell (1625-1686). 
After his first marriage, on 21 December 1665 to Mary (1646-1692), daughter of Sir Edward Bagot of Blithefield, Staffordshire, Newdigate settled at Arbury Hall, the family seat near Nuneaton in Warwickshire. Here, in addition to acting as broker for certain Birmingham gunsmiths and drawing up proposals for a canal between the Severn and the Avon, he embarked on increasingly ambitious and costly schemes for the improvement of his estates. To his house were added an elaborate private chapel, grandiose stables, and gardens which impressed his contemporaries. A comprehensive five-volume study of his parish, Chilvers Coton, undertaken for him between 1681 and 1684, provides a uniquely detailed and accurate picture of landownership, land use, and community structure at this time. 
Newdigate's particular enthusiasm was reserved for his coal mines, and he considered himself such an expert on them that 'it was morally impossible that he should fail' (Newdigate, 'The Case'). His inventiveness extended to the construction of a waterway to carry coal from Arbury to Nuneaton (1687), the pioneering use of gunpowder blasting, and the installation of a 'great water wheel' to drain the pits (1707). The wheel cost about $2360, but soon after Newdigate's death it was superseded by a Newcomen engine. Investment was heavy; returns habitually fell short of Newdigate's over-optimistic expectations. 
Newdigate's private writings reveal a pious, orthodox Anglican, and he had friends in the Caroline clerical establishment. However, he had an acrimonious dispute with the incumbent at one of his family's residences at Harefield, in Middlesex, and his uncompromising anti-popery and chosen political stance brought accusations of over-familiarity with 'fanatics'. Appointed in 1675 to the Warwickshire commission of the peace, on which he was fairly active, he soon displayed wider ambitions. An abortive attempt in early 1678 to enter the war against France brought charges of levying troops without a warrant. His unsuccessful candidacy for a county seat in both elections of 1679 alienated a majority of the Warwickshire gentry, who were critical of his 'country' stance and personal demeanour. In November 1679 the lords Denbigh and Brooke gained his dismissal both from the magistrates' bench and from his position, briefly, as gentleman of the privy chamber. Yet two months later he was offered a peerage and, 'despite abominable foul play' (Newdigate to Conway, 'CSP dom.', '1680-81', 43-4), reported to Edward, earl of Conway, the vindication of his behaviour at the summer assizes. Elected to the Oxford parliament of 1681, he made contact with Monmouth, but had his considerable armoury confiscated after the Rye House plot and had to work hard after James's accession to prove his loyalty. Restored to the bench and returned to the Convention Parliament in 1689, he continued an active and loyal magistrate to William III. 
In the last decade of Newdigate's life, his once affectionate relations with most of his seven daughters and four surviving sons deteriorated. Their petition in 1701 to have him declared insane was withdrawn after arbitration, but rifts reopened after his second marriage, to Henrietta (died 1739), daughter of Thomas Wigginton, contracted on 6 August 1703 but acknowledged only after a court of arches case in 1704. Newdigate's outrage at his 'persecution' was manifested in a colourful, but largely unconvincing, pamphlet in 1707. There were no surviving children from this marriage. 
Newdigate died in London on 4 January 1710 and was buried with his ancestors at Harefield. His heir, Richard, whose so-called 'hellish contrivances' (WCRO, CR136, C1977) led to his exclusion from Newdigate's will, inherited by prior settlement an estate overburdened by debt. 


@@@@@


doc= 47963


North, Thomas (1810/11-1868), coal owner, was born probably at the Toll House, London Road, Nottingham. He was the son and heir of Thomas North (died 'c'.1833), a toll-gate keeper and mining contractor, but little else is known about his early life. He married twice; following the death of his first wife, Hannah Laycock (1811/12-1865), North married Catherine Sarah Stanley (died 1920); they had a son, also called Thomas, born in 1867. In the 1820s the population of Nottingham was growing under the impetus of a fast-expanding demand for the machine-wrought lace in which the town specialized. North's father embarked on brick making at Mapperley, near Nottingham, and the production of coal from small mines at Babbington village, near Ilkeston. He is known to have borrowed $800 from Thomas Nunn, a chemist, in 1826; but apart from this the source of his capital can only be guessed at. 
Between 1832 and 1841 (when he moved to The Park, Nottingham) North lived at Babbington Cottage, and was in overall control of the mining enterprise in that village. These mines were run by sub-contractors called 'butties', who hired the labour and provided the working capital. Mining methods and equipment were primitive and working conditions harsh. In 1835 North was joined by Thomas Wakefield (1791-1871), a member of a prosperous family engaged in textiles, who injected substantial capital funds into the partnership. In 1839 James Morley of Sneinton (third son of Richard Morley, a partner in the textile firm of I. and R. Morley) also joined the partnership; he contributed capital and worked full time without salary. About this time North and Wakefield were taking out mining leases over a wide area to the north of Nottingham, and were busily engaged in widening and deepening old shafts and sinking new ones. Between 1835 and 1844 they also constructed 18 miles of private railway, linking all their mines with canals, landsale wharves, and, subsequently, main-line railways, which gave them access to a substantial market at minimal cost. In July 1845 a fourth partner, Samuel Parsons, was admitted by agreeing to pay $18,000, in instalments, for a one-fifth share of the firm. 
North and his partners then embarked on a new and risky venture. Up to this point all coalmines in Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire had been sunk into the exposed coalfield, where the seams outcropped onto the surface. The new Cinderhill colliery (about 3 miles north of Nottingham) was to work coal in the east of the coalfield, where the seams were concealed below magnesian limestone. The general belief was that either there was no coal beneath the limestone or, if there was, it was of no value. However, relying on the advice of his mining engineer, J. T. Woodhouse of Moira, North sank two shafts into the top hard seam in 1841-3; production commenced using the most up-to-date methods and equipment -- the true longwall system, a powerful winding engine, iron wire ropes, shaft cages held rigid in the shafts by guide rails, mechanical haulage underground, efficient furnace ventilation, and pumping equipment. Also the shafts were lined with wrought iron 'tubbing' to keep them dry. All these were new to the district. Unfortunately a major fault to the east of the shafts brought production almost to a halt in March 1845, and pessimists were certain that this marked the limit of the coalfield. But North decided to drive a stone heading through the fault, and though by the middle of September 1847 he was in dire financial straits and had almost given up, coal was once more reached and production recommenced. Unfortunately the chief capital provider, Wakefield, had been bankrupted, losing his own money, that of his late father's estate, and funds entrusted to him by various charitable institutions. To add to North's difficulties, Morley felt cheated also, and consequently the partnership came to an end; North carried on as sole proprietor with the backing of Wright's Bank. For his share in the enterprise, Wakefield received from North only $2000, a mere fraction of the amount he had invested. 
Thomas Wakefield had been leader of the whig Liberal group that dominated the Nottingham borough council. It was owing to his influence that North became a councillor in 1837 and mayor in 1844-5. In 1859 North was elected alderman, a position he held until his death in 1868. However, unlike Wakefield, he played no active part in politics and rarely spoke in council. Although coming from a Baptist background, North became an Anglican and was for some years a churchwarden at Basford parish church, Nottinghamshire. At a cost of $2000 in 1856 he provided a daughter church at Cinderhill, close to Basford Hall, the substantial mansion he leased in 1851 and in which he resided until his death. He also provided a Baptist mission hall at Cinderhill and a General Baptist chapel in Babbington village, along with houses for his workers. 
North sank several new collieries similar to Cinderhill in the 1850s and 1860s. He also owned Nottinghamshire's largest brickworks, adjacent to his Cinderhill mine. He built a gasworks which supplied gas lighting to his mines as well as to chapels and workmen's houses. Without doubt he over-extended himself financially, and he and his agent spent much time and energy fending off creditors. When he died he owed Wright's Bank over $190,000. Ironically, the period 1871-4 was one of high prosperity in the coal trade, and had North lived his debts would have been cleared and his massive investment would have shown a handsome return. 
North's pioneering venture at Cinderhill induced others to invest in large, well-equipped collieries to exploit the concealed coalfield in Nottinghamshire, which became the most profitable coalmining district in Britain. Despite his flawed character, North's enterprise and vision brought prosperity to what had been a poverty-stricken agricultural and framework-knitting district. He died at Basford Hall, Nottinghamshire, on 28 January 1868, from haematuria and congestion of the lungs, and was buried at Old Basford cemetery. He was survived by his second wife, and left an estate valued at under $120,000. 


@@@@@


doc= 47964


Pochin, Henry Davis (1824-1895), manufacturing chemist and industrialist, was born in Wigston, near Leicester, on 25 May 1824, the eldest son of William Pochin (1794?-1850), a Leicestershire farmer, and his second wife. Nothing is known of his early education but at the age of thirteen he spent a short time finishing off his education at the Leicester proprietary school, in which his father had a financial interest. He then entered the chemical and drug trade and was first apprenticed, for five years from 1838, to a Mr Harris of Northampton; he then joined James Woolley in Manchester. After spells in Edinburgh and London he won a certificate of merit in the Pharmaceutical Society's materia medica examination in 1847. In 1848 he rejoined Woolley and, in 1849, with the aid of a loan of $600 from his father, became a partner with Woolley and a Mr Halliday in A. P. Halliday & Co., manufacturing chemists of Salford. 
On 20 April 1852 Pochin married Agnes (1825-1908) ['see 'Pochin, Agnes], youngest daughter of George Gretton Heap and his wife, Hannah, of Timperley, Cheshire, and the sister of the wife of his late partner, Halliday. Both Pochin and his wife were radicals, having links with John Bright. In 1855 Agnes wrote 'The Right of Women to Exercise the Elective Franchise'. In 1853 Pochin was elected a member of Salford council; later he was its fifteenth mayor (1866-8). Attempts to enter parliament between 1865 and the early 1870s resulted in failure, however; his only election success, as a Liberal candidate for the county of Stafford in 1868, was subsequently overturned following complaints of intimidation levelled against his agent and supporters during the election. 
Following Woolley's death in 1858 Pochin became sole owner of the Salford chemical business, which expanded rapidly, with new branches being opened at Bristol (1863) and Newcastle upon Tyne (1865). The success was linked to Pochin's inventive ability -- he patented a process for producing aluminous cake (a substance used in bleaching and papermaking) and, with Edward Hunt, a process for purifying brown rosin used in soap manufacture -- and he also provided the financial basis for his involvement, together with a group of associates including David Chadwick (borough treasurer of Salford at the time Pochin became a councillor), in the promotion of several joint-stock companies, mainly in the iron and steel and engineering industries. In this manner Pochin became a director of twenty-two companies, including the Staveley Coal and Iron Company Ltd, John Brown & Co. Ltd, Bolckow, Vaughan & Co. Ltd, and the Tredegar Coal and Iron Company Ltd. In association with Sir Edward Watkin, Pochin was involved in the rescue of the insolvent Metropolitan Railway Company. He played an important role in its return to prosperity and served as deputy chairman until his death. Pochin was also a director of the Manchester, Sheffield, and Lincolnshire Railway. 
In 1870 Pochin, who had previously resided at Broughton Old Hall, Salford, moved to Barn Elms, Surrey, formerly the home of Sir Francis Walsingham. Failure to acquire the estate led him to turn his attention to north Wales, where he acquired a number of properties and subsequently helped to develop the town of Prestatyn as a holiday resort. Among these acquisitions was the Bodnod estate, near Conwy, acquired in 1874 and renamed Bodnant. Pochin took up residence there in 1876, following extensive alterations to both the house and gardens. The well-known landscape gardener Milner assisted with the latter work, though Pochin, a conifer enthusiast, was personally responsible for many changes. It was following additional work by Pochin's daughter, Laura Elizabeth McLaren, and her son, Henry Duncan McLaren, however, that the gardens at Bodnant acquired their fame. 
Pochin, who had been a keen athlete and enjoyed long walks on the Welsh mountains, was an enthusiastic archaeologist and, together with his wife, enjoyed entertaining and intellectual company. In later years he became a justice of the peace, a deputy lieutenant, and the sheriff of Denbighshire. Throughout his life Pochin had suffered from headaches and high blood pressure. In December 1890 he suffered a slight stroke and, though he made a full recovery, following sixteen months of subsequent ill health he died on 28 October 1895 at Bodnant Hall, Eglwys-bach, Denbighshire. He was survived by his wife and two of his six children, Laura Elizabeth and Percival Gerald. With the latter disinherited 'for conduct which private papers confirm, fully warranted that decision' (Milliken, 95-6), Laura, who had married Charles Benjamin Bright McLaren (later first Baron Aberconway), inherited most of her father's property. Pochin was buried in a mausoleum at Bodnant. 


@@@@@


doc= 47967


Reynolds, George Bernard (1852/3-1925), engineer, was the only son of Commander George Stewart Reynolds (died 1882) RN and his wife, Eliza Susannah; his birth was not registered in England, but his death certificate describes him as a British subject by birth in the UK. His father died a vice-admiral, on the retired list. Details of Reynolds's education are not known, but he graduated from the Royal Indian Engineering College and served in the Indian public works department. He then worked for the Royal Dutch Oil Company in the Sumatra oilfields. Some time before 1895 he married, and although his wife, Lavinia Jane, never seems to have accompanied him on his overseas tours of duty, he wrote regularly to her. They had no children. 
In 1901 William Knox D'Arcy, having obtained an oil concession in Persia, engaged Reynolds as fields engineer there. After prospecting near the border with Mesopotamia (Iraq), Reynolds began drilling operations late in the following year. The wells had to be abandoned in 1904, and he was then instructed to investigate likely sites in south-west Persia. D'Arcy became so short of funds that he persuaded the Burmah Oil Company to finance the Persian venture. Reynolds was too proud and independent-minded to accept the constant interference of his new managers, and he often resorted to uncivil and sarcastic ripostes in his weekly correspondence to them. 
Burly and exceptionally robust, Reynolds had the presence and mental strength to face down all his problems in Persia, from troublesome issues concerning drillers and local tribesmen to hardships ranging from polluted water and aggressive insects to extremes of climate. Deriving solace from his pipe, a pet dog, and occasional picnics with cronies, he drove his men hard but was solicitous for their welfare, ordering cider, library books, seeds, and bowling kits for them. Even so, he ironically likened himself to the skipper of a windjammer, forever bombarded with complaints about the rations. 
The years 1905 to 1908 were the most arduous and frustrating in the quest for Persian oil. Drilling on an unproductive site wasted two years, and operations did not begin at his favoured location, Masjed-e-Suleiman, until January 1908. Initial setbacks coincided with a severe cash crisis in Burmah Oil, and the directors instructed him to abandon drilling if no oil appeared at 1500 feet. Then, on 26 May 1908, oil was struck in enormous quantities within that limit. This proved to be the first of the massive Middle-Eastern oil fields; and its discovery allowed the Anglo-Persian Oil Company to be floated in London in April 1909. 
Relations between Reynolds and his employers thereafter became increasingly fractured. He resented the administrative structure the new company was planning for Persia, refused to co-operate, and deliberately withheld urgently needed information. Early in 1911 he was recalled and dismissed, with a golden handshake of $1000. No word of thanks was offered for his signal achievements. 
Sir Henri Deterding shortly afterwards recruited him to work for the Royal Dutch-Shell petroleum group in Venezuela. There he surveyed a potential oil site near Lake Maracaibo on the country's northern coast. Having reported favourably on its prospects, he was appointed fields general manager there. Physical conditions were quite as primitive as they had been in Persia. However, though by then approaching his sixties, his strong constitution and hard-won experience served him equally well there. By 1914 he had begun to produce oil commercially, on a small scale. Venezuela's oil output remained modest until in December 1922 Reynolds secured his second huge find of oil, in La Rosa field, also close to Lake Maracaibo. He must have retired shortly afterwards. 
Once back in Britain, Reynolds was asked by the directors of Anglo-Persian to travel to Persia on a courtesy visit. Before he could take up this invitation, however, he died suddenly on 23 February 1925, aged seventy-two, at the Hotel de Inglaterra, Seville. None of the oil journals in that year noticed the man whose initiative, technical skills, and doggedness had opened up the oil riches of the Middle East. Reynolds was survived by his wife who may have seen all too little of him during his eventful career. 


