@@@@@


doc= 47970


Southwell, Sir (Charles Archibald) Philip (1894-1981), petroleum geologist and industrialist, was born at Oak Royce, Calverley Lane, Rodley, Calverley, Yorkshire, on 6 June 1894, the only son of Charles Edward Southwell, medical practitioner, and his wife, Clare, 'nee' Beaumont. Educated at Newcastle under Lyme high school between 1904 and 1912, his academic achievements were overshadowed by his prowess at cricket, rugby, and hockey. Encouraged by his father's friend, the geologist Dr Wheelton Hind (1859-1920), he enrolled at Birmingham University as one of the first students on the new petroleum technology course set up there by John Cadman (1877-1941). His training was interrupted by the First World War, throughout which he served mostly in the Royal Artillery; he was awarded the MC in 1918. He then returned to Birmingham and graduated in 1920. 
Southwell's long and fruitful career in the oil industry, often in Cadman's footsteps, began when he joined S. Pearson & Son, engineering contractors. Between 1922 and 1929 he worked for the Trinidad government petroleum office. He returned briefly to marry on 17 August 1926 Mary Burnett (died 1981), daughter of Thomas Scarratt of Belmont Hall, Ipstones, Staffordshire. In 1930 he accepted Cadman's offer of the post of local manager of oil fields and geology with the Anglo-Persian Oil Company (later British Petroleum). His subsequent experience in the Persian Gulf led Southwell to predict the existence of the great oil reserves of Kuwait. Few other geologists were optimistic, and in only one well had oil been discovered in Kuwait prior to the Second World War. Southwell was then recalled and put in charge of exploring for oil reserves in England, using imported American technologies and organizing British experiments on horizontal drilling. 
In 1946 Southwell became managing director of the new Kuwait Oil Company, jointly owned by BP and the American company Gulf Oil. His task was to open up Kuwaiti fields with American partners who had no previous experience of conditions in the Middle East. He built up the company workforce to 15,000 men, who initially lived under canvas, and he went on to develop the oilfields with great success, in line with his earlier forecasts. Kuwaiti oil replaced much of that lost to Western nations when the Iranian government nationalized its oilfields in 1951. Southwell was an early advocate of the need for local control of production from Middle East fields, and he anticipated the eventual formation of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC). He deplored the invasion of Suez in 1956 and campaigned behind the scenes for its early end. 
Southwell was president of the Institute of Petroleum from 1950 to 1952, and an honorary fellow from 1959. As one of Cadman's first students, the award of the institute's Cadman memorial medal in 1954 gave him particular pleasure. He was awarded the Royal Society of Arts silver medal in 1953 for his paper on Kuwait, and he sat on the RSA council from 1958, in which year he was also knighted. He was a liveryman in the Shipwrights' Company. Southwell left BP and Kuwait Oil in 1959 having reached the age of sixty-five. Retirement was, however, far from his mind and he threw himself energetically into developing the oilfields newly discovered under the North Sea, where conditions were very different and vastly more difficult than those of the Middle East. In 1960 he became chairman of Brown and Root (UK) which laid the first pipeline from BP's West Sole field in 1966. Southwell played a pioneering role in constructing North Sea oil and gas platforms, as first chairman of Brown and Root's joint venture with George Wimpey Ltd -- Highland Fabricators from 1973, based at Nigg Bay -- and as director of the Halliburton Company in Dallas from 1973. He became president of Brown and Root (UK) in 1978 and only relinquished this and the post with Highland Fabricators on 1 January 1981. 
Southwell attributed his good health, energy, and longevity to his early passion for water polo, another sport at which he excelled. He was active in work for charities in Britain and in the Middle East, where the Southwell Hospital at Ahmadi in Kuwait was opened in 1960. He was director-general of the St John Ambulance Brigade from 1960 to 1968, a commander of the order of the Cedar of Lebanon and bailiff grand cross of the order of St John of Jerusalem, for whose eye hospital he also raised funds. Mary Southwell, who had shared enthusiastically in his interests, died in September 1981; Southwell died at the Queen Elizabeth Military Hospital, Woolwich, London, after a minor operation on 30 November 1981 and was buried at Tendring parish church in Essex on 4 December. Two sons survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 47971


Sorocold, George (c.1668-1738?), engineer, was the son of James Sorocold (1627-1675), a Lancashire gentleman who moved to Derby. Little else is known of Sorocold's life until on 7 December 1684 he married Mary, the daughter of Henry Franceys, a prosperous Derby apothecary. By 1702 they had thirteen children, of whom eight then survived. 
The earliest known engineering work undertaken by Sorocold was connected with the supply of water to Macclesfield between 1685 and 1687, and the recasting and rehanging of the bells at All Saints' Church in Derby in 1687. Although he had a varied engineering career, he is best-known for his pioneering work in water supply; and one of his innovations in this area was the introduction of pumps worked by water-wheels which rose and fell in accordance with the level of the stream. In 1693 a patent along these lines was granted to his working colleague, John Hadley, so there is a possibility that it was a joint venture. 
Sorocold was particularly associated with waterworks in provincial towns such as Derby, Bridgnorth, Bristol, Deal, King's Lynn, Leeds, Newcastle upon Tyne, Norwich, Portsmouth, Sheffield, and Great Yarmouth; but he also worked in London, improving London Bridge waterworks and the New River, and constructing Marchant's waterworks. At many sites his pumping machinery was adapted to other uses as well, and on occasion put to draining mines, such as at Alloa in 1710. His sole patent, a horse- or water-powered machine for sawing planks, was probably another variation. 
Sorocold was more involved in river improvement work than is often realized. His work on the early unimplemented schemes on the River Derwent is well known, but a letter he wrote in 1711, when advising on problems along the lower tidal River Lea, cites his involvement on the River Aire, probably after the death of Hadley in 1701, and on the River Cam a few years later. He expounded a philosophy of river improvement, whereby a series of locks with a fall of only 3 or 4 feet was preferred to fewer locks with larger falls, as the latter were more harmful to mills and meadows. For the non-tidal Lea, which he had surveyed at his own expense in 1702, he made the novel suggestion that it be improved by the construction of several temporary seasonal flash locks, but such recommendations were not implemented. 
There is also evidence of Sorocold's involvement in erecting iron forges, and in setting up atmospheric engines, and he had some interest in dock engineering. Statements about his involvement in the construction of Howlands Dock in Surrey cannot be substantiated by contemporary evidence, but he did give advice to the corporation of Liverpool on their first wet dock scheme, a dock built by Thomas Steers. He also erected the mill work at Cotchetts' silk mill at Derby in 1702, an enterprise taken over in 1719 by John Lombe, and then Sir Thomas Lombe. This mill was one of the most important early modern factories. In 1699 Thomas Surbey noted that when Sorocold was showing some gentlemen round the corn mill at Derby waterworks he fell into the mill race and although swept under the water-wheel, was not hurt. However, Daniel Defoe, in his 'Tour thro' the Whole Island of Great Britain' (1727), reported this accident as having occurred at Lombe's silk mill. 
Sorocold made several trips to Scotland between 1710 and 1715, and he assisted John Adair in surveying the route of a proposed canal between the Forth and the Clyde. In 1717 he was described as the 'ingenious, unfortunate, mathematician' (Williamson, 45), but it is not known why. His engineering skills were undoubtedly valued by his contemporaries: he was characterized as 'one of the two engineers of this age who never failed in what they undertook because they considered perfection and success of their work first and their profit afterwards' (private information). 
The date of Sorocold's death is not known, but the lease to Derby waterworks was still in his name as late as 1738. 


@@@@@


doc= 47974


Thomas, Lucy (bap. 1781, d. 1847), colliery owner, was baptized at Llansamlet in south Wales on 11 March 1781, the daughter of Job Williams and his wife, Ann James. Much remains obscure about her early life, but she married Robert Thomas (died 1833) at Llansamlet on 13 June 1802. Lucy's husband was a contractor of a coal level at Cyfarthfa ironworks, and in the 1820s he opened his own coal working at Waun Wyllt, near Abercannaid, just south of Merthyr Tudful. Between 1805 and 1825 they had six sons and two daughters. 
The relative absence of knowledge about Lucy Thomas's personal details perhaps encouraged the development of her legendary reputation in Welsh industrial history: she was referred to as the 'mother of the Welsh steam-coal trade'. This title derived from the fact that the initial cargoes of steam-coal to London came from the Thomas family's tiny level at Waun Wyllt, and from the belief that these enterprises were negotiated with Robert Thomas's widow, Lucy. Robert Thomas had opened the level in 1828 on a yearly tenancy from Lord Plymouth, and the terms explicitly banned any sale to the four ironworks which dominated the town. 
In November 1830 George Insole shipped to London 413 tons of smokeless steam-coal from the (later) celebrated 'Four Feet' seam. In the same year -- whether before or shortly afterwards is unclear -- James Marychurch and two companions (George Locket and James Duke) also visited Waun Wyllt and are said to have agreed to act as agents in Cardiff and London for the whole output, but Insole continued to pay first Robert and (after his death) Lucy for monthly quantities. Lucy Thomas and her son William later also worked the coal under the neighbouring Graig Farm, for which a lease was signed in 1838. In 1843 William Thomas leased the Llety Siencyn colliery in the neighbouring Aberdar valley. In his memoirs John Nixon later described how Lucy Thomas conducted business at Graig colliery: 'She sat in her office, a wooden hut near the pit's mouth and traded for cash, placing in a basket over her head the moneys which she received for her coal. Her cleverness, her witty tongue, her pleasant manner were known to all the countryside. (Smith, 8)' Much of Lucy Thomas's story is taken from the 1888 account given by the Merthyr historian Charles Wilkins, who had a penchant for imaginative touches but was usually sound on essentials. The impression he gives is of an enterprising woman looking for extra markets. However, this is certainly exaggerated: the accounts agree that it was Insole and Marychurch who struggled to seek her out in Abercannaid, and the latter seems to have contracted for a set price, which suggests that Mrs Thomas was not the risk taker. In 1840 John Nixon also claimed that she was reluctant to increase her output to provide him with supplies. Moreover, before her husband died on 19 February 1833, all business references mention only Robert Thomas, who was almost certainly the one to negotiate the initial shipments. Lucy and her eldest son, Robert, were granted probate and thereafter Insole paid to her the sums due for coal dispatched. It was not until 1835 that the account with the Glamorganshire Canal was transferred from Robert to Lucy Thomas. More substantially, although Cardiff later dominated the steam-coal trade, the earliest efforts to open a London market in steam-coal probably came from the ports of Swansea and Llanelli to the west. The Llangennech company, based near Llanelli, sent steam-coal -- and not just anthracite -- to London as early as 1824, and until the opening of the Aberdar valley in the 1840s most Welsh coal sent to London came from the west. Indeed, while Lucy Thomas was alive, her Merthyr coal was the only source in the Merthyr area for steam-coal shipments. Nevertheless, such mundane considerations have been unable to withstand the power of a myth based on the singularity of a woman actively engaged in the almost totally male world of the coal industry. The myth was given some sort of material embodiment when her granddaughter's husband, W. T. Lewis, first Baron Merthyr, paid part of the cost of a water fountain built in Merthyr in remembrance of Robert and Lucy Thomas, in 1906. 
Lucy Thomas died on 27 September 1847 at Abercannaid, Merthyr Tudful, having suffered from typhoid fever in the two previous weeks. Like other members of the family, she was buried in the cemetery of the Unitarian chapel at Cefncoedycymer, near Merthyr. Her estate, including the Waun Wyllt colliery and her half-interest (with her son William) in the Graig colliery, was valued at $11,448. However adventurous Lucy Thomas may have been as an entrepreneur, she clearly had conventional views about the solidity of real estate: in her will she bequeathed nearly fifty freehold and leasehold houses and cottages to her various children. 


@@@@@


doc= 47976


Turner, Sir (Ronald) Mark Cunliffe (1906-1980), merchant banker, was born on 29 March 1906 at 41 Cheyne Court, Chelsea, the only son and younger child of Christopher Rede Turner (1877-1967), clerk in the House of Commons, and his wife, Jill Helen, daughter of Harry Pickersgill Cunliffe (1858-1919), of Staughton Manor, Huntingdonshire. He was grandson of Major-General Sir Alfred Turner (1842-1918), military policeman, alpinist, polyglot, and chairman of the North Borneo State Rubber Company. After schooling at Wellington College, Mark Turner at the age of eighteen became a messenger at the merchant bank of M. Samuel in 1924. He came to specialize in corporate finance, but after the rejection of his proposals for the bank to fund capital-starved businesses with good growth prospects he transferred in 1934 to the smaller merchant banking house of Robert Benson & Co. 
Bensons had recently formed the Kenterne Trust to operate in the new issues business. Turner's energy and ingenuity in ensuring successful share issues in textiles, steel, paper, and catering propelled Bensons to a higher ranking among City merchant banks. Turner was firm, tactful, and decisive, with superb powers of assimilation and analysis enabling him to form clear views and reliable recommendations on diverse business propositions. Both then and in later life he worked intensely hard and marshalled his time and energy with remarkable effectiveness. He had much charm, and an eager smile. When young he was active in the Peckham Health Centre, a pioneering institution promoting family health, and he maintained progressive sympathies throughout his life. 
In 1931 Turner married Elizabeth Mary ('b'. 1910), daughter of Major-General Hugh Clement Sutton, and granddaughter of Charles Lindley Wood, second Viscount Halifax. They had one daughter. This marriage was dissolved in 1936 and in 1939 he married Margaret (1913-1997), daughter of Major-General Sir Hereward Wake, thirteenth baronet, and granddaughter of the founder of Robert Benson. 'Peggy' Turner was a delightful woman, with an attractively deep voice, a slightly scatterbrained manner, a wry, shrewd humour, and an infectious capacity for enjoyment. They had three sons and two daughters. 
Between 1939 and 1944 Turner was an official at the Ministry of Economic Warfare. He was responsible for devising and operating a blockade of petroleum oil supplies to Spain in 1940-42. This deterred the Spanish from joining the axis powers, and turned Generalissimo Franco's regime from a stance of non-belligerency in 1940 to neutrality by 1942. He also advised on the destruction of Romanian oilfields and on oil policy generally. Turner was recruited to the Foreign Office in 1944 as head of a new department charged with preparing the post-war allied administration of Germany and Austria. At the request of Ernest Bevin he postponed his return to banking, and served in 1945-7 as under-secretary for economic affairs at the Control Office for Germany and Austria. He was knighted in 1946. 
Turner resumed his banking career in 1947 and became joint managing director of the newly expanded Robert Benson, Lonsdale & Co.; during the early 1950s he emerged as the leading figure in the bank. He instigated the merger of Robert Benson Lonsdale with the accepting house, Kleinwort, to form the highly successful merchant bank of Kleinwort Benson in 1961. He was a director of Kleinwort Benson from its formation until 1977, and acted as senior executive (1961-71) and deputy chairman (1966-71). As a merchant banker with great mental gifts his expertise was sought by many businesses. He joined the boards of such companies as Rio Tinto (1947), Commercial Union Assurance (1948), Calico Printers (1952), Tanganyika Concessions, Tunnel Portland Cement, Nuclear Developments, Transport Holdings (1962), Toronto-Dominion Bank (1963), Midland and International Banks (1966), National Cash Register (1968), Whitbread Investment (1969), Bank of America Limited (1971), and the Sotheby Park Bernet art auctioneers (1977). As one example of the facilitating role he filled as a non-executive director, Turner was still on the board of Commercial Union, and Kleinwort Benson was its financial adviser, when Commercial Union took over Northern and Employers in what was then the largest ever insurance merger (1968). Turner was also chairman of the Mercantile Credit Company (1957-72) during a period of strategic reform and dynamic expansion; later he was chairman of British Home Stores (1968-76). 
The most important of Turner's outside interests was Rio Tinto. Acting as part-time managing director in 1948-50, Turner laid the strategy which transformed a vulnerable business, with only a pyrites mine in Spain and investments in the Rhodesian copperbelt, into one of Britain's most powerful multinationals. He determined that the company must expand into metal mining in politically stable nations, and selected many key personnel to implement this strategy. His recruitment of J. N. V. Duncan, and their subsequent co-operation, was decisive in Rio Tinto's regeneration. Turner was crucial in its merger with the Zinc Corporation to form Rio Tinto Zinc (1961) and in raising large funds for mining development with little security other than long-term supply agreements. His diplomatic skills were valuable in negotiations with foreign governments. Following Duncan's sudden death Turner became chief executive (1975-8) and chairman of RTZ from 1975 until his death. During this period he had to justify the company's plans to its environmentalist critics, and he was involved in other delicate issues: he pleaded the fifth amendment in litigation pursued by Westinghouse Electric, alleging an international uranium cartel (1977). Lord Charteris of Amisfield, who was Turner's co-director at RTZ, admired 'his imagination, his humour, his infectious sense of fun, his care for others and his determination always to hold to what was true' ('The Times', 17 Dec 1980). 
Although Tony Benn in 1975 claimed that Turner was an archetype 'of the international capitalist and British tory establishment' (Benn, 403), Turner had an active social sense and considerable moral courage. When he joined the Observer Trust in 1959, that reformist Sunday newspaper was still anathema in the City, owing to its opposition to the Anglo-French expedition at Suez in 1956. Friends and colleagues were angered by Turner's decision but, according to the editor of 'The Observer', David Astor, 'for the next seventeen years [Turner] supported the paper's position of independence with vigour, and devoted long, unremunerated hours to steering its financial course' ('The Observer', 21 Dec 1980). Turner retired as trustee in 1976. 
Turner had discriminating cultural tastes, and in 1944 was involved in negotiations with the Pilgrim Trust and the National Trust to secure the future of Audley End after Lord Braybrooke's death in action. Later he was a governor of Brunel University, and a trustee of the Glyndebourne Arts Trust. He died of abdominal cancer on 13 December 1980 at his home, 3 The Grove, Highgate, London, survived by his second wife, who died on 21 April 1997. 


@@@@@


doc= 47980


Wallace, (Charles) William (1855-1916), oil industrialist, was born in Calcutta on 21 November 1855, the elder son of Alexander Wallace, an East India merchant, and his wife, Helen, 'nee' Davidson. He was educated at Framlingham College, Suffolk ('c'.1866-1874), and in 1874 joined a Calcutta mercantile firm (not his father's). He rose rapidly in that business, helping to sort out its chaotic accounts, and in 1886 he refounded it as Shaw, Wallace & Co. In 1881 he married Ellen Charlotte, daughter of Captain George Fulton of the Royal Engineers, a veteran of the siege of Lucknow in 1857; they had two sons and three daughters. 
One of the agencies held by Shaw Wallace was for marketing kerosene in India for the Burmah Oil Company. When in 1892 Wallace returned to London, he found himself helping out in the nearby London office of Burmah Oil, of which he became a director in 1902. There he assisted the chairman, John Cargill, who was based in Glasgow, over negotiating with the Admiralty an agreement, signed in 1905, to supply fuel oil from Rangoon. 
Cargill and Wallace, aided by the company's consultant, Sir Boverton Redwood, jointly agreed to buy for Burmah Oil some Persian oil concessions from William Knox D'Arcy; Wallace thereafter maintained contacts with government departments in London. Despite bouts of severe liver disorder, Wallace agreed to become vice-chairman and managing director of a new firm, the Anglo-Persian Oil Company, set up in 1909 after oil had been discovered in Persia. His chairman was the aged imperialist Donald Alexander Smith, first Baron Strathcona. Wallace's executive assistant, and successor as managing director in 1910, was Charles Greenway, a former employee in Shaw Wallace. 
From 1912 onwards, Greenway attempted to persuade the British government to purchase a majority stake in Anglo-Persian, and this was finally agreed in 1914. These negotiations, which involved a number of government departments, were protracted and arduous. Wallace monitored every move taken by Greenway, but remained largely in the background, emerging only when Greenway needed powerful support. 
Wallace possessed the intellectual capacity and the vision to have become one of the country's outstanding oil entrepreneurs of his day. As an old India hand, he grasped the immense economic and strategic advantages to Britain of a presence in Persia, to forestall Russian expansionist designs on Britain's route to the east. However, he exercised his talents mainly behind the scenes, partly because of illness; yet he would not have been happy as a high-profile tycoon. His influence sprang from a thorough knowledge of commercial conditions in the East and from his patent integrity and reliable judgement. The latter was not infallible, however, as he thought that the allies were going to lose the First World War; and he could be crusty, sceptical, and outspoken to a fault. His marriage ended in separation, but he got on well with his children and was devastated by the death of his younger son in action. A human touch was his legacy to a daughter's friend, Gwen Ffrangcon-Davies, to help her in what later became an acting career of distinction. 
Equally human were Wallace's idiosyncrasies, such as his rule in Shaw Wallace that no one could be appointed who was related to those already in the firm. Again, believing that wealth acquired from the people should be appropriately returned, he bequeathed the residue of his $125,966 estate to the treasuries of Britain and India. In 1977 the British exchequer received from this source $1 million, and the governments of India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, and Burma shared in a further $1 million. Wallace had no particular interests outside his work, apart from recreational travel in company with one or more of his daughters. Had he been a more contented man, his achievements might have been less considerable. 
On Strathcona's death in 1914, Wallace's reputation in Whitehall was so high that he was officially recommended to be chairman of the Anglo-Persian Oil Company. He declined because of poor health; a year later he had to give up all business commitments. By the time of his death he had lost his sight; he died of kidney failure on 2 August 1916 at his London home, 76 Avenue Road, St John's Wood. 


@@@@@


doc= 47981


Watson, Robert Irving (1878-1948), oil industrialist, was born at Nith Bank, Dumfries, on 22 November 1878, the younger son of Thomas Watson, editor and proprietor of the 'Dumfries and Galloway Standard', and his wife, Nancy Hamilton. At Dumfries Academy, he became classical 'dux', or star pupil of his year. 
Having determined on a career in the East, Watson obtained some legal training and in 1900 joined the Burmah Oil Company. At the company's agency in Rangoon, his talent for hard work and a capacity for unravelling the most complex issues marked him out for future promotion. In 1909 he married Caroline, daughter of Alexander Walker Mouat, a dentist from Edinburgh; they had a daughter and two sons. In 1912 Watson returned to become deputy manager in Burmah Oil's London office. Among his many tasks was that of maintaining regular contact with Robert Waley Cohen of Royal Dutch Shell over the workings of their eastern marketing agreements. 
Soon after the outbreak of the First World War, Watson took charge of Burmah Oil's London office, later becoming a member of the petroleum pool board, which was responsible for allocating oil products throughout Britain. As his company's 'de facto' managing director, although not appointed as such until 1920, he had the agreement of the chairman in Glasgow, Sir John Cargill, to overhaul systematically every part of the company's operations: for example, he introduced electrification of the drilling process in the Burmese oilfields and up-to-date refining and prospecting techniques. In 1921 he oversaw the company's acquisition of the languishing Assam Oil Company, and the expenditure of millions on making it efficient and profitable. 
However, Watson failed in an ambitious attempt, together with Cohen, to form a major all-British oil group comprising Burmah Oil, Shell, and Anglo-Persian. Although Conservative ministers favoured selling the government-held shares in Anglo-Persian in order to help forward the merger, that company's top management was broadly hostile to the scheme, as were the Admiralty, the government of India, motorists' organizations, and the trade unions. It was finally rejected by the first Labour government in 1924, a decision upheld by the incoming Conservative cabinet later that year. Watson had very adroitly played a mediocre hand in promoting the scheme in Whitehall and Delhi; he was greatly disappointed at its collapse. As a second best, therefore, he helped to create a joint marketing organization, the Burmah-Shell Oil Storage and Distributing Company of India; in 1928 Burmah Oil bought a large shareholding stake in Shell, after which Watson was elected to that company's board. 
Almost single-handedly, Watson turned the Burmah Oil Company from a collection of loose-knit managing agencies into a modern and centralized multinational company; this survived the depression years with reduced profits but a robust corporate structure. By the 1930s his reputation among oil magnates on both sides of the Atlantic was such that scarcely any important international petroleum conference would have been complete without this unassuming but resourceful man, who was always ready with a fresh idea or a relevant fact. Slight and dapper, he nevertheless had a personal authority that was out of all proportion to the relative smallness of his own company. 
In 1938 Watson was offered the chairmanship of the Petroleum Board, designed to control oil distribution in Britain in the event of war. He declined the post, but when war came he arranged for the oilfields in Burma and Assam to increase production to meet the needs of the forces and civilian markets in the Far East. Then, after the entry of Japan into the war, Burma itself was invaded by the Japanese. Watson therefore had to agree to the destruction of the refineries in Rangoon and the oilfield installations, to deny them to the invaders. However, continued output from Assam, together with investment income from the shareholdings in Anglo-Persian and in Shell, kept Burmah Oil's profits at a reasonable level. 
By 1943, when Watson became company chairman on Cargill's retirement, he was thinking ahead to the end of the war. He collected evidence for a future compensation claim from the British government for the assets destroyed in Burma, and attempted to cajole uninterested Whitehall civil servants into making plans for immediately resuming operations once Burma was recaptured. The company was not allowed to restart until 1946, by which time he was greatly concerned with the likely consequences for oil of the proposals, which became reality in 1948, for giving independence to Burma. However, Watson retired at the end of 1947, after a serious illness that year. He died of a heart attack on 26 January 1948 at his home, Lower Bowden, in Pangbourne, Berkshire. He was cremated at Reading, but his ashes were later buried at Dumfries. 


@@@@@


doc= 47983


Williams, Sir Evan, baronet (1871-1959), coal owner and employers' representative, was born at Llwynhendy, Pontarddulais, Carmarthenshire, on 2 July 1871, the elder son of Thomas Williams, coal owner, of Llwyn Gwern, Pontarddulais, and his wife, Mary Williams ('nee' Harry). Like D. A. Thomas, but unusually for Welsh coal owners of the time, Evan Williams followed an upper-class pattern of education, from public school (at Christ College, Brecon) to ancient university (at Clare College, Cambridge). In September 1903 he married Charlotte Mary (1877-1961), the youngest daughter of David Lackie, coal owner, Montrose. There were no children. Williams was created a baronet in 1935: the title lapsed on his death. 
There is an apparent paradox in Williams's career: the family was, and remained, relatively minor coal owners away from the (then) centres of activity in the south Wales coalfield; yet Williams was the major figure on the employers' side for a quarter century during which coal dominated British industry. Perhaps as a small, unthreatening coal owner himself he could bridge the endemic divisions within coal owners' associations at both district and national levels. At all events he was chairman of the Monmouthshire and South Wales Coal Owners' Association in 1913, president of its crucial conciliation board from 1918 to 1944, and, finally, was president of the Mining Association of Great Britain (MAGB) from 1919 to 1944. 
The last-named position was both central and exceptional. It was central because industrial relations in the coal industry were a significant determinant of both economic and political developments in the years between the wars; it was exceptional because before 1919 the presidency of the MAGB had always been a temporary, honorary post, and the MAGB itself had played a very limited role in representing the industry on (mostly) legislative matters. The change was induced by the extent of public acceptance of the condemnation of the coal owners embodied in the evidence to the Sankey commission in 1919. As president at the time (the youngest the MAGB had ever had) Williams played a crucial role in securing the reorganization necessary to meet the crisis: the MAGB acquired full-time staff and four standing committees, which significantly included one for 'propaganda'. In 1920 Williams reported that they had put 'nationalisation to sleep' (Supple, 'History', 57); in 1921 a national strike was successfully weathered, and Williams was informally established as a more or less permanent president. 
Throughout the inter-war years Williams sang from just two hymn-sheets: no national settlements, especially on wages, for the coal industry; and -- even more vehemently -- no interference (by state, miners, or anyone else) with the sole prerogative of the owners to manage the collieries. He never tired of the performance and, if the messages were short, their delivery was protracted. Most famously, in the dying days of the 1926 stoppage, when Winston Churchill threatened government action if the coal owners did not carry out an earlier indication to accept an element of settling by national negotiation, Williams insisted on the pure milk of district agreements. The meeting between Churchill and Williams was acrimonious and prolonged (the verbatim account covered 56 foolscap sheets). Churchill had to give way, reflecting not their relative debating skills, but Williams's awareness of two realities: the miners were then beyond resistance and (as the newspapers put it) 'is it conceivable that a conservative Government will coerce the owners, however foolish, and the assumption is, No.' (Jones, 80). Williams could also recognize when reality changed: in 1943, towards the end of his long reign, he bluntly warned the south Wales coal owners that 'the industry could not revert to the old state whereby 'we are the masters and they are the men'' (Supple, 'History', 580). 
Williams the man remains elusive. It is curious and puzzling that one who held such key positions in a key industry during a crucial period attracted so little specific attention. There was no biography and he left no memoirs or personal papers. The 'Western Mail', traditionally the coal owners' paper, carried no obituary. Too significant entirely to disappear, he has only a flickering existence in the indexes and footnotes of many of the mountain of books covering this period and this industry. Thomas Jones's early judgement of him as 'an insignificant little man' (Jones, 12) is as implausible as the claim in the 'Times' obituary that he had the 'secret goodwill' of the miners ('The Times', 5 Feb 1959). It rings truer that he was 'ever-polite and courteous' but that he was inflexible in views which 'he held with a singular tenacity and unfailingly expressed with precision and in exactly formulated phrases' (Page Arnot, 46). 
Besides other positions that Williams held in the coal industry (for example as chairman from 1930 to 1938 of the central council under the 1930 'Coal Mines Act') and in industry in general (as president in 1925-6 of the National Confederation of Employers' Organisations) he was also a JP and, in 1922-3, high sheriff of Carmarthenshire. He was a knight of the order of St John of Jerusalem and seneschal of its priory for Wales, and he was awarded an honorary LLD from the University of Birmingham. His clubs were the Carlton and the Oxford and Cambridge, and his home was Glyndwr at Pontarddulais, Carmarthenshire. He died at the Santa Maria Nursing Home in Swansea on 3 February 1959. His wife, who died two years later, is buried beside him at Hendy Chapel. 


@@@@@


doc= 47987


Sir Thomas Beaumont (c.1555-1614), who was his associate in a number of business ventures, was equally entrepreneurial. Thomas was the third born but second surviving son of Nicholas, and was also probably born at Coleorton. About 1575 he married Catherine Farnham (died 1621) and thereby succeeded to the lordship of the manor of Stoughton in Leicestershire. He also inherited the estate of Henry Beaumont of Giltsham, Devon, on the latter's death without issue. Thomas was knighted in 1603. He and Catherine had three sons and seven daughters. His daughter Elizabeth married Sir John Ashburnham, who died in 1620 in the Fleet debtors' prison in London. 


@@@@@


doc= 47988


Bowes, George (1701-1760), coal owner and landscape builder, was born on 21 August 1701 at Streatlam Castle, near Barnard Castle, co. Durham, the third son of Sir William Bowes ('bap'. 1657, died 1707), landowner, of Streatlam, and his wife, Elizabeth Blakiston (died 1736), heir of Sir Francis Blakiston of Gibside House, near Rowlands Gill, 3 miles south-west of Newcastle. After the death of Sir Francis Blakiston in 1713, the mineral-rich estate of Gibside became the possession of the Bowes family and thereby transformed its fortunes. William Blakiston Bowes, the first son, who came of age in 1717, was the first of the brothers to enjoy this inheritance. However, he died in 1721, and the second brother, Thomas, died the following year. In 1722, then, at the age of twenty-one, George found himself unexpectedly possessor of both estates. He had been educated first in Newcastle and then at Mr Hill's school in London. As a younger son of a gentry family in need of a profession, he had chosen the army and had become a captain in General Wade's regiment of horse. On inheriting the estates in 1722 he disposed of his commission, and the following year he made an abortive attempt to enter the House of Commons as member for Berwick upon Tweed. 
The Streatlam estate was the ancient seat of the Bowes family: their ownership can be traced to the fourteenth century. It was, however, the acquisition of Gibside and its coal that made the family rich. George Bowes was determined to exploit the ownership of coal to its greatest possible extent: he succeeded in becoming member of parliament for co. Durham in 1727 (which he represented until 1760). Membership of the House of Commons brought prestige in the county, but above all it helped to protect the interests of the producers of coal in the north-east of England, in their main market, London. In 1726 he was one of the founder members of the 'Grand Allies'. This, the most important association of coal owners in the eighteenth century, was designed to regulate the production of coal in the north-east. In 1726 George Bowes joined forces with three other large colliery proprietors: the Hon. Sydney Wortley, of Wortley, Yorkshire, with Edward Wortley, his son and heir; Sir Henry Liddell bt, with George Liddell, his guardian, both of Ravensworth Castle; and William Cotesworth. They signed a 99-year agreement to drop suits against each other, to grant each other wayleaves over their land, to refrain from buying or leasing collieries without the consent of the others, and to work all collieries as a joint concern. One of the allies' early joint enterprises was the construction of the Causey Arch, the first railway bridge of a large single span in the world. This crossed the Beckley burn a few miles south-west of Gateshead and carried the wagonway leading the coals of the Grand Allies from Tanfield and Causey to the staithes on the Tyne. 
Bowes was by 1731 a convinced advocate of the need for regulation: George Liddell noted in 1731, 'I am of Mr Bowes' opinion that nothing but a Regulation will heale the Coale Trade' (Hughes, 239). By 1739, it had succeeded so well that a pamphleteer, speaking on behalf of the consumers in London, accused the coal owners of 'locking up collieries' (ibid., 247). 
All the surviving evidence suggests that Bowes was a dynamic and emphatic personality. The fortune he amassed was worth at least $600,000 at his death, and he used his wealth to transform the grounds at Gibside House. In 1729 extensive plantations began and picturesque buildings of various kinds were erected in the grounds, including in 1736 a bath house in classical style and in 1742 a gothic banqueting house designed by Daniel Garrett -- one of the first in this style in the north of England. Among the more striking of the works was the column to British liberty (1750-57) and the mausoleum chapel designed by James Paine. This remained unfinished at Bowes's death and was completed in 1812 by his grandson, the tenth earl of Strathmore. Spencer Cowper, dean of Durham, summed up both the work at Gibside and Bowes's character in a letter in September 1753: 'Last week I was at Glory Bowes' at Gibside, to do it justice, I think it will be one of the finest places in the North when he has finish'd his design. The whole of his works takes in a range of seven miles; which if ever compleated will be worthy his Magnificence and Immensity. ('Letters', 165)' Bowes was married twice: in October 1724 he married Eleanor Verney (1710-1724), daughter of the Hon. Thomas Verney and heir to George, Lord Willoughby de Broke. She died on 14 December 1724 at the age of fourteen. He married secondly in June 1743 Mary Gilbert (died 1781), heir to her father, Edward Gilbert of St Paul's Walden, Hertfordshire. Bowes's only child and heir, Mary Eleanor Bowes, was born on 24 February 1749. It was rumoured in 1742 that he was to be offered the Order of the Bath, a prospect he treated with scorn in a letter of 30 December 1742 (Durham RO, D/LO/F743). Bowes died at Gibside in September 1760 and was buried on 26 September in Whickham parish church. In 1812 his body was moved to the mausoleum at Gibside. 


@@@@@


doc= 47989


Cargill, David Sime (1826-1904), merchant and oil industrialist, was born at Maryton, near Montrose, on 9 April 1826, the fourth and youngest son of the nine children of James Cargill, farmer, and his wife, Helen Thomson. After a brief exposure to office life in Glasgow, he spent the years 1844 to 1861 in Ceylon, building up the trade of a Scottish firm of East India merchants and establishing a Colombo department store that became known as the 'Harrods of the East'. When he returned to Glasgow, Cargill was wealthy enough to buy out his employers, and in 1861 to marry advantageously. His wife was Margaret (1840-1872), daughter of Dr John Traill of Arbroath. Three sons and two daughters were born to them before she died in 1872. 
By the 1870s Cargill had immersed himself in a venture that was to become his life's work: the commercial exploitation of Burmese oil. In 1876, after visiting Burma, he purchased the Glasgow-based Rangoon Oil Company Ltd, which had failed because the king of Upper Burma used his monopoly power to overcharge for the crude oil that was to be found in his dominions. Over the next ten years Cargill supported the loss-making downstream activities from his own pocket, to the extent of $100,000. Then, in 1886, after the Third Burmese War, the British authorities annexed Upper Burma, and granted him prospecting licences in the oilfields there. Cargill introduced machine drilling and had the Rangoon refinery modernized to cope with the increased production. When in July 1886 he founded a new company, the Burmah Oil Company, his Glasgow associates were highly sceptical about its prospects. Yet in the final year of his life, 1904, it made $264,000 net profit and sold more than 2 million barrels of oil products, two-thirds of which comprised the cheap kerosene which kept Burmese and Indian lamps burning. 
People who knew Cargill attributed his achievements to his combining certain conflicting qualities rarely to be found together: great courage with great caution, and broad vision with an unquenchable passion for detail. A sufferer from chronic insomnia, he often worked far into the night. Cargill had an impressive and well-tailored presence, enhanced by a Roman nose, broad forehead, and large beard. He was an active figure in Glasgow's inner commercial and public counsels, from the chamber of commerce, the Merchants' House, and the Clyde Trust to the council of the Royal Institute of Fine Arts and the Glasgow Maternity Hospital. However, Cargill's single-mindedness and lack of consideration exacted a high price from others. His managing director, Kirkman Finlay (1847-1903), doggedly worked for seventeen years in London with no effective support, before suffering a breakdown and killing himself. Although in 1878 Cargill was married again -- to Connel Elizabeth Auld, with whom he had a son and a daughter -- his innate reserve and general busyness clearly stunted his family's emotional lives. Two of the sons never married, one died an alcoholic, and his second son, Sir John Cargill, never lost the diffidence he had acquired as a child. 
David Cargill died of paralysis at Carruth, Bridge of Weir, Renfrewshire, near Glasgow, on 25 May 1904. He was survived by his second wife and left a movable estate worth $943,000, two-thirds of which represented his stake in the Burmah Oil Company. 


@@@@@


doc= 47990


Curr, John (1756-1823), coal viewer and engineer, was born at Kyo, near Lanchester, co. Durham, the third and youngest son of John Curr (1712-1777), a coal viewer, or mining engineer, and his wife, Elizabeth ('b'. 1722). As a child he was familiar with the Durham coalfield at Bushblades where his father worked as a coal viewer to the Silvertops, a landed Roman Catholic family. Curr developed an interest in mining and engineering, encouraged by his father who 'brought up his son' to be 'a civil engineer' (E. M. Curr, 'Memoranda'). The son of Catholic parents, Curr was raised and remained within the faith throughout his life. The family's religion almost certainly influenced the employment of Curr's father by the Silvertops and was a likely factor in the decision of the Catholic Charles Howard, earl of Surrey, later eleventh duke of Norfolk, to employ Curr as coal viewer at his Sheffield collieries -- a position he most probably took up in 1777. 
At Sheffield Curr was 'faced with a financially bankrupt and technologically backward concern' which he set about investigating with another viewer, John Stephenson of Kimberworth Park colliery in Rotherham (Medlicott, 'John Curr and the development of the Sheffield collieries', 52). From the outset it was clear that the cost of extraction far outstripped profit. Faced with these problems the lessees of the collieries surrendered their lease on lady day 1781 and the mines reverted to the direct control of the earl of Surrey who in that year promoted Curr 'Superintendent of the coal works' (ibid.). On 1 May 1781, at St Peter's Church, Sheffield, Curr married Hannah Wilson (1759-1851); the couple lived at Bellevue House, Sheffield Park, and had three sons and six daughters, all of whom were brought up in the Roman Catholic faith. One son, Edward Curr, left England in 1820 and became a noted politician and entrepreneur in Australia. 
With considerable financial backing from the earl of Surrey, John Curr worked with great imagination to overcome the shortcomings of the Sheffield collieries. His first invention was the flanged cast-iron railway -- described as 'plate ways' or 'railroads' -- which were the first flanged iron rails installed underground for the hauling of coal. The date of their introduction has been contested, not least because of conflicting statements made by Curr himself, though they were probably first adopted in Sheffield in 1787. Prior to this invention, coal had been hauled underground either in wooden sledges or in wheeled corves along wooden rails. Curr's use of iron rails dramatically improved the hurrying of coal by reducing the number of horses needed to pull the corves, and by enabling an additional 2000 corves to be moved annually -- realizing an estimated annual saving of some $312, 10's'. 0died (Buddle, 'Report', 7 April 1787, Sheff. Arch., Arundel Castle MSS, ACM/S/223, fols. 3-5). In addition to the iron rails Curr introduced a new four-wheeled corf with a capacity five times greater than those previously used at the Sheffield site. Though the iron tracks were flanged, the corf's wheels were flat and could run with or without rails above ground. Curr's invention provided considerable gains in productivity -- enabling the extraction of coal at greater distances from the shaft bottom, and so reducing the need to sink new pits to work deeper seams. From 1787 Curr also experimented at Sheffield with new designs to move coal via an underground canal connecting railroads from different pits. The scheme was approved by the mining engineer John Buddle (1743-1806) as 'peculiarly favourable', though it does not appear to have been realized (ibid., fols. 8-11). Reaction to Curr's underground railroads was mixed. While his intention was for the rails to be used with pit ponies, the new method of haulage was so effective that it encouraged cheaper child labour in place of animals and adult putters. Concern at possible changes in working practices initially led many colliers to oppose Curr's invention. However, as his schemes became better known he was complimented for easing the colliers' lot; in a poem of 1843 he was praised 'wi' peace and plenty' for 'furst invent[ing] metal plates' (T. Wilson, 'The Pitman's Pay and Other Poems', 1843, 32). 
At Sheffield Curr also sought to improve the efficiency of the steam engine, and discovered that raising the cistern higher above the cylinder produced a stronger vacuum without additional fuel. For these experiments he became an acknowledged expert in the construction of atmospheric steam engines and was regarded as a successor to John Smeaton. In 1797 he published plans and descriptions of his modified Newcomen steam engines, with detailed comparisons between the power of different types of boiler. In the previous decade Curr had also made advances in winding technology, patenting designs for an 'entirely new... scheme of drawing two corves abreast, at one time, up a pit... by means of sliding conductors' -- or vertical iron guide-rails -- along with a new mode of 'landing' and tipping the coal (patent no. 1660, 1778). By 1801 the scheme was 'practised by a great number of Collieries' (Curr, 'Report', 23 Oct 1801, Sheff. Arch., Arundel Castle MSS, ACM/S/214, fols. 1-2). However, it was to the manufacture and use of rope that Curr gave his closest attention, with nine patents between 1792 and 1813. He began with a design for 'double Rope', which afforded considerable savings by lifting 'more than double the weight of coals', and followed this in 1798 with a new 'Flat Rope' that solved the problem of corves rotating when lifted up the shaft (ibid.). 
Growing demand for his inventions led Curr to become a major stakeholder in the Queen's Foundry, Sheffield, and to establish another iron foundry and rope walk at Sheffield Park in 1792. From here he supplied the duke of Norfolk's collieries and other mines in the Yorkshire coalfield as their owners adopted his schemes. Rails were introduced at Middleton Colliery, Leeds, in 1790 and from this year he was also employed by the once Catholic landowner Sir Thomas Gascoigne to introduce his 'patent schemes' at Garforth and Parlington collieries in the West Riding. By the time he left Gascoigne's employment in 1801 Curr estimated 'that about 16 Collieries out of 20' had introduced his railroads 'in the County's of York, Lancaster, Salop, Derby, Stafford, Warwick, and great parts of Wales, and is now adopting near London, and in the Neighbourhood of Newcastle upon Tyne' (Curr, 'Report', 23 Oct 1801, Sheff. Arch., Arundel Castle MSS, ACM/S/214, fol. 1). Take up of the railroads owed much to the ironmaster and civil engineer Benjamin Outram who copied and developed Curr's unpatented rails, installing them in a range of industrial concerns from 1793. Though originally designed for underground haulage, it was in surface transport that Curr's rails attracted most interest. In 1793 he advised the Coalbrookdale Company in Shropshire on haulage equipment and the possibility of using his rails to improve communications between the ironworks and the Shropshire canal. The Peak Forest tramway, Derbyshire (1796), the Merthyr tram road, Glamorgan (1802), and the Surrey Iron Railway (1803) -- the first public railway, which ran between Croydon and Wandsworth -- also adopted Curr's rails above ground. 
In 1797 Curr published 'The Coal Viewer and Engine Builder's Practical Companion' which he dedicated to his patron, Charles Howard, now eleventh duke of Norfolk. An early engineering textbook, it remains a key source on Curr's inventions with meticulously detailed plans and instructions for carpenters, blacksmiths, and founders on how to construct and repair his rails, corves, winding gear, and steam engines. A section devoted to flanged railroads is the earliest published engineering work on railway track and contains 'the most elaborate description of a Newcomen pumping engine at the highest state of development' (Day and McNeil, 184). 
By 1800, and not withstanding Curr's innovations, the Sheffield collieries were again operating at a loss. In October of the following year he was dismissed by Norfolk. Curr vigorously protested the duke's decision, outlining all his work and 'reasons why the collieries of late years have been unproductive' (Curr, 'Report', 23 October 1801, Sheff. Arch., Arundel Castle MSS, ACM/S/214). These protests came to nothing for, while a highly proficient mining engineer, Curr's abilities as a manager were limited. Faced with rising costs and falling profits from 1791, he had failed to balance capital investment with financial return, focusing too much on the experimentation and implementation of his new technologies. This said, Curr's inventions significantly extended the working lives and productivity of the mines in Sheffield and other parts of the county. As Curr informed the duke: 'bad as the Collieries have lately proved, they would have been worse if I had not made the improvements I have' (ibid.). 
Following his dismissal, Curr promoted his innovations nationwide. He maintained a close working relationship with the duke of Norfolk from whom he leased agricultural land, and continued to supply the duke's collieries with goods from his rope walk and foundry. From 1814 he developed a major interest in a Norwich iron foundry that produced paddle boat steam engines, and advised his close friend, the mining engineer John Buddle the younger -- who was interested in buying the Tyne steam packet -- on boat engine designs ('John Curr Norwich Iron Foundry', Durham RO, John Buddle MSS, NCB I/JB, 370-73). Curr ceased rope making in 1818 and two years later he sold Bellevue House and moved with his wife to Paris, where he resided for upwards of eighteen months before their return to Sheffield. A prominent member of Sheffield's Catholic community, he was instrumental in establishing the church of St Marie. In the months prior to his death he lost $30,000 which he had invested in 'some mercantile bubble' on the advice of a French priest (E. M. Curr, 'Memoranda'). He died in Sheffield, aged sixty-seven, on 27 January 1823 and was buried at St Marie's. He was survived by his wife who died on 10 June 1851 and was buried at the Bar Convent, York. 


@@@@@


doc= 47991


Sir Ralph Delaval, first baronet (1622-1691). Until this time any potential expansion of the coal and salt trades was limited by the fact that seagoing trading vessels could not use the small haven at Hartley, so that coal and salt had to be carried from Hartley to the Blyth or the Tyne for shipment. About 1670 this disadvantageous situation was rectified by Sir Ralph by the building of a pier -- after two unsuccessful attempts -- at the mouth of the burn, 'and so it stood', noted Sir Francis North in 1676, 'and was very useful to him in his trade of Salt and Coal' (Emsley, 16). The building of the pier was followed by the creation of a tidal sluicing system to clear the harbour of river-borne silt and tide-washed sand, also seen by North. Thereafter the harbour became known as Seaton Sluice, and this harbour sluicing system so impressed John Smeaton, who examined it some eighty years later, that he recommended a similar system in his famous harbour plan for Ramsgate. The $7000 which Sir Ralph had spent on his harbour works persuaded Charles II to make him collector and surveyor of his own port, and it would seem that he then built a second pier, presumably on the opposite side of the mouth of the burn to the first, having been offered a $1500 grant towards its construction by the king. One-third of this grant had been paid at the time of Charles's death in 1685, but the remainder was never forthcoming. 
On 2 April 1646 Sir Ralph had married the widowed Lady Anne Fraser (died 1696), daughter of General Alexander Leslie, earl of Leven, commander of the Scottish army which had stormed and taken Newcastle only two years before; one month after the marriage Leslie was holding Charles I prisoner in the town. In 1649 Sir Ralph became the first high sheriff of Northumberland appointed by the Commonwealth, and he entered Richard Cromwell's parliament as a knight of the shire for Northumberland in 1659, being re-elected after the Restoration. He was made a baronet on 29 June 1660 and, after a fifteen-year absence from the house, he was elected to the long-lasting Cavalier Parliament at a by-election in 1677, subsequently supporting the court party; he was re-elected to the three subsequent parliaments. 
In spite of the success of the harbour at Seaton Sluice the Delaval estates around Hartley seem to have been in a parlous state by the late 1680s and Sir Ralph attempted to amend this situation by making advantageous marriage arrangements for his sons -- he and his wife had seven sons and three daughters. His first son, Robert (1647-1682), apparently a sickly young man, was married to Lady Elizabeth Livingston (1648?-1717), daughter of James, earl of Newburgh, in 1670 ['see 'Delaval, Lady Elizabeth]; Lady Elizabeth was a noted beauty at the court of Charles II but the marriage was not a success and had effectively ended before Robert's death without an heir. In 1684 Sir Ralph arranged the marriage of his eldest surviving son, another Sir Ralph (1649-1696), to Diana Booth (died 1713), daughter of Lord Delamere. He settled the succession of the estates on this son and his heirs male, and failing any, upon the next surviving son 


@@@@@


doc= 47994


Leigh, Alexander (c.1683-1772), local government officer and industrial promoter, was born at Millgate, Wigan, but little else is known about his origins. During his lifetime his home town of Wigan was transformed from an archaic borough dominated by craft companies and disputes over burghal rights, office holding, and parliamentary elections, to the archetype of Dickens's Coketown. As a prominent agent of the change, Leigh founded a large fortune and a notable lineage. 
From about 1710 to 1760 Leigh dominated the borough administration of Wigan: he held many of the key offices, serving as mayor (1727, 1737, and 1759), bencher (1726, 1741, 1760-62, and 1765), town clerk (1733-6), town attorney (1743-53), and town justice (1760). During these fifty years he also managed the parliamentary electorate of Wigan in association with Robert Holt, Holt's son Edward, and his own son Robert. First to benefit from the often violent chicanery of 'their high and mightinesses Leigh and Holt' (NL Scot., Crawford MS 47/2) was James Barry, earl of Barrymore, who was MP for Wigan (1715-47), and also its mayor (1725 and 1734). Although Leigh initially acted against the interest of Sir Roger Bradshaigh, third baronet (1675-1747), who also represented Wigan in parliament (1695-1747) and served as mayor, he and the Holts subsequently became close associates of the Bradshaighs. In an acrimonious dispute in 1759-60 Leigh set up, as senior alderman, an alternative borough administration, of which he made himself mayor. By 1761 he had lost control of Wigan, and 'Corporation feuds... moderated into peace; for the Electors, doubtless, have discovered that beating out of brains did not contribute to the honesty or worth of the elected' (Walker, 34). 
Leigh married his first wife, Elizabeth, before 1709, and they had seven children between 1709 and 1718. Four died in infancy, and a fifth at the age of twenty-one. Their son Robert (1713-1741) also practised as an attorney and was active in Wigan politics until his early death. In addition Leigh had an illegitimate son (who died in 1725) with Mary Tootell. On 22 July 1728 Leigh married Dorothy ('b'. 1705), daughter of Robert Holt; they had seven children between 1729 and 1737. 
As the agent or trustee of many local landowners and steward of seventeen manor courts, Leigh was experienced in proving and exchanging manorial titles, and therefore common and mineral rights. Oversight of the local affairs of the Bradshaighs, who spent most of their time at court in London, gave Leigh considerable expertise in estate and colliery management. In 1737 and 1738 he kept Bradshaigh minutely informed about a fire in his Haigh colliery (yet without mentioning that six colliers were killed in the disaster). He bought Hindley Hall estate from the Hindley family, and in 1721 he obtained an act to enclose Hindley commons; this was steered through parliament by Bradshaigh and Barrymore, against strong local opposition. By about 1750 Leigh also had land in Manchester (developed as Cannon Street), Wigan (including Whitely Hall), Orrell, and Ince. Leigh's estates contained rich coal deposits as did land acquired next to his own in Orrell on the marriages in 1762 and 1760 of his sons Holt (1731-1785) and Edward ('b'. 1733) to two wealthy sisters of a neighbouring family. By 1770 the Leigh family owned 4 million tons of high-grade coal in Orrell; and reserves in Hindley, Ince, and Aspull, though not as well located relative to waterways until after Alexander's death, were even bigger. 
Mining developed rapidly after the River Douglas was made navigable from Wigan to the Ribble estuary. Contractors appointed in 1720 did not do the work, and the parliamentary commissioners for the project (including Barrymore) appointed Alexander Leigh and Alexander Radcliffe of Ormskirk to complete it in 1731. Leigh took over five-sixths of the enterprise and Robert Holt one-sixth in 1737. Although the commissioners declared the navigation finished in 1742 within the stipulated eleven years, the first receipts were earned in 1744, and the business did not move into consistent profit until 1753. At this point Leigh announced that annual dividends would be paid, and he sold two shares of one thirty-sixth each. The total cost of the waterway was over $23,000; however, receipts from tolls on coal shipments grew nearly ninefold between 1748 and 1754, and annual profits between 1753 and 1755 averaged nearly $200 and were climbing steeply. Leigh operated collieries on the river, traded coal to the Ribble estuary and the Lancashire coast, and made money from rents on coal yards, way-leaves, and coal royalties. Threats to impose sea-borne coal duties on boats crossing estuarine and coastal waters were fought off in parliament by Barrymore and Bradshaigh. 
A few weeks before his death, Leigh sold his twenty-nine of the thirty-six navigation shares for $14,500 to the proprietors of the Leeds and Liverpool Canal, who thereby gained control of waterway access to the Wigan coalfield. Holt Leigh had already sold the two shares he had received from Edward Holt to the canal company for $2000 in 1768, days after a cancelled agreement for the transfer of all of his father's shares to him in return for settling debts of only $6335. The Orrell and Wigan estates were not bequeathed in Alexander's will, and must have been transferred before his death to Holt Leigh. 
Alexander Leigh's powers were perhaps failing as he moved into his late eighties, though he granted mortgages in the last year of his life and the will drawn up within weeks of his death was signed with the usual bold flourishes in a firm hand. Judged on his behaviour in Wigan affairs, Leigh was domineering and cantankerous. In his later years it seems that he continued to be unscrupulous: in his quarrels with and threats against Sir Roger Bradshaigh and Edward Holt, in the chancery suit he began in 1755 against the other beneficiaries of Robert Holt's will of 1740, in the sour tone of his bequest to his wife, in his contractual dealings with his son Holt, and in his sale agreement with the Leeds and Liverpool Canal Company (it excluded the land necessary to run the navigation, which was obtained by returning a share). When he died at his lifelong home in Millgate, Wigan, in 1772, the only surviving members of his family were his widowed granddaughter of his first marriage, Cicely Harvey, to whom he bequeathed $3000, his sons Holt and Edward from his second marriage, and his second wife. He was buried at All Saints, Wigan, on 27 November 1772. Holt Leigh was Alexander's elder surviving son and principal heir; like his father he was an attorney and had considerable business acumen, and he amassed more land and coal rights (including the marriage portion and paternal inheritance of his only surviving brother, Edward). He also rebuilt Whitely Hall as Leigh Place in the five years after his father's death. Despite the 'folly and profligacy' of his unmarried 'mature years' ('VCH Lancaster', 4.120), Holt Leigh's son and heir, Sir Robert Holt Leigh, first baronet, of Hindley Hall (1763-1843) was MP for Wigan between 1802 and 1820. He left an income of over $14,000 a year for life to a distant kinsman, Thomas Pemberton, who took the name Pemberton Leigh in 1842. 


@@@@@


doc= 47996


Redwood, Sir (Thomas) Boverton, first baronet (1846-1919), petroleum consultant, was born in London on 26 April 1846, the eldest in the family of six sons and two daughters of Theophilus Redwood (1806-1892) and his wife, Charlotte Elizabeth (died 1868), daughter of Thomas Newborn Robert Morson ['see under 'Morson, Thomas], who owned a London pharmaceutical firm. After education at University College School, London ('c'.1857-1862), he worked in the laboratory of his father, a professor in the School of Pharmacy of the Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain and editor of the 'Pharmaceutical Journal'. His future in pharmacy seemed to be determined; then in 1869 he abruptly changed direction by becoming secretary of the Petroleum Association, where he developed his expertise as an analytical chemist. Four years later he married Mary Elizabeth (died 1937), daughter of Frederick Letchford; they had two daughters and a son who died in 1911. 
Redwood made his reputation in undertaking technical enquiries, for example, to devise a reliable method of testing the flashpoint of combustible oil products. He invented the viscometer in 1886 to measure the fluidity of oil. He was soon in constant demand as an expert both on select committees to do with safety legislation and on inquiries into oil explosions and other accidents. He became technical adviser to the corporation of the City of London and to the Port of London Authority, and was an honorary adviser to a number of government departments, including the Home Office and the Admiralty. He was knighted in 1905 and was created a baronet in 1911. 
Tall and of impressive presence, with heavy jutting eyebrows and a strong profile, Redwood was always immaculately turned out, with an orchid in his buttonhole. Those whom he advised were much taken with his charm and with the easy way in which he was able to put over complex facts and issues. The less charitable noted his affected and deliberate manner of speaking and his provincial accent, and the vanity that gave him pleasure when mistaken for the actor Sir Henry Irving. 
Redwood's regular travels to oilfields in many parts of the world, notably the United States, Russia, and India, gave him a uniquely global view of oil affairs. In 1893 he became a part-time consultant to the Burmah Oil Company, a post he held for life. When in 1905 the Admiralty sought a British purchaser for the oil concession in Persia held by William Knox D'Arcy, who had so far failed to discover the extensive oil reserves there, it is almost certain that Redwood suggested Burmah Oil, which bought the concession. After three years, oil was finally discovered in Persia by George Bernard Reynolds; and when in 1909 the Anglo-Persian Oil Company (later British Petroleum) was registered, the prospectus cited Redwood's report on the potential value of the oil deposits. During the same period, Weetman Pearson (later Lord Cowdray) likewise made use of Redwood for a survey of the large areas in Mexico over which he had oil prospecting rights. 
From 1911 onwards Winston Churchill as first lord of the Admiralty was determined to change the fuel used in warships from coal to oil. This led to the establishment in 1912 of a royal commission on fuel and engines, of which Redwood was a member: it investigated the whole question of oil for the navy, and led to the government's purchase of a majority share in Anglo-Persian. During the First World War, Redwood's professional expertise was much in demand, most notably when he was petroleum adviser to the Ministry of Munitions. In 1917 he was appointed director of technical investigations in the newly set up petroleum executive, and was in charge of the technical problems of oil production and research. The strain of this unremitting toil throughout the war was undoubtedly responsible for his death in London on 4 June 1919. He was survived by his wife. 
Redwood was the first (and only) petroleum consultant of his kind. He not only helped to devise an oil strategy for Britain but also educated non-expert officials and businessmen alike in the technicalities of oil. 


@@@@@


doc= 48004


Gulbenkian, Calouste Sarkis (1869-1955), oil industrialist and benefactor, was born in Scutari, adjacent to Constantinople, in Turkey, on 23 March 1869, one of three sons of Sarkis Gulbenkian (died 1894), a trader in kerosene and a provincial banker. Although he respected his family, Calouste does not seem to have had close relations with his brothers throughout his life. 
Armenian by birth and tradition, Gulbenkian was initially educated locally and gained admission to Robert's College, Constantinople. He then attended the Ecole Superieure, Marseilles, before being admitted to King's College, London, in 1884, where he was elected an associate in 1887, having been awarded prizes and commendations in physics and mechanics. In that year he returned home to Constantinople, where his linguistic proficiency and technical training provided the essential elements for his subsequent career. 
Gulbenkian was soon representing his father's interests, gaining experience of commercial affairs, and acquainting himself with the Ottoman corridors of political power. In particular, he impressed the Ottoman authorities with his understanding of the political and economic issues involved with the nascent oil industry; and he was soon consulted about oil concessions and the prospects for oil in Turkish territories. His ambitions were aroused. He was a good-looking, elegant young man of medium stature, with dark eyebrows and bright eyes and with a well-trimmed moustache and beard. In later life his domed, balding forehead and bushy eyebrows were prominent, and a tendency to plumpness was noticeable. 
Gulbenkian courted and eventually married in London in 1892 Nevarte Esseyan (died 1952), whose father, Ohannes, was a substantial man of business in Constantinople. Their honeymoon was spent in Paris where their host was Cesar Ritz, a lifelong friend. The couple settled in London at 36 Hyde Park Gardens, living there from 1900 to 1925. They had a son, Nubar Sarkis ('b'. 1896), and a daughter, Rita. Nevarte was more outgoing than her husband -- humorous and charming, entertaining with warmth and a real social flair. He was dutiful and patriarchal, insisting on obedience and respect rather than exhibiting affection, but he was devoted to her. Proud of his strong-willed son's ability, he was disappointed at his undue attitude of independence and regretted what he regarded as his ostentatious manner. Nubar feared rather than loved his father, but admitted his father's indulgence towards him, though he resented his tight financial control. 
Well established at the turn of the century, Gulbenkian gradually extended the scope and scale of his commercial operations in London and Constantinople, with frequent visits to Paris, where he based himself at the Ritz Hotel. He and his family had survived the worst excesses of the Armenian massacres of 1896; and out of those misfortunes he came to know and befriend the Mantachev family, who had widespread petroleum interests in Russia; he became acquainted with Nubar Pasha, a prominent Egyptian politician and a relative of his wife. Such distinguished figures were important contacts and Gulbenkian's affairs prospered at a time when oil, as a result of new discoveries and the impact of new technology, was playing an increasing role in world trade. Although Russian and American production dominated the opening years of the twentieth century, Dutch and British interests were beginning to become important and prospects for oil in the Middle East brightened with the commencement of oil production in Persia in 1908. 
Gulbenkian was at the heart of these developments, though he strangely failed to recognize the significance of the Persian oil find and its adverse repercussions on his own interests. He was more concerned with the potential for discovering oil in the Ottoman empire, and especially in Mesopotamia, which potential he pursued with 'unusual foresight and persistence' ('The Times', 21 July 1955). However, Gulbenkian was aware of the interplay of the respective strengths of the main international oil companies; and he was closely involved with Henri Deterding and Marcus Samuel of Royal Dutch Shell, and with Shell's entry into the US market in 1912. 
There was fierce international competition to obtain the concession to explore for oil in Mesopotamia, and Gulbenkian played an important role in the consortium of rival interests that was eventually formed. In 1912 he was one of the partners involved in the formation of a company for the eventual exploitation of the assumed oil reserves of Mesopotamia. This was the Turkish Petroleum Company (TPC), later renamed the Iraq Petroleum Company (IPC), in 1929. This became Gulbenkian's principal concern; he originally held a 15 per cent interest in the company, and then 5 per cent. He derived from it not only immense wealth, but also the sobriquet of 'Mr Five Per Cent'. 
Despite the political and economic gyrations in those years just before and after the First World War, especially in the Middle East, Gulbenkian managed to protect his own interests in Mesopotamia as the pace of exploration accelerated. In 1925 a new concession was signed with the government of Iraq. In 1928 oil was discovered at Baba Gurgur and in the same year a new constitution for the company was agreed. This confirmed the shareholdings of the Anglo-Persian Oil Company (later BP) and Royal Dutch Shell, and provided for the inclusion of French instead of German interests, as well as allowing for American participation and Gulbenkian's 5 per cent share. However, there were self-denying clauses in the agreement which prevented the partners in IPC from taking concessions elsewhere in the Ottoman empire. Gulbenkian's interests by this time were held by a Canadian company and were registered in Canada. With the discovery of oil in Kirkuk in 1934 and the completion of the first pipeline, Iraq became a major oil-producing region. 
Although Iraq remained the main focus for his oil interests, Gulbenkian had also become involved in the formulation of French oil policy, especially during the First World War when he became a confidant of Senateur Henri Berenger, the minister in charge of oil affairs. He also at this time acted as the representative of Royal Dutch Shell in France. 
In the early 1920s Gulbenkian extended his oil interests to the emerging areas of production in Venezuela, in the course of which an unfortunate quarrel with Henri Deterding came to a head. Both men were strong-minded and opinionated. Gulbenkian felt that Deterding had treated some of the shareholders in Venezuelan Oil Concessions Ltd with scant regard, including himself. Deterding denied the accusations: compromise proved impossible and the break was absolute. Unfortunately it blighted the career of Gulbenkian's son, Nubar, who was Deterding's personal assistant and thought by some to be the right person to become his successor. Calouste, however, was adamant that his son leave Shell, which he did, to concentrate on family affairs. In 1927 Gulbenkian acquired a new residence in Paris, at 51 avenue d'Iena, a large and imposing house which he made into a home and a gallery for his greatly respected collection of art. 
During the negotiations following the cancellation of the Anglo-Persian Oil Company's concession in 1932, Gulbenkian acted as adviser to the Persian government, though he played very little part in the final settlement of the dispute. The 1930s were a rewarding time for him, as oil from Iraq began to flow, and he enjoyed the company of a wide range of friends drawn not only from business and politics but from the cultural world, including Upham Pope, the American historian of Persian art, and Sir Kenneth Clark, director of the National Gallery. 
The onset of the Second World War not only shattered the international scene, it changed Gulbenkian's life. He had retained his British nationality (granted in 1902), but he also held an Iranian diplomatic passport. After the surrender of France in 1940 he remained in Vichy France with the Iranian diplomatic mission. It was then claimed that his British nationality brought him within the provisions of the 'Trading with the Enemy Act' and prevented him, like the Compagnie Francaise des Petroles (CFP), from participating in the business of the IPC. The custodian of enemy property was empowered to vest in himself 'enemy' property and act as if he owned it. By agreement with the custodian a vesting order was made in relation to Gulbenkian's IPC shares, and the custodian then appointed an associate of Gulbenkian and his lawyer in England to represent the custodian at IPC meetings. When diplomatic relations between Iran and France were severed in 1942, Gulbenkian, persuaded by Nubar, found refuge in Portugal rather than Switzerland and he installed himself at the Aviz Hotel in Lisbon. Soon after he arrived, the vesting order was revoked and the IPC shares were returned to him; he remained in Lisbon for the rest of his life. 
The war caused fundamental changes in the balances of political and commercial power. The United States rejected past isolationism and responded to the challenge of the cold war, adopting an interventionist policy in respect of Arab-Israeli differences. By 1943 the Middle East had become the recognized dominant oil region of the world, and Saudi Arabia became the focus of American attention. Efforts were made by the American companies in IPC to free themselves from the agreement not to take concessions elsewhere in the former Ottoman empire. The American companies claimed that the discontinuity in IPC affairs, caused by the wartime 'enemy' status of Gulbenkian and the French company CFP, meant that the 1928 agreement had been frustrated and that they should be permitted to participate in Saudi Arabian concessions. This was challenged legally but after lengthy and complicated negotiations a settlement was ultimately reached out of court in 1948. By then Gulbenkian was in declining health and his affairs were being handled by a group of his closest advisers, including his son, Nubar, his son-in-law, Kevork Loris Esseyan, and his nephew Roberto Gulbenkian. Predeceased by his wife in 1952, Gulbenkian, who confidently expected to live to an advanced age, died on 20 July 1955 in Lisbon. He was cremated in Switzerland and his remains were committed to the care of the church of St Sarkis, in London, with full Armenian rites. 
During a successful and fulfilling life of business enterprise, Gulbenkian's determination of character, adaptability of manner, shrewdness in negotiation, integrity in business, hard-working attention to detail, and cosmopolitan outlook were always apparent. With little or no organization behind him he largely managed his enterprises himself, with only a small staff in the later years of his life. He had little use for formal office routine and relied upon personal contact. 
During his lifetime Gulbenkian had one indulgence, his caring concern for his art treasures -- his 'children', as he termed them. They formed the core of one of the finest individual private collections in the world. The story is told that as a boy his father had rewarded him for some school success and that with the money he had gone to the bazaar and purchased one antique coin, rather than saving it, as his father had expected. After the Russian Revolution he succeeded in acquiring some fine items there including Jean Antoine Houdon's 'Diana', 'Helene Fourment' by Peter Paul Rubens, and 'Pallas Athene' by Rembrandt, as well as fine gold and silver ware by Francois Thomas Germain. 
Gulbenkian's collection was based on his personal choice and owed nothing to extravagance or fashion. Every piece was in the finest condition and he took the best advice available. His range was wide: books, manuscripts, paintings, statuary, textiles, coins, carpets, and various 'objets d'art'. Knowledgeable himself, he was respected by dealers and art historians alike. While he felt more at home with art of the past he had some choice modern examples and appreciated the artistic virtuosity of Rene Lalique and Auguste Rodin. He was on good terms with curators and directors of national galleries, such as Sir Kenneth Clark in London and John Walker in Washington, and in middle life he lent generously to the National Gallery and the National Gallery of Art. He was a generous benefactor to the Armenian church and founded and endowed the church of St Sarkis in London, in memory of his parents. He contributed to the Armenian patriarchy of Jerusalem and was a frequent contributor to philanthropic good causes and reliefs without seeking public acknowledgement. It was in keeping with the private nature of his character. 
Gulbenkian did not travel a great deal but he was enthusiastic about the delights of architecture and was particularly moved by the charms of the Alhambra. In Egypt he was impressed with the sense of great antiquity. Not only was he deeply appreciative of the beauty and grace of art, especially of the feminine figure, but he was also very sensible of the natural and scenic beauty occasioned by sunrises and sunsets. In 1937 he purchased a romantic park with beautiful trees, Les Enclos, near Deauville, a favourite haunt, where he often spent part of the summer. 
Gulbenkian had already begun in 1938 to refer to his intention to establish a permanent home for his art treasures, without deciding on anything very practical except some ideas for a gallery in London. Plans became more definite in a will drawn up on 6 May 1950 and more precise in his will of 18 June 1953. Controversy subsequently attended the creation and organization of the Calouste Gulbenkian Foundation for charitable, artistic, educational, and scientific purposes: Nubar stated that it failed to represent the objectives of his father; and Lord Radcliffe, closest confidant, legal adviser, and first choice of Gulbenkian to be the initial chairman, declined the honour. In the event Dr Jose de Azeredo Perdigao, Gulbenkian's Portuguese lawyer, succeeded, and he successfully guided the foundation on its way for more than thirty-five years. 
After Gulbenkian's death a long and appreciative obituary in 'The Times' carried the apt headline, 'Great wealth amassed and well spent'. It mentioned that his 'entrenched 5 per cent gave Gulbenkian a unique position in industrial democracy' (ibid.), and described how when negotiations affecting his interests were undertaken, he ranked on a par with governments. Gulbenkian, it argued, was one of those, like Cecil Rhodes and Ferdinand de Lesseps, whose commercial kingdoms gave them an international standing in their own right ('The Times', 21 July 1955). 


@@@@@


doc= 48006


Mills family (per. 1773-1939), bankers, was one of the most distinguished families in English banking and came to prominence with 


@@@@@


doc= 48007


William Mills (1714-1782). Five generations of Millses were partners in Glyn's, England's foremost private banking house, from its foundation in 1753 to its take-over by the Royal Bank of Scotland in 1939, the name of Mills appearing in the bank's various names from 1773 onwards. Moreover, in the second half of the nineteenth century, the Mills family was at the very core of the network of relationships linking landed aristocracy and City aristocracy. 
Glyn's held a unique position in English banking, offering a combination of deposit, investment, and merchant banking. On the one hand it acted as the London correspondent for a large number of country banks, on the other hand, it behaved almost as a continental 'banque d'affaires' (Cottrell, 229). The bank's partners, in the first place George Carr Glyn, later first Baron Wolverton, had played a leading role in railway finance in the 1840s; for many years Glyn's was known as the 'railway bank'. They had also handled Canadian loans in the 1850s and, with a group of business associates and family relatives, had promoted several overseas banks: in Australasia, with the Bank of Australasia in 1837; in the Middle East, with the Bank of Egypt and the Ottoman Bank in 1856, the latter becoming the Imperial Ottoman Bank in 1863; in central Europe with the Anglo-Austrian Bank in 1863; and in Latin America with the London and Brazilian Bank in 1863 and later with the English Bank of the River Plate in the 1880s. Glyn's also had a large number of major provincial industrial customers, including John Brown, Vickers, Stavely Coal and Iron, and British Westinghouse, and its involvement in industrial finance extended to acting as an issuing house on behalf of customers. 
These business activities were reflected in the size of the company. By 1850 Glyn's had probably become the largest London bank, though precise data are not available as private banks did not then publish their balance sheets. From the 1860s onwards, however, private banks could no longer compete in terms of size with the ever expanding joint-stock banks. Nevertheless, Glyn's remained a large bank until the last decade of the nineteenth century and maintained its pre-eminence among private banks, with total assets twice as large as those of its immediate follower, Barclays, in 1891. This partly explains the decision not to enter the amalgamation movement in the 1890s and to preserve, as Algernon Mills put it, 'a characteristic which we alone of all large and serious banks possess, namely of having only one door' (Fulford, 226-7). 
Members of the Mills family took an active part in the bank's development, though none of them played the leading role until the twentieth century. As a banking family, however, it was among the most successful in the country, with a remarkable longevity due to the maintenance of the bank's independence until the eve of the Second World War. The first connection was established in 1773, when William Mills, a linen draper, became a partner in Glyn and Hallifax. The bank was forced to suspend payment for a few weeks following a temporary shortage of cash during the crisis of the summer of 1772. William Mills came forward with the sum of $10,000, another $20,000 being advanced by the third Lord Middleton. The name of the bank was then changed to Hallifax, Glyn, Mills, and Mitton. William Mills was the son of John Mills (1676/7-1717), a clerk in the six clerks office of the court of chancery, and his wife, Sarah Best, who also had one daughter, who died in infancy. He inherited $1500 from his father on coming of age and in 1739, married Selina, the only child of Sir John Salter of Warden's Hall, Essex, lord mayor of London, and became prominent in trade with the Orient through his father-in-law. William Mills was almost sixty by the time he joined Glyn's and, with no training or experience in banking, he played little role in the affairs of the bank which was mainly run by Thomas Hallifax. He died at his house, Warden's Hall, Essex, on 1 December 1782. 
William Mills had no surviving children and was succeeded in the bank by his nephew 


@@@@@


doc= 48010


Charles Mills (1755-1826), second son of the Revd John Mills, rector of Barford, near Warwick, and his wife, Sarah Wheler. Born on 13 July 1755, he was educated at Rugby School, and was a partner in the bank from 1777 to 1826. The business of the bank expanded considerably during this period, with the number of staff increasing from seven in 1790 to fifty-one in 1830, and the number of country bank agencies from four to forty-nine. The outstanding personality of the period, however, was Richard Carr Glyn, the other members of the partnerships being of far less consequence. The Mills, however, were important providers of business, especially through their connections with Indian trade. Charles Mills succeeded his older brother William Mills (1750-1820) as director of the East India Company in 1785 and was deputy chairman in 1801. He was MP for Warwick between 1802 and 1826. On 21 March 1810, at the age of fifty-five, he married Jane, daughter of the Hon. Wriothesley Digby of Meriden, Warwickshire, and the sister of his older brother's wife. They had no children. Charles Mills died on 29 January 1826. 
Charles Mills was in his turn succeeded at the bank by his nephew 


@@@@@


doc= 48012


Capel, James (1789-1872), stockbroker and philanthropist, was born on 22 January 1789 at Kempsey, Worcestershire, the second child and eldest son of Henry Capel of Kempsey and his wife, Elizabeth Goile, of Fowicke, Worcestershire. James Capel married Marion Mary Cundy, who was probably the cousin of his father (she was the granddaughter of Henry Capel's grandfather, James Capel of Droitwich). They had four sons and five daughters. 
James Capel went to London to enter the office of his cousin John Capel, a registered bill broker of 96 Cornhill, London, but in 1806 became a clerk in the office of Antrobus and Wood, stockbrokers. In 1813 he became a member of the London stock exchange, and a partner, at which time the firm changed its name to Antrobus, Brown, and Capel. In 1816 he was sworn a stockbroker as a member of the London Framework Knitters' Company, and in 1822 his firm changed its name again, becoming Marjoribanks, Capel, & Co., and moved to new premises at 5 Throgmorton Street. The partnership was divided into seventeen parts, of which Marjoribanks and Capel each took five, Norbury three, Alexander Trotter two, and Richard White two. In 1837 the firm again changed its name, becoming James Capel, Norbury, Trotter & Co., and James Capel became the senior partner. His son James Bury Capel was a partner in the firm by about 1844. The partnership was reconstituted in 1850, with James Capel controlling eight of the thirty shares, and again in 1864, when the firm became officially known as James Capel & Co., although it had long been informally known in this way. 
The early nineteenth century was a period of rapid development in the stock exchange, which had acquired its own premises in 1802. British funds were the principal securities traded, together with East India Company, South Sea Company, and Bank of England stock. From the second decade of the nineteenth century the stock exchange was listing canal shares and by the mid-1830s railway company shares were also listed. By 1824 there were 156 companies quoted, and by 1842 this number had risen to 755, but in spite of this rapid growth, as late as 1853 British funds amounted to three-quarters of the total nominal value of securities quoted on the stock exchange. The stockbroking firm with which James Capel was associated was one of the principal dealers in government funds. After 1815 foreign government securities also began to make their appearance in the London stock exchange. James Capel became a member of the foreign committee. In the 1840s trading in these securities became increasingly difficult and the Spanish government proposed to repudiate its bonds. James Capel became chairman of the Spanish Bondholders' Committee and as such persuaded both the London stock exchange and the Paris bourse to suspend dealings in these bonds. Eventually, in 1852, the Spanish government was persuaded to give up this proposal and James Capel was presented with a piece of plate by grateful Spanish bondholders. 
In 1841 fraud and forgery upon a considerable scale in exchequer bills were uncovered, and James Capel gave evidence before the Treasury committee appointed to investigate the matter. The mid-1840s saw rapid growth in dealings in railway shares, a period known as the 'railway mania'. James Capel & Co. played some part in railway company flotation and in 1849 James Capel gave evidence before the House of Lords select committee on railway accounts. By 1847 James Capel & Co., with five partners, was one of the two largest stockbroking firms in the London stock exchange, the other being Lawrence, Cazenove, and Pearson. 
James Capel became one of the trustees and managers of the stock exchange in 1843, and chairman in 1853, when he oversaw the rebuilding of the premises of the stock exchange. He also became a member, and for twenty-five years chairman, of the Stock Exchange Fund for Decayed Members. By now he was living at 37 Fitzroy Square, London. He became treasurer of the London Orphan Asylum at Watford and remained in this office for eighteen years. 
Marion Mary Capel died in Pisa at some time before 1861. James Capel himself died on 18 November 1872, at his home, 62 Westbourne Terrace, London. At the time of his death Capel was the oldest member of the stock exchange and was described by a contemporary as: 'a man of the strictest honour, untarnished reputation, exemplary in all business transactions, shrewd in his perceptions, keenly alive to the fluctuations of the market, clever at bargains for his clients, yet ever ready to act in a spirit of liberality in his dealings with his brother members of the Stock Exchange. (Guildhall MS 15096)' 



@@@@@


doc= 48015


Currie, Raikes (1801-1881), banker and politician, was born on 15 April 1801, the second son of Isaac Currie (1760-1843), a banker of Bush Hill, Enfield, Middlesex, and his wife, Mary Anne (died 1834), daughter of William Raikes, a prominent East India merchant. The Curries were an old Scottish family from Berwickshire. Migrating to London in the mid-eighteenth century, they established themselves as distillers, and it was out of this business that the banking firm was born. The Raikes were also connected with banking and it was the growing professional links and friendship between the two families which brought Currie's parents together. Their marriage in 1789, two years after Mary Anne's brother, Robert Raikes, joined Curries & Co., further improved the prospects of Isaac Currie's banking firm. Mary Anne's uncle, Thomas Raikes, was governor of the Bank of England from 1797 to 1799, and her cousin, George Raikes, followed her brother and joined Curries in 1806, marrying her daughter, Marianne, in 1814. 
Currie was educated at Eton College, in preparation for joining his father's bank at 29 Cornhill, London. At the age of eighteen he was greatly influenced by his reading and analysis of John Locke's 'Essay Concerning Human Understanding'. Believing the study of metaphysics to be of supreme importance, he was particularly impressed with the work of David Hartley, Thomas Brown, Thomas Reid, and Dugald Stewart. From this study, in part, he developed a radical commitment to independence of thought and private judgement, yet believed that life was a 'dreary, cheerless thing without the belief of immortality, and an entire trust in an all-wise and all-beneficent Creator' ('Currie, 1827-1896', 1.195). On 28 June 1825 he married Laura Sophia (died 1869), daughter of the second Baron Wodehouse of Kimberley, Norfolk; they had four sons and two daughters. In the following year, on the death of George Raikes, Currie became a partner in Curries & Co. 
As Isaac Currie actively directed the business, his son devoted substantial time to politics and philanthropy. He established a mechanics' institute, assisted in the formation of a literary and scientific institution, and established and maintained at his own expense a school for the education of eighty children. Currie served as magistrate and deputy lieutenant for Middlesex, and as magistrate for Buckinghamshire, Essex, Hampshire, and Kent. In the wake of the abortive Hungarian revolution of 1848, Currie offered considerable assistance to prominent emigres, including Lajos Kossuth and Paul Strzelecki. 
With the death of his father in 1843, effective management of the bank fell to Raikes Currie, who eventually brought his two eldest sons, George and Bertram Wodehouse Currie, into the business. Bertram was taken in as partner in 1852, and almost immediately became the guiding force of Curries & Co., allowing his father more time for travelling and parliamentary affairs. In 1864 Curries & Co. merged with Glyn, Mills & Co. to become Glyn, Mills, Currie & Co., moving business to 67 Lombard Street. 
In September 1836 Currie accepted an offer to stand as Liberal candidate for Northampton borough on the platform of repeal of the 'Septennial Act', support for the ballot, strict economy in government, removal of all civil disabilities, abolition of tithes and pluralities, and a 'moderate fixed duty on corn... with a view to a gradual return to the sound principle of free-trade in the great staple of man's subsistence' ('Northampton Mercury', 10 Sept 1836). A committed Benthamite throughout his career, he readily paraded to the electors the 'hackneyed phrase' which stood as his guiding political principle -- 'the greatest happiness of the greatest number'. Surprising most observers, he was elected on 27 July 1837, ahead of the sitting Conservative, and held the seat until March 1857. Though wealthy, he was neither vain of his wealth nor parsimonious. He appealed to 'the operative classes' through frankness and a genuine flattery, finding them to be 'as a body, beyond all comparison, the most honest politicians'. Currie admitted that the working classes were justifiably suspicious of 'all professions' from 'pretended friends', and argued that the progress of the people depended principally upon their circumstances, modified by laws and institutions ('Northampton Mercury', 3 Dec 1836). 
Energetic, but not ambitious for fame, Currie often worked behind the scenes with friends, including George Grote, Lord Overstone, George Warde Norman, and Charles Buller, to promote an advanced Liberal social agenda, and the economic reforms recommended by philosophic radicalism. In 1837-8 he served on the House of Commons' committee which adopted Rowland Hill's proposal for twopenny postage. He voted in the small minority favouring Charles Villiers's annual motion for the abolition of the corn laws, and for George Grote's annual motion for the adoption of the ballot. During the 1840s Currie became intimately involved in forwarding the various banking and trade reforms which culminated in the 'Bank Charter Act' of 1844 and Sir Robert Peel's repeal of the corn laws in 1846. In 1841 he joined Overstone, Norman, Samuel Gurney, and Lionel Rothschild in supporting Lord John Russell's nomination for the City of London, as the 'Minister of Free Commerce' (O'Brien, 1.26-7). Though an avowed radical, Currie as early as 1841 became convinced that Peel would repeal the corn laws, and deeply regretted the Conservative prime minister's death, exclaiming that he would not 'have given him for a whole wilderness of Whigs!' ('Currie, 1827-1896', 1.382). He supported Peel's financial policy in parliament against his own party. 
In 1849, and again in 1857, Currie proposed Lionel Rothschild as parliamentary candidate for the City of London, pleading the cause of civil and religious liberty, and the loyalty of 2000 Jewish voters in the constituency. At the meeting of the parliamentary committee of the Liberal Registration Association on 10 March 1857, Currie himself was suddenly proposed along with Rothschild, in the wake of Lord John Russell's premature announcement that he would not contest the seat at the general election called following the defeat of Palmerston's administration in a parliamentary division on the government's China policy. Russell reconsidered his decision, entered the race without the support of the registration association, and proceeded to come third in the poll, leading to Currie's defeat. Currie then retired from politics, and largely from public life. 
Currie had a 'happy, easy disposition', according to his son, and 'never allowed the cares of life to depress his spirits'. He took great pleasure in his extended family, and was especially instrumental in promoting the career of his nephew John Wodehouse, later first earl of Kimberley. Largely independent of others for his enjoyment, however, he was seldom disappointed, reading much and amusing himself 'with the ordinary pleasures of the country' ('Currie, 1827-1896', 1.57-8). He died at his country residence, Minley Manor, near Farnborough, Hampshire, on 16 October 1881, and was buried five days later. His fourth son, Philip Henry Wodehouse Currie, a diplomat, was created Baron Currie. 


@@@@@


doc= 48022


Russell, Thomas (1830-1904), financier and land speculator, was born in Cork, the first of six children of Thomas Russell (1808-1873), carpenter, and Mary Roberts (1811-1847), ward of a Church of Ireland rector. The Russells left Ireland with the infant Thomas in 1833. After seven years in New South Wales the family settled in Auckland, the new capital of New Zealand. In 1844 young Thomas was articled to Auckland's foremost lawyer, Thomas Outhwaite. While undergoing legal training, he became an enthusiastic lay worker for the then powerful Wesleyan denomination. Licensed to practise at twenty-one, he had grown into a tall, energetic man of persuasive personality. As ambitious as he was able, he set up as a sole solicitor. The Wesleyans helped him by putting much church and mission work his way. On 18 July 1854 he married Emeline Vercoe; they had seven children. 
During the later 1850s Russell rose to be a powerful figure in the Auckland business community, as an activist in the progress party (the political arm of the local merchants), and as a foremost conveyancing solicitor. Determined and plausible, he established an ascendancy over the settlement's capitalists which endured for three decades. In 1859 he took the initiative in forming the New Zealand Insurance Company, and two years later was the driving force behind the creation of the Bank of New Zealand. In the same year he formed a legal partnership with Frederick Whitaker, renowned counsel and politician. Whitaker and Russell soon became the most profitable practice in the land. In an era when business advantage was inseparable from political influence, Russell entered the general assembly in 1861. Within a year he was taken into the cabinet, holding office until late 1864 in two successive ministries. As minister of defence in the second administration, he pressed for an uncompromising military reckoning with Maori during the land wars, and for confiscation of all 'rebel' lands, policies which cause, even today, undiminished anguish and resentment among the Maori people. 
When the capital was shifted to Wellington in 1865 Russell withdrew from politics to concentrate on his multifarious business interests. He was the chief promoter in the same year of the New Zealand Loan and Mercantile Agency Co. Ltd, incorporated in London. This company raised mortgage debentures in Britain to finance short-term advances to squatters secured by a lien on the season's wool clip, and more importantly to take over some troublesome long-term mortgage advances of the Bank of New Zealand. During the Thames gold rush Russell was a heavy investor in mines, batteries, and goldmining companies. By 1874 he had so prospered that he went to live in England as an expatriate rentier, entrusting his extensive interests in New Zealand to his partner Whitaker and to local agents. He realized, as few did, that by living in London he could take advantage of the capital market there at times when investors were 'on the feed' to finance first the development of extensive landed estates run by syndicates, of which he was the key figure, and second the Bank of New Zealand and its loan company whose directorates he now dominated. A rural collapse in New Zealand and the well-founded suspicion of British debenture holders that colonial borrowers could no longer service their debts brought down Russell's landed companies in the later 1880s and imperilled the financial institutions he had created. Russell himself would have been ruined had he not shuffled off some of his debts to the shoulders of others, and invested in the highly profitable Waihi Goldmining Company formed in 1887. 
Russell remains a controversial figure. He was extraordinarily self-regarding. A chancery judge investigating the affairs of Russell's insolvent Loan and Mercantile Company in 1894 identified him as the chief culprit; the evidence showed 'irresistibly' that the other directors had the 'fixed belief that everything recommended by Mr Russell must be right and for the interest of the company... They left him absolute master of the situation' (Mennell, 71-2). Yet he was admirably forward-looking. His policy of making use of readily available nineteenth-century British capital to develop the infrastructure of the colonial economy has few detractors today, although most historians agree that his sanguine temperament often led him to mistake the right time to invest. He died at Farnham, Surrey, where he had lived from 1897, on 2 September 1904. 


@@@@@


doc= 48023


Gibbins family (per. c.1770-1919), manufacturers and bankers, came to prominence with 


@@@@@


doc= 48025


Drummond, Henry (c.1730-1795), banker, was born about 1730, the son of William Drummond, fourth viscount of Strathallan (1690-1746), and his wife, Margaret (1692-1773), the daughter of Lord William Murray, later Lord Nairne. He was one of at least thirteen children. In 1744, with his brother Robert, he was entrusted to the care of his uncle Andrew Drummond (1688-1769). His father, who had taken part in the 1715 Jacobite rising, joined Prince Charles Edward Stuart in 1745 and commanded the Jacobite forces in Scotland during the period of the advance into England; he was killed at the battle of Culloden in April 1746. 
Henry Drummond was employed in his uncle's banking business in Charing Cross, London, from 1749, and during the Seven Years' War he acted as agent to the 42nd (the Black Watch), 46th, 87th, and 89th regiments of foot. In 1763 he was financial agent for New Jersey, and from 1764 he was associated with the army agent Richard Cox (1718-1803). He went into partnership with Cox from premises in Craig's Court, Whitehall, in 1765. The two men acted as joint paymasters to the Royal Artillery from 1766 and by 1771 had eighteen regiments on their books. From 1767 Drummond was also involved in the contract for the payment of the British forces in North America, and in 1770 replaced his cousin John (1723-1774) in the partnership with Thomas Harley (1730-1804). 
Drummond joined his brother Robert and cousin John as a partner in the family banking firm in 1772, from which time his partnership with Cox ceased, although they continued to have a business connection until 1774. From the early 1770s the volume and profits of the banking business increased significantly, and by the time of Drummond's death in 1795 the firm had almost 3200 accounts -- double the number at Andrew Drummond's death in 1769 -- and average annual profits approaching $30,000. 
In December 1774 Drummond purchased a seat in parliament at Wendover, Buckinghamshire, from Lord Verney. He consistently supported Lord North, but by 1777 had become disillusioned over North's policy in North America. In June 1777 Harley and Drummond were given a year's notice of termination of their contract; however, in the event they were able to secure its renewal and extension to the West Indies, and the work continued until 1783. At the 1780 general election, at North's recommendation, Drummond purchased a seat at Midhurst, Sussex. Drummond supported North until his fall, but he was not present at the divisions on Fox's 'East India Bill'. Being a friend of Henry Dundas (whose daughter Anne married Drummond's son in 1786), he may have followed the latter's political lead, and by 1784 he was listed among Pitt's supporters. He held his seat at Midhurst until 1790. 
As a young man Drummond lived at the bank and also had a property at Lawers, Perthshire. Later he acquired a house in St James's Square, London, and owned a country residence, first at Langley Park, Buckinghamshire, and from 1787 The Grange, near Alresford, Hampshire. He married Elizabeth (died 1819), the daughter of Charles Compton MP (died 1755) and his wife, Mary, the daughter of Sir Berkeley Lucy, on 23 March 1761; they had two children, Henry (1762-1794) and Anne. 
Drummond was a member of 'the Gang', an informal circle of friends which, in addition to his brother Robert, included William Amherst, Thomas Bradshaw, Lord Frederick Campbell, Anthony Chamier, Richard Cox, Thomas Harley, Sir Robert Murray Keith, Richard Rigby, and Sir John Sebright. It started out as a bachelors' monthly dining club and soon became the forum for wild activities and jocular camaraderie. As time went on the friendships matured and extended to incorporate the members' families. 
Drummond died on 24 June 1795 at The Grange. 


@@@@@


doc= 48026


Powell, Thomas (1779-1863), coal owner, was born in Monmouthshire (at Monmouth or Chepstow) on 6 January 1779, the son of John Powell. No records of his early life and education have been found. His substantial achievement was to lay the foundations of the Powell Duffryn Company, the most widely known name in the Welsh coal industry. 
Powell began his commercial career around 1810 as a timber merchant. He became interested in Monmouthshire's newly developing bituminous (house) coal industry, which at the time was mostly operated through single, small-scale enterprises. Powell's ambitions were wider. In 1837, along with Thomas Protheroe and Joseph Latch, he made a determined effort to control Monmouthshire coal prices by forming the Newport Coal Company, through which the main proprietors were to sell their coal. Before 1840 he had already become the greatest single figure in the bituminous coal trade, and by 1841 he owned four collieries -- Gelli-gaer, Gelli-groes, Bryn, and, in partnership with Protheroe, Buttery Hatch -- which employed 431 men and boys. 
Powell was also exceptionally quick to recognize the potential of the new trade in steam coal from Cardiff, and perceptive in not following its legendary pioneer, Lucy Thomas, into the Merthyr valley in the 1830s. Instead he moved to the virtually unworked Aberdar (Cynon) valley and rapidly opened a succession of collieries to serve this new market: Old Dyffryn (Tir Ffounder) was sunk first (1840-42), then came Upper Dyffryn (1844-6), Middle Dyffryn (1850), Lower Dyffryn and Cwm Pennar (1850-54), Abergwawr (1855), and Cwmdare (1852-4). Thomas Powell was unique at this stage of the development of the coal industry of south Wales. By the time he was sixty and heavily handicapped by deafness he had built up a similar supremacy in the business of steam coal to the one he had achieved in the bituminous coal trade. At a time when even the most enterprising were unlikely to be involved in more than two collieries, he ruled over a multi-pit undertaking. 
Powell's other activities -- in banking, docks, and railways (he was on the original board of the Taff Vale Railway) -- were influenced by and undertaken to support his coal enterprises. By 1862 he owned sixteen pits and exported 700,000 tons of coal a year. After his death his property passed to his three sons (his will was stolen but dramatically recovered by a policeman disguised as a woman), who avoided their obligations by selling, for $365,000, all the steam-coal collieries in the Aberdar valley, together with the New Tredegar colliery in the Rhymni valley, to a group headed by Sir George Elliot; and on 28 July 1864 the Powell Duffryn Steam Coal Company was formed. 
Thomas Powell lived a long life of frugality and industry: the day before his death at the age of eighty-three he had been at work in his Newport office. He left a personal estate of about $250,000. Even the most celebratory books on the coal pioneers, however, hint at something more dubious than an industrious approach. It is not surprising, therefore, to find the colliery owner John Nixon complaining that Powell had simply reneged on paying him an agreed commission for marketing Powell's coal in France. Nixon recorded Powell's blunt response: 'I had a law suit with Lord Bute, and I beat him... I never in my life made an agreement that I could not get out of' (Vincent, 152). This was not entirely accurate: in 1841 Powell had been obliged to pay substantial damages to Sir Charles Morgan of Tredegar for moving coal under his land without a way-leave. More creditably, after an explosion killing twenty-eight people at Dyffryn in 1845, Powell rejected a public subscription to care for the five widows, instead giving them an allowance of 9's'. a week with housing and coal. 
Powell was one of the first six aldermen of Newport under the 1835 act. He was a member of the Church of England, and was married three times (although his family life is obscure). He is known to have had three sons and at least two daughters. The eldest son was, with his family, murdered in Abyssinia in 1869; the youngest disappeared without trace while in a hot-air balloon over the English Channel in 1881; and the middle son later died following a blow from a horse. Thomas Powell died at home at The Gaer, in the parish of St Woolos, Newport, on 24 March 1863, survived by his third wife, Anne Powell. 


@@@@@


doc= 48027


Stuckey family (per. c.1770-1845), bankers and merchants, came to prominence with 


@@@@@


doc= 48028


William Mellish (c.1710-1791), landowner and politician, of Blyth, Nottinghamshire, and his second wife, Anne, the daughter of John Gore, a leading government financier. 


@@@@@


doc= 48030


Mellish, William (1764-1838), banker and politician, was born on 13 July 1764, the third son of 
Mellish's father was the second son of Joseph Mellish, landowner and politician, and his wife, Dorothy, the daughter of Sir William Gore, lord mayor of London. The elder William Mellish was educated at Eton College and at Peterhouse, Cambridge, of which he became a fellow. Originally intended for the bar, he was admitted to Lincoln's Inn in 1725 and to the Inner Temple in 1734. In the following year he married Catherine ['see 'Mellish, Catherine Rachel (1710-1747)], the daughter of Joseph da Costa (1683-1753) and the widow of Joseph Isaac Villareal of Edwinstowe, Nottinghamshire. Both her father and first husband were wealthy Portuguese Jews. The couple had two sons. In 1762 Mellish married again; his new wife was Anne, daughter of John Gore, himself the son of Sir William Gore. 
Keen to hold office, Mellish was appointed lord treasurer's remembrancer, a minor sinecure office in the exchequer, in 1753, and continued to hold this office until 1754. He was elected MP for East Retford in 1741, but gave up his seat in 1751 upon his appointment as a commissioner of excise. He became receiver-general of customs in 1760, but was dismissed in January 1763. He owed all his appointments to the patronage of the duke of Newcastle. An uninspired politician, Mellish's name appeared in Lord Egmont's list of 1749-50 as one of 'the most obnoxious men of an inferior degree', and also as one of the twelve 'worst cast for us in the whole House' (HoP, 'Commons, 1715-54', 2.252). He succeeded to the Blyth estate in 1757 upon the death of his elder brother. He died on 16 December 1791. 
The younger William Mellish and his elder brother John each inherited $10,000 as well as the business of John Gore (including $12,000 of capital stock in trade); in 1798 William secured sole control upon the death of his brother, murdered by highwaymen. There appears to have been in practice two firms, John Gore & Co., and J. and W. Mellish & Co., and in addition to being contractors in government loans, both firms seem to have been general mercantile houses, trading in cotton and copper to the Baltic, to Lisbon, and to Hamburg in 1807. William Mellish became a director of the Bank of England in 1792, and so continued until his death. He was deputy governor in 1812 for two years, then governor, again for two years. He became captain of the grenadier company of the Bank of England Volunteers in 1798, and major in 1805. 
Mellish was elected MP for Grimsby in 1796, and again in 1803, ostensibly as a supporter of William Pitt. He was returned for Middlesex in 1806, and held this seat until defeated in 1820. He usually supported the ministries of the duke of Newcastle and the earl of Liverpool, and was always opposed to any measure of Roman Catholic relief. He spoke on several occasions in defence of the Bank of England, and voted in 1810 against parliamentary reform. 
At the time of his death in 1838 Mellish, a wealthy man, owned a house in Bishopsgate, London, and a country estate at Bush Hill, Edmonton, which he had inherited from an aunt. This latter was a well-managed agricultural undertaking. Mellish died on 8 June 1838, at Bishopsgate, in his seventy-fifth year, and was buried in the church of All Saints, Edmonton. He does not appear to have married. 


@@@@@


doc= 48032


Cotesworth, William (c.1668-1726), merchant and industrialist, was born the second surviving son of Charles Cotesworth (1637-1687) of Eggleston, co. Durham, a yeoman farmer, and his wife, Anne (died 1712). His eldest brother, Charles, remained on the land while Cotesworth himself was apprenticed in March 1683 to a prosperous Gateshead merchant and tallow chandler who died three years later, leaving his trade in the hands of his widow and inexperienced son. The bright young apprentice seemed to provide a welcome addition to the weakened firm and he was soon brought into partnership, paying only a token $20 towards the joint capital. On 9 May 1699 he married his partner's sister-in-law, Hannah Ramsay (1673-1710), and gained in prosperity with the passing years, allegedly by milking the partnership's capital to finance his private business ventures. Whatever the truth of this allegation, it is beyond question that the breakup of the firm in 1706 left him able to establish a successful independent business and to enter the capital-intensive salt and coal industries, while the fortunes of his former partner steadily declined. 
Over the next few years Cotesworth's standing in the area grew rapidly, particularly through his friendship with the Liddell family of Ravensworth Castle in co. Durham, and through his activities as principal agent of the Regulation, a cartel formed in 1708 by several of the principal mine owners of the Tyne valley. His spectacular business success and increasing influence aroused resentment since they were felt to be out of keeping with his relatively humble background; and this resentment intensified when in 1712 he persuaded his wealthy brother-in-law, William Ramsay, to buy the strategically placed manors of Gateshead and Whickham, south of the Tyne. Cotesworth exploited this purchase to regulate the amount of coal coming onto the market from the new collieries south and west of Ramsay's estate, a policy that dragged his reluctant relative into open and often violent confrontation with the owners of these collieries. Meanwhile, his active loyalty to the Hanoverian government made him more enemies in an area where political divisions were deep and bitter. In 1715 the transformation from impoverished apprentice to landed gentleman was completed when Ramsay died, childless, leaving Cotesworth the bulk of his estate. He became a JP and, four years later, was appointed high sheriff of Northumberland. By this time he had retired from trade to concentrate on his extensive investments in land and industry, which by the early 1720s were estimated to yield a total annual income of more than $8000 -- a remarkably successful return on his original stake of $20. The satisfaction which he presumably felt in surveying his expanding business empire from his country house on the outskirts of Gateshead was nevertheless marred, by the deaths of his wife (1710) and of four of their seven children. 
The years which marked the peak of Cotesworth's success, however, were also those in which he began to encounter difficulties in his 'great concerns'; thereafter he was forced to fight hard to keep his head above water, let alone advance any further. The last five or six years of his life were spent in a constant battle against illness as well as against enemies anxious to deprive him of the fruits of his success. In 1725 he survived an assassination attempt allegedly instigated by one of his bitterest rivals. His aggressive self-righteousness undoubtedly played a part in sowing the whirlwind that he was to reap in the 1720s, but other factors working against him were outside his control and might well have had similar effects on the careers of less belligerent men. In attempting to break into a high-risk, capital-intensive, and aristocratically dominated industry like coal, Cotesworth characteristically overreached himself, and the difficulties he encountered so overwhelmed him that he left his only surviving son, Robert (1702-1729), a muddled and encumbered inheritance. His achievements, however, should not be underestimated: in his final years he was the driving force behind the so-called 'grand alliance' which dominated the Newcastle coal industry for another hundred years and, despite the financial burdens imposed by protracted lawsuits, he was able to leave his heirs a respected position in society and a landed estate valued at $60,000. 
William Cotesworth died after a long and painful illness and was buried on 15 December 1726 at St Mary's parish church at Gateshead. His will contained a final surprise: a codicil revealed to Robert Cotesworth and his sisters, Elizabeth ('b'. 1701) and Hannah (1706-1787), that in 1722 or 1723 their father had married his housekeeper, Hannah Watson (died 1766). Their daughter, Henrietta ('c'.1723-1781), who was reputedly very like her father, in 1760 became sub-governess of the royal nursery. 


@@@@@


doc= 48033


Mansfield, Edward Dillon (1845-1924), headmaster, was born on 12 February 1845, at Bathwick, Bath, Somerset, the eldest son of the Revd Joseph Mansfield, rector of Blandford St Mary, Dorset, and his wife, Emily ('nee' le Poer Trench). He entered Marlborough College in August 1856, joining C.I. house (the former 'Castle Inn' before the school's development). He left Marlborough in September 1864 and in the following month entered Trinity College, Oxford, where his father had been a member. He obtained a pass BA in 1867 (MA 1877). Mansfield became an assistant master at Clifton College, Bristol, in 1874. Appointed third form master, he became in the same year the inaugural master of the preparatory school, a post he held until 1883 when he left to become headmaster of Lambrook School, Bracknell, a private preparatory school founded by R. J. Burnside in 1860. He married Muriel Edith Campbell-Ross; Sir John Maurice Mansfield was their son. 
Mansfield's success at Lambrook, where he set out to test his ideas of education, established his reputation among his fellow preparatory school headmasters. He was an outstanding leader in the affairs of the Association of Preparatory Schools (APS), the precursor of the Incorporated Association of Preparatory Schools, where he promoted his liberal and progressive ideas in the teaching of young boys. A sturdy champion of the reform of the curriculum and a critic of too early specialization, he played an important role in the negotiations with the public schools for the institution of the common entrance examination in 1904, being appointed with Herbert Bull to represent the APS on its board of management. It has been said that 'if Frank Ritchie [headmaster of the Beacon school, Sevenoaks] devised the machinery of the examination, Mansfield was the guiding spirit'. With the help of Charles Darnell (of Cargilfield School, Edinburgh) he was also responsible for the setting up, in 1897, of the Oxford diploma course, run by M. W. Keatinge for the training of preparatory-school masters who were without a qualification. 
Opinion varies concerning Mansfield's personality: he was said by some to be aloof but by others he was seen to be good with both boys and staff, showing understanding of their problems but showing 'no mercy to the shirker and evil doer'. His teaching was of a high quality, being lucid in explanation, and he was capable of understanding boys' rudimentary problems. He was not in favour of the boys' use of translations and was himself a well-known writer of school books. He co-edited with Evelyn Abbott, a fellow Cliftonian master, a Greek grammar (1877), which went through several editions. He was a keen sportsman and played with, and coached, his boys at both cricket and rugby football, which he regarded as 'the cure for all boyish ailments'. He was also a craftsman, and expert at wood-carving; he ensured that the boys, through the school curriculum, were encouraged to work in wood. 
Mansfield retired from Lambrook School in 1904 and threw himself into local politics, becoming an alderman of Berkshire county council and a member of its education committee. He sat on governing bodies of secondary schools and the council of the University of Reading. He died on 10 November 1924 at his home at Pucks Wood, Finchampstead, Berkshire, survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 48034


Tabor, Robert Stammers (1819-1909), headmaster and Church of England clergyman, born in Colchester on 14 February 1819, was the son of Robert Tabor. He was educated at a private school in Essex, before matriculating as a sizar at Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1838, graduating BA in 1842 as twenty-fourth senior optime in the mathematical tripos, and proceeding MA in 1848. Ordained deacon in 1842 and priest in 1844, he was curate to Henry Montagu Villiers, later bishop of Carlisle, at St George's, Bloomsbury, from 1842 to 1844, before being presented in 1844 to the perpetual curacy of Christ Church, Enfield, by the patron, Robert Cooper Lee Bevan (1809-90). He married on 7 March 1845 Mary, second daughter of Francis Dollman, perpetual curate of St Mark's, Clerkenwell. 
Villiers and Bevan, a wealthy banker who had built Christ Church, Cockfosters, had become interested in the fortunes of Cheam School, a private classical school which was in a low state and facing closure. They agreed that Bevan should buy out the sitting head, Henry Shepheard ('c'.1809-1878), a former fellow of Oriel College, and headmaster since 1846. Tabor, who had supplemented his stipend at Enfield by taking private pupils, was to be installed in Shepheard's place. On becoming headmaster of Cheam in 1855 Tabor set about converting it into a private preparatory school catering for boys up to the age of fourteen. This soon proved a success and numbers rapidly grew; by 1864 there were 100 pupils. Cheam School built up a reputation as a nursery for Eton College and attracted a fashionable clientele; pupils under Tabor included (Lord) Randolph Churchill. In 1874 Tabor was joined by his son Arthur Sydney Tabor (1851-1927), a Cambridge cricket blue, who succeeded his father as headmaster from 1891 to 1920. His eldest son, Robert Montagu Tabor (1845-1925), educated at Eton and King's College, Cambridge, was assistant secretary to the Board of Education from 1903 to 1909. In all Tabor had seven sons and five daughters. 
On 15 December 1887 Tabor married again; his second wife was Annie, daughter of J. Harvey, a barrister. After his retirement in 1890 he lived at 64 St George's Square, London, where he died on 14 January 1909. 


@@@@@


doc= 48039


Bull, Herbert Arthur (1854-1928), headmaster, was born at Harrow on 21 May 1854, the son of William John Bull (died 1890), an assistant master at Harrow School, and his wife, Augusta Jane ('nee' Marshall). Educated at Rugby School from 1867 to 1873, Bull entered Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1873, graduating with a pass degree in 1877. He represented Cambridge against Oxford at rugby football, tennis, and racquets. His first teaching post was as an assistant master at Wellington College, where he taught modern languages from 1880 to 1886. He left Wellington to set up, in partnership with his brother, Reginald Alfred Bull ('b'. 1857), a private preparatory school at Westgate-on-Sea, which they named Wellington House. They started with only one boy, but by 1896 there were over fifty; many proceeded with scholarships to Wellington College, with which Bull maintained close ties. Reginald Bull set up a preparatory school (St Andrew's, Southborough, Kent) on his own account in 1890, leaving Herbert as sole headmaster at Wellington House until his retirement in 1920. Bull ran the school with the help of his wife, Elinor, daughter of Alfred Willett, a surgeon, whom he married in 1889. Wellington House closed in 1970. 
Ordained in 1884, Bull was deeply religious, and built a chapel for the school. Simple and honest in his approach to the education of boys, he could also be a frequent user of the cane. A lifelong enthusiast for sport, he was one of the original members of the Hockey Association. 
Bull was a leading light in the formation of the Association of Preparatory Schools (APS) in 1892, seeing the importance of having a public body to bring the heads of public and preparatory schools together. He was twice elected chairman (1899 and 1910). Holding high ideals about the teaching of the young, he saw the APS members as a band of brothers dedicated to the early teaching of the leaders of the nation. He could, however, be impatient with those who did not share his views. His last appearance at the APS conference was in 1917, when he defended the retention of the scripture paper in the common entrance examination. 
After his retirement Bull was active in local government and became chairman of Westgate-on-Sea urban district council. He was appointed rural dean of Westbere, Thanet, in 1917. He died at his home, Idene Place, Benenden, Kent, on 10 August 1928. 


@@@@@


doc= 48040


Carden, Sir Robert Walter, first baronet (1801-1888), banker and politician, was born in London on 7 October 1801, the youngest son of James Carden (1758-1829), a barrister, of Bedford Square, London, and Richmond, Surrey, and his wife, Mary (1765-1830), daughter of John Walter, founder of 'The Times', a newspaper in which her son Robert retained a proprietary interest. One of his brothers was George Frederick Carden, cemetery founder. In 1816 he took a commission in the 52nd foot and in 1822 he began a sixty-five year association with the stock exchange, becoming the 'father of the house' and remaining active until his death. He married Pamela Elizabeth Edith (died 1874), daughter of William Smith Andrews of the 19th foot, in 1827; they had ten children. 
In 1855 Carden founded the City Bank, incorporated by royal charter. It became a limited company in March 1880. By 1898 the bank had opened twenty-one branches in London and its suburbs, and had amalgamated with the London City and Midland Bank Ltd. It was renamed the London Joint City and Midland Bank in 1918 and the Midland Bank in 1923, with its headquarters in Threadneedle Street. Although he was thought of as a pillar of the City (he was also a chairman of the Royal Exchange Bank and director of the Canada Company), Carden's aspirations were relatively modest. Politically, however, his influence continued to grow. His connection with the City's Dowgate ward began in 1849, when he became, in an uncontested election, its alderman, and continued until he retired to the ward of Bridge Without in 1871. He was a commissioner for the lieutenancy of London in 1849. The following year, in December 1850, he made the first of many attempts to enter parliament, on this occasion at St Albans. It was here that, although unsuccessful, he gained his reputation for forthrightness by fighting widespread corruption in the constituency. Besides sitting for Gloucester from April 1857 to May 1859 and Barnstaple from April 1880 to 1885, he also contested Marylebone in April 1861, Reading in November 1868, and Barnstaple in February 1880. 
Carden had more success in his municipal career and brought to it the same direct approach. After serving as a sheriff in 1850-51 and receiving a knighthood on 17 July 1851, he was noted as the proposer of the Indian Mutiny Fund, and he made a visit to Russia on the occasion of the coronation of Tsar Alexander II. He was lord mayor of London in 1857-8. Again, he refused to accede to bribery and corruption, this time from within the common council. Consequently, on his return to the common hall of the livery companies he was received with hooting and groans. During his mayoral year his unpopularity deepened. He was the first to abandon the water procession of the lord mayor's show and to concede the City's rights over the Thames to the Thames Conservancy Board. More crucially, however, he was seen as a 'sturdy' evangelical conservative (he attended services at Portman Chapel, under the ministry of the Revd Neville Sherbrooke) in a city that maintained its Liberal and whig mix ('City Press', 21 Jan 1888). 
His year as lord mayor was also one in which Carden widened his scope for public service, becoming a JP for Middlesex and Surrey. As a magistrate, he confined City vagrants for three weeks at a time and as a result the streets were said to have been cleared of a nuisance. At a public meeting he promised to find work for all the unemployed present, but he complained subsequently that few remained working for more than a month, and only two for a year. His experience as a teacher in the Ogle Mission, Gray's Yard ragged school, and at George Yard, Whitechapel, all institutions to which he contributed financially, also gave him a close knowledge of the unemployed. Every three years, he opened his Surrey residence, Mole Lodge in West Moulsey, to the children of the High Street Mission, thus revealing a personality that could be alternately generous and stern. 
The death of his wife in 1874, a year after the death of his second son Robert, a clergyman of the Church of England, seemed to temper his outlook. In 1876-7 he undertook his third spell as master of the Cutlers' Company, this time in more favourable circumstances. In June 1887 he was rewarded with a baronetcy. He was discovered dead in his chair after dinner on 19 January 1888 at his home at 64 Wimpole Street, Marylebone, London. He was buried at Kensal Green, in the cemetery which his brother George had founded. According to one obituary he was remembered as 'frosty but kindly' ('City Press', 21 Jan 1888), the qualities that he had shown during a life that spanned almost the whole of the nineteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 48041


Abraham Robarts (1745-1816), born on 27 September 1745 in Stepney, Middlesex, the son of Captain Abraham Robarts and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Wildey. He married Sabine, daughter of Thomas Tierney and sister of the Rt Hon. George Tierney MP, sometime leader of the whig opposition, on 16 June 1774. Well connected in the political world, the family was also well placed in the City of London. Already a director of the Royal Exchange Assurance by 1781, West India factor, and East India Company director (1788-92, 1793-7, 1799-1803, 1804-7), Abraham Robarts went into partnership with Curtis, Were, Hornyold, and Berwick of Cornhill in 1792, and was based at 15 Lombard Street, the site of the old Lloyd's Coffee House, from 1795. Besides his London banking interests, he was also a partner in Lechmere's Bank at Worcester, and thus began a long family connection with this city. As a successor to Edmund Lechmere he held the seat in parliament as a whig, was returned unopposed in 1796, and fought off challenges in 1802, 1806, and 1812. He had unsuccessfully contested Wootton Bassett in 1784. His parliamentary career was relatively pedestrian, but he was known to have been a 'staunch friend' (Thorne, 23) of the abolition of the slave trade and to have voted both for an inquiry into ministerial corruption and for parliamentary reform. 
Economics and politics also mixed when Robarts was the 'leading man' (Cope, 58) of Walter Boyd's consortium in 1794, and when his firm donated $30,000 to the loyalty loan in 1797. He was an advocate of the 'principle and strict practice of banking' (Pressnell, 412) and the company, by the turn of the century, were already 'princes amongst London agents' (ibid., 405). In March 1806 a consortium of which he was a member secured the government loan contract. In this instance, as in others, Robarts was uncompromising in his attitude towards business. Similarly, in the series of banking panics of December 1825, 1836, and November 1840 his firm was seen as a rock amid the uncertain waters of some stormy financial weather. His forthright language and approach were not confined to his dealings with Pitt, government ministers, or his connections in the City, but extended to his colleagues in the country banks. Good practice may have begun in London but certainly, he believed, it should not have ended there. 
This attitude, however, masks both Robarts's generosity towards his family and his voluntarist spirit. He was a commissioner of lieutenancy for the City of London and colonel of the first regiment of the East India volunteers. Accordingly, on his death at Taplow on 26 November 1816, aged seventy-one, he left money to the relief of distressed officers in the East India Company, to his servants, and to all his clerks in the bank. Despite his lukewarm political support for George Tierney, he made substantial bequests to the Tierney family in his will. However, he left the lion's share of $350,000 and a country estate to the eldest of his four sons and $10,000 to each of his three daughters. His middle sons, George and James, were left $33,892 and $22,251 respectively. 
Unlike most of his siblings, 


@@@@@


doc= 48042


Abraham Wildey Robarts (1779-1858), his eldest brother, was the main beneficiary of his father's success, and the vessel in which his aspirations continued to travel. Born on 1 August 1779, he was educated at the Revd Thomas Horne's school, Chiswick. In 1794 he gained an East India writership in China. After seven years he joined his father in the family partnership in Lombard Street. By the time he inherited his father's business in 1816, it had already been known as Robarts and Curtis for twelve years, and two years later it became Sir William Curtis, Robarts, and Curtis. He married Charlotte Anne, daughter of Edmund Wilkinson of Potterton Lodge, Tadcaster, Yorkshire, on 20 January 1808. Unlike the older partner, Curtis, who was leader of the tories in the City of London, the younger Robarts was a whig. It was thought he would inherit his father's seat in Worcester but he sat instead for Maidstone, in place of Sir Robert Thomas Wilson, and in every parliament from 1818 until he eventually retired in 1837. As the nephew of George Tierney and with resources gleaned from the family business, he came top of the poll. He voted with the opposition on most issues. 
With Abraham Wildey Robarts as chairman of the committee of bankers, the company prospered, and it changed its name under his stewardship in 1833 to Robarts, Curtis & Co., a promotion of the family's position. As a noted collector of fine, mainly Dutch, paintings he left the social reputation of the Robartses in an even better condition than he found it. He died at his home, 26 Hill Street, Berkeley Square, Mayfair, on 3 April 1858, aged seventy-nine, after a very brief illness. The Robarts family interest went on to amalgamate with Sir John William Lubbock & Co. in 1860. As one of the last private banks, Robarts Lubbock & Co. itself amalgamated with Coutts & Co. in July 1914. At the time the business had nine partners, capital of $500,000, and deposits and current accounts of $4,130,850. It was a move that united a City bank and clearing-house with one based in the West End. It also had the effect of uniting country banking interests with those of the City of London. The place of the Robarts family in the polity had been consolidated and then advanced. 


@@@@@


doc= 48044


Robarts family (per. c.1780-1914), bankers, came to prominence with 


@@@@@


doc= 48047


Larnach, Donald (1817-1896), banker and financier, was born on 17 July 1817 at Caithness, Scotland, one of at least two sons of William Larnach (died 1829), reputedly a naval purser, and his wife, Margaret, 'nee' Smith. Little is known about his early life, but he clearly received a good education. In 1834 he joined his squatter brother, John, in New South Wales. During the 1840s' colonial depression he bought a steam flour mill in Sydney and also traded and acquired urban and pastoral property. On 3 September 1845 he married Jane Elizabeth, the eldest daughter of a leading merchant and fellow countryman, William Walker, the influence of whose advice and guidance he later generously acknowledged. 
In 1845 Larnach began his legendary association with the Bank of New South Wales, first as auditor and, from the following year, as an innovative and respected director. Compact and well-proportioned in figure and features, Larnach had a composed appearance which belied energy and confidence. Following his involvement in the reconstitution of the bank in 1850, he was elected president (1852-3). He steered his charge to notable prosperity, greatly enhanced by direct dealing in gold. Generous-minded, Larnach identified easily with a rising colonial society, and was early bent on making its first bank successful: by 1866 the 'Wales' had assets greater than any other bank in Australia. 
By the age of thirty-six Larnach had laid the foundation of a personal fortune and was also a director of a gold company. After moving to London in 1852 he organized a branch for the bank that freed it from overseas agencies. He was appointed foundation managing director at Cannon Street in 1854, where for more than forty years he promoted expansion of the bank outside Australia. Ambitious to make an impression and even 'take the lead of all others', he could soon write, 'we stand as high as any Bank in London and you may say to our friends that although many of them thought it very fine to belong to English Banks, I would not exchange with any of them' (Larnach to Alexander Stuart, 2 Jan 1854, London letter-book, B/LON/2, Westpac archives). 
While a steady flow of gold from Australia had no doubt helped, Larnach's fine judgement, finesse, and acute professional principles met recognition in the capital. He became director (1858-91) and president of the London Joint Stock Bank, and a director of the Chartered Mercantile Bank of India, London, and China and of the Indemnity Mutual Marine Insurance Co. During the financial crisis following the collapse of Overend, Gurney & Co. in 1866 he chaired a committee formed to contain the failure of the Agra and Masterman's Bank. In the panic he assured headquarters at Sydney that 'I always hold myself in readiness to pledge all I have in the world for the Bank here' (Larnach to Shepherd Smith, 26 Sept 1866, London letter-book, B/LON/2, Westpac archives). It was no small pledge. Larnach fully appreciated the subtleties, social and otherwise, of metropolitan financial activities. Living at Kensington Palace Gardens ('Millionaires' Row'), and riding in nearby Hyde Park, he entertained appropriately but not ostentatiously; his estate, Brambletye, in Sussex (where he was high sheriff in 1883), was close to members of the Walker family. 
Larnach raised loans and development finance on the London market for the Australian colonies, adroitly reducing the consequences of unco-ordinated borrowing. His shrewdness was a byword in the Antipodes, and his advice widely depended on. He kept in close touch with the bank's Sydney management and with visitors, correspondents, and colonial politicians. In the early 1870s Larnach virtually ran the New South Wales agent-general's office in London. In 1879 he was appointed chairman of the London board and retired as managing director. Increasingly sceptical of the financial management of short-lived colonial administrations, he agreed in 1884 -- when the bank relinquished the New South Wales government account, held since 1868 -- that '... we would be as well without their business' (Larnach to Shepherd Smith, 8 Aug 1884, London letter-book, B/LON/2, Westpac archives). Larnach visited Australia, where he retained investments and property, in 1880 and 1886. A founding vice-president of the Institute of Bankers, he was acknowledged as the doyen of Australian bankers. 
Survived by his wife, two sons, and a daughter, Larnach died at home, at 21 Kensington Palace Gardens, Kensington, London, on 12 May 1896. 


@@@@@


doc= 48054


Joseph Holland (d. 1605), who also illustrates some of the virtues and shortcomings found among the less celebrated members of the society. Born at Weare in Devon, Holland was admitted to the Inner Temple in November 1571, and continued to live in London, where on 16 May 1575 he married Angella Bassano, presumably a member of the celebrated family of musicians. Their son Philip was born on 14 March 1576. Angella had died by 24 October 1584 when Holland married Sara Hewett, also of London, with whom he had two sons and a daughter, and whom he made his sole legatee and executor on his deathbed in November 1605. He was granted a coat of arms on 28 September 1588, appropriately, in the light of his own heraldic collections, which included one for his native county, recorded in the College of Arms in the eighteenth century. He was typical of members of the Society of Antiquaries in that he lived in London (he still had chambers in the Inner Temple in 1601), where a residence was probably essential, since attendance at meetings seems to have been required. As these were held during the law terms, members with country residences might not have been completely excluded, but they would not have been easily able to participate. Holland had become a member of the society by 3 June 1598, when he spoke concerning the antiquity of English cities, declaring that 'I have divers antiquities in coin stamped at several times in England', the oldest 'a British piece of gold' from Colchester (Hearne, 1771, 1.38). He collected documents too, among them a charter of King Edgar and a deed of the Edward, the Black Prince, and manuscript volumes, notably the mid-thirteenth-century almoner's cartulary from Reading Abbey (now BL, Cotton MS Vespasian E.v) which John Dodderidge gave him on 16 May 1605. Holland also noted monumental inscriptions and other physical remains of the past, for instance Maiden Castle, Dorset, and the prehistoric barrows surrounding it. The twenty papers that he is recorded as giving to the society show him to have been a careful observer and assiduous collector, but fallible in his judgements. Thus he confidently derived sterling money from its having been first struck by Edward I at Stirling in Scotland; better-informed colleagues contradicted him. 
The writings of Elizabethan antiquaries circle around a few historiographical poles, notably the use of legal and heraldic sources and the collection of evidence in the form of manuscripts, coins, and marbles. Some authors followed in Camden's footsteps by publishing chorographies, a form defined by a contemporary as 'the description of some particular place, as Region, Ile, citie, or such like portion of the earth severed by it selfe fro the rest' (Mendyk, 23). The results varied widely, embracing John Stow's scholarly and affectionate 'Survey of London' and Richard Carew's more exuberant 'Survey of Cornwall', as well as many less personal productions, like the history of Norfolk, in Latin, that Sir Henry Spelman left unfinished at his death. Equally closely linked to antiquarian concerns was a large body of legal writing: many antiquaries searched the evidence of the past to find arguments for legal positions, reaching back as far as the ancient Hebrews for arguments on natural law. Besides religious sources, Spelman cites linguistic and textual evidence from Hebrew, Greek, and Arabic sources. Francis Thynne discusses the legal functions of ambassadors with reference to etymological and philological evidence. William Lambarde comments on the high courts of justice by relating them to Hebrew precedents in the 'Bible', as well as to what was then known about Anglo-Saxon and Norman courts. Robert Cotton used antiquarian evidence to defend the rights of parliament and to assert the primacy of the king of England over the king of Spain. A few antiquaries, including John Stow and William Thynne, also took an interest in literary editing: Stow and Thynne collaborated on an edition of Chaucer, and Stow published a selection of Skelton's poetry. There was an abiding interest in language. 
The work of the Elizabethan Society of Antiquaries has been described as Baconian, or inductive, both in its reasoning style and in its focus on collecting data. Many antiquaries were indeed collectors, involved in determining the provenance of objects from medieval texts to Roman pavements. Both acquisition and cataloguing required serious financial commitment. Robert Cotton is the prime example. His manuscript collection included the Lindisfarne gospels, two contemporary copies of the 'Magna Carta', the only surviving copy of the poem 'Beowulf', many medieval cartularies and chronicles, and numerous Anglo-Saxon texts. Before the disastrous fire in Ashburnham House in 1731, in which a number of manuscripts were utterly destroyed and still more were damaged, Cotton's collections had been even greater. An eighteenth-century list, complemented by John Speed's 'History of Great Britain', indicates that Cotton's coins included Greek, Roman, and ancient British specimens, along with 160 Anglo-Saxon coins (the first scholarly collection of these ever assembled in Britain) as well as Norman and later ones. Cotton's marbles included significant finds from Hadrian's Wall, together with Romano-British inscriptions. Some of the Cotton manuscripts came from the royal library. Stories of antiquaries' acquisitiveness were not uncommon. Unsurprisingly, perhaps, Cotton and his contemporaries were not above failing to return books and manuscripts that had been lent to them. 
About 1602 Cotton, Ley, and Dodderidge petitioned Queen Elizabeth for the incorporation of a library and academy to support English historical scholarship, a 'Collegium Antiquariorum'. A draft for a royal charter was composed (BL, Cotton MS Faustina E.v, fol. 12) but the project failed. Some five years later the society itself was brought to an end. The causes of its demise in 1607 are obscure. There is manuscript evidence for society meetings until about 1607 -- also the year of the sixth and final edition of the 'Britannia'. But no documentation survives from the period following 1608, strongly suggesting that the society discontinued its meetings at that time. Spelman's account attributes its cessation to the deaths of members, which is certainly relevant in some cases. On the other hand, his reference to 'some Rules of Government and Limitation' as proposed for a re-formed society in 1614, 'That for avoiding Offence, we should neither meddle with Matters of State, nor of Religion' (Van Norden, 135), also points to possible reasons for the society's earlier discontinuance. At the end of the sixteenth century its discussions had become increasingly concerned with political issues, and in the years immediately after the accession of James I they had been specifically directed towards religious topics as well. It may be, therefore, that government pressure had brought meetings to an end. If so, Spelman clearly hoped that the hiatus would only prove temporary. His optimism would not have been unreasonable. Society members still alive in 1614, like Robert Cotton, had not ceased to be active in the collection and preservation of antiquities. Camden was still publishing. It cannot be supposed that informal discussions had not occurred between friends and colleagues in the years since 1607. Perhaps, then, prudent members planned to refrain from investigating subjects that seemed provocative to James I, whom they believed disliked their proceedings. If so, their hopes of renewed activity were disappointed. Before they could meet again they learnt that 'his Majesty took a little Mislike of our Society' (ibid.) and the attempt to relaunch it was abandoned. Nothing survived except its name when the Society of Antiquaries of London was founded in 1717. 


@@@@@


doc= 48056


Menelaus, William (1818-1882), engineer and iron and steel manufacturer, was born in East Lothian on 10 March 1818. Little is known about his family background except that his father was a writer to the signet at Edinburgh, and his mother's maiden name was Darling. He was probably educated locally, and apprenticed to a millwright or to a firm of engineers at Haddington. On 26 August 1852, in Aberdar, he married Margaret Janet, the second daughter of Jenkin Rhys of the Llwydcoed ironworks, but she died just ten weeks later in November 1852, possibly of cholera. Menelaus did not remarry but, childless himself, he brought up and educated two nephews: William Darling, who became a law lord, and Charles Darling, who became an MP and later a baron. 
Menelaus came to south Wales in 1844 to remodel a corn mill for Rowland Fothergill of Hensol Park, who persuaded him to stay and eventually manage Fothergill's ironworks at Llwydcoed and Aber-nant. Around 1850 he was induced by Sir John Guest -- offering, it was said, to double his salary to $600 a year -- to join the Dowlais Iron Company, where, in early 1851, he became the engineer-manager of the mills and forges department. It was a risky time to join the company: the enterprise had been paralysed through most of the 1840s by the long failure to agree terms for the renewal of its lease; and when this was settled in 1848, stagnation continued because of the long illness of Guest, virtually the sole owner. There was some revival under the management by his widow, Lady Charlotte Guest, but a decade's neglect had taken a heavy toll. The real climb came after Lady Charlotte's remarriage in 1855 when overall control fell to the chief trustee, G. T. Clark, who then appointed Menelaus as general manager. 
It was a remarkably successful combination: Clark as, in effect, managing director looking after overall strategy, and Menelaus in operational control. Menelaus astutely insisted on weekly reports on physical and financial performance from all departments. As well as this managerial data, he also ensured firsthand knowledge of production by daily walks through the extensive and exposed works. He and Clark explicitly based their main decisions on long-run considerations: the spurning of short-run profit maximization in favour of investment for long-run growth infused his magisterial 1857 report on the state of the Dowlais works. He was also responsible for another landmark report in 1861 pressing the case for Dowlais to enter the coal trade. And it was Menelaus who went to Spain in October 1871 to negotiate a long-run source of cheaper ores, culminating in the launching of the Orcenario Iron Ore Company in 1873, jointly owned by Dowlais, Consett, and Krupps. It paid off: from being close to closure in the mid-1850s and in a period when most of the other works -- even the Crawshays of Cyfarthfa -- failed, or slid into decline, Dowlais profits between 1863 and 1882 averaged nearly $120,000. 
The success derived from innovation as well as organization. Menelaus invented several mechanical handling devices and designed the massive new two-directional Goat mill for iron rolling. He fostered the famous 1860s Bessemer experiments in steel making at Dowlais and quickly adopted the Siemens furnace: in the early 1870s Dowlais was already becoming a significant steel maker, with six Bessemer converters and four Siemens open-hearth furnaces. By the time of Menelaus's death Dowlais had substantially effected the difficult transition from iron to steel. He used small coal, a waste product, in the furnaces, releasing the large coal for the lucrative steam coal trade; he exploded the entrenched belief in long blast furnace campaigns by demonstrating that old worn-out furnaces were merely vehicles for destroying fuel; and in 1870 he was first to use the waste gas from the coking ovens to fuel the furnaces. 
Menelaus took little part in local public life, although he was a lieutenant in the Dowlais works volunteer force and supported Sir W. T. Lewis in his unsuccessful attempt in 1880 to become Conservative MP for Merthyr. His public activities were mostly related to his professional enthusiasms. He was the driving force of the 1857 meeting at the Castle Hotel, Merthyr, which led to the foundation of the South Wales Institute of Civil Engineers, of which he was the first president. Similarly, he took the chair at the 1886 meeting at the Queen's Hotel, Birmingham, which led to the founding of the Iron and Steel Institute of Great Britain, and was its president from 1875 to 1877. In 1881 Menelaus was awarded the Bessemer medal. He also appeared before numerous parliamentary committees dealing with iron, coal, and the railways, and his evidence usually related to ways of reducing costs. With Dowlais 1000 feet above sea level and with raw materials increasingly coming in as well as products going out, he saw transport as particularly crucial: 'we shall not make large profits in coal, until we have a more direct road to Cardiff', he reported to Clark (Owen, 79). At his death he was said to have been responsible for all the existing rail connections to Dowlais, and he also fought for cheaper freights, being, as he told a select committee in 1881, 'strong enough to fight the railway companies ourselves' ('Select committee... conveyance of goods'). Although active in the South Wales Coalowners' Association -- formed primarily to present a united front in dealing with the workmen -- Menelaus's opposition to any 'artificial' price-fixing bordered on the mystical: supply and demand constituted 'a law of God's providence' ('Western Mail', 31 March 1882). 
By the 1880s Menelaus's salary was reputed to be $3500 p.a., while he had personally invested in several large coal and iron enterprises. All this was not to support an ostentatious lifestyle; indeed, his only extravagance seems to have been collecting works of art, which were said to fill his home in Merthyr. He was severe and autocratic at the works to which he came as 'a tall, strong handsome man' ('South Wales Daily News', 31 March 1882) and was later characterized by his long, black hair and 'thoughtful face and piercing eye' (ibid.). 
Menelaus died, after a lengthy illness, on 30 March 1882 at Charlton House, High Street, Tenby, Pembrokeshire. He had previously given part of his valuable art collection, which consisted of thirty-six items valued at $10,000, to Cardiff Free Library. He was buried on 4 April 1882 in a secluded spot in the mountain churchyard of Penderyn, near Merthyr, in the same brick grave that had already held his wife for thirty years. 


@@@@@


doc= 48057


Mensforth, Sir Holberry (1871-1951), engineer and engineering company executive, was born at Snow Hill, Bradford, Yorkshire, on 1 May 1871, the second son of Edward Mensforth and his wife, Dorcas, 'nee' Harrison. His father was a painter and decorator; his mother's family were machine makers, of Crabtree Harrison of Bradford. (Some socialist influence through his grandfather Thomas Mensforth probably led to his being named after a well-known Chartist leader, Samuel Holberry.) 
Mensforth was educated until aged about twelve at Christ Church Day School in Bradford, worked briefly in a law office, and then became a millwright's apprentice at S. Clayton & Co., a Bradford gas engine maker. Before completing his time he acted as foreman. Further technical instruction followed at evening classes at the mechanics' institute in Bradford in 1893-4, after which he became an instructor in metalwork at the Hull Municipal Technical School in 1896-7. He emerged as a versatile mechanic and toolmaker (a full member of the Amalgamated Society of Engineers) and head of Clayton's engineering shop. In 1900 he married, at Shipley, Yorkshire, Alice Maud (died 1948), third daughter of William Jennings of Rossington Grange Farm, near Doncaster, and Emmie Temperley. They had one daughter, Muriel ('b'. 1911), and two sons, Thomas ('b'. 1901) and Eric ('b'. 1906). Both sons had distinguished engineering careers. 
After briefly running his own gear-cutting business, Mensforth joined B. H. Thwaite's heavy engineering firm in Westminster, London, which brought him experience in the installation of gas engines and blowers in iron- and steelworks. In 1903 he joined the Trafford Park works of the American firm Westinghouse in Manchester, as a technical engineer in the engine department. (The firm produced gas engines, steam turbines, and a complete range of electrical equipment.) He made rapid progress with the firm, becoming superintendent of the engineering department in 1909, then in 1917 general manager. Mensforth was particularly successful in handling wartime labour difficulties and in increasing the output of munitions. To combat the disruptive effect on factory labour caused by the war, he set up in 1917, nine months before the Whitley councils, a works committee and staff committee. He appreciated the value of a university training and the need to attract graduates to his works. He was also a founder member and chairman of the Manchester and District Armaments Committee, which through its constituent firms -- Westinghouse, Crossley's, Armstrong Whitworth, and Mather and Platt -- aimed at ensuring a continuous supply of shells. These efforts were rewarded by a CBE and by an honorary MSc from the Manchester College of Technology in 1919. 
After the war Sir Eric Geddes, the minister of transport, recruited Mensforth to smooth the transition of the munitions factories from war work to peacetime operations. As director-general of factories from 1920 to 1926, Mensforth successfully reduced the workforce and number of factories, won the co-operation of the unions, and introduced more commercial businesses and practices. In 1923 he was created a KCB. He was also a member in 1925 of the Biles subcommittee, which aimed to investigate the royal dockyards and their administration -- though the attempt to introduce more businesslike methods in this case was less successful. 
Mensforth then took up a post as managing director of Bolckow, Vaughan & Co. Ltd, an ailing coal, iron, steel, and chemical producer in the north-east. Alongside Henry D. McLaren, second Baron Aberconway, he helped reorganize and modernize the works, characteristically introducing joint consultation with labour, and then in 1931 negotiated its merger with another troubled iron and steel producer, Dorman Long. 
In 1930 Mensforth accepted the chairmanship of the English Electric Company, which had been reorganized under an American syndicate. He took two important decisions: he negotiated a comprehensive technical and commercial agreement with Westinghouse and, to run the business, he made the inspired choice of one of his old Westinghouse apprentices, George H. Nelson (later first Lord Nelson). He handed over the chairmanship of English Electric in 1933 to Nelson, who continued as managing director. 
In 1933 McLaren invited Mensforth to join the board of John Brown & Co. Ltd of Sheffield, on which he served as non-executive director. Mensforth concerned himself with the engineering aspects of the collieries, steelworks, and shipyards of Browns and chaired a number of subsidiaries, such as Nasmyth Wilson of Manchester and Cravens of Sheffield. He made three influential contributions: the development of the Firth Brown Engineers' tool department in Sheffield for the manufacture of high-quality cutting tools; the purchase in 1936 of Markham & Co. Ltd of Chesterfield, which strengthened Browns' engineering interests; and the recruiting of the German refugee Ludwig M. Loewy, whose designs for aluminium extrusion presses enabled Browns to close a crucial gap in British aircraft production facilities. Mensforth remained on the board of Browns until his retirement in 1945. 
A vice-president of the British Electrical and Allied Manufacturers' Association, Mensforth was also a member of the Institution of Civil Engineers and the Institution of Mechanical Engineers and contributed occasionally to debates. He was a member of the executive council of the National Union of Manufacturers, and in 1928 was part of a deputation received by Stanley Baldwin, calling for the safeguarding of British industries. 
In all his posts Mensforth combined both practical skill and 'firmness but fairness and integrity in dealing with men and unions' (Mensforth, 55). He was not committed to any political party and served willingly either Labour or Conservative governments. He died of a cerebral thrombosis on 5 September 1951 at his home, the Red House, 347 St Johns Road, Hazlemere, Buckinghamshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 48058


Mercer, Thomas (1822-1900), maker of marine chronometers, watches, and clocks, was born in November 1822 at St Helens, the second of three children of Richard Mercer (died 1830), sailmaker and barge builder, and his wife, Sarah. In 1836 Sarah married Samuel Fletcher, manager of the Bridgewater Canal. Fletcher did not accept young Thomas, who was therefore apprenticed to his grandfather William Walker (1783-1860), a watch-movement maker at Duke Street, St Helens. His apprenticeship duties included on occasion walking from St Helens to Liverpool to deliver a basket of uncased watch movements to his uncle at 108 Homer Street, though his grandmother insisted that he should also attend the local school. In 1843 he went to work for Thomas Russell at 30-32 Slater Street, Liverpool, in order to learn from the top of the trade. In his free time he made watches, which he signed and sold under his own name. While in Liverpool, he absorbed the radical views then current, his support for these ideas earning him the nickname of 'Radical Tom', though he did not join any political group. 
In 1854, having decided that the English watch and clock industry held no future for him, Mercer took a coach to London and purchased a one-way ticket to America, a land where, he said, everyone was equal and where he would be able to make progress. Fate decided his future, however, for while awaiting passage he saw a marine chronometer in the shop window of John Fletcher, one of the most important chronometer makers of the day. He entered the shop to ask for work, and was accepted as a watch springer and finisher. During this period, the Greenwich premium trials were being held, to enable the Royal Navy to find makers capable of supplying and servicing chronometers that could be relied on to perform accurately and consistently under the extremes of temperature and motion encountered at sea. High prices were paid for chronometers that passed these trials. Mercer left Fletcher's service in 1858 to set up on his own as a chronometer maker at New North Road, London, moving to 45 Spencer Street, Clerkenwell, in 1860 and later to other addresses in Clerkenwell. He had to face considerable competition in his chosen craft. Thomas Earnshaw and John Arnold, the two great modernizers of the marine chronometer, were long dead, but Dent, Frodsham, Blackie, the Poole brothers, Reid, and the Scandinavians Kullberg and Johannsen were all established and active in this lucrative field. 
Mercer became involved in the British Horological Institute, which had been established in 1858 and was reputed to be the oldest professional institute in the world for that discipline. He served as its honorary treasurer from 1875 to 1895, and lectured there on the need to modernize the industry and to train young people. In 1874 he moved to St Albans, setting up a factory behind his house at 14-15 Prospect Road. Each Friday he travelled the 20 miles to collect finished parts from his specialist outworkers in Clerkenwell and call into the Horological Institute. In 1890, feeling the need to have a London address on his dials and letterheads, he took an office at 81 Westmoreland Place, City Road. 
Mercer's marriage to Mary Thompson, daughter of a St Albans newspaper reporter, on 15 May 1875, was held at the church of St John in Holloway, so that many of his old friends and competitors could attend. The couple had seven children in six years: three boys and two sets of girl twins. Success in the Greenwich trials was the key to Mercer's profitable business: he entered at least one chronometer each year and he was placed second in 1881, his son Frank being placed first in 1911. Thomas Mercer was appointed as judge for the horological class at the Universal Exhibition held in Paris in 1900. Unfortunately he caught a cold on the ferry crossing to France and died at the Hotel Internationale, Paris, on 29 September 1900. He was buried in St Stephen's Church, St Albans. At the time of his death he had been responsible for the manufacture of over 5000 chronometers, sold to the Royal Navy and to the navies of the world. The obituary of Mercer, published in the 'British Horological Journal' for November 1900, attested: 'The annexed portrait affords a very fair idea of the man. Straightforward and self-reliant, he was, nevertheless, of retiring and unpretentious disposition, rarely mixing in public gatherings, yet taking an absorbing interest in all that pertained to horology, and especially in any proposal or device connected with improved methods of manufacture. Unswerving honesty was his prominent characteristic; this, coupled with the large amount of sound common sense with which he was endowed, enabled him by plodding industry to attain a position second to none in the trade.' 



@@@@@


doc= 48059


Miles, Frederick George (1903-1976), aircraft designer and manufacturer, was born on 22 March 1903 in Worthing, Sussex, the oldest of the four sons of Frederick G. Miles, laundry proprietor of Portslade, Shoreham Harbour, Sussex, and his wife, Esther, 'nee' Wicks. He left school in Brighton in 1916 at the age of thirteen, while his father was away fighting in France, and started a motorcycle rental business. 
Miles became interested in flying in 1922 and with the help of friends designed and built a small biplane, the Gnat, in his father's laundry. In 1928 he persuaded Cecil Pashley, a pilot who owned an Avro, to go into partnership with him and start a flying school and joyriding business, the Gnat Aero Company Ltd, in Shoreham. Pashley taught Miles to fly and the enterprise expanded as they bought derelict aircraft and undertook aircraft repairs; it soon split into two companies, the Southern Aero Club Ltd, and Southern Aircraft Ltd. 
In 1931 Miles went to South Africa intending to emigrate, but the following year he returned and married the recently divorced Maxine Frances Mary (known as Blossom), daughter of Sir Johnston Forbes-Robertson, the actor-manager. She and her first husband, Inigo Brassey Freeman-Thomas, Viscount Ratendone, had joined the Southern Aero Club in 1930, and Miles had taught them both to fly. Miles and Blossom had one son and one daughter. 
Blossom Miles persuaded her husband to design an aeroplane and together they produced the Miles M1 Satyr, a single-seat biplane, in 1932. The following year the Hawk, designed by Miles and Blossom, who performed the stress analysis, was built by Phillips and Powis at Woodley, near Reading. Following the success of the Hawk, which was faster, cheaper, and easier to fly than the De Havilland Moth, previously the most popular private plane, they joined Phillips and Powis and Miles became technical director and chief designer. The company concentrated on light aircraft and in October 1934 its Falcon broke the light aeroplane record for the journey from Australia to England. In 1935 the firm had a number of successes in the king's cup air race, and in 1936 Colonel Charles Lindbergh asked Miles to build him a fast, long range, light aeroplane for European business trips. This became the Mohawk, first flown in 1937. 
In 1935 the decision was taken to become a public company, with Rolls-Royce Ltd providing the financial backing. In 1936 Miles became chairman and managing director, with his brother George as technical director and chief designer. In the same year Phillips and Powis began to produce training planes for the Air Ministry, and the Miles Magister remained a standard trainer for the RAF throughout the Second World War, with more than 1200 built. In 1938 the ministry placed a $2 million order for the Miles Master, and an average of seven Masters were built a week, with more than 3000 produced altogether. 
In 1941 Rolls-Royce, no longer interested in the manufacture of airframes, withdrew its capital, and Miles bought financial control of the company. In 1942 it was admitted to full membership of the Society of British Aircraft Manufacturers, and the company was renamed Miles Aircraft Ltd in 1943. At its peak the company had 6000 employees. Miles and his wife started the Miles Aeronautical School for sixteen- and seventeen-year-olds to train as technicians and draughtsmen, which lasted until 1948. 
Miles's most significant contribution to aeronautical progress was his design of a supersonic aircraft, the M52. In October 1943, in top secrecy, Sir Stafford Cripps, minister of aircraft production, awarded him the contract to design and produce a supersonic aircraft, powered by a Whittle engine. In February 1946, when the prototype was almost ready, the contract was cancelled by Ben Lockspeiser, controller of scientific research at the Ministry of Aircraft Production, following the discovery that scientists at the German research establishment at Volkenrode, near Brunswick, had shown that aircraft drag at high speeds could be reduced by sweeping back the wings. This was something that British scientists had not appreciated, and it was decided to cancel any high-speed projects that did not incorporate swept-back wings. In addition, Lockspeiser had never believed that manned supersonic flight would be possible. Miles was required to send all his technical information and drawings to the United States, to NASA (the US National Aeronautics and Space Administration), and as a result the Bell X-1, a straight-winged plane, was the first manned aircraft to break the sound barrier, on 14 October 1947. Meanwhile a $500,000 contract was awarded to Barnes Wallis, head of research at Vickers, to design a scale model, powered by a rocket motor, to be tested with models dropped from bombers at 30,000 feet. The tests were a failure and in 1948 the contract was cancelled; in 1955 it was recognized in the white paper on the supply of military aircraft that the decision to abandon research on supersonic flight in manned aircraft seriously delayed the progress of aeronautical research in the UK. It was also generally accepted that the M52 would have been capable of reaching supersonic speeds. 
Difficulties after the war with the return to the production of civil aircraft led to the collapse of Miles Aircraft Ltd in 1948. Miles started a new business at Redhill, and in 1949 moved back to Shoreham to start F. G. Miles Engineering Ltd. In 1961 the firm joined the newly formed Beagle Group of aircraft companies, with Miles as deputy chairman and George Miles as chief engineer of the Beagle-Miles subsidiary. After the collapse of the Beagle Group in 1969 he became chairman and managing director of Miles-Dufon Ltd, making flight simulators, and of Miles Hivolt Ltd. 
Miles died on 15 August 1976 at the Larkspur Nursing Home in Worthing, Sussex. He was cremated at Worthing on 20 August. His widow died in 1984. 


@@@@@


doc= 48062


Milward, Sir Anthony Horace (1905-1981), airline executive, was born in Feckenham, near Worcester, on 2 March 1905, the son of Henry Tomson Milward, a needle manufacturer, and his wife, Elsie Newton. He was educated at Rugby School and at Clare College, Cambridge. 
After leaving university, Milward joined the Manchester textile merchants Glazebrook Steel & Co. in 1926, instead of entering the family firm, Milward Needles of Redditch. In 1927 he was sent to India and worked for a year in Calcutta, with shorter spells in Madras, Bombay, and Karachi. In 1929 he returned to Manchester, and became a director of Glazebrook Steel in 1930. He married Frieda Elizabeth Anne (died 1984), daughter of the merchant Gustav Adolf von der Becke in 1931. They had a son and a daughter. 
Milward learned to fly under the Civil Air Guard scheme and acquired his 'A' pilot's licence in 1939. In 1940, at the age of thirty-five, he joined the Fleet Air Arm. He remained on flying duties throughout the Second World War, serving in Trinidad on anti-submarine and convoy protection sorties. In 1943 he was made lieutenant-commander, and was given command of the naval section of the radar experimental airfield at Defford in Worcestershire, testing airborne radar and night-flying equipment. In 1945 he was made an OBE. 
At the end of the war, with a successful business career and wartime flying experience behind him, Milward relinquished his interests in the textile industry, and began a new career in civil aviation. After a brief period at the British Overseas Airways Corporation (BOAC), in April 1946 he joined the state-owned British European Airways (BEA), as general services manager, and became general manager of continental services shortly afterwards. In 1952 he became controller of operations at BEA, and in 1956 was appointed chief executive by the chairman, Lord Douglas of Kirtleside. Finally, in 1964 he succeeded Lord Douglas as BEA's chairman, a position he held until his retirement in 1970. He was made a CBE in 1960 and knighted in 1966. 
Milward devoted twenty-five years' service to BEA, and although he was not as well known as his predecessor, Lord Douglas, he must be credited with a large share of the responsibility for BEA's success as an effective, and largely profitable, European flag-carrier. His business experience, combined with his technical background, was of great value in the management of the corporation, as was his quiet determination, and sense of leadership. 
Convinced that BEA should make profits, and that nationalized industries should be commercial enterprises in public ownership, Milward spent a considerable amount of time battling with ministers and officials in the 1960s, a period when the nationalized industries were experiencing a high degree of government involvement. He was less inclined to continue Lord Douglas's rigid preference for British-built aircraft, and showed greater concern for the operating economics of new types acquired by BEA. A notable instance occurred in 1966 when BEA sought to abandon its British-only procurement policy, and buy the American Boeing 727 aircraft. The government refused to allow this purchase, and its insistence that BEA use the inferior Hawker Siddeley Trident Three instead, led to the payment of substantial compensation to the airline. On other occasions, however, Milward did seek to encourage the British aircraft industry. With the move to wide-bodied aircraft, he pleaded unsuccessfully for the development of the British Aircraft Corporation Three-Eleven jet, warning in 1969 that failure to do so would mean the demise of a major civil aircraft manufacturing industry in Britain; it is ironic that a very similar project to the Three-Eleven later reached fruition as the European Airbus A-300. 
After his retirement from BEA, Milward was chairman of the London Tourist Board from 1971 until 1976, and thereafter its president. He died at Moore Cottage Hospital, Bourton on the Water, on 12 May 1981. 


@@@@@


doc= 48064


Mitchell, Sir Henry (1824-1898), textile merchant and philanthropist, was born in November 1824 at Esholt, near Bradford, Yorkshire, the son of Matthew Harper Mitchell, a small local textile manufacturer, and his wife, Ann. He went to a local elementary school, and at the age of fourteen entered his father's worsted mill to learn the principles of textile manufacture. In 1841 he was taken on by the worsted firm of William Fison & Co. Seven years later he moved as a buyer to the Bradford firm of A. and S. Henry & Co., of which he was made a partner in 1852, and with which he was associated for the rest of his life, gaining a reputation, with Jacob Behrens, as one of the chief authorities on the worsted trade, and achieving a very influential position within that trade. Mitchell married, in 1851, Annie, daughter of the Revd D. W. Gordon of Earlston in Scotland. They had three sons: Gordon, who became a successful merchant in South Africa; Henry, who became a sergeant-major in the guards; and Samuel. Annie died in 1886 following a long period of mental illness. 
The firm of A. and S. Henry was one of the major mercantile houses in the transatlantic textile trade, having been founded in Manchester in 1804 by the brothers Alexander and Samuel Henry. The beginnings of the business perhaps lay in the emigration to America in 1783 of their uncle, Alexander Henry, who had been born in the north of Ireland in 1766. He became a clerk in Philadelphia, but soon developed a successful merchanting business, importing cloth from Britain. The firm retained strong commercial links with America and traded in all types of textiles. It established branch warehouses in Leeds, Huddersfield, Bradford, Belfast, and Glasgow, which by the 1840s were operating with a degree of autonomy. Samuel died on 13 January 1840 in a fire on the American steamer 'Lexington' sailing from New York to Providence, Rhode Island. Alexander died in 1862. By 1848 the business was in the control of Alexander's two sons, John Snowden Henry and Mitchell Henry, but neither was very actively involved. The management of the Bradford branch of the business was in the hands of Henry Mitchell from the 1850s, at a time when the worsted trade was expanding very rapidly. He travelled regularly to America, and gained a widespread commercial reputation, expanding the business considerably as the main branch of A. and S. Henry. The company was converted to limited liability status in 1889, with a capital of about $1 million. 
Although from an Anglican family, Henry Mitchell converted to Wesleyanism, staunchly supporting the church, and contributing financially to local Wesleyan chapels and schools. He also supported a variety of other local activities, and is reported to have donated over $100,000 to philanthropic causes in Bradford during his lifetime. He championed the promotion of technical education, believing that continental success in industry had benefited greatly from technical schools there. He helped found the Bradford Technical College between 1878 and 1882, providing substantial donations to it. He served as a governor of the Bradford school board and Bradford grammar school, and as vice-president of the Bradford Mechanics' Institute. He was knighted in 1887 for his services to education. 
Mitchell was a strong supporter of the interests of the worsted trade, not least through his service to Bradford chamber of commerce, of which he was president for six years. He was one of the main witnesses, on behalf of Bradford, to the royal commission on depression in trade and industry in 1886, providing detailed evidence on the state of the Bradford worsted trade. He was critical of the services provided by British consuls; campaigned for improvements in rail transport; and supported 'fair trade', rather than free trade, arguing for reciprocal arrangements in trading relations and, at times, advocating commercial retaliation, as for example, to the proposed new French tariff in 1890. He served as a judge at the important Philadelphia Centennial Exhibition in 1876; an exhibition that many Bradford manufacturers boycotted in protest at United States protectionist policy. In 1878 he was vice-president of the jurors for worsted yarn and fabrics at the Paris Universal Exhibition, and wrote a perceptive report about it. 
Sir Henry Mitchell died at his home, Parkfield House, Manningham, Bradford, on 27 April 1898, after a long illness, a few days after he had been made a freeman of the city of Bradford. He was buried at Undercliffe cemetery, Bradford, on 30 April. 


@@@@@


doc= 48065


Mitchell, John Thomas Whitehead (1828-1895), co-operative society administrator, was born on 18 October 1828 in Rochdale, with no recognized father. His mother was a beerhouse keeper in Red Cross Street, where Mitchell attended the national school. His mother's forebears were in the hat trade, which became extinct in Rochdale during the early 1850s. His father was almost certainly a man by the name of Whitehead, alleged by Beatrice Webb to be 'a man in good position but of ungoverned character' (Webb, 'My Apprenticeship', 307). Although Mitchell's mother was poor, she kept him out of the factories for as long as she could, until he was ten or eleven, when he went to work as a piecer in Townshead mill for 1's'. 6died per week. However, he was sent to learn reading and writing at a Sunday school run by a clerk in the foundry. 
One day in 1846 two men were canvassing the streets round Hope Street in Rochdale for Providence Chapel Sunday school. In the Mitchell house they found the boy reading and his mother making the dinner. 'They seemed to live on the most affectionate terms' (Maxwell, 395). They asked John to join, and secured his mother's agreement. The next Sunday, one of the men, Mr Pagan, a flannel weaver (and later twice mayor of Rochdale), called for Mitchell and enrolled him in his own class. This led Mitchell to accept radical and puritan ideals and to sign the pledge. This must have been a big decision, as it meant breaking with his mother's only visible means of support. 
Mitchell subsequently used the library at Providence Sunday school, and joined its juvenile temperance society, which led him into the Rochdale Temperance Society, of which he became a committee member. He also became a member of the local Rechabite Tent which became the 'love and truth' division of the Sons of Temperance. He remained a member and an official until he died. The subcommittee of the temperance society held meetings in Mitchell's room at the top of his mother's house. 
Then, about 1850, Mitchell personally experienced secession, a characteristic event in the associational culture of the day. There was disagreement at Providence about the appointment of a new pastor. A number of members split to form the New Milton Congregational Church in Bailie Street. Mitchell went with them. By 1854 he was a Milton Sunday school teacher. Mr Pagan did more than recruit and teach his young clients. He offered Mitchell a situation in the warehouse at 16's'. a week. The firm changed hands several times. Mitchell stayed for eighteen years until 1867, and was promoted from wool sorter to manager of the wool department. By June 1871 he was a 'manufacturer', having set himself up in trade as a flannel dealer. He did this on his own account for some years until he gradually let it go, as his work in the co-operative movement became too demanding. 
Mitchell was clearly a man who longed for organizational work and the chance to do business. This was his lifetime affair. His contacts in the flannel trade later led to his appointment as liquidator of the Lancashire and Yorkshire Productive Society, a co-operative concern at Littleborough which hit bad times. From 1878 until the end of his life he nursed that company round, incurring attacks on his probity partly as a result. No one else had hope for the society. But for much of his working life Mitchell worked every day between 7.30 a.m. and 9.30 a.m. to try to make it viable. Finally he managed to free it from creditors and prepare it for take-over by the Co-operative Wholesale Society. Meanwhile, Mitchell had established a London agency to run his own business, getting cotton goods made by the Rochdale Manufacturing Society dyed and finished at Middleton which he then sold through his agency. He used his home as a warehouse, adding an adjoining cottage as the business grew. 
Mitchell joined the Rochdale Equitable Pioneers' Society in 1853, and in 1856 became a member of its committee ['see 'Rochdale Pioneers]. About 1857 he moved in with Abraham Howard, and they remained close friends. Mitchell's other very close friend was Thomas Butterworth (their deaths occurring within a few days of each other). At one time Butterworth had been in disgrace in Rochdale, imprisoned for stealing from a co-op. When he was released about 1872, Mitchell held out his hand in friendship. They became inseparable. 
It was through the Rochdale Pioneers that Mitchell was elected to the board of the Co-operative Wholesale Society (CWS) in 1869 and, in June 1874, became its chairman. This was the most important step in his life. It was an immensely demanding and influential post; and Mitchell remained chairman until his death. He nevertheless remained as a Sunday school teacher at Milton School, always returning from national or international meetings on every possible Sunday. Apart from his secretaryship to the government-financed science and art classes for many years in Rochdale and running for office as a radical Liberal in local election campaigns in Rochdale in 1893 and 1894, it was to the co-operative movement that he devoted his formidable energies. Beatrice Webb saw him as a business genius. In her 'Diaries', she described him as 'corpulent' with a 'shiny bald head, clean shaven face, exhibiting a full, good-tempered mouth, largely developed jaw and determined chin' (Webb, 'My Apprenticeship', 315). Webb received considerable help from Mitchell with her book about the co-operative movement. Published in 1891, this 'revealed a sympathy with Mitchell's view of the role of the CWS in industrial production' (Bellamy and Saville, 242). 
By the late 1880s the annual turnover of the CWS exceeded $6 million, its warehouse at Manchester was a small town, and it was administering nearly $1 million of funds in shares, loan capital, and reserve. By the late 1890s there were 8407 people employed by the society, working in the distributive departments and in the bank as well as in the productive works and services. It remains an extraordinary fact about Mitchell, however, that as chairman of what Beatrice Webb saw as 'the most varied if not the largest business enterprise in the world at that time' (Webb, 'My Apprenticeship', 307), he received only something like $150 a year in fees -- and this at a time when (to use a Mitchell phrase) in 'the Barnum wickedness of the competitive world' ('Co-operative News', 11 Dec 1880) conspicuous consumption by capitalists on the one hand, and self-regarding professional managers as a separate social group on the other, were busy establishing themselves. 'Perhaps no man in Europe presided over so large a business, and certainly no man ever presided over so vast a concern who took such slender remuneration for so doing' ('Rochdale Observer', 3 April 1895). 
For Mitchell, means were united with ends through the movement, with all its constitutional inventions and disciplines. If, like idealistic Christian socialists, despising the store, you did not take the movement seriously, the movement as a way of life rather than as an idea, and as a real life association of large numbers of disagreeing, and sometimes disagreeable, working people, then you did not take Mitchell seriously. Mitchell's strong views were at the heart of a strategic argument about co-operative production which took place within the movement during his lifetime. The Christian socialists, on one side, advocated self-governing workshops (with bonus to labour, profit sharing, and other such measures), while the CWS, on the other, held that all production should be carried on in large-scale factories governed by the CWS general committee, with the CWS itself being owned and controlled as a federation of local retail co-operative societies. In the CWS system, advocated by Mitchell, the benefits of co-operation were to be realized by the worker as member (along with all other members) rather than by the worker as producer in his own, self-governing workshop. This was a serious debate, both sides of which are still relevant to anyone interested in the connections which complex co-operation in an era of large-scale industry requires. 
Concentration of trade in a single channel was Mitchell's dream and that of the CWS: 'My desire is that the profits of all trade, all industry, all distribution, all commerce, all importation, all banking and money dealing, should fall back again into the hands of the whole people. If co-operators will manage their enterprises in such a way as to concentrate all their trade in one channel, I am certain that this can be accomplished. (Redfern, 'The Mitchell centenary', 15-16)' Sharing a platform with Tom Mann in Bristol in 1893, Mitchell expressed his vision thus: 'we want to put the profits of trade into the pockets of the people, not a section of them, but the entire community. Until the people get hold of trade profits they will never be able to undertake the productive business of the world. Mr Carnegie of America said that $1,000 in the hands of one person would do more good to the community than 1,000 persons owning $1 apiece. That was absolutely untrue. It would be better still if the seven hundred million pounds of the British Debt were owned by the forty millions of British people, than to belong to a small section of the community. Co-operators want to use the best means to get the entire wealth of this country, land and everything else, into the possession of the entire body politic. (Co-operative Congress, 132)' The difference between this form of late nineteenth-century Owenism, with strong early nineteenth-century plebeian-radical connections and earlier forms of communitarianism, is that it was practical rather than rhetorical and led to very large-scale voluntary association among people arranging the means of life for themselves, rather than to demands for political concessions from Britain's government. In party political terms, it was non-political. 
Mitchell believed in singular, complete solutions to society's problems. He was wary of theory and theorists. In terms of conventional nineteenth-century political categories, he was a radical or an advanced Liberal. He very occasionally referred to himself as a 'collectivist', but this was not a label he favoured and in 1894 he qualified the remark, adding but 'not by Act of Parliament' ('Co-operative News', 20 Oct 1894). Strongly anti-individualist, even anti-individual, Mitchell espoused only an individuality for the good of all. To use an early nineteenth-century word with which he was familiar, he was an associationist. 'Co-operation ought to be based on the principle of united interest with the societies and not individuals. Some persons thought that individuals should be the basis' (Haslam, 76). Mitchell's main belief was in association, with very large numbers of working people choosing to do their own business instead of allowing other people to do it for them. 
Mitchell died at his home, 15 John Street, Rochdale, on 16 March 1895 from chronic bronchitis and pneumonia. He left effects worth only $350 and his bedroom was described as humble in the extreme. It contained reports and balance sheets, portraits of a few friends, his 'Bible' and hymnbook, and that was all. He was buried on 20 March in Rochdale cemetery. The CWS erected a granite monument there in his memory, engraved with a key sentence from his presidential address at the 1892 Co-operative Congress: 'The three great forces for the improvement of mankind are religion, temperance and co-operation; and, as a commercial force, supported and sustained by the other two, co-operation is the greatest, noblest and most likely to be successful in the redemption of the industrial classes. (Bellamy and Saville, 242)' 



@@@@@


doc= 48066


Henry Ludwig Mond, second Baron Melchett (1898-1949), industrialist and financier, only son of Alfred Mond, was born in London on 10 May 1898. He was educated at Winchester College and served from 1915 in the First World War, in the South Wales Borderers, entering before he was strictly old enough; he was wounded in 1916. He had ambitions to become a writer and poet but he had neither the talent nor the connections to make a success of this as a career, although his skill was later shown in political writing. His wife was (Amy) Gwen Wilson, whose origin is obscure but who described herself as daughter of John Wilson of Klerksdorp, Transvaal. She came from South Africa to study art, and was for a time involved with Augustus John. She later went to live with the writer Gilbert Cannan. Cannan was married to Mary (the former wife of J. M. Barrie), who cited Gwen as co-respondent in an action for judicial separation. Henry Mond crashed his motorcycle outside the Cannan flat in St John's Wood, was cared for by Gwen, and set up a 'maison-a-trois' with her and Cannan. Alfred regretted the arrangement and Henry's attempt to make a living in literature but went on supporting him. Eventually Cannan gave up Gwen to Henry and they were married on 30 January 1920. Henry then began to play an effective part in the family enterprises. He and Gwen had two sons and one daughter. The elder son, Derek, was killed in a flying accident on active service with the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve in 1945. 
Henry Mond entered some of his father's businesses, becoming a director of ICI (of which he was deputy chairman in 1940-47), of the Mond Nickel Company, and of Barclays Bank. He was elected member of parliament as a Liberal for the Isle of Ely from 1923 to 1924, in which year he left the Liberal Party. He returned to parliament as a Conservative for the East Toxteth division of Liverpool in 1929 but vacated this seat on the death of his father and his succession to the peerage. (His wife was asked to fill the vacancy but was unable to accept.) Henry Mond was faced with the task of restoring the family finances since Alfred had made investments which were very vulnerable to the damage inflicted on them by the worldwide recession of the early 1930s. Henry patiently put his inheritance on a sound footing through a talent for finance which he exercised in all his many appointments. 
On leaving the Commons, Mond shifted the balance of his interests away from politics and concentrated mainly on economics and industry. He believed that formal consultation, in a kind of third chamber, between some industrialists and financiers, some scientists and economists, and some ministers, could solve economic problems. He published two books on these issues: 'Why the Crisis?' (1931) and 'Modern Money' (1932). 
Henry Mond had been brought up as a not very active member of the Church of England but in 1933 reflection on his family history and the news of the treatment of the Jews in Germany persuaded him to accept formal conversion to the Jewish religion of his forebears. He became a champion of Zionism, but held that Jew and Arab could be persuaded to live harmoniously together, making his views public in a book, 'Thy Neighbour' (1937). He hoped for a time when the Jews could be established in their own land as an independent state. He advocated the evacuation of all Jews from Germany and some from other countries for transfer to Palestine, believing that this would lead to among other things the reconciliation of Germany to the rest of Europe. During the Second World War he continued to press the British government to facilitate the transfer of Jews to Palestine, there to form an independent state as part of the British Commonwealth. He later made visits to Palestine, was chairman of the British Agency for Palestine, and took a great interest in the Maccabean Jewish youth organization. 
In addition to other books on economic subjects Henry Mond wrote one entitled 'Hunting and Polo', which reflects his enthusiasm for riding: he was master of the Oakley Hounds. When his father died he closed Melchet Court and went to live at Colworth, Bedfordshire, which in 1941 he turned into a rest home for American nurses. He brought his industrial career to a close by resigning from ICI in 1947, when the condition of his health became clearly life-threatening. He died at Miami Beach, Florida, USA, on 22 January 1949, and was succeeded by his surviving son, Julian Edward Alfred. 



@@@@@


doc= 48070


Morris, John (1823-1905), lawyer and businessman, was born on 12 December 1823 at South Molton, Devon, the third of four children of George Morris, a wool-stapler, and his wife, Elizabeth Hutchings. He had one brother, William Morris, later a promoter of tramways, and two sisters. Educated privately, he then served for three years (1838-41) as a clerk in the offices of Gilberd Pearse, a local solicitor, before moving to the London office of William Ashurst. After completing his articles, Morris joined Ashurst as a partner in 1854. In the same year Morris married Sarah Taylor; they had six children. 
In 1862, following the appointment of William Ashurst to the post of solicitor to the General Post Office, Morris became senior partner. By this time the most important clients of Ashurst and Morris were the merchant bankers James Morrison and his son Charles Morrison, and it was this connection that was to lead to the transformation of the firm John Morris now managed. Soon to be styled Ashurst, Morris, Crisp, the business became one of the first British law firms to specialize in corporate business. 
As a solicitor, Morris played a part in numerous company liquidations, rescues, and reconstructions, especially of railway and urban utility companies. The Grand Trunk Railway Company of Canada retained him to work, along with Sir Edward Watkin, on the measures that led to the 'Grand Trunk Arrangement Act' of 1863. Morris was also involved in the affairs of a number of other ailing North American railways, including the Great Eastern Railway in Canada and, in the United States, the Erie, the Wabash, and the Baltimore and Ohio. But it was as a company director, an organizer of long-term investment syndicates, and a provider of management services that Morris was to be best-known during the later years of his career. 
Following his clients the Morrisons into Latin America, Morris became solicitor in 1881 to the River Plate Trust Loan and Agency Company Ltd, a company founded to salvage the failed Mercantile Bank of the River Plate, in which Charles Morrison had invested heavily. Morris became a director of the River Plate Trust in 1883 and chairman the following year, a position he was to occupy for more than twenty years. The Trust company was to be one of the most profitable of British investments in Argentina, yielding an annual average return of 16.5 per cent to its ordinary shareholders between 1881 and 1905. Moreover, it provided the managerial and financial core of a group of more than a dozen London-registered Anglo-South American railway, utility, land, and financial companies with a combined capital of about $7 million, most of whom were also clients of Ashurst, Morris, Crisp. 
Notoriously shy, and well known as someone who conducted business through lieutenants, Morrison appears to have withdrawn from daily engagement with these Latin American businesses by the 1880s, preferring the roles of rentier and collector. He continued to hold about $0.5 million in shares of Anglo-South American companies in the 1890s, but it was Morris, whose own River Plate investments amounted to $100,000, who maintained meticulously detailed correspondence with local managers of the half-dozen companies with which he was closely associated. Morris also constructed, sometimes with, and sometimes independently of, Morrison, but almost always working closely with the stockbroker Sir William Cuthbert Quilter, numerous investment syndicates including those responsible for the famous railway bridge over the Firth of Forth, Scotland, the introduction of telephones to London, the construction of the first underground railway in the City (the District line), and the waterworks of Saratov and Beirut. By 1895, the corporate clients of Ashurst, Morris, Crisp numbered close to 150, divided more or less equally between Britain, the Americas, and the rest of the world. The legal business arising from these multifarious connections yielded profits of $117,851 to Ashurst, Morris, Crisp in 1891 on a fee income of over $600,000. 
Morris had a long and wide-ranging business career. Heavily involved in railways and public utilities, he also organized a syndicate to buy the Liberal newspaper the 'Daily News' in 1868. However, he seldom went to the City of London after 1898, preferring to spend his summers in the south of France and the remainder of the year at Abbot's Cliff House, near Folkestone. He died at his London town house, 34 Hyde Park Square, on 22 March 1905. He fainted while in his bath, and his death was due to asphyxia from drowning. He was buried at Highgate cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 48071


Morrison, Charles (1817-1909), merchant banker, was born in London on 20 September 1817, the eldest of seven sons and four daughters of James Morrison (1789-1857), then a humble shopman but later to become a self-made wholesale textile warehouseman, merchant banker, and MP, who made himself one of the very wealthiest men in Britain, leaving perhaps $5 million at his death, as well as over 100,000 acres of land. Charles Morrison's mother, Mary Anne Todd (died 1887), was the daughter of the proprietor of Todd & Co., the textile warehouse at Fore Street in the City of London, of which James Morrison became manager after his marriage and which he then developed into perhaps the largest business of its kind in Britain. Charles Morrison was educated at private schools in London and Geneva until the age of fifteen, and spent three years each at the University of Edinburgh, and at Trinity College, Cambridge. Although he won several prizes at Edinburgh, through ill health he was forced to leave Cambridge without taking a degree. 
In 1841 Charles Morrison and his younger brother Alfred Morrison joined their father in a new firm, Morrison, Sons & Co., located at 62 Moorgate Street, which took over the financial and merchant banking interests their father had been developing. While Charles Morrison remained a partner in the Fore Street textile warehouse until it became a limited company in 1864, it was chiefly as a financier and merchant banker that he spent the remainder of his long life. 
Morrison, Sons & Co. chiefly expanded into two types of investment: lending money on the security of mortgages to British aristocrats (among them the duke of Buckingham and Chandos, who became a spectacular bankrupt), and investments in foreign railroads, especially in France and the United States. Charles Morrison travelled extensively throughout the United States in the early 1840s, and his surviving letters and diaries offer a vivid description of America in a time of great economic and demographic expansion. Although Morrison, Sons & Co. was heavily hit by the liquidation of the Bank of the United States in 1841, it prospered thereafter. James Morrison owned $800,000 in American securities at his death in 1857. 
In the 1850s Morrison, Sons & Co. appears to have been wound up, and, enriched by a generous inheritance from his father, Charles Morrison spent the next sixty years as an independent merchant banker, though he also sat on the boards of several companies, and served as chairman of the Hounslow and Metropolitan Railway Company and of the North British and Mercantile Insurance Company. Morrison increasingly specialized in South American securities, becoming prominent, in particular, in the River Plate Trust, which built many of the railways and utilities in Argentina from the 1870s onwards. He continued as well with mortgage, railway, and utility investments in Britain, and for many years made a speciality of purchasing good securities at what an obituarist described as 'absurdly low prices' during times of economic disturbance, frequently selling when their prices rose. It is believed that he kept a large sum in gold as a reserve against a time of serious financial trouble. Although no miser, he lived a bachelor existence with some frugality, and habitually saved most of his vast income. By these means, continued over many decades, Morrison greatly increased even his father's princely wealth, and was certainly among the half-dozen wealthiest men in Britain when he died. Although Morrison was well-known to the financial 'cognoscenti' -- a 300-word obituary appeared in 'The Times' when he died -- he was virtually unknown to the general public and is a classic instance of a virtually unknown man who, quietly and behind the scenes, exercised perhaps greater economic influence than many household names. At his death Morrison left the extraordinary sum of $10,936,666, considerably more than the value of any estate ever left previously by a British businessman. Despite his near total obscurity, Morrison was probably the wealthiest financier in Britain, far richer than any individual member of the renowned Baring and Rothschild families. Charles Morrison and his family also remained totally unknown to economic historians until the 1970s, when they were rediscovered as remarkable leviathans of wealth. 
Apart from his business interests, Charles Morrison was also a landowner on a grand scale, inheriting the entire island of Islay in Argyll from his father, who had purchased it in 1849. In 1883 Charles Morrison owned 75,732 acres with an annual rental income of $31,434. Apart from Islay's 67,000 acres in Argyll, Morrison owned the 7000-acre Basildon Park estate in Berkshire, and smaller holdings in Essex, Oxford, and Suffolk. The five Morrison brothers, who are recorded in John Bateman's 'Great Landowners' (1883 edn), owned 106,915 acres, yielding $53,740 in landed income, more than that of most dukes. Although Charles Morrison occasionally visited Islay, he spent most of his time at Basildon Park. At Islay, however, he maintained a steamer service at an annual loss of $6000 in order to benefit his tenants, who had no other way of getting their stock to market. 
Throughout his life Morrison was shy and retiring, and suffered from cystitis. He took little or no direct part in public life, although he served as deputy lieutenant for Argyll and Berkshire. In 1854 he published an 'Essay on Labour and Capital' in which he advised workers to marry late, produce fewer children, and thus raise their living standards; he also praised the cautious, intelligent businessman as superior to the speculator. At his Basildon home he maintained a valuable painting collection, which included works by Leonardo, Rembrandt, Rubens, Turner, and Watteau. He was an Anglican, and a supporter of the Liberal Party throughout the nineteenth century. 
Charles Morrison died at Basildon Park on 25 May 1909. He was unmarried, and his enormous estate was divided among his many relatives, with his nephew Hugh Morrison (1868-1931) (later a Conservative MP) inheriting the Islay estate and a larger share of his vast personal fortune than anyone else. 


@@@@@


doc= 48072


Morson, Thomas (1825-1908), pharmaceutical manufacturer, born in London, was the son of 
Thomas Morson was educated at University College School and then studied pharmacy in France before joining his father's business. In 1857 he married the daughter of a Boulogne pharmacist, whose family name was Dagomet. There were two sons of the marriage, Thomas Pierre and Albert Robert. When his father died in 1874, Morson took over the running of the business. He employed the chemist Robert Taubman to run the laboratory the Morsons had by then established, and from 1891 until his death in 1905 Taubman was also a partner in the business. 
The Morsons enjoyed a high reputation and a number of leading medical scientists, including Joseph Lister (1827-1912), consulted the firm. This led to the development and marketing of Lister's cyanide and other named products, but, despite its standing, the Morson business and laboratory, like others in Britain at that time, did not engage in speculative research and development leading to innovation of the kind that was taking place in the industry in Germany in the 1890s and the first decade of the twentieth century. The pharmacy in Southampton Row was closed in 1900 and new offices and warehouses were opened in Elm Street, Gray's Inn Road. 
Morson was essentially a private rather than a public person, with artistic interests and friends, and he built up a collection of contemporary paintings. Like his father his interest in science reached beyond pharmacy and he was a member of the Geological and Zoological societies. He died at his home, 30 Elsworthy Road, Primrose Hill, London, on 5 February 1908. 
The business was inherited by his sons who converted it in 1915 into a private limited company. It was later acquired by the American pharmaceutical company, Mercke, Sharp, and Dohme. 


@@@@@


doc= 48073


Mortimer, William Egerton (1878-1940), lawyer, was born on 9 August 1878 in Ash, Shropshire, the son of Christian Mortimer (died 1916), vicar of Ash and later canon residentiary of Lichfield Cathedral, and his wife, Lucy Sarah Hannah Scholfield. Canon Mortimer was one of the seventeen children of George Ferris Whidborne Mortimer, headmaster of the City of London School between 1840 and 1865. Mortimer was educated at Shrewsbury School before reading Greats at Christ Church, Oxford, where he held the Careswell and Boulter exhibitions, was president of the boat club, and took a second in jurisprudence in 1901. 
In October 1904 Mortimer was admitted a solicitor; he then practised alone at 21 Cannon Street for eight years. During this time it seems that he made the acquaintance of William May, partner of and co-founder in 1889, with William Slaughter, of the City firm known then and ever since as Slaughter and May. Mortimer's name is entered as a member of various shooting parties, from 1908 on, in the gamebook of Pitt Hall Farm, an estate near Basingstoke belonging to William May. Mortimer was also, like May, a keen yachtsman, although no record survives of whether these shared sporting interests played any part in securing for Mortimer an invitation, which he accepted, to join Slaughter and May as a partner. In 1912 Mortimer left Cannon Street and became one of the five partners at 18 Austin Friars. 
When war broke out in 1914 Mortimer was thirty-six and too old for active military service. He spent most of the war at Austin Friars, although in 1917 he was seconded to the Air Ministry for a time. Sir William Slaughter, the firm's senior partner since 1889, died in 1917 and many of his clients and directorships were passed on to William May. Mortimer, who already shared some of the firm's significant commercial clients, particularly banks, in the City with May, took on more of these in the 1920s. The merchant banks Schroders, Barings, and Rothschilds were all clients of the firm and more specifically of Mortimer in the 1920s. When Sir Frank Crisp of Ashurst Morris Crisp died in 1919, Morgan Grenfell, formerly his client, moved to Slaughter and May. By the mid-1920s Mortimer's reputation was sufficient to warrant an invitation to sit on the committee chaired by Wilfrid Arthur Greene, appointed in 1925 to review the body of company law and consider what, if any, amendments were required. In the event the committee, after lengthy sittings, recommended only some slight changes. 
From the late 1920s until 1940 Mortimer was, according to the firm's historian, its driving force, although he did not become senior partner until 1933. In these years, as his own reputation and that of the firm grew in the City, the firm acquired 'the stamp of Mortimer's complex and forceful personality' (Dennett, 158). From 1924 he was a member of the council of the Law Society, but otherwise he did not seek influence in wider public spheres. He was well known among British and foreign bankers, particularly after his involvement, representing British interests, in the creation of the foreign creditors' standstill committee, set up after the collapse of the Credit Anstalt in 1931. 
City law firms were at this time -- and most remained so until the 1960s -- hierarchical and conservative in character, formal in dress and manners. In the office, Mortimer -- known as Mortie, although whether any dared to address him as such is doubtful -- was autocratic and demanding, a stickler for accuracy as far as work and behaviour were concerned. A bachelor himself at this time, he dedicated his considerable energies and abilities to Slaughter and May and tended to expect the same of his partners and staff. He could also, however, as articled clerks and members of staff found, be unobtrusively kind and generous. 
By the late 1930s Slaughter and May, with nine partners, was a large firm in City terms and with a reputation for excellence that Mortimer had done much to sustain and enhance after the deaths of the founders. On 7 or 8 August 1938 Mortimer married Cicely Eleanor, widow of Major-General Neville-White and daughter of William Melville Pigot, rural dean of Ipswich. Two years later, while sheltering from an air raid, he suffered a heart attack. A few days later, on 3 December 1940, he died of bronchitis at his home at 95 Eaton Square, London; his wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 48074


Morton, Sir James (1867-1943), textile and dyestuffs manufacturer, was born on 24 March 1867, at Darvel, Ayrshire, the third of nine children in the family of Alexander Morton (1844-1923) and his wife, Jean, 'nee' Wiseman (1844/5-1924). Alexander (1844-1923), of hand-loom weaving stock, was the leading entrepreneur in the factory production of lace, mainly for curtains. He had also pioneered direct selling to retailers and diversified into heavier decorative materials, including machine-made carpets. James was educated at Darvel School and Ayr Academy before joining the firm as an apprentice at the age of sixteen. The firm's success depended on the application of the most modern technology, especially Nottingham lace machinery, and the lowest regional labour costs and unionization in the industry. There was also a strong commitment to stylish designs. 
Several of Alexander Morton's sons and relatives were employed by the firm, and by 1895 they were trying to obtain control. James, his brother Gavin, and his cousin Guy became the executive partners, and Alexander assumed the chairmanship, and increasingly turned to hackney horse and pansy breeding and fruit-growing, finally settling in Donegal (1909). By 1895 the firm's annual turnover was $89,000; nearly half this turnover comprised lace and madras, a quarter carpets, and slightly over a quarter tapestry and chenille. Expansion could not be sustained locally because of the scarcity and increasing cost of labour; therefore the firm built a large factory at Carlisle and three carpet factories in Donegal aided by the Irish congested districts board. This expansion was funded by a preference share issue and bank overdrafts. 
James Morton's interest in colour and fashion was stimulated by the Arts and Crafts movement associated with William Morris and the Pre-Raphaelites, and was reinforced by his marriage on 21 March 1901 to Beatrice Emily Fagan (1871-1958), an art teacher trained by Charlotte Mason. In 1902 he was disturbed to find that one of his firm's fabrics, which he had coloured, faded badly after only a week in the windows of Liberty's of London, and he spent the next three years trying to improve colour fastness. His work with John Christie of United Turkey Red led to the production of new fast dyes, and in 1905 the first Morton fabrics were sold with guaranteed replacement if they faded. These fabrics, mostly produced at Carlisle, were advertised under the brand name Sundour (dour in Gaelic means water; in Scots, stubborn, hard to move). Within four years Sundour materials accounted for half the firm's annual profits of $16,500, and within seven years three times the profit produced from other output. In 1913 Morton decided to split the firm into two companies: Alexander Morton & Co., which concentrated on lace at Darvel and employed nearly 600 people, and Morton Sundour Fabrics Limited, producing other fabrics at Carlisle. While his father remained chairman of both companies, James Morton became managing director and majority shareholder of Sundour. 
Most of the dyes used by Sundour were manufactured in Germany, and when war began in 1914, only five months' supplies were in stock; Morton sought alternative sources, and a chemical plant was built and put into operation to supply his firm's requirements before the German stock was exhausted. By 1918 dyestuffs were being produced to supply other companies; this led to the establishment of Solway Dyes Limited, a subsidiary which also licensed American producers. Morton recognized the demand opportunities, and also the potentiality for further research, and therefore established Scottish Dyes Limited at Grangemouth (1919) with a capital of $300,000, about half of which was raised outside the firm. There followed the discovery of Caledon Jade Green, the fastest dyestuff so far produced; German producers, previously world leaders, had to apply for licences to produce it. 
In 1923 Morton sold Scottish Dyes to the British Dyestuffs Corporation, later part of Imperial Chemical Industries. His talents were recognized by ICI, where he served on the dyestuffs division board from 1926 until his death. Morton received a knighthood in 1936 for services to the dye and colour industries. 
After selling Scottish Dyes, Morton tried to improve production by seeking to replace the shuttle and loom, and succeeded in combining an innovation in warp-knitting technique with a new method of inserting continuous wefts. By 1935 prototypes (called by Morton 'fly-needle frames') were operational and demonstrated to Samuel Courtauld (1876-1947). A joint company (FNF Limited) was established: Courtaulds took 60 per cent of the shares and provided the working capital and also paid $250,000 for a quarter of the equity in Morton Sundour Fabrics; Morton Sundour took the remaining 40 per cent. FNF did not live up to the expectations of Courtauld and Morton in their lifetimes, but in 1944 an improved device ran at more than three times the speed of the normal warp-knitting machine in a demonstration to the trade. By the 1950s it was being sold worldwide. Morton's association with Courtauld reflected his firm's problems in the depression of the 1930s; profits were slow to recover and research and development were expensive; he lost his chief commercial executive to a rival, and needed time to blood a successor. In the late 1930s he was joined by his elder son, Alastair James Fagan Morton, who became a great designer, and by his son-in-law, Lieutenant-Commander R. S. E. Hannay, as production manager. 
Brought up in a sabbatarian and teetotal home, Morton was a conscientious member of the Church of Scotland, and reared his family of six children according to his beliefs. He was interested throughout his life in art and design, serving during the First World War on a Ministry of Reconstruction committee on adult education, and helping in the formation of the Design and Industries Association. He was an active member of the Royal Society of Arts and of the British Association for the Advancement of Science. In 1923 he became the first recipient of the gold medal awarded to celebrate the Faraday benzene centenary. He died on 22 August 1943 at his home, Dalston Hall, near Carlisle; his wife died on 20 April 1958. 


@@@@@


doc= 48075


Moss, Harry Neville (1895-1982), draper, was born at 10 The Triangle, Kensington, London, on 25 October 1895, the younger son of George Frederic Moss (1855-1906), master tailor, and his wife, Lucie Phoebe Amy, 'nee' Campbell. His grandfather, Moses Moss, a bespoke tailor and dealer in secondhand clothes, had opened a shop in Covent Garden, London, in 1860. Moses set up George, the eldest of his five sons, and Alfred (1862-1937) in another shop nearby in 1881, with George responsible for tailoring, and Alfred in overall charge of the business, including the purchase of high-quality secondhand clothing for resale. Both of George's sons joined the business. During the First World War, Harry was commissioned and served at Salonika; the elder brother was killed. His uncle Alfred married late in life. 
Before the First World War the firm was winning a reputation as military outfitters, well able to handle the idiosyncratic variations of regimental uniform. A branch was set up in Camberley for Sandhurst officer cadets, and during the war the firm was able to produce high-quality ready-to-wear uniforms at short notice. After the war the firm retained many of its wartime customers and added formal diplomatic and court wear to its range of full-dress military uniforms. In another area the business changed its emphasis from the sale of secondhand and misfit clothing to the hire of morning and evening dress; it continued to make high-quality, hand-finished ready-to-wear suits, which were cheaper than, but hardly distinguishable from, bespoke tailor-made suits. 
On 15 June 1920 Moss married Sophia Ida Woolf (1901-1971) at the West London Synagogue in Marylebone. On his return to the firm after the war, Harry Moss gained his uncle's confidence and was made a director in 1921. He gradually brought change into the traditional business, introducing mechanization for routine tailoring processes, while retaining hand-finishing. He rationalized office methods, making card indexes of customers, and -- with considerable misgivings -- introduced discreet, humorous direct-mail advertising for existing customers. This proved to be a much-appreciated innovation. The premises were largely rebuilt in 1929, but most activities, including tailoring and the care of dress wear for hire, were still carried out under the same roof. In 1934 Moss took over as managing director, a position he was to hold for forty years. At that time around a hundred staff were employed, and turnover was over $220,000 per year. 
Following the Second World War, the business changed in several ways. The range of clothing was extended to include women's wear, including wedding and evening dresses, both for sale and hire. New branches were opened; there were thirty-two in 1971, including two in Paris. The firm aimed to attract young customers as well as a more established clientele. It began to advertise extensively, ironically having to emphasize that the firm actually sold clothes as well as hiring them, such had been its reputation for hiring. Annual turnover in 1971 was $3.5 million and the staff numbered 1350. The company, a private limited company since 1914, was converted into a public company in 1947, but the majority of shares still remained under family control. When Harry Moss died in 1982 there were six Mosses in the business. 
Moss was committed to ensuring the preservation of his family firm's high reputation, and care for customers and staff alike. He was a respected figure in the menswear trade. Outside his work he devoted much time to the West London Synagogue, and rarely missed the Friday evening service. He enjoyed cricket -- he was a redoubtable left-handed opening bat -- and golf. He encouraged his firm to sponsor and attend sporting events such as show-jumping, skiing, and golf tournaments. He served as treasurer and governor of an approved school near his home in Surrey, and was president of the Master Tailors' Benevolent Association, and joint president of the Boys' Club Movement. Moss died in Middlesex Hospital, Westminster, on 11 May 1982, survived by a daughter and his son Monty, who had succeeded him as chairman. 


@@@@@


doc= 48077


Mulholland, John, first Baron Dunleath (1819-1895), textile manufacturer, was born at Belfast on 16 December 1819, the only son of Andrew Mulholland (1791-1866) and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' MacDonnell. In 1840, following education at Belfast Royal Academy, John Mulholland went into partnership with his father. The elder Mulholland remains one of the most famous figures in the history of the Ulster linen industry who, together with his brother, Thomas, introduced the wet-spinning of flax into Belfast in 1828, using steam-powered machinery. When John Mulholland joined the firm twelve years later, the Mulholland mill was one of the largest of thirty-five flax-spinning enterprises in Ulster, employing 900 workers and containing 15,000 spindles. John Mulholland became the sole proprietor in 1846, when his father withdrew to the rural pleasures of Ballywalter Park, later known as Springvale, purchased from the Matthews family, who had owned it from early in the century. 
In 1851 Mulholland married Frances Louise, daughter of Hugh Lyle of Knockintarn, co. Londonderry. They had three sons. Mulholland took as his managing partner his sister's husband, Nicholas de la Cherois Crommelin, and together they created an integrated spinning and weaving business, reorganized in 1851 as the York Street Flax Spinning Company. Crommelin retired in 1860 and was replaced by Ogilvy Blair Graham. The company prospered during the cotton famine of the 1860s and adopted limited liability in 1865 -- one of the first businesses in Ireland to do so -- with a nominal share value of $500,000. It survived the depression that followed the American Civil War by careful attention to overseas marketing and further integration. Branches were opened in Paris (1870), New York (1871), Berlin (1872), London (1874), and Melbourne (1892). In 1883 it purchased a bleach works at Muckamore in co. Antrim. By the time John Mulholland died, the York Street Flax Spinning Company was the largest integrated flax-spinning and -weaving business in the world. 
Although Mulholland remained nominally in control, his connection with the business became increasingly tenuous, and he left the day-to-day supervision to the board of directors, including R. R. Reade and Sir William Crawford. When the firm adopted limited liability, he sold a substantial portion of his personal shares for $164,250 and with the proceeds of the sale purchased the Southwell estate, property of the former lord of the manor in Downpatrick, co. Down, as well as land in co. Tyrone -- adopting, as his father had done, the lifestyle of a country gentleman. Mulholland also became well known, in Britain, if not in Ireland, as an enthusiastic yachtsman, the owner of the 'Egeria'. When he died, the 'Northern Whig' (13 December 1895) commented, a little tartly, that 'he has for the past quarter of a century been seen very little in Belfast'. The 'News Letter' (13 December 1895) was more charitable, declaring that he 'never lost his interest in Belfast and its people'. 
These conflicting assessments of Mulholland's later life stemmed in part from the different political perspectives of the two newspapers, for Mulholland had political ambitions in the Conservative and Unionist cause. At the 1868 general election the Belfast Conservative Association nominated Sir Charles Lanyon, architect and former lord mayor, together with Mulholland as candidates. Mulholland was unpopular among working men, which may indicate his reputation as an employer, and they ran a small-time Orange landowner against him. Mulholland lost. However, in 1874 he was elected for the tiny constituency of Downpatrick (dismissed contemptuously by the 'Northern Whig' as a pocket borough), and remained an MP until the seat was abolished in 1885. 
As a political figure Mulholland's achievements were modest. In 1860 he was 'one of those chosen to consider and report on the negotiations for a commercial treaty with France'. In 1868 he served on a royal commission appointed to consider the advantages of the state buying the Irish railways. He was high sheriff for co. Down in 1868 and for co. Tyrone in 1873. He was a JP for co. Antrim and co. Down, and deputy lieutenant for co. Antrim. He received an honorary LLD from Trinity College, Dublin in 1881. In 1892 he was raised to the peerage as Baron Dunleath of Ballywalter, co. Down. 
Mulholland's other principal interest was the Church of Ireland. He assisted in the financial settlement following disestablishment in 1869, and was a member of the general synod, and the synods of the dioceses of Down and Connor, and Dromore. He was a generous supporter of the Church of Ireland Young Men's Society. He died at his London home, 7 Eaton Square, on 11 December 1895 after a long illness, and was buried on 17 December at the family home, Springvale, in the parish of Ballywalter. His wife survived him and his eldest son, Herbert Lyle Mulholland (1854-1931), succeeded to the title. 


@@@@@


doc= 48078


Mullard, Stanley Robert (1883-1979), radio engineer and industrialist, was born in Bermondsey, London, on 1 November 1883, the third of five children of Robert Mullard and his wife, Ann, 'nee' Ludford. He left school at the age of fourteen, joining Mackey's Electric Lamp Company Ltd, where his father was works manager, in 1899. He joined the Institution of Electrical Engineers as a student in 1903, becoming a full member in 1910 and a fellow in 1928. By the early age of twenty-three he was a director of the Mackey company. Two years later, in 1908, he married Emmie Gladys Winifred, daughter of George Walter Hole, an estate agent. 
The Mackey company failed in 1909, and Mullard went to the lamp factory of Societe Anonyme des Usines Pintsch in Paris. He returned to England in 1910 to take charge of Ediswan's research laboratory at Ponders End, Middlesex. Ediswan was then experimenting with silica (fused quartz) instead of conventional glass envelopes for filament lamps; silica has a low coefficient of thermal expansion, and so was subject to lower stresses as the lamps warmed up. Mullard put this experience to good use when commissioned in the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve in 1916. He was posted to the wireless telegraphy establishment in HMS 'Vernon' to assist in developing silica radio valves for high-powered wireless transmitters. The first successful silica valve, produced in September 1920, had an output of 10 kilowatts on test -- sixty times the maximum power from contemporary valves with glass envelopes. 
After demobilization in 1919, Mullard was appointed managing director of the 'Z' Electric Lamp Manufacturing Company and also continued his research for the Royal Navy. On 17 September 1920 he set up the Mullard Radio Valve Company, which at first used part of the 'Z' Company's works at Southfields, Wimbledon, and then moved to its own premises in Claybrook Road, Hammersmith in 1921. Mullard's company was financed largely by the Radio Communication Company (RCC), on the strength of an order for 250 silica valves (at $66 each) from the Admiralty. Mullard's new business did not depend on producing transmitting valves alone. The broadcasting boom of the 1920s created a market for small receiver valves as well. In 1923 the company moved to new premises in Nightingale Lane, Balham, increasing its manufacturing capacity to meet the demand. Mullard's experience of all aspects of electric lamp production was invaluable. His company established a reputation for efficiency; he was soon selling valves at about half the prices of other manufacturers. But success brought unwelcome attention from powerful rivals. In 1922 the Marconi group brought a suit against Mullards, alleging infringement of their patents. Mullard fought the case as far as the House of Lords, with judgment given in his favour at every stage. However, it is unlikely that his small company could have survived this action on its own resources. It depended on the support of RCC and of the Admiralty; both would have been liable for substantial royalties had Marconis won the case. 
But the company lacked the capacity to develop its own techniques. In 1925 Mullard therefore agreed to sell 50 per cent of Mullards stock to N. V. Philips' Gloeilampenfabrieken of the Netherlands, in order to benefit from Philips's research and patents. In return, the Dutch firm gained entry to the heavily protected British valve market. But, despite Mullard's personal reassurance, the powerful new shareholder exerted an increasing influence on the company's activities. The strength of the existing shareholders was reduced at about the same time by Marconi's acquisition of RCC. Philips was then able to purchase the remaining equity (in Mullard's name), the company becoming a fully owned subsidiary of Philips in January 1927. Mullard apparently misunderstood the full implications of this takeover. He was an experienced engineer and administrator, a competent organizer and team leader. From 1920 to 1925 he had been personally responsible for his company's policies. Appointed managing director by the Philips board in 1927, he appears to have expected this state of affairs to continue. The new owners, understandably, insisted on deciding important matters for themselves. After considerable friction, Mullard resigned in 1930, ostensibly on medical advice. He remained a director until 1970, but his duties were purely nominal. 
Described by a friend as 'grim, saturnine, take-it-or-leave-it, a good business man' ('Daily Telegraph'), Mullard had an aversion to publicity. The Philips takeover left him with a sense of grievance, exacerbating his reticence about business affairs. He withdrew entirely from the radio industry after 1930, devoting his time to horticulture. In later years he said that he had made more money from growing carnations than he received for his contributions to electronics. Mullard died at Brooklands Nursing Home, Paddockhall Road, Haywards Heath, Sussex (where he was then resident), on 1 September 1979. He was survived by a son and three daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 48080


Murrant, Sir Ernest Henry (1889-1974), shipping company executive, was born on 15 July 1889 at Brixton, London, the only son of Henry John Murrant (1857-1943), in his later life a self-employed builder, and Minna Augusta Schultz (1852/3-1931). He experienced only a rudimentary education in south London before leaving school at the age of thirteen. On 1 August 1914 he married May (1884-1973), the youngest daughter of John Archer, a tailor, of Belfast. The couple had two children, one of whom, a daughter, died in infancy. 
Apart from spells during the two world wars when Ernest Murrant was seconded to government service, he spent his whole working life with the shipping company Furness Withy. He joined the firm in 1902 as an office boy following an introduction secured by his father. His outstanding shorthand skills brought him to the notice of his superiors, and Murrant was soon appointed secretary to Sir Frederick Lewis, who became chairman of Furness Withy in 1919, when the company was reorganized to buy out the Furness family interest. Murrant worked closely with Lewis, not just as his personal secretary, but with executive responsibility for seeing through the chairman's ideas. Murrant was elected a director of Furness Withy in 1924, and deputy chairman in 1935, by which time the firm was an integrated, multinational company, which operated on its own account and controlled a diversified portfolio of assets. Upon the death of Lewis (then Lord Essendon) in 1945, Murrant was appointed chairman. 
Murrant's chairmanship was conservative and uncontroversial, as he grappled with the problems facing British shipowners after the Second World War. Furness Withy accumulated substantial reserves, but under Murrant's guiding hand the firm doubled its fleet tonnage by 1959, and opened new routes to replace those lost to foreign competition. His style of leadership was probably that of strong central control, epitomized by Lord Essendon, rather than the decentralized managerial system that became more common in the 1960s. With hindsight it is clear that Murrant may have overlooked crucial business opportunities, though many of the lost chances of British shipping occurred after his retirement, from ill health, in 1959. 
Murrant's public career started at the outbreak of the First World War in 1914, when he joined the Board of Trade as a member of the shipping control committee, advising upon the collection and distribution of neutral and captured enemy tonnage to allied owners, for which work he was appointed MBE in 1918. During the Second World War Murrant was appointed by the minister of war transport as special representative in the Near East, responsible for co-ordinating allied tonnage, liaising with friendly governments, and advising the Middle East Supply Centre, services recognized by his appointment as KCMG in 1944. The remainder of Sir Ernest's public career was entirely conventional. He enjoyed many directorships in shipping and the financial services sectors, and was a member of a number of City livery companies. He retained a keen interest in the training and welfare of seamen throughout his life, assuming a number of important voluntary responsibilities for these areas. He was also president of the chamber of shipping (1947-8), and he served on official inquiries into Britain's shipping industry. 
To business colleagues Murrant may have appeared somewhat cold, with a ferocious capacity for hard work. To his family he was a devoted husband and kindly father, who in his last years preferred the quiet of home to the bustle of society. His wife's death in 1973 seemed to sap his own will to live, and, after increasing ill health, he died on 29 March 1974, at his home, Browning's Manor, Blackboys, near Uckfield, Sussex. He was cremated at Framfield, near Uckfield. His son, Geoffrey, subsequently became deputy chairman of Furness Withy. 


@@@@@


doc= 48082


Napier, Montague Stanley (1870-1931), motor car and aero-engine manufacturer, was born on 14 April 1870 at 68 York Road, Lambeth, London, the youngest of the four sons of James Murdoch Napier, mechanical engineer, and his wife, Fanny Jemima, 'nee' Mackenzie. His Scottish grandfather moved from Scotland and had founded a business in York Road, Lambeth, by 1836, specializing in making printing machinery for the newspaper industry. Under James Murdoch Napier the firm made coin-weighing machines for the Royal Mint, but by his death in 1895 the business of D. Napier & Son was in decline. Nothing is known about Napier's education, but although he started working for his father at an early age, he was not doing so at the time of his father's death. He bought the family business from the executors and expanded into making machine tools for the cycle industry. 
Napier turned to making motor cars in 1899, after Selwyn Edge, like Napier a keen racing cyclist and former member of the Bath Road Club, asked him to modify the Panhard et Levassor car which he had bought after it came second in the 1896 Paris-Marseilles race. Edge was so impressed with the new two-cylinder engine that Napier designed that he contracted to buy six cars from him, setting up the Motor Vehicle Company, with a showroom in Regent Street, to sell them. The first cars, ready in 1900, were so successful that Napier moved his works to larger premises in Acton in 1903, and in 1904 produced the first commercially successful six-cylinder car. While Napier concentrated on the technical side, Edge was attracting publicity for Napier cars with spectacular successes in races and competitions, winning the Gordon Bennett international trophy in 1902. Thanks to the marketing skills of Edge, Napier cars dominated the luxury car trade in Britain until challenged by Rolls-Royce Ltd after 1906. 
Unlike Rolls and Royce, who formed a single company to make and market Rolls-Royce cars, Napier and Edge converted their private firms into public companies, D. Napier & Son Ltd in 1906, followed by S. F. Edge (1907) Ltd in 1907, and Edge's company agreed to buy $120,000 worth of Napier cars every year until 1921. In 1912, Napier and Edge parted company, and S. F. Edge Ltd was wound up. Napier's health began to break down in 1915, and following an operation for the removal of a kidney he moved permanently to Cannes, in the south of France, in 1917. He set up a design office there, however, remaining managing director of the firm, and, from 1924, joint managing director. He realized that his firm could not compete with the large manufacturers of mass-produced cheap cars, and although he designed one new car, which came on the market in 1920, there was little demand, and the last Napier car was sold in 1924. 
Napier began to make aeroplane engines in response to the Air Ministry's need at the beginning of the First World War, and he started work on his own water-cooled engine in 1916. This engine, the 450 hp Lion, was in use by the end of the war, and in 1918 the government placed an order worth $2.5 million. The Lion became the most widely used British engine, with a larger share of the aircraft business than its rivals Rolls-Royce, Armstrong Siddeley, and Bristol, and it built up a reputation for reliability over long distances. By 1926 Imperial Airways had flown over 2 million miles with the engines, and in 1926 a Lion-powered flying boat made the first non-stop flight across the south Atlantic, from Spain to Argentina. As early as 1919 Napier realized the need to have a new design ready to replace the Lion, and began work on the 1000 hp Cub, which was eventually rejected by the government, in 1925. But throughout the 1920s the Lion continued to be successful: in 1927 Napier employed 1600 men, making fifty engines a month. After the failure of the Cub, he worked on a 250 hp engine, but the Air Ministry and Imperial Airways were more interested in the new large radial engines being developed by his rivals. By the end of 1929 Napier was producing only twelve engines a month. An attempt to take over Bentley in 1931 was thwarted by Rolls-Royce, but D. Napier & Son survived until 1942, when it was taken over by the English Electric Company. Napier's great successes had been the pre-war six-cylinder luxury cars, and the Lion aeroplane engine, but in both instances he was overtaken by Rolls-Royce. 
Napier was a tall, bearded, quiet man, 'with a face not unlike an apostle' (Edge, 263), with none of the flamboyance of racing drivers such as Edge. He was not a keen motorist himself, and never drove a racing car. In 1903 he married Alice Caroline Mary, 'nee' Paterson, a school governess. They had two sons and two daughters. Napier and his wife were legally separated in 1922. He died at his home, Villa des Cistes, Cannes, France, on 22 January 1931, leaving over $1 million. The chief beneficiary of the will was Norah Mary Fryer (wife of Dr Edwin Fryer), with whom he had lived since 1915. 


@@@@@


doc= 48083


Nelson, Sir Amos (1860-1947), cotton manufacturer, was born on 31 January 1860 at Winewall, near Colne, Lancashire, the eldest son of James Nelson (1831-1912), an overlooker, and his wife, Mary Ann, 'nee' Hartley. Although he came from a hand-loom weaving family, James Nelson began work in a power-loom weaving factory in 1842 and by 1867 had risen from the position of weaver to overlooker to mill manager at the Cotton Tree mill of Critchley and Armstrong at Colne. It was in this mill that Amos was first employed at the age of eight as a half-timer; he had begun full-time work by the age of thirteen and was employed in a range of occupations before being apprenticed as an overlooker when he was sixteen. By the 1880s the family, six children in all, was an example of a highly successful Lancashire working-class family, but in 1881 the closure of the mill threatened its prosperity. 
James Nelson invested his savings of $1200, considerable for a working man, in buying 100 looms and renting room and power in nearby Nelson. He was joined in this venture by his son Amos, who, at the age of twenty-one, had already saved $200. Nelson and Burnley were the centres of the 'room and power' system in weaving, a system by which a successful working man could transform himself into an entrepreneur through renting both room and power in a weaving shed, thus needing to buy only the looms. The effect of the system was to reduce the start-up costs for new business, easing entry for those families who had been able to save a modest sum. 
The firm, James Nelson & Son, was a remarkable success story. By 1895 it had erected mills at Valley Road, Walverden, in Nelson, and was operating some 1200 looms. The firm continued to grow, and in 1912, on the death of James Nelson, owned some 3000 looms. Its success lay in seeking out specialist markets in which it could obtain a premium for its cloth. Having first concentrated on the market in China, the firm moved into the more prosperous home and European markets. It was also the first to introduce the sateen trade into Nelson. During the period of James Nelson's life there appears to have been a division of responsibility between the two men in the firm, the father managing production and the son responsible for finance and policy, including marketing. 
In 1914, after his father's death, Amos Nelson set up a private limited company in which he chaired the board. The firm continued its pre-war success and by the end of the First World War had further expanded its capacity by buying spinning and doubling firms and creating an integrated enterprise. By 1922 Nelson controlled 3700 looms as well as more than 300,000 spindles and 60,000 doubling spindles. 
Business success also brought with it considerable personal wealth. Nelson had married Mary Driver (1861-1931) of Winewall, Colne, in 1879, and they had three sons and two daughters. They lived initially in Nelson before moving to the Manor House at Thornton in Craven, near Skipton, Yorkshire, and in 1919 Nelson acquired Gledstone Hall and estate, also near Skipton, with the intention of modernizing it. He invited Edward Lutyens, the distinguished architect, to draw up plans. Lutyens, who had a reputation for over-spending, produced plans that were too expensive, and Nelson, who had been knighted in 1922, instead asked him to build a new hall to a budget of $40,000. The hall, which was built between 1923 and 1927, cost $120,000, and although some of the estate's 6000 acres provided an income the cost, coinciding with a depression in the cotton industry, severely taxed Sir Amos's finances. The hall was one of Lutyens's finest buildings. 
Gledstone Hall was not Nelson's only project at the end of the war. The firm built a sports and social club in Nelson as a memorial to those employees who had given their lives during the conflict. As the largest employer in the town, and with a record for paying the highest wages, Nelson's was regarded as a good place to work, and the new sports and social club further enhanced this reputation. 
The inter-war crisis in the Lancashire cotton industry presented the firm and Sir Amos with their most formidable challenge. The initial post-war depression forced the company to suspend production for three months in 1921, and, while there was some recovery after an intensive marketing operation in the United States of America, the firm responded far more quickly than most of its rivals to the need to adapt. Nelson followed three strategies. The first was to diversify by moving into artificial silk (rayon). He set up two subsidiary companies, Lustrafil Ltd, which by 1924 was producing viscose yarn at Valley Mills, and Nelson Silk Ltd, at Lancaster, making acetate yarn from 1929. 
The second aspect of Nelson's strategy was to move away from selling 'grey' (unfinished) cloth through merchant distributors. Instead the company began to develop its own commercial outlets, giving direct access to buyers. Nelson acquired five subsidiary companies in Bradford and Manchester which specialized in selling the firm's branded products at home and abroad. Many contemporary manufacturers were critical of the merchant sector, but Sir Amos was one of the few to act positively by supplanting it. 
The third strategy was to reduce costs in cotton weaving by a system of 'more loom' weaving in the Valley Mills. This was a system by which weavers minded six or eight looms, rather than the traditional four, but were paid at new rates which enabled employers to cut overall costs. The more looms system was a common response by employers in cotton weaving in the 1930s and was the cause of major industrial unrest in Lancashire weaving between 1929 and 1932. Nelson's policy differed from that of most employers in that he introduced a more looms system on semi-automatic looms, rather than the traditional Lancashire looms, enabling him to pay higher wages than his competitors. His proposed more looms system attracted opposition not from the trade unions, but rather from his fellow employers, who felt his proposals undermined their own position. They therefore attempted to prevent him from implementing an agreement with the local trade union, the Nelson Weavers' Association. It was a measure of the growing desperation of the cotton industry that in 1931 Nelson chose to ignore the policy of the Cotton Spinners' and Manufacturers' Association and introduced a local agreement. 
Sir Amos established a reputation as an industrial conciliator during the 1928 weavers' lock-out in Nelson. The dispute had been sparked by the fining of John Husband, vice-president of the Nelson Weavers' Association, and for seven weeks some 7000 weavers were locked out by their employers over a 1's'. fine. Encouraged by the town's Labour mayor, Andrew Smith, to intervene, Sir Amos proposed to employ the Nelson Weavers' vice-president in his own mills, but he infuriated his fellow employers by suggesting an experimental scheme whereby there was no fining in the town. The county employers' organization, the Cotton Spinners' and Manufacturers' Association, threatened to take action against him if he did not withdraw, though when the dispute was finally settled John Husband was employed at Valley Mills. 
The inter-war years also brought personal sadness for Nelson when his first wife died. In 1931 he married his second wife, Harriet, 'nee' Hargraves (1896-1966), the daughter of his agent at Gledstone; they had one son. 
Sir Amos was active in local politics, sitting as a Liberal on the Nelson town council between 1900 and 1910 and holding the office of mayor between 1903 and 1906. He left the council in 1910, when he broke with the Liberal Party over the issue of free trade, having become convinced that tariff reform was the solution to Britain's economic problems. It was this issue which persuaded him to stand as Conservative parliamentary candidate in 1923 for Nelson and Colne. Despite his local popularity, he was defeated by the Labour candidate, Arthur Greenwood. 
The outbreak of war in 1939 changed the economic position of the cotton industry, but recovery did not come until after the war, when from 1945 to 1951 there was a sellers' market in cotton cloth. During this period Sir Amos chose to convert the firm from a private to a public company. Profits had risen substantially in the period 1936-46, and the public company, employing 2600 workers, was capitalized at $1.2 million. Nelson remained chairman of the new company but his tenure was short-lived, as he died on 13 August 1947 at Gledstone Hall. He was buried at St Peter's Church, Marton in Craven. 


@@@@@


doc= 48084


Nevile, Sir Sydney Oswald (1873-1969), brewer, was born on 12 July 1873, at 2 Gordon Houses, Scarborough, the thirteenth of the fifteen children of the Revd Christopher Nevile (1806-1877), landowner, and rector of Wickenby, in Lincolnshire, and his wife, Mary Anne, daughter of Robert Tooth, brewer and hop grower of Swift's Park, Cranbrook, Kent. The Neviles were a well-connected family with large estates, but Christopher Nevile's death in 1877, when Sydney was four, produced financial problems which restricted his education to the somewhat sporadic tuition of Mr Travers's Preparatory School in Bognor. His mother decided on a brewing pupillage for him, since her brothers had done well in Australia, establishing a major brewery, Tooth's of Sydney. In January 1888 Sydney became an articled pupil at Ebenezer Robins & Son's Hove brewery, paying $100 a year. After two years he joined a larger concern, Brandon's Putney brewery, in London, for a further six months' pupillage. In July 1890, when only seventeen, he was appointed assistant brewer there to T. K. Amos, with a salary of $100 a year. 
Nevile's precocity in a conservative industry was further demonstrated when, on Amos's premature death in 1896, he became Brandon's head brewer at the age of twenty-two. He was probably the youngest in such a post in the country. Brandon's quickly expanded, mainly through the free trade, and Nevile took the eye as a promising London brewer with a wider vision than most. It was no surprise when he left the company in 1919 to become a managing director of Whitbread & Co., a much larger and more prestigious company. By that time he had become a nationally known figure in the trade, advocating moderation in drinking and the introduction of improved public houses as the best way to ward off the temperance lobby. 
It was during the two world wars that Nevile was at his most influential. In the First World War he often acted as one of the industry's representatives in negotiations with the government. He became a member of the central control board (liquor traffic) from 1917 to 1921. This was Lloyd George's substitute for brewing nationalization, where, despite overt opposition from several quarters in the industry, Nevile adopted a positive response, advising on brewing at Carlisle (where the brewery was state-owned), and ensuring that his enthusiasm for improved pubs was turned into reality. His role in nationalized brewing was a long-term one, since he served on the council of state management districts until 1955. He was also a member of the Hop Control Committee, 1917-23, and an influence on the 'Licensing Act' of 1921. President of the Brewers' Society in 1938-40, he used his earlier experience to good effect in the Second World War, producing a more harmonious relationship with government, while protecting brewing interests large and small. He was chairman of the brewing advisory committee appointed by the Ministry of Food, 1940-46, where he gave clear and authoritative advice on fuel and transport economies. He also played a full part in post-war reconstruction, serving on the Morris committee on war-damaged licensed premises, 1942-4. He was knighted in 1942, and in 1946 married Madeleine de Lacy, daughter of Dr C. A. Wickham, of Willesborough, Kent. 
At Whitbread, Nevile was for three decades the only director to be recruited from outside the families of the old partnership. He was also one of the company's longest-serving directors, acting as a managing director until 1946 and as an ordinary director until 1968. By orchestrating important mergers in the inter-war years, he was a key figure in Whitbread's emergence as a national brewer. The development of the company's beer brands, marketing, and retailing were particular interests. He helped to establish the Improved Public House Company, a subsidiary which managed Whitbread's large improved pubs in the London area. He also encouraged the company to spend more on advertising. Indeed, his ideas were taken to a national stage when he promoted the Brewers' Society's collective advertising campaign of 1933, based on the themes 'Beer is best' and 'Beer -- the best long drink in the world'. He spent his later years pressing for better training for licensees. Nevile's many positions in the brewing industry included the posts of president of the Institute of Brewing (1919-21), master of the Brewers' Company (1929-30), and chairman of the National Trade Defence (subsequently Development) Association (1946-8). He also gave evidence to the royal commission on licensing of 1929-31. Outside the industry, he was a council member of the Federation of British Industries, 1922-58, and vice-president in 1958. 
Sir Sydney Nevile combined a disarming conviviality and wit with tremendous energy and a shrewd business brain. He was also a keen oarsman, and later an enthusiastic yachtsman. The initiator of a new era of 'responsible drinking', he was one of the most influential brewers of the twentieth century. He died at his home, 9 Mill Road, Worthing, on 3 September 1969, survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 48085


Nickalls, Thomas (1828-1899), stock jobber, was the elder son of Patteson Nickalls (died 1868). His younger brother was Sir Patteson Nickalls (1836-1910), a renowned pro-Boer Liberal and fellow stock jobber. Almost nothing is known about his early life, except that aged five he accompanied his father, a corn dealer, to Chicago. There, according to one source, Tom (as he was always known) 'hunted wolves in the forest' (Boase, 'Mod. Eng. biog.', 6.294). Nickalls returned to England in 1845. He married Emily, daughter of Henry Quihampton, a farmer, on 3 July 1860. She was to become the first woman to climb Mont Blanc and Mont Rosa in the same week. The couple first settled at Cheriton Villa in Bromley, Kent. Their eldest child, Guy Nickalls, was born on 12 November 1866 (died 1935), and eleven others followed. All, except one, survived infancy -- a rare achievement for a Victorian family. 
From 1864 up until his death Nickalls worked as a stock jobber in the City of London, concerned with the business of selling securities to stockbrokers, and playing a key role in setting prices on the exchange. He was to become highly successful in his chosen career and one of the leading jobbers on the American market. Yet in 1868 he suffered a severe setback. At the suggestion of some of its more senior members, who promised to pay his costs, he (according to his son's account) agreed to fight a stock exchange law case. Unfortunately for Nickalls, Lord Chief Justice Bovill later ruled against such a payment, and he was told to foot the bill of $18,000. This, however, seems to have had little real effect on the enterprising Tom, as he subsequently embarked on a European tour with his wife and children. From 1868 they lived at Holmesdale House, Horton Kirby, Kent. 
Nickalls became active in the vigorously competitive (and in contemporary stock exchange terms, most largely dealt-in) world of American railroad financing. In 1872 his prominence and success in the American markets earned him the accolade the 'Erie King'. A clerk of the 1870s remembers Nickalls as a great, burly man whose habit was 'to come into the market and bellow, 'I buy Eries.'' (Kynaston, 'The City of London', 38). Despite the dubious ethical standards applied in railroad financing, Nickalls always displayed integrity and independence of mind. Not only was he the most significant jobber in the American market, but he was also a well-liked figure on the stock exchange. He must also have exerted a deal of influence over his sons Guy and Vivian, who both chose to follow him onto the exchange. 
Nickalls was a keen sportsman. He had been an original member of the London Rowing Club (founded in 1856), and in 1879 he became master of the Surrey stag hounds. In 1887 he bought a large sporting estate in Sweden and then another adjoining it in Norway. He also ensured that his children were taught shooting, horse and hound riding, cricket, boxing, and billiards during their holidays. 
Despite his early rowing accomplishments, Tom's great ambition was for his sons to become cricketers; Guy remembered his saying: 'Cricket, my boy, will take you round the world, and rowing, up and down the Thames' (G. O. Nickalls, 38). However, he did not seem too disappointed when Guy took to rowing at Eton and Oxford, culminating in his captaincy of the university boat club. On one famous occasion in 1890 Nickalls senior treated his son's crew to a long weekend at Brighton's Grand Hotel to prepare themselves for the boat race. When Oxford won Guy recalled that his father slipped him a cheque for $100, and joined in the post-race festivities. As he had just won $7000 from a colleague on the stock exchange, by betting against Cambridge, Nickalls too had something to celebrate. Guy and Vivian dominated the Henley Diamond Sculls competition from 1888 to 1896. 
Tom Nickalls died on 10 May 1899 at Patteson Court, near Redhill, Surrey, where he and his family had lived since 1872, and was buried at Nutfield; his wife survived him. A brief obituary in 'The Times' read: 'He prospered in business, and while not neglecting the Stock Exchange, gave up much time to sport... Mr Nickalls was perhaps best known to the general public as the father of the famous scullers, Mr Guy and Mr Vivian Nickalls' (12 May 1899). 


@@@@@


doc= 48089


Oldroyd, Sir Mark (1843-1927), woollen manufacturer and politician, was born on 30 May 1843 at Spinkwell, Dewsbury, Yorkshire, the youngest of the three sons and two daughters of Mark Oldroyd (1797-1874) and his wife, Rachel, the daughter of Marmaduke Fox, of Soothill, Dewsbury. He was educated, to the age of thirteen, in the small local school in Dewsbury of Jesse Smith, then at Batley grammar school, and lastly at New College, St John's Wood, London, a theological college for Congregationalists, where he trained for the ministry. But his religious vocation was not pursued and he returned to Dewsbury in 1862 to enter the family woollen firm. 
The family firm had been established by Oldroyd's father in 1818, after he moved from Hanging Heaton, near Dewsbury, and relinquished his interest in an early local joint-stock company woollen mill. Mark senior was joined in the business by his eldest son, George, and his second son, John, establishing the name of the firm as M. Oldroyd & Sons. The father retired in 1859, leaving the running of the business to George and John, who agreed in 1862 to their father's request to admit Mark junior. As was common at the time, the new junior member of the firm received experience in the various departments of the business. John, however, remained firmly in control of the enterprise, providing the main business mind and taking responsibility for formulating policy. Mark Oldroyd married Maria Tew Mewburn, the daughter of William Mewburn of Wykham Park, Banbury, but previously of Halifax, in 1871. They lived at Hyrstlands in Batley. There were no children. 
In 1874 the firm became one of the earliest in the woollen industry to be formed into a limited liability company. By that date George had retired and John and Mark carried on the business as life directors, within the articles of association of the company. The company was floated with a capital of $750,000 in $10 shares, and it amalgamated with the blanket-making business of Blakeley and Latta of Hunslet Mills, Leeds, with which it had previously had a co-partnership. 
In 1877 John Oldroyd got into serious personal financial difficulties and was forced to relinquish his connection with the firm. Mark Oldroyd was left with the responsibility of rebuilding and managing the family business. This he did with rapid and great success, creating one of the major enterprises of the British woollen industry in the late nineteenth century. It was a giant in an industry where firms were typically very small. By the 1880s the business had a blanket works near Leeds which could make 1000 pairs of blankets a day, and four large factories in Dewsbury with a peak output of 7000 to 8000 yards of heavy broadcloth a day. By 1888 the business employed over 2000 workers on 18 acres of mill floor space and had substantial interests in two collieries at Castleford, which supplied coal for the textile works. 
In the closing decades of the nineteenth century the British woollen industry was holding its own against competition from the continental powers. Its ability to do so was largely the result of its skill in the use of raw materials, particularly the incorporation of shoddy and mungo (wool recovered from rags) in new cloth. Shoddy provided a cheap and effective raw material for the Yorkshire woollen industry, allowing costs and prices to be kept low and products to be adapted rapidly to price fluctuations. Oldroyd had a central role in this trade, not through any major technical contribution, but through the scale of his enterprise and its significance within the local economy of the Dewsbury district. He had a reputation as an independent businessman of high moral standards who paid attention to the well-being of his workforce and recognized its value to the business. He was reputed to have paid above average wages and to have maintained a very loyal and reliable labour force. He was described as being a solitary, aloof, and rather brusque figure. However, many contemporary reports indicate particular respect for him among his workforce and within the neighbourhood. His legacy to the industry and the local community was more significant than that of many of his peers. He championed the cause of woollen manufacture in national debate on industrial and commercial matters, providing evidence to the royal commission on depression of trade and industry in 1886, serving the local chamber of commerce, and acting as president of the Heavy Woollen District Manufacturers' Association from its inception in 1912 until his retirement in 1920. He extolled free trade as a major supporter of the West Riding Free Trade Federation. 
Oldroyd was associated with the Congregational church throughout his life. For sixty-three years he was a member of the United Congregational Church in Dewsbury, and he became its senior deacon. On occasions he addressed the annual meeting of the Congregational Union of England and Wales. He supported missionary work and many local charities, including the local Guild of Help and the Dewsbury Day Nursery. In 1919 he donated $10,000 towards the establishment of a children's ward at Dewsbury and District Infirmary. He remained a staunch advocate of temperance and of personal and religious freedom. His political commitment was as a stalwart Liberal, of the Gladstonian persuasion, and from 1868 he was active in the local Liberal Party organization. He served Dewsbury as a councillor, alderman, and mayor and was the first chairman of the Non-County Boroughs Association. He was made the first honorary freeman of Dewsbury in 1919. As the member of parliament for the Dewsbury constituency for thirteen years (from the by-election of 1888) he spoke infrequently in the House of Commons, but had an active involvement in committees concerned with trade and factory legislation. He was knighted in 1909. 
Oldroyd's local and national commitments gradually diverted his energies away from the day-to-day management of the woollen business, which was left to the other directors, but he remained firmly in control of the policy of the firm until his retirement. He resigned his life directorship in 1913, but continued as chairman until 1920. His wife died in 1919, and the following year he married Annie Jane, the daughter of a Gainsborough merchant, Richard Pattison; she died in 1926. Oldroyd died suddenly from a seizure on 5 July 1927 at the home in Goathland, Yorkshire, to which he had retired. He was buried in Batley on 8 July. His surprisingly small estate of $93,124 was left mainly for the benefit of the workpeople, past, present, and future, of his firm. 


@@@@@


doc= 48090


Ostrer, Isidore (1889-1975), financier and film producer, was born in the East End of London on 17 June 1889, the third surviving son of Nathan Ostrer (died 1932), a jeweller's salesman, and his wife, Francesca 
(Fanny; died 1932)
. His father had left Ukraine to escape antisemitic persecution in the 1870s, and came to England via Paris, where he met his future wife. Isidore was the most outstandingly intelligent of the six Ostrer children; the film actor James Mason later said that the five brothers had one opinion and one brain between them ('The Guardian', 9 July 1996). 
Ostrer began work as a stockbroker's clerk in the City of London. On 31 March 1914 he married Helen Dorothy, daughter of Lloyd Spear-Morgan, a solicitor, and granddaughter of the high sheriff of Carmarthenshire. The couple had six children. Ostrer was turned down for service in the army because of health reasons, but prospered sufficiently to set up the Lothbury Investment Corporation in 1919 and Ostrer Brothers Merchant Bank (with two of his brothers, Maurice and Mark) in 1921. 
In the 1920s Ostrer and his brothers were responsible for a number of company flotations, the most important of which were Amalgamated Textiles in 1920 and the Gaumont-British Picture Corporation in 1927. The prospects opened up by the first 'Cinematograph Films Act' and the coming of the 'talkies' encouraged Isidore to assume direct control of Gaumont-British. In August 1929 he became chairman, with Mark as vice-chairman and Maurice joint managing director. 
Having created a circuit of over 350 cinemas, Ostrer turned his hand to film production. The old Gaumont studio at Lime Grove, Shepherd's Bush, was rebuilt and Ostrer encouraged his production chief, Michael Balcon, to make big budget films which would appeal to an international audience. Most ambitious of these was an adaptation of Leon Feuchtwangler's 'Jew Suss' (1934) starring Conrad Veidt, Benita Hume, and one of Ostrer's three daughters, Pamela. However, the American market proved resistant to British films, substantial losses were made, and in 1937 Gaumont-British's production activities were severely curtailed. 
Ostrer had encouraged American investment in Gaumont-British as early as 1929 when William Fox bought a substantial (though not, as he had thought, a controlling) interest in the company. In 1936 another deal was planned with the brothers Joseph and Nicholas Schenk -- the heads respectively of Twentieth Century Fox and MGM -- but it was disrupted by a hostile counterbid by John Maxwell of the rival Associated-British cinema circuit. In October 1941 Ostrer sold his shares to J. Arthur Rank, though it was not until 1944 that the conflicting interests in the corporation were sufficiently reconciled for Rank to assume complete control. 
His first marriage having ended in divorce, on 27 April 1933 Ostrer married Marjorie, daughter of John William Ernest Roach. Because of his second wife's tuberculosis, Ostrer moved to South Africa; but his Jewish background and radical views made it difficult for him to condone a white supremacist society. He returned to England, but remained in touch with his wife, an actress and model, and their adopted daughter. Isidore Ostrer published two books on economics, 'A New International Currency' (1921) and 'The Conquest of Gold' (1932), displaying an idiosyncratic but strikingly progressive approach similar in spirit to that of J. M. Keynes. He also published two books of poetry, and was fond of telling people that money was only important to him in so far as it permitted him to write and paint. 
Although Ostrer had divested himself of his film interests, he was not ready to retire, and he reinvolved himself with the textile industry. Since the launch of Amalgamated Textiles in 1920 he and his brothers had retained a twenty-three per cent stake in the company (which long since had been renamed Illingworth-Morris). Ostrer quickly built this up to over fifty per cent and took control of the company, attempting over the next twenty-four years to make it the dominant force in the woollen textiles industry. Guided by Ostrer's economic theories, Illingworth-Morris used its profits to expand by buying up its rivals. This policy was misguided, and by the time of Ostrer's death the company had become an unwieldy giant, supplying vestments to the papacy and tennis-ball cloth to Dunlop, but ill-equipped to withstand the harsh economic climate of the late 1970s and early 1980s. Ostrer's daughter Pamela Mason, the film actress, inherited his dominant shareholding in the company. 
Isidore Ostrer's progressive views extended from economics to health and lifestyle. He believed that the secret of longevity lay in fasting -- sometimes for as long as thirty days -- and drinking only water. He was disappointed in his expectation that he would live until he was 130, but he managed to lead a healthy and active life until shortly before his death from cancer at the age of eighty-five on 3 September 1975 at his home, Hills End, Titlarks Hill, Sunningdale. 






@@@@@


doc= 48091


Parkinson, Sir Albert Lindsay (1870-1936), builder and contractor, was born on 24 February 1870 at Hastings Place, Lytham, Lancashire, the second of the four sons in the family of seven children of Jacob Parkinson (died 1902), joiner, and his wife, Mary Anne Hall, who later ran a boarding-house in Blackpool. He left school at fourteen to join his elder brother working with their father, who had moved the family to Blackpool in 1873, and had built up a joinery business, registered as Jacob Parkinson & Co. in 1877, working from a small shed in Central Drive, Blackpool. As the business expanded into the building trade, the Parkinsons built a sawmill and joinery works to supply timber for their projects, and moved into the new premises in Kent Road in 1896, the year in which Albert Parkinson took control of the company. After the death of Jacob Parkinson in 1902, it became a limited company, with Albert Parkinson as managing director. 
With his brother William in charge of the day-to-day running of the business, Parkinson soon established a reputation for getting things done quickly and on time. Taking advantage of the rapid development of Blackpool as a holiday resort, he built the Talbot Hotel in seven weeks, and after he had built the Theatre Royal, Newcastle upon Tyne, in six months, the company won contracts for more theatres, including the Princes Theatre in London, also built in six months, in 1905, and the interior of the Lyceum. He also built several roller-skating rinks, including one in Paris. He opened offices in Newcastle in 1902, and London in 1905, and in 1911 won his first major contract, to build the new asylum at Whalley for Lancashire county council, completed in 1914 at a cost of $1 million. In 1905 the company built the Blackpool racecourse, the first time it had used reinforced concrete in construction. Parkinson's first wife, whose name is not known, died about 1908 and on 21 February 1911 he married his second wife, Margaret ('b'. 1886/7), daughter of Jackson Robert Singleton, a corporation official and one of Parkinson's partners. He had three sons from his first marriage and one from his second. 
During the First World War the Blackpool works supplied shell boxes and joinery for the war department, while Parkinson won contracts to build two aerodromes in 1916 and 1917, and to extend others. During the war he developed the Parkinson-Kahn reinforced concrete house, which he used in several large housing estates in Lancashire and other parts of the north in the 1920s. The firm also built office blocks in London, including Aldwych House (1920-21); the Poland Street garage (1924), the first in Britain to be built with a circular ramp; cinemas such as the Odeon, Temple Fortune, London (1929); the Miners' House in Blackpool (1924-7); the Collegiate School for Girls, Blackpool (1928); and Oddendino's Hotel, Regent Street, London (1927-8). As well as a number of industrial buildings such as the new fish dock in Grimsby (1930-34), the firm undertook road-building contracts, including a section of Western Avenue in London (1929-33), the Barnet by-pass (1928-9), and, most importantly, the Liverpool and East Lancashire Road (1929-33), 25 miles of arterial road between Liverpool and Manchester, the largest new road project ever undertaken in Britain. Government contracts included new RAF aerodromes at Bicester and Heyford (1926-7) and the headquarters of the Royal Corps of Signals at Aldershot. At the same time Parkinson bought several local businesses in Blackpool, including Louis Tussaud's waxworks, and expanded into the ownership of breweries and hotels elsewhere. In 1927 he split the company into two, separating the building and contracting side of the business from the property management side. 
Although the headquarters of the company was in London, Parkinson remained closely involved in local activities in Blackpool. A member of the town council from 1905 to 1919, he was mayor of Blackpool from 1916 to 1919, and served as MP for Blackpool from 1918 to 1922, as a coalition Unionist. After he was knighted in 1922, he changed the name of the company to Sir Lindsay Parkinson & Co. Ltd. He declined a baronetcy in 1934. 
Parkinson claimed to be the first person in Blackpool to own a private motor car, and his interest in flying led him to organize the country's first aviation meeting in Blackpool in 1909. A keen sportsman, he played for the South Shore Football Club in 1885, and later for Blackburn Rovers as an amateur, and had several offers from league clubs to turn professional. He also played cricket for Blackpool from 1890, and for a number of years took a team to Ireland. In 1924 he and his brother William gave Blackpool a cricket ground and pavilion which later became the county ground, and at his death he was chairman of the Blackpool United Football Club and president of the cricket club. In the 1920s he became a successful greyhound owner, and from 1929 a less successful racehorse owner. He also built up a large art collection, which included the Romanov imperial Russian art collection. 
Sir Lindsay Parkinson died on 3 February 1936 at his home, Royal Bank, Preston Old Road, Marton, Blackpool, and was buried in Marton cemetery on 8 February. He was survived by his wife. He had transformed a small local business into a major national company, but after the Second World War it lost its leading role in the building industry, and was sold in the early 1970s. 


@@@@@


doc= 48092


Pasold, Eric Walter (1906-1978), textile and clothing manufacturer, was born in Fleissen, in the Austro-Hungarian empire (after 1918 it became Plesna, in Czechoslovakia), on 19 June 1906, the eldest of the four children of Max Walter Pasold and his wife, Berta, 'nee' Geipel. The family, Lutheran and German-speaking, had long been connected with textiles. Eric Pasold was educated at a state school in Fleissen and a textile college in Asch. His involvement in the family business took him on visits to England, and in 1932 he bought a site near Slough and built a small knitting factory. His younger brother, Rolf, joined him, and from 1932 to 1939 they shuttled between England and Czechoslovakia, running both the new venture and the old family firm. The brothers identified themselves with Britain by becoming naturalized British subjects in 1936 and 1937. The Slough business specialized in children's knitted clothing marketed under the trademark Ladybird. Output rose during the war and soared thereafter, and the communist take-over in Czechoslovakia in 1948 ensured that the family enterprise, by then extremely successful, was concentrated in Britain. 
In 1957 Pasolds became a public company, though almost all the capital remained in family hands. Problems of marketing, management, and succession loomed, however; the much expanded firm needed something other than the old techniques of family direction. Eric, always the dominant partner in the business, sought a link with one of the big textile groups. The outcome was that in 1965 he sold 54 per cent of the Pasold equity to Coats Paton Ltd. He joined that company's board but resigned after three years. In 1971 Coats Paton bought the remainder of the Pasold equity. 
Pasold's approach to business was strongly influenced by the political upheavals of his lifetime. In his twenties he found himself a citizen of a new country whose language he did not speak and whose nationalistic aspirations he did not share. The original family business came to be controlled by the Nazis after Hitler's annexation of the Sudetenland in 1938; a decade later it was confiscated by the communists. Pasold's business success sprang from a combination of technical expertise, an eye for markets, a search for efficiency in an integrated plant, and a tough management style. Characteristically, he conducted much of his international commuting in the 1930s piloting his own aeroplane. During the war he served on numerous textile industry committees. Disillusionment set in during the 1960s; England, he believed, was succumbing to socialism. Devoted to free enterprise, adventurous and individualistic, he had little love for the interventionist ways of trade unions, civil servants, and governments generally. 
Pasold had a strong personal interest in the history of textiles and especially of knitting. In 1964 he established the Pasold Research Fund, and in 1968 a lectureship in textile history at Nottingham University was financed. His services to exports were recognized by an OBE in 1961, and his work in education by an honorary MA from Nottingham University in 1977. 
In 1969, with his health deteriorating and having sold all his British assets, Pasold retired to Switzerland. He died at 51 Haldenstrasse, Lucerne, on 5 January 1978. 


@@@@@


doc= 48094


Paton, Alexander Allan (1874-1934), cotton merchant and broker, was the only son of the five children of Alexander Allan Paton (1837-1904) and his wife, Marie, the daughter of John Crowshaw of New York. His father was a successful Scottish-American cotton merchant who had emigrated to the United States about 1860 and during the American Civil War worked for the United States mail railroad, initially as a conductor. After the war he became general freight agent of the Memphis and Louisville railroad, but then in 1868 established a cotton marketing firm with branches in St Louis, Memphis, New Orleans, and Liverpool. R. G. Dun's Memphis agent reported in 1875 that Paton 'st[an]ds well with the Trade and Banks. Does an extensive business and is a shrewd and ever pushing man.' 
These firms did well, and by the early 1880s they were worth in America somewhere between $150,000 and $200,000. The Liverpool branch was managed by Paton's elder brother, Andrew Brown Paton (1833-1913), who, after private school and London University, had been a Congregational minister, but had retired from the ministry in 1869 on account of ill health. In 1889 Alexander Paton senior returned to Liverpool and established his own firm of Paton, Maclaren & Co. He managed the Liverpool branch, while George S. Maclaren took care of the Memphis branch. By 1900 this firm had become one of the largest cotton importers in Liverpool. A. B. Paton's firm also grew. After he retired in 1902, Andrew Vaughan Paton, A. A. Paton's nephew, succeeded, and in 1917 became president of the Liverpool cotton exchange. Alexander Paton junior therefore grew up in a rising Liverpool cotton marketing family. 
When his father returned to England in 1889, Alexander Paton entered the Leys School, Cambridge. He joined his father's new Liverpool firm in 1892, and became a partner in 1898. In 1899, having learned the trade, he was sent out to manage the firm's purchasing operations in Memphis. He returned to Liverpool in 1903 and took over the business with a capital of about $20,000 from his father, who died in 1904. Barings' Liverpool branch reported: 'There is every reason to suppose the... firm will continue to be well and prudently conducted.' The firm indeed did well and in 1911 had branches in Liverpool and Memphis and also in Dallas, Hillsboro, and Sulphur Springs, Texas. Barings provided Paton Maclaren with credits. The firm purchased cotton in the southern USA, hedged it in New York, shipped it to Liverpool, and sold to a circle of Lancashire mills. 
Paton quickly rose in the Liverpool cotton trade. He was a director of the Liverpool Cotton Association from 1907 to 1910 and was on the council of the British Cotton Growing Association. When the First World War broke out in August 1914, the Bank of Liverpool appointed him as one of two cotton directors to help restore confidence. The war ended normal peace-time operations, but Paton was able to use his commercial experience well. From 1915 to 1918 he worked in the contraband department of the ministry of blockade in the British embassy in Washington. In 1917 he advised the Balfour mission to the United States on the blockade. He declined an offer of an OBE for his work in 1918. He was at the Versailles peace conference in 1919 as adviser 'in charge of the Establishment at the Hotel Majestic', for which he was made a CB in 1920. 
Paton re-entered the cotton trade after the war, but there is little information about the firm's activities. Generally Liverpool firms never recovered their pre-war position. Instead American firms such as Anderson Clayton dominated the trade, establishing buying agencies in the southern states and selling direct to continental European spinners. In Britain, however, the cotton trade was so large and varied that the Liverpool cotton exchange and Liverpool brokers remained vital intermediaries. Paton became vice-president of the cotton exchange in 1925 and president in 1926. He was also a member of the New York cotton exchange. He found additional new interests especially in the important financial institutions in Liverpool that had originally been created to service the cotton and other trades. 
Paton continued to serve as director of the Bank of Liverpool and was deputy chairman from 1922 to 1929 and chairman from 1929 to 1934. While he was deputy chairman, the bank merged with Martins. When he became chairman he opened a new head office and reformed the bank's management. He also served on a bevy of insurance companies. He joined the board of the Royal Insurance Company in 1910 and became deputy chairman in 1924 and chairman in 1930. He was also chairman of the Liverpool and London and Globe, and a director of the Thames and Mersey, the Legal, and the British Foreign and Marine Insurance companies. 
The cotton trade at that time provided many of the civic leaders in Liverpool. The elder Patons were strong believers in practical social reform. A. A. Paton senior served as a Liberal on the council, A. B. Paton was a generous philanthropist, and another brother, Dr John Brown Paton, was first principal of Nottingham Congregational college. The younger Paton also served as a Liberal on the Liverpool council, representing Sefton Park in 1911. On the council his main interests were as treasurer of the Unemployed Fund and president of the labour inquiry sub-committee which investigated unemployment. After the war he became an important supporter of the voluntary hospitals in Liverpool. He was president of the Royal Southern Hospital and on the board of the Liverpool Hospital for Consumption. He proposed that the Liverpool hospitals should merge to gain economies of scale. Then, as in America, high fees paid by the wealthy could subsidize services for the poor. 
Paton never married, but found many other interests. Aside from public service he played cricket and golf and was a member of the Royal Clyde Yacht Club. In 1928 he purchased 'Lulworth', a fast racing cutter in which he was once able to defeat Sir Thomas Lipton's 'Shamrock V' at Cowes. Paton died at his home, The Rocklands, Thornton Hough, Bebington, in the Wirral, on 27 June 1934, aged sixty, still holding many offices. All the managers of Martins Bank and the leaders of the insurance companies, the hospitals, and the cotton trade attended his funeral in Liverpool on 30 June. Paton was a quiet but effective man. Contemporary comments reveal that, despite a reserved and sardonic exterior, he privately earned affection for many generous acts. His estate in Britain passed largely to his sisters and their descendants. He also left assets in America. 


@@@@@


doc= 48097


Pearson, Sir James Reginald (1897-1984), motor vehicle manufacturer, was born on 17 November 1897 in Dudley, Worcestershire, the son of George Henry Pearson, a fender moulder, and his wife, Annie, 'nee' Stringer. He attended a local infant school after which he moved to Park demonstration school, and later to Dudley higher elementary school. When he was fifteen he took up a machining apprenticeship at Bullers Ltd of Tipton with attendance at evening classes. During the First World War he joined the Royal Flying Corps but was withdrawn to do essential war work, taking up a post at the national projectile factory in Dudley. He became unemployed after the war and in 1919 travelled to Luton to seek work, eventually finding a position at Vauxhall Motors. His first position was as a centre-lathe turner in the machine shop. He was to remain at Vauxhall for the next forty-three years, rising through the ranks to a seat on the board. In 1925 he married Nellie Rose Vittery (died 1977), a draper's daughter; they had one daughter. 
Pearson became a foreman in 1927, and two years later was again promoted, to area manager. He then progressed rapidly when his potential senior managerial qualities were recognized by the newly appointed managing director, Charles Bartlett, who in 1934 promoted him to assistant production manager, beginning a working relationship which spanned the following twenty years and encompassed the enormous expansion of the company through peace and war. 
In 1939 Pearson was promoted to the crucial position of production manager, and became a key figure in the wartime production changeover from cars to Bedford army trucks, Churchill tanks, and other war material. Both as assistant and as production manager Pearson was in close contact with production workers and, having risen from the shop floor himself, felt a close affinity with them. In his managerial philosophy he recognized that close involvement with the workforce to foster good industrial relations was essential for co-operation and high productivity. The implementation of these aims was embodied in the group bonus system, which had been introduced in the 1920s. His aim was to make time-and-motion measured operations comfortable for employees and to ensure a reasonable bonus for each group of workers. Such a system, he felt, encouraged team effort and a harmonious working atmosphere, and, together with the close working relationship between managers and the workforce, was, he believed, responsible for the comparatively untrammelled industrial relations at Vauxhall up to the 1950s. 
In 1942 Pearson was made factory manager and became the supremo of wartime production at the Luton plant. Despite air raids and bombing, which frequently disrupted production, his capable management resulted in a smooth return to work and the fulfilment of ordnance contracts which often meant working under great pressure. In 1946 he was appointed a director of Vauxhall and in 1950 made OBE in recognition of his service to British industry in peace and war. In 1953 he was appointed executive assistant to the managing director, and in 1958 he became deputy chairman. He was knighted in the following year, and retired from Vauxhall in 1962. 
Sir Reg, as he was known to his friends, led an active life in retirement, becoming lord lieutenant of Bedfordshire, chairman of Dawley New Town corporation (1963-8), and vice-president of the Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents. The diversity of his other interests can be gauged by his membership of the Glyndebourne Festival Society and the English-Speaking Union, and his fellowship of the Royal Horticultural Society. He never lost his affection for Vauxhall and retained strong connections with it until his death. Living in nearby Harpenden he was called upon to act as guest speaker at numerous company functions, and was life president of its recreation club. He died at 220 Old Bedford Road, Luton, on 17 March 1984. 


@@@@@


doc= 48098


Peddie, James Mortimer, Baron Peddie (1905-1978), co-operative movement activist and politician, was born on 4 April 1905 in Hull, one of the six sons of Crofton Peddie, a colour-works labourer, and his wife, Ethel, 'nee' Whisker. He was educated at St Paul's Church of England School and Hull Municipal College, and then studied at the London School of Economics, where he took day and evening classes on the general course in 1927-8, supporting himself by part-time night work. He returned to Hull to work as a lecturer in economics at Hull Technical College and then as a lecturer in economics and industrial administration at Hull College of Commerce until late 1939. In Hull Peddie was active in both the trading and the political sides of the local co-operative movement. In 1931 he married Hilda Mary Alice, daughter of J. E. Bull, a fish merchant; they had two daughters and a son, Ian James Crofton ('b'. 1945). Between 1940 and 1945 Peddie worked for the ministries of Food and Information and was appointed MBE in 1944. 
Jim Peddie was a major co-op business figure between 1945 and 1965. He was a director of the Co-operative Wholesale Society (CWS) Ltd from 1945, and vice-chairman of its board from 1961 to 1965. For the same period he was a director of the Co-operative Permanent Building Society and also of the Co-operative Insurance Society, of which he was vice-chairman of the board. Writing in the 'Co-operative News' on 19 April 1978, William Richardson, a lifelong friend and leading co-operator, recalled that Peddie 'never hesitated to initiate or take up a challenge. On the CWS board he was fertile of ideas and at times impatient that the federation was not making a great impact on the nation and the co-operative movement'. 
Peddie's career as a co-operative businessman was closely linked with his involvement in co-operative and wider politics. He was the first person from the business side of the movement to become chairman of the Co-operative Party, a post he held from 1957 to 1965, a high point in its history. He firmly ensured that the Co-op movement's interests were safeguarded when the Labour Party sought in 1957 to limit the number of candidates sponsored by the Co-op. He was president of the Co-operative Union in 1958 when he chaired both the May annual congress and a special November congress to consider the report, largely written by Anthony Crosland, produced by the independent commission of inquiry into the effectiveness of co-operative production and marketing chaired by Hugh Gaitskell. Although Peddie spoke up vigorously for 'efficiency and progressive management', little was done. 
During his years as chairman of the Co-operative Party, Peddie became a national figure and spoke at major labour movement meetings. He strongly supported Gaitskell's leadership of the Labour Party. While the Co-operative Party conferences supported unilateral disarmament Peddie bluntly told political audiences that he was 'a supporter of multilateral disarmament and could not support the unilateralist point of view'. He was created a life peer in 1961. After Gaitskell's death in 1963, Peddie became known as a supporter of George Brown -- so much so that when Brown, as minister of economic affairs, set up the National Prices and Incomes Board in 1965, Peddie became one of its full-time members, resigning from his co-operative business positions as well as the chair of the Co-operative Party. He succeeded Aubrey Jones as its chairman in October 1970 until its abolition on 31 March 1971. Under his chairmanship the board completed work on ten cases, including low pay, the prices, profits, and costs of food distribution, London Transport's fares, and solicitors' remuneration. He led joint parliamentary delegations to Sweden (1965) and Finland (1968) and in 1974 served on the Council of Europe. 
Peddie had a reputation for being a tough negotiator and a very blunt Yorkshireman. A historian of the Co-operative Party wrote, 'Peddie is a character about whom few can be neutral -- one either admires him considerably or dislikes him intensely' (Carbery, 53). Richardson, in his obituary in the 'Co-operative News', observed that he had been 'a bonny fighter for policies and principles that he believed in and he fought to win'. Peddie died on 13 April 1978 from bronchopneumonia and cancer at Epsom and Ewell Cottage Hospital. He was survived by his wife, son, and one daughter. Roy Hattersley, then secretary of state for prices and consumer protection, gave the address at his memorial service on 24 May 1978. 


@@@@@


doc= 48099


Perkins, Francis Arthur (1889-1967), diesel engine manufacturer, was born on 26 February 1889 at Clifton Villa, Park Road, Peterborough, Northamptonshire, the second of the three sons of John Edward S. Perkins, who became managing director of Barford and Perkins Ltd, makers of agricultural machinery, and his wife, Margaret Charlotte, 'nee' Long. He was educated at Lindley Lodge preparatory school (1899-1902), Rugby School (1902-4), and Gresham's School, Holt (1904-7), and went up to Emmanuel College, Cambridge, in 1907, leaving with a pass degree in mechanical engineering in 1910. 
A career in agriculture was always likely, given his background, and Perkins initially rented a farm in Hertfordshire. On the outbreak of the First World War he volunteered, and was commissioned in the army, serving in the 34th divisional company of the Royal Engineers in the Dardanelles, Palestine, and Egypt. In 1915 Perkins, who was commonly known as Frank, married Susan Gwynneth Gee, daughter of Hugh Roberts Williams, a government inspector. They had one son and three daughters. Perkins was demobilized in 1918 with the rank of major and worked for Lawes Chemicals Ltd before joining the family firm at the Queen Street ironworks in Peterborough. 
Barford and Perkins was one of fourteen firms to join the Agricultural and General Engineers (AGE) group, a holding company formed in 1919 on the initiative of Thomas Aveling and Frank Garrett to enable leading British manufacturers of agricultural machinery to compete against American rivals in the world market by rationalizing production and centralizing sales. In the 1920s Barford and Perkins was developing roadrollers powered by petrol engines, and in 1928 Perkins moved to the leading British manufacturer of steamrollers and steam traction engines, Aveling and Porter Ltd of Rochester, another AGE member, as works director and vice-chairman; in the same year the two companies formed a joint roller manufacturing company. Perkins became involved in the development of a four-cylinder high-speed diesel engine to power agricultural tractors made by Garretts of Leiston, also a member of AGE. A Garrett tractor, with an Aveling and Porter Invicta diesel engine, was exhibited at the Smithfield Show and at the World Tractor Trials in Wallingford in 1930, and in 1931 it broke the world non-stop ploughing record in a ploughing marathon organized by the Oxford University Institute of Agricultural Engineering, ploughing for 977 hours. But the project was halted in 1932 when AGE went bankrupt and was disbanded and its companies were sold off individually. 
Aveling and Porter and Barford and Perkins were sold together, and a new firm of Aveling and Barford Ltd began manufacturing at Grantham. Perkins bought the development and production rights on the Invicta engine and started his own company, F. Perkins Ltd, to continue the development of a lightweight high-speed diesel engine at the Queen Street works in Peterborough, which had closed at the end of 1931 but which still belonged to his father. With Charles Chapman, former head of engineering at Aveling and Porter, as chief engineer, and three former employees of Aveling and Porter, he was testing the first Perkins engine, the four-cylinder Vixen, by the end of 1932. This became the Wolf series, and was accepted by Commer Cars Ltd at the end of 1933 to power Commer trucks. 
Perkins drove from Peterborough to Perth in a Hillman Wizard fitted with a Perkins Fox engine, at a fuel cost of one-eighth of a penny per mile, in 1933, and from Helsinki to Moscow in 1934, and in 1935 a racing car fitted with a Wolf engine broke or set six world records for diesel at the Brooklands circuit. However, the main demand for diesel engines at this point was for commercial vehicles. Diesel engines were not only cheaper to run, but they could cope with heavier loads than their petrol equivalents, and the firm converted many trucks and vans from petrol to diesel for its customers. It was five years before the company started to make a profit, following the success of the first six-cylinder diesel engine, the P6, which came on to the market in 1937, and could be used to power boats, trucks, vans, and industrial machinery. Sales rose from $7006 in 1933 to $206,320 in 1939. Shortly before the outbreak of the Second World War, the Air Ministry commissioned F. Perkins Ltd to provide engines for air-sea rescue launches, and during the war these made up the bulk of the company's production. 
After the war the world demand for diesel tractors and commercial vehicles grew, and the Perkins P6 became the most popular engine, with customers including Ford UK and Massey-Harris of Canada. The company moved to a new factory at Eastfield, outside Peterborough, in 1947, and turnover grew from $1.25 million in 1946 to $9.35 million in 1951. In 1951 F. Perkins Ltd launched itself as a public company. Although it continued to expand during the 1950s, with overseas plants and sales and service outlets in France, Spain, India, and Brazil, and a turnover in 1956 of $21.5 million, problems were developing. Customers began to think about manufacturing their own engines rather than buying from Perkins, and at the same time competitors were producing lighter-weight, more economical engines. 
Too late, Perkins put more money and time into research and development rather than being content with the success of the P6, but the new design, the R6, was developed too quickly and was not properly tested, leaving dissatisfied customers. Following the closure of the Suez Canal in 1956 and the subsequent loss of markets in India and the Far East, the value of sales fell by a third in 1957, and for the first time Perkins incurred losses, of $319,000. Following a report prepared by Perkins's deputy, Monty Prichard, which recommended amalgamation as the only way forward, a deal was made with Massey-Ferguson, one of its biggest customers, at the beginning of 1959. Massey-Ferguson bought all the shares in F. Perkins Ltd, which became a subsidiary and continued to produce engines in Peterborough. Production grew from 77,000 engines a year in 1959 to 250,000 in 1963. Perkins remained as chairman until 1962, when he was elected honorary president. 
In 1961 Perkins's first wife died, and in 1965 he married a widow, Maud V. Dixon, daughter of Robert L. Andrews, a retired army captain. Perkins's interests -- shooting, fishing, and sailing -- were those of a country gentleman, and he owned and managed a small arable farm. He was president of the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders (1956-7), high sheriff of Cambridgeshire and Huntingdonshire (1956-7), and president of the Peterborough Agricultural Society from 1961, and was made an honorary freeman of the City of Peterborough in 1962. Perkins died on 15 October 1967 at his home, Alwalton Hall, near Peterborough. 


@@@@@


doc= 48100


Perry, Percival Lee Dewhurst, Baron Perry (1878-1956), motor vehicle manufacturer, was born on 18 March 1878, at Bristol, the third son of Alfred Thomas Perry, clerk, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Revd Henry Wheeler. He won a scholarship to King Edward VI's Grammar School, Birmingham, which he attended from 1889 to 1894. His earliest jobs were in a bicycle shop and a solicitor's office, but his hope of studying law was frustrated by lack of funds. At the age of seventeen he sold his stamp collection to pay for a rail ticket to London, where he was employed by the motoring pioneer Harry Lawson. He married in 1902 Catherine, daughter of John Meals, postmaster, of Hull. They were childless. 
In 1903 Perry was commissioned to write a technical report on the earliest Ford Model A cars imported to Britain. He was afterwards involved in an agency importing Ford cars, and during 1906 visited Detroit to meet Henry Ford. It was Perry who envisioned Ford's manufacturing motor vehicles outside the USA for sale across the British empire and Europe. He raced the company's cars, and in 1907, on the occasion of the motoring exhibition at Olympia, published 'The O.K. Verses', a pastiche on 'Umar Khayyam, giving a boisterous account of contemporary motoring and its cars, racing drivers, chauffeurs, makers, and touts. After being appointed in 1909 to run Ford's new showroom in London he organized a national network of exclusive dealers and superintended an assembly plant at Trafford Park which began production in 1911. The Ford Motor Company (England) Ltd was established in that year as a wholly owned subsidiary of the Detroit business, and proved indispensable after the imposition of McKenna import duties in 1915 enforced the need for the company to manufacture in Britain. Perry broke trade unionism at his factory and imposed job mobility, time wages, and direct managerial control over production, while paying his workers more than was usual in his sector. Ford's mechanized chassis assembly system, which was inaugurated in 1914, was the first in Britain. 
Perry worked without remuneration as deputy controller of the food production department of the Board of Agriculture and Fisheries in 1916, and then as director of the agricultural machinery department of the Ministry of Munitions in 1917-18. He was deputy controller of the mechanical warfare department and director of traction at the same ministry in 1918-19. His wartime experiences gave him a rooted objection to state controls over manufacturing. He was appointed CBE in 1917 and knighted in 1918. 
After the war Henry Ford wanted to run British operations from Detroit despite Perry's determination to direct all European business himself. Their differences could not be reconciled, and in May 1919 Perry resigned. He led a group which in April 1920 bought the Slough motor car repair depot (comprising 600 acres and 15,000 vehicles) from the Ministry of Munitions for $3.35 million. This property was converted into a model manufacturing estate based on Trafford Park. In 1922 Perry resigned as chairman and managing director of Slough Estates (although remaining on its board) having acquired the lease of the 300 acre Isle of Herm, in the Channel Islands, from the writer Compton Mackenzie. Perry lived for several years on Herm, where with his wife he wrote 'The Island of Enchantment' (1926). 
Ford's American managers having failed in Britain, he offered Perry the chairmanship of the newly formed Ford Motor Company Limited in 1928. Perry accepted, taking responsibility for Ford's new Dagenham factory, which was the largest automobile factory in the world outside the USA and by 1936 produced over 94,000 vehicles annually. The Dagenham plant in 1932 launched an 8 hp model costing $120 which was the first Ford car specifically made for European markets; it sustained the business through the depression. There was much less interference from Detroit under this new regime, and the policy of using British rather than American managers was soon vindicated. Perry in 1928 devised a new European strategy, which was, however, frustrated by deteriorating political and fiscal conditions. He superintended factories and assembly plants in Eire, Denmark, Spain, France, the Netherlands, Belgium, and Germany, and maintained an English suzerainty over Ford's European operations. 
Perry, who was interested in agriculture, instituted an experiment in co-operative farming, the Fordson farms, at Boreham in Essex during the 1930s. He was business adviser to the minister of food in 1939-40, and held outside directorships with the Firestone Tyre and Rubber Company and the National Provincial Bank. He enjoyed literary dabbling, and wrote 'New Songs' (1925) and 'The International Balance of Trade' (1932), as well as pamphlets advocating 'free enterprise' published by the Individualist Bookshop in the early 1940s. In 1943 he led the formation of the propagandist body Aims of Industry, of which he was first president. 
Perry was stocky and genial-looking; heavy spectacles masked granite grey eyes of a rather designing hardness. He was keen, energetic, independent-minded, and personable, with an aptitude for selecting and motivating his staff. In the motor industry he was considered urbane and even intellectual; by contrast, the memoirs of his literary neighbour Sir Compton Mackenzie depict him as vulgar, pawky, penny-pinching, and complacent. He received an honorary LLD from Birmingham University in 1937 and was awarded several foreign decorations. He was raised to the peerage in 1938. Having retired from Ford in 1948, Perry died on 17 June 1956, at New Providence Island in the Bahamas, when his peerage became extinct. His wife died in the Bahamas in December 1956. 


@@@@@


doc= 48101


Petter, Sir Ernest Willoughby (1873-1954), engine and aircraft manufacturer, and his business partner, 
The ironmongery firm of Harman and Gillett in Yeovil had been given to James Petter by his father as a wedding present. He later acquired the Yeovil Foundry and Engineering Works, making agricultural machinery, and also started the Nautilus Stove Company, making grates and kitchen ranges, much in demand after Queen Victoria had installed Nautilus fire grates at Balmoral Castle and Osborne House. Percival, Percy as he was generally known, became manager of the foundry in 1895, and he, in particular, became interested in the new horseless carriages being designed on the continent. With the help of the foreman he designed and built a single-cylinder 1 hp oil engine and installed it in a chassis built by the local carriage builders, Hill and Boll. Demonstrated in 1895, this was one of the first vehicles propelled by internal combustion to be produced in Great Britain. The Yeovil Motor Car and Cycle Company Ltd was established and twelve motor cars were built following the appearance of a technical description of the Petter horseless carriage in 'The Engineer' in 1896. But the company did not prosper, and the Petters decided to concentrate on small oil engines for agricultural use. The Petter Patent Oil Engine (1.25 hp) was exhibited at the Royal Show in 1899, and in 1901 the brothers bought the business from their father, and it was reorganized as James B. Petter & Sons Ltd, with Ernest and Percy Petter as joint managing directors. The range of oil engines was expanded, with power outputs from 1.25 to 22 hp, and in 1902 they produced an agricultural tractor powered by a 30 hp oil engine. 
After its registration as a public company in 1910 Petters Ltd continued to expand and by 1912 had over 500 employees and was producing 1500 engines a year. The existing foundry could not cope with this level of production, and in 1913 a site was found at West Hendford, west of Yeovil, for a new foundry and a garden village for the employees, which became known as Westland. 
With the outbreak of the First World War the demand for engines increased but in 1915 Ernest Petter, the new chairman of Petters Ltd, persuaded the board to put its manufacturing resources at the disposal of the government. As a result, Petters was asked to build aeroplanes, beginning with an order for twelve Short seaplanes. Westland Aircraft Works was founded as a subsidiary of Petters with R. A. Bruce, former managing director of the British and Colonial Aeroplane Company in Bristol, as managing director. The seaplanes were followed by Sopwith fighters and Airco De Havilland bombers, and nearly a thousand planes were built by the end of the war. By then Westland Aircraft Works had built up a design office and converted neighbouring farmland into an airfield in order to be able to test planes, and when the DH 9 bomber was found to have shortcomings in its design, Westland's drawing office was asked to redesign it to enable it to take the American Liberty engine. The success of the DH 9A bomber brought Westland recognition. 
Meanwhile Petters, with Percy Petter as managing director, continued to make engines together with shell cases and gun carriage equipment. After the war, it concentrated on the production of diesel and petrol engines, which were used throughout the world as agricultural engines, electricity generators, and marine engines. A venture in association with Vickers, Vickers Petters Ltd, in Ipswich, formed to produce large diesel engines and managed by Ernest Petter, was less successful. 
The Petters continued to regard the aircraft works very much as a sideline to the oil engine business. Westland Aircraft Works, like other aircraft manufacturers, suffered after the war from the cancellation of military contracts. The design office produced seventeen new designs but none was accepted until 1927, when the works won the government contract for the Wapiti, a replacement for the DH 9A. More than a thousand Wapitis had been sold all over the world by the early 1930s, including more than five hundred to the RAF, and they accounted for most of the Westland production between 1927 and 1934. In the early 1930s exports of Petter oil engines fell, and it was the aircraft works which kept the firm going. 
In 1935 the Petters decided to separate the engine and aircraft businesses completely, and Westland Aircraft Ltd was registered as a public company, with Petters Ltd retaining half the shares. In 1938, John Brown Ltd, the Clydeside shipbuilding firm, bought a controlling interest in Westland. Ernest Petter, who had been knighted in 1925, resigned as chairman of Petters Ltd and Westland Aircraft Ltd, sold his aircraft shares to Associated Electrical Industries Ltd, and emigrated to Victoria, British Columbia; Percy Petter resigned as vice-chairman. The Petters Ltd engine business was sold to Brush Electrical Engineering Ltd, and moved to Loughborough. 
Ernest Petter stood unsuccessfully for parliament three times, twice contesting Bristol North as a Conservative, in 1918 and 1923, and St George's, Westminster, in a 1931 by-election. He published a number of pamphlets on industrial economics, including 'The Disease of Unemployment and the Cure' (1925). He was president of the British Engineers' Association from 1923 to 1925, and was knighted after organizing the engineering section of the British Empire Exhibition at Wembley in 1925. In 1907 he married Angela Emma (died 1934), daughter of Henry Petter of Calcutta; they had three sons, the eldest of whom, (William) Edward Willoughby Petter, became an aircraft designer, and one daughter. After her death he married, in 1935, Lucy Ellen, daughter of Charles Hopkins of Portsmouth. Petter returned to England from Canada in 1953, and died at his home, Bywell, Spencer Road, New Milton, Hampshire, on 18 July 1954, survived by his wife. 
Percy Petter, in contrast to his extrovert brother, was shy and withdrawn, and a teetotaller. A devout Anglican and a member of the Christian Brethren, in 1919 he was one of the 'Pilgrim preachers' who preached on a journey between Bath and London. He retained his interest in invention, and as late as 1932 designed a desk calculating machine, the Petometer, which sold in small numbers. Percy Petter was active in local politics, and was mayor of Yeovil 1925-7. He married in 1904 Emily Kennan of Dublin, daughter of one of the selling agents for Petter engines in Ireland. They had two sons and four daughters. After her death he married Ruth Penson-Harris. Percy Petter died at his home, Heather Lawn, Seaway Avenue, Christchurch, Hampshire, on 15 September 1955, and was buried at Yeovil cemetery on 19 September. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 48102


Percival Waddams Petter (1873-1955), were identical twins born on 26 May 1873 in High Street, Yeovil, Somerset, the third and fourth of the fifteen children of James Bazeley Petter, ironmonger, of Yeovil, and his wife, Charlotte Waddams, 'nee' Branscombe, of Bristol, the daughter of a rubber merchant. They were educated at Yeovil grammar school, and after two years at Mount Radford School, Exeter, they left school in 1890 at the age of sixteen to start apprenticeships in their father's business. 


@@@@@


doc= 48104


Pickersgill, William (1847-1936), shipbuilder, was born on 28 August 1847 in Dock Street, Monkwearmouth, Sunderland, co. Durham, the eldest child of William Pickersgill (1823-1880), shipbuilder, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Bedingfield. His father, who had been apprenticed at Laing's yard, founded a shipyard, Pickersgill and Miller, at Southwick about 1851, and launched his first vessel in 1854. By the time the partnership was dissolved in 1863, the yard had completed more than thirty ships. Pickersgill was apprenticed to a timber yard before working as a carpenter and then as foreman in his father's yard. He became a junior partner in the firm in 1869. On 24 August 1870 he married Ellen (1845/6-1932), daughter of Joseph Lincoln of Southwick, a farmer and butcher. 
A traditional shipyard, Pickersgills built forty-six wooden ships, and it was the last firm on the Wear to do so, launching 'Coppername', the last wooden ship to be built on the Wear, in 1880. The firm had bought more land to extend the yard, in order to be able to build iron ships, but it was while working on its first iron ship that Pickersgill's father was killed in an accident at the yard in 1880. Pickersgill took over as managing director, joined by his two younger brothers, Charles (died 1895), and Frederick, who left the firm when it became a private company in 1907. Their first iron ship, SS 'Carmargo', was launched later that year. Pickersgill managed to keep the yard going during the depression of 1885-7, and by the end of the 1880s had changed from iron to steel construction, following the lead of the Clyde shipyards. 
The reputation of Pickersgills in the 1880s rested on its sailing ships. Its iron clippers and steel barques competed with the fastest in the world. Pickersgills built several iron clippers for the copper ore and nitrate trade based on Liverpool, including the 'Chepica' (1885), later commemorated by John Masefield in his poem 'Ships' as 'The 'Chepica', a steel grey lovely barque'. In the early 1890s they built large sailing ships for the Liverpool trade in coal from New South Wales. The 'Andhorina' (3400 tons) was the largest sailing ship ever built on the Wear. Pickersgills also perfected the clipper for the Newfoundland fishing grounds. The last tall ship built on the Wear, the 'Marguerita', was launched by Pickersgills in 1893. 
Pickersgills also continued to build steamers for many leading shipping lines, and later specialized in cargo steamers. In the twenty years since taking over the management of the yard, Pickersgill succeeded in increasing the annual tonnage of ships built from 3907 tons in 1881, when the yard was eleventh of the Wear yards in tonnage, rising to fifth place in 1900, with 20,845 tons. Although his son William John Pickersgill took over as managing director in 1907, when the firm became William Pickersgill & Sons Ltd, Pickersgill continued to play an active role at the yard until 1915. 
Pickersgill was a member of the Bethesda Free Church, an independent evangelical church. A keen cricketer, he also played football for the Sunderland Cricket and Football Club. He died at his home, 3 The Avenue, Sunderland, on 29 May 1936; he was survived by four sons. The company merged with Austins in 1954 to become Austin and Pickersgill Ltd, which became North East Shipbuilders Ltd after the nationalization of the shipbuilding industry in 1977. It survived until 1988 and the closure of the last shipyards on the Wear. 


@@@@@


doc= 48109


Samuel Radcliffe Platt (1845-1902) was born on 1 July 1845, the second son of John Platt and his wife, Alice. He began work at the age of seventeen, organizing the exhibition of the firm's machinery at the International Exhibition of 1862 in London. He proved to be the only one of the seven brothers with a decided mechanical bent and passed through every department of the works between 1862 and 1865. He became a member of the Manchester Royal Exchange in 1866, a partner in Platt Bros. in 1867, a director in 1868, and, in 1872, the youngest chairman in the firm's history. He maintained the impetus given by his father by making his own tours of world markets between 1865 and 1876 and by extending the influence of senior managers and leading hands. He continued his father's policy of appointing the best managers as directors and from 1872 he made the best foremen into shareholders. He doubled the number of hands from over 6000 in 1872 to 12,000 in 1902, when Howard and Bullough of Accrington employed 6000, Dobson and Barlow of Bolton 4000, and Asa Lees of Oldham 2500. The process of vertical integration was completed with the extension of operations into coalmining in 1874, so safeguarding the interests of the firm against any recurrence of such a 'coal famine' as that of 1872-3. The boom of 1873-5 in the formation of joint-stock spinning companies was financed in part by well-paid mechanics, who ensured that orders for machinery were placed with local firms. That boom transformed Oldham into 'the metropolis of cotton spinning' ('Oldham Express', 24 June 1882) or 'Plattington' (B. Brierley, 'Out of work', 'Tales and Sketches of Lancashire Life', 6, 1885, 5-12). It also sealed the doom of the spinning trade of north-east Lancashire, so that the cotton industry segregated its main processes between the spinning district of south Lancashire and the weaving district of north Lancashire. The firm's profits averaged 11.4 per cent over the thirty years from 1873 to 1902 and its dividends 18 per cent, reaching a relative peak of 37 per cent in 1876-7. The firm established a research department, probably in the 1870s, and manufactured, between 1866 and 1902, four successive models of the new ring spinning frame, becoming in 1888 the largest manufacturers in the world of that machine. Platt Bros. supplied an estimated 36 per cent of the world's increment in cotton spindleage installed between 1880 and 1913. It supplied machinery to the first spinning mills in Venice in 1882, in Turkey in 1888-90, in Guatemala in 1889, in Hanoi in 1893, in Shanghai in 1894, in Cochin in 1895, and in Alexandria and Canton (Guangzhou) in 1900. After 1878 its rivals ceased in chagrin to display their products at international exhibitions. Platt Bros. were the sole British exhibitors at Milan in 1881 and at Chicago in 1893. 
S. R. Platt became a member of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers in 1867 and of the Iron and Steel Institute in 1873. He subscribed for 2500 $10 shares in the Manchester Ship Canal Company and served as a director of the company (1885-91), believing that 'the trade of the country must centre in Manchester' ('Oldham Standard', 21 Feb 1891). He carried the company's directors on his yacht, 'Norseman', on the inaugural voyage of 1 January 1894 along the new waterway. He was elected president of the Oldham chamber of commerce on its formation in 1883 and as such became an 'ex officio' director of the Manchester chamber of commerce. He was elected president of the Oldham District Engineering Trades Association and served as one of Oldham's three representatives on the executive board of the Engineering Employers' Federation established in 1896. Emerging victorious from the strikes of 1897 and 1897-8, he was elected in 1900 to the council of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers. He fostered the development of technical education and commemorated his father by establishing at Owens College the Platt exhibitions first awarded in 1875, and by enlarging the Oldham School of Science and Art between 1878 and 1881. He became the fourth and last member of the family to join the borough council (1882-92), twice serving as mayor, in 1887 and 1888. He became a county magistrate in 1873, a borough magistrate in 1886, and in 1897 deputy lieutenant and high sheriff of Lancashire. He remained a staunch Liberal, a dedicated Unionist from 1886, a stalwart free-trader, and a confirmed Anglican. 
Samuel Platt also developed interests in cricket, music, drama, and foreign travel. He became chairman of the Werneth cricket club from its foundation in 1864, bringing to Oldham an All-England eleven in 1866 and the Australian eleven in 1878 on their first overseas tour. He organized works orchestras in 1865 and 1873 and works choirs in 1878 and 1884. He also gave employment in the works office to the bass baritone Charles Walton, the future father of the composer William Walton (1902-1983). In 1892 he became a founder member and trustee of the Royal Manchester College of Music as well as founder and president of the Oldham School of Music. From 1895 he served as president of the Oldham Orchestral Society, established in 1891. He married into the Irish gentry, taking as his bride on 28 May 1884 Helen May Hodder Roberts (1863-1926), with whom he had two sons and two daughters. In 1897 he became the first member of the family to appear in 'Who's Who' as well as in a dictionary of musical biography, which omitted any mention of his business interests. On 5 September 1902 he died on board his yacht in the Menai Strait, at the age of fifty-seven. He was commemorated in the S. R. Platt scholarship at the Oldham School of Music. 
Platt Bros. dated its foundation from the years when operations were transferred from Dobcross to Oldham and enjoyed a singularly long lifespan of 161 years (1821-1982). It also established a worldwide reputation, the name of Platt being transliterated into Russian as 'Blatt' and into Japanese as 'Pratt'. More than any other firm it supported the role assumed during the nineteenth century of 'Cotton as a world power' (J. A. B. Scherer, 'Cotton as a World Power', 1916, 1969). In the process it generated wealth for its mechanics and its managers as well as for its owners. Howard and Bullough may well have supplied the industry's first millionaire in the person of John Bullough (1838-1891), who left $1,228,184. The Platts had, however, enlisted the co-operation of their managers as Howard and Bullough had singularly failed to do and reduced the shareholding of the Platt family in Platt Bros. from 82 per cent in 1867 to 52 per cent in 1881. As a direct result of that policy the firm itself paid an average annual dividend of 9.5 per cent (1903-74). 
S. R. Platt became the last of the Platts to reside at Werneth Park and to chair the board of directors. He was succeeded by John Dodd (1837-1912), the last of John Platt's lieutenants, under whom production reached its all-time peak level during 1906. The firm experienced two distinct climacterics, in the 1890s and in the 1920s. During the 1890s its golden age came to an end as it was surpassed in size by other firms both at home and abroad. Dividends reached an absolute peak in 1891-2 and profits fell off sharply from 1894 as competition increased in the market for ring frames from Tweedale and Smalley of Rochdale, as well as from Howard and Bullough. Exports of looms reached their peak in 1879 and exports of spindles in 1896. The vast works had by then become too large to be managed efficiently but still underwent extension down to 1929. In the First World War the firm converted its operations to the manufacture of munitions, but the Platt family suffered the loss of four members of the rising generation. The elder son of S. R. Platt, John Rookhurst Platt (1890-1916) of Youlston Park, Barnstaple, Devon, was killed at Ypres on 27 March 1916 and Henry Evelyn Arthur Platt (1884-1916), younger son of John Harold Platt, was killed on 15 May 1916. The only son of Sydney Platt, Lionel Sydney Platt (1885-1917) of St Bruno, Sunningdale, Berkshire, died on 13 April 1917. Maurice Cedric Platt (1892-1918), the younger son of S. R. Platt, died on 26 November 1918, fifteen days after the armistice, at the British legation, The Hague. 
It may be doubted whether the fallen officers would, had they survived, have enlisted in the service of the firm. It remains certain, however, that the last member of the family to chair the board was a nephew of John Platt. His sister Louisa Platt (1835-1904) had married William Hall (1825-1887) in 1862 and with him had three sons and one daughter. Her eldest son, Henry Platt Hall (1863-1949), joined the firm in 1880 at the age of seventeen and became a director in 1897, succeeding as chairman from 1920 to 1924. He acquired a Welsh estate at Pentreheylin Hall in Montgomeryshire, became an eminent numismatist and left $138,777, where his father had left only $10,353. His son William Reid Hall (1893-1968) became an engineer and served as a director (1924-62); he also acquired an estate in Montgomeryshire, at Melyniog, and left $70,240. On two occasions, in 1924 and again in 1930, the directors had to recruit a chairman from outside their own ranks. The firm lost the support supplied by an expanding domestic market after the cotton industry reached a climacteric in 1926. It paid no dividends during the black decade of 1927-36, became in 1930 a constituent of Textile Machine Makers Ltd, and passed under the administration of the Prestons, Sir Walter R. Preston (1875-1946) and Sir Kenneth H. Preston (1901-1995), who served as chairman respectively from 1930 to 1946 and from 1946 to 1967. 
The three Platts who had created the firm did not, unlike Henry Platt Hall, enjoy a long span of life. They did, however, enhance the status of the family by enormously enlarging its resources. In consequence advantageous marriage alliances could be formed with such families as the Radcliffes and the Duncufts of Oldham and then with the Sykeses and the Wellesleys. It proved much more difficult, however, to provide for the succession to the management of the firm. Only one of Samuel's brothers, James Edward Platt (1856-1928), took an active part in the family business. He became a member of the Manchester Royal Exchange at the age of nineteen in 1876. Then during the 1890s he abandoned business in favour of sport, and acquired a villa at Cannes. Samuel's older brother Henry Platt (1842-1914), after the same education as Samuel, continued it with three years at St John's College, Cambridge. Henry remained a large shareholder in the firm, but never joined the board and spent most of his life outside Oldham, becoming a landowner and a banker. In 1872 he inherited the estate at Gorddinog and became a keen farmer, acquiring a special interest in the breeding of cattle. He built up a fine herd of Welsh black cattle, founded the Welsh Black Cattle Society in 1873, and published 'Notes on Black Cattle' in 1885. He became high sheriff of Caernarvonshire in 1873 and of Anglesey in 1879. He was twice mayor of Bangor in 1883-5 and in 1884 became a colonel of the fourth battalion of the Royal Welch Fusiliers. He became CB in 1897 and was granted arms in 1899, after the sale of the Bryn-y-Neuadd estate, but suffered a defeat in the Caernarfon election of 1900 at the hands of Lloyd George. He was elected principal grand master of the north Wales freemasons in 1905 and left $407,540. His son, Major Eric James William Platt (1872-1946), was educated at Eton College and Trinity Hall, Cambridge, and became high sheriff of Anglesey in 1907. He was the only Platt to survive active service in the First World War and became the last member of the direct male line of the Werneth branch of the family. On the death of his widow the Gorddinog estate was sold in 1956. 
John Platt's younger sons received a more conventional education than their two eldest brothers. Apart from James Edward, they became country squires and developed an interest in country sports, so reverting to the rural traditions of the family. Frederick Platt (1849-1906) became a country squire at Barnby Manor near Newark in Nottinghamshire. He acquired interests in four other counties, becoming a major in the Duke of Lancashire's Own yeomanry, deputy lieutenant for Herefordshire, JP for the North Riding of Yorkshire and Nottinghamshire, and high sheriff and JP for Kesteven, Lincolnshire. In 1883 a grant of arms was made to him and to other descendants of his father, the family motto appearing as ''virtute et labore''. He left $243,696, while his son Algernon John Frederick Platt (1875-1912) left $10,233. Joseph Arthur Platt (1852-1904) was educated at Harrow School and St John's, Cambridge, and resided at Brocton Lodge in Staffordshire. John Harold Platt (1855-1912) was also educated at Harrow and St John's. He married into the Irish gentry in 1879 and became a JP and deputy lieutenant for Kent as well as a JP for Anglesey. He died in Belgravia. Sydney Platt (1861-1937) was educated at Eton College and Balliol College, Oxford. He lived at Bryn-y-Neuadd until 1898 and became high sheriff for Caernarvonshire in 1888. He moved to the south of England after 1898 and finally retired to the Villa Beatrix in the winter resort of Pau in the far south of France, with its congenial clutch of English institutions including the 'cercle anglais', a fox hunt, a racecourse, and a golf club. He left $567,295. 
S. R. Platt bequeathed $200,000 apiece to his two sons and $100,000 each to his two daughters. The lives of the daughters followed divergent patterns: one achieved high social status, the other great material wealth. The elder daughter, Angela May (Angel) (1885-1973), married in 1909 Francis Cecil Brownlow (1870-1932), younger son of Baron Lurgan (Burke, 'Peerage'); she had two sons and one daughter and left $339,786. Her daughter, the Hon. Daphne Angela Brownlow (1917-1995), also married into the Irish gentry when she became the bride in 1942 of Lieutenant-Colonel George Edward Brian Brazier-Creagh of the Royal Artillery. She died on 29 July 1995, leaving $1,475,344. The younger daughter of S. R. Platt, Nancy Quenelda Platt (1895-1993), proved to be the longest-lived member of the whole family. She never married but developed an avid interest in the history of the Radcliffe family. Her grandmother Alice had been a Radcliffe and two of her aunts had married Radcliffes. Her interest may have been influenced by the decision of her elder sister to prefer the style of Angela May to her given name of Alice, which was that of her grandmother. That interest culminated in the formal change of her own name, presumably by deed poll, from Platt to Radcliffe-Platt. She died at the age of ninety-seven on 28 April 1993 and was interred at Witherslack, Grange-over-Sands, Cumbria, where her favourite aunt, Emily Bertha Radcliffe (1858-1950), had resided until her death at the age of ninety-one, leaving $5345. The estate of Nancy Quenelda Radcliffe-Platt totalled $8,235,256: in real terms, when adjustment has been made for the depreciation in the value of the pound, it was much less than the estate left by John Platt in 1872. S. R. Platt himself enjoyed a belated commemoration in 1990 when a public house and restaurant named the Samuel Platt was inaugurated on the new Salford Quays by John Camilleri, an enthusiast for the Manchester Ship Canal and an admirer of Samuel Platt. In 1973 the head offices of the firm at Werneth had become one of the first listed buildings in the borough of Oldham. 


@@@@@


doc= 48110


John Dane Player (1864-1950), tobacco manufacturer, was born at Beastmarket Hill, Nottingham, on 29 November 1864. His younger brother, 


@@@@@


doc= 48111


William Goodacre Player (1866-1959), tobacco manufacturer, was born on 23 January 1866, also at Beastmarket Hill. The two sons were educated at Nottingham high school. Although John Player died before his sons reached their majority, he left a carefully prepared will in which two executors, Joseph Bright and a local bank manager, were appointed to oversee the business until the boys became twenty-five. When the business was incorporated in 1895 the sons became joint managing directors. At this time the share of the market held by John Player & Sons Ltd was substantially smaller than that enjoyed by W. D. and H. O. Wills Ltd; and six years later, when the prosperity and independence of the British tobacco industry was threatened by the powerful American Tobacco Company, thirteen leading firms federated to form the Imperial Tobacco Company. Players's share of the capital was reckoned at only $600,000 out of $11.9 million. Nevertheless, J. D. Player was one of the original directors of the combine and was also appointed advertising manager to the parent company. His younger brother became a director following the first board meeting. Imperial Tobacco 'leaned heavily on the advertising skills of Messrs J. D. and W. G. Player' (Alford, 275), but this did not prevent the Players brands competing with those of other members of the group, nor apparently did it dilute the quality of the Nottingham firm's advertising. 


@@@@@


doc= 48112


Gundeville, Hugh de (d. 1181?), administrator, appears to have come from Somerset or Gloucestershire. He is first recorded in 1147, when, styled constable, he witnessed a charter of Robert, earl of Gloucester (died 1147); shortly afterwards, with the same designation, he was one of the hostages for the observance of the treaty between Robert's son, Earl William (died 1183), and Roger, earl of Hereford (died 1155). In 1166 he was said to hold two fees of William de Mohun, lord of Dunster in Somerset, and also to have been enfeoffed with land on Earl William's demesne. In 1153 or 1154 he attested a charter of Duke Henry for St Augustine's, Bristol, and became an important royal servant when the duke became king as Henry II. In 1155/6 he had the custody of lands at Langport and Curry Rivel in Somerset, and from 1157/8 he accounted for the royal manor of King's Somborne, Hampshire. Ten years later he had custody of the honour of Basing, also in Hampshire, accounting for the aid due from its knights towards the marriage in 1168 of the king's daughter Matilda (died 1189). 
Gundeville frequently witnessed charters of Henry II and undertook a variety of duties for him, including maintenance for the royal family, purchase of horses for the king's use, and works in Winchester. In 1164 he was one of the envoys sent to the pope to put Henry II's case against Thomas Becket. In 1170 he acted for the king on Becket's return to England, and was one of the 'tutors' of Henry, the Young King, with whom those wishing to approach the latter on Becket's behalf had to negotiate. In the following year he accompanied Henry II to Ireland, and was one of the men to whom the king entrusted the custody of Waterford, but he had left Ireland by the end of 1172, and attended the king's Christmas court at Caen. 
From Easter 1170 Gundeville had been sheriff of Hampshire, an office he held until Michaelmas 1179. He was also sheriff of Northamptonshire from Michaelmas 1174 to Easter 1177, and of Devon from Easter 1177 to Michaelmas 1179. In 1176 and 1177 he was a justice itinerant in the midlands, and sat in the exchequer afterwards to settle business arising from the eyre. He was rewarded with pardons of scutage in Gloucestershire, Sussex, Devon, Dorset, and Somerset. He held the honour of Arundel apparently through his wife, Agnes de Falaise, with whom he was a benefactor of Boxgrove Priory, Sussex. He also gave revenues in Winchester to Goring Priory, Oxfordshire. He probably died about Easter 1181, because he ceased to hold lands entrusted to him by the king half way through the financial year 1180-81. He appears to have been disposing of his estates before his death, since at Michaelmas 1181 his nephews Hamelin and Robert de Gundeville were proffering to have seisin of lands at Ham in Somerset and Tarrant Gunville in Dorset, as they had had it before the death of their uncle Hugh. 


@@@@@


doc= 48113


Ralph fitz Stephen (d. 1202), courtier and administrator, was probably the son of Stephen, a royal chamberlain who appears on the 1156/7 pipe roll. With his brothers William and Eustace he served Henry II in a number of capacities, in a manner characteristic of the 'familiares' of that king. He frequently witnessed royal charters, often designated king's chamberlain; his deed confirming an agreement between Worcester Cathedral priory and the nuns of Westwood in 1178 uses this title. From Michaelmas 1171 to Michaelmas 1175, throughout the period of baronial rebellion, he was sheriff of Gloucestershire (his brother William accounted on his behalf each year, and then replaced him as sheriff, holding office until 1189). He received money from Henry II's chamber from 1156/7 onwards, and was concerned with the maintenance of the king and royal family, including provision for Queen Eleanor in her captivity in the last decade of Henry's reign. In 1170 he was among the 'tutors' of Henry, the Young King, with whom those wishing to approach the latter on Thomas Becket's behalf had to negotiate. In 1176 he was appointed a justice for the eyre in the south-west, and served as an assessor of tallage and a justice in several counties from then until 1190. He handled provisions and building works for the Carthusians at Witham (a royal foundation), accounted for Glastonbury Abbey's scutage in 1187/8, when the monastery was in the king's hand, and was probably the Ralph fitz Stephen who kept Guildford Castle in Surrey in 1192/3. Between 1176 and 1190 he accounted for the forest of Chippenham in Wiltshire, and from 1176 to 1197 for Sherwood Forest in Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire. 
Ralph's rewards were as typical as his services. From 1161-2 onwards he received pardons of scutages in several counties, under both Henry II and Richard I. In 1163 he received Winterbourne and Wapley, both in Gloucestershire, from the king, in 1189/90 making fine to have tenure of them for life -- Richard I confirmed him in them at Messina in April 1191. In 1184 or 1185 he married Maud, or Matilda, de Cauz, widow of Adam Fitzpeter and heir of half the Nottinghamshire barony of Shelford. John, count of Mortain, the future king, granted the hereditary forestership of Sherwood to Ralph, Maud, and their heirs. The returns to the 1166 inquest into feudal subtenancies had recorded him as holding one fee of the bishop of Exeter, half a fee of the honour of Totnes, and two fees of Hubert Fitzralph's honour of Crich in Derbyshire. He gave a fee held of Robert Fitzrandulf in Blackwell, Derbyshire, as a marriage portion with his niece Idonea to William Fitzrandulf. He was a benefactor of Haverholme Priory, Lincolnshire, Darley Abbey, Derbyshire, Gloucester Abbey, and Stanley Abbey, Wiltshire -- his grants to the latter were also confirmed by Richard I in 1191. Ralph fitz Stephen died on 25 July 1202. When Maud died, in 1224, John of Birkin, the son of her first marriage, made fine to have her lands and forest custody; in 1225 the king took homage from Richard of Gloucester, perhaps the son of Ralph and an earlier wife, as Ralph's nearest heir for Winterbourne. 


@@@@@


doc= 48114


Bernard (fl. 1123-1130), administrator, came from a middle-ranking thegnly family in Cornwall, which, like many others, had suffered loss of estates and social depression as a result of the Norman conquest. His grandfather, Theodulf, had a modest estate in Cornwall; his father, Ailsi, was a master builder in Launceston; and his uncle, Brihtric, in 1084 held five small manors in Cornwall of the count of Mortain. Bernard had two brothers: the elder, Jordan, was a landowner near Launceston, and the younger, Nicholas, was another royal scribe. Both Bernard and Nicholas seem to have been unmarried, and Bernard may, like Nicholas, have become a canon of the Augustinian priory of Merton in Surrey. Jordan, however had a son, Peter of Cornwall, who became prior of Holy Trinity, Aldgate, and early in the thirteenth century made a vast collection of visions and revelations which throw some light on the family's history. 
As a 'scriptor' ('scribe') Bernard clearly set himself, with the help of his royal master and of his chancery superiors and colleagues, to recover through litigation what ancestral lands he could; and he also benefited from rewards from his patrons and satisfied clients. Some of his acquisitions probably went with his office. In Cornwall he had the land and revenues of Gisulf, the royal scribe who had perished in the wreck of the 'White Ship' on 25 November 1120, a man whom Orderic Vitalis despised. The grant by the king of a vacant plot in Launceston Castle, 'between the well and the chapel', was for his lodgings. He also held in the castle the land of Ranulf the chancellor and an orchard. In Winchester he had a tenement in Parchment Street, which Count Stephen of Mortain relieved of a rent-charge, and in Busket Lane, by grant of William de Pont l'Eveque, sheriff of Hampshire and royal chamberlain, two tenements which had belonged first to the clerk Anselm and then to Gisulf. As he does not appear by name in either of the Winchester surveys, Bernard's tenure of property there probably lies between 'c'.1110 and 1148. In London, similarly, by confirmatory charter of John of Bayeux, a royal chaplain and bastard son of Bishop Odo of Bayeux, he held land and houses which had been Gisulf's, together with a soke held of the archbishop of Canterbury, free of all service so long as he served in the royal court. But if he left the court he had to make specified payments to John. Further afield he had land in Northamptonshire, and in Normandy at Mathieu near Caen. 
As scribes are not itemized in 'Constitutio domus regis', a guide to the royal household prepared for King Stephen, it would seem that the compiler regarded them as of relatively lowly status. But Bernard was on occasion, perhaps usually, attended by two or three squires, and he is always found in the company of ministerial colleagues of high standing in the court. He and his brother Nicholas divided their wealth between their eldest brother's family, the church of Launceston, and Merton Priory. Launceston inherited 'inter alia' the silver-embossed ivory writing-case with silver ink-horn they had used in the king's service. The church converted it into a reliquary. Although he attested none of Henry I's charters, Bernard was a rather grand royal domestic servant. 


@@@@@


doc= 48115


Fitzgerald, Henry (d. 1170x74), administrator, was, like his brother Warin, probably the son of Robert Fitzgerald, whose service of eleven knights' fees King Stephen conferred in 1141 upon Geoffrey de Mandeville, earl of Essex (died 1144), which suggests that the Fitzgeralds were already major landholders in Essex at that date. There is also good circumstantial evidence that these Essex Fitzgeralds were part of a wider family network that included the Fitzgeralds of Wales and Ireland, a major baronial family descended from Gerald of Windsor, constable of Pembroke (died 1116). Shortly after his accession in 1154 Henry II granted or confirmed to Warin and Henry Fitzgerald a major portion of the honour of Eudo Dapifer (died 1120), comprising more than fifty knights' fees in Essex, Kent, and East Anglia. Land to the value of at least a further $74, at Sawbridgeworth, Herefordshire, and elsewhere, associated with the same honour of Eudo Dapifer, was held by Warin and later by Henry Fitzgerald as a mesne tenancy from the Mandevilles for the service of four knights. In addition, in 1154 the king granted Warin land to the value of $34 in the manor of Sevenhampton, Wiltshire, henceforth to serve as a hereditary serjeanty linked to a newly created chamberlainship in the exchequer of receipt, and further land worth $37 at Sparsholt and Cricklade on the Berkshire-Wiltshire border. Warin Fitzgerald first appears together with his brother Henry as witness to the foundation charter of Walden Abbey issued by Geoffrey de Mandeville some time between 1139 and 1144, and from at least 1147 occurs as a leading member of the household of the future king, Henry II. He is recorded in possession of the chamberlain serjeanty at Sevenhampton from at least 1155 until 1160, although his brother Henry appears to have succeeded to his lands at Sparsholt and Cricklade as early as 1157-8. On his deathbed, at some time between 1157 and 1160, Warin bequeathed land worth $6 at Sawbridgeworth to the monks of Bury St Edmunds where he chose to be buried. 
Warin's lands and office passed to his brother Henry Fitzgerald, who had witnessed several charters of Henry, duke of Normandy, before the latter became king. In 1154 or 1155 Henry Fitzgerald was serving as the steward of Geoffrey de Mandeville, son of Earl Geoffrey, and between 1157 and 1160 was in receipt of $50 a year from the royal manor of Sutton Courtenay, Berkshire. He continued in royal service from 1154 until his death, being active at the king's chamber as early as 1157-8, appearing with the title chamberlain in the year 1159-60, and in possession of the chamberlain serjeanty at Sevenhampton from 1160 onwards. He witnessed numerous royal charters in both England and France, and is said to have officiated as constable of Wallingford shortly after 1154. Between 1164 and 1171 he accounted as farmer for the royal manor of Wycombe in Buckinghamshire, and between 1166 and 1168, during the exile of Archbishop Becket, he acted as paymaster to the king's knights in Kent. In 1168-9 he served as royal justice there, levying fines. 
Fitzgerald was dead by the exchequer year 1173-4, when his lands at Sevenhampton and Sparsholt were accounted to his son. He was buried at Reading Abbey, to which he had earlier granted land at Sawbridgeworth. He also granted an annual measure of corn to Southwark Priory and land to the monks of Rochester, for the soul of his brother Warin. With his wife, Matilda de Chesny, heir to a major estate in Oxfordshire and elsewhere, Henry had at least two sons; Warin Fitzgerald the younger ('c'.1167-1215/16), a minor at the time of Henry's death, and Henry Fitzgerald the younger ('c'.1173- 'c'.1231) who entered the service of William (I) Marshal, earl of Pembroke (died 1219). The Fitzgerald chamberlainship of the exchequer passed from Henry the elder to Warin Fitzgerald the younger, married to Alice de Courcy, a major heiress in England and Normandy. Warin, who was buried beside his father at Reading, was succeeded by a daughter named Margaret (died 1252), married first to Baldwin de Revieres and second to Falkes de Breaute (died 1226). Her heir was her son Baldwin de Revieres, earl of Devon. Thereafter the Fitzgerald chamberlainship descended to Baldwin's daughter Isabella, countess of Aumale (died 1293), who conveyed it to her steward Adam of Stratton. Adam's lands and offices reverted to the crown following his disgrace in 1289. 


@@@@@


doc= 48116


Bamburgh, Odard of (fl. c.1115-c.1133), administrator, has been identified as a son of Liulf of Bamburgh, sheriff of Northumberland between 'c'.1103 and 1116 (Round, 'Genealogist', 5.25-8), though the identification cannot be regarded as certain. An important royal servant in the north, Odard was sheriff of Northumberland by 2 February 1116, when he was one of the addressees in a writ of Henry I that ordered the restoration of lands belonging to Bishop Ranulf of Durham. Between 1115 and 1119 Henry's son, William, notified Odard that the king had granted him land for the service of three knights, and on 13 April 1121 Odard, described as sheriff of the Northumbrians, attended an assembly of northern magnates at Durham, at which they discussed Durham Priory's claim to Tynemouth. He was also one of the addressees in royal writs commanding that the monks of Tynemouth should have quiet possession of their lands (1120-33), and that they and the abbot of St Albans should have right of warren in their Northumberland lands ('c'.1116- 'c'.1126). Between 1119 and 1124 he attested Earl David of Huntingdon's foundation charter for Selkirk Abbey. Between 1115 and 1127 Odard was notified by Henry I of his gift of property to Eustace fitz John, and between 1118 and 1128 himself attested a charter of Henry I in favour of William, son of Aluric of Corbridge. He was still sheriff of Northumberland in 1130, when he was pardoned 15's'. for danegeld. 
Odard was probably the father of William fitz Odard of Bamburgh, and of William's brothers, Adam, John, and Ernald; he may also have had a daughter named Gumilda. About 1133 Henry I granted to William fitz Odard of Bamburgh all the lands that his father had held in chief (lands named in a charter of King Stephen as situated in Bamburgh and Corbridge, 'Burnulfestona' and 'Chinewallia'), which suggests that Odard was dead by then. The shrievalty of Northumberland passed to Adam, and John acquired the lordship of Embleton in Northumberland and was the ancestor of the Viscount family. 
Odard the sheriff of Northumberland may have been the same man as Odard the sheriff of Carlisle; under the Carlisle heading, the 1129/30 pipe roll records the debts of this Odard 'for the old farm of the pleas of Carlisle which belong to the shrievalty', for the same farm in the previous year (1128/9), and for the pleas of Walter Espec and Eustace fitz John. If the two Odards were one and the same, it would appear that Odard of Bamburgh held some authority over Carlisle or Cumberland generally. Another sheriff Odard, lord of Wigton in Cumberland, may or may not have been the same man as Odard the sheriff of Carlisle, and therefore may possibly be identifiable with Odard of Bamburgh. A much less likely identification is with yet another Odard, son of Hildred of Carlisle, the man who accounted for the farm of Carlisle in the 1129/30 pipe roll. 


@@@@@


doc= 48118


Wheeler, Sir Arthur, baronet (1860-1943), stockbroker and corporate financier, was born at Derby Road, Nottingham, on 18 September 1860, the son of Benjamin Wheeler, a heating engineer, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Radford. He was educated at Nottingham high school (1871-6) and spent his early business career with Simon, Meyer & Co. (later Simon, May & Co.), a rapidly growing Anglo-German merchant house which exported lace to Russia, Latin America, and other overseas markets. He was quick with figures and rose to be chief clerk. In 1896 he married Mary, the daughter of Frederick Pullman, a Nottingham JP; they had two sons and two daughters. 
In 1899 Wheeler, together with Arthur Blake, launched his own business in Leicester as Blake and Wheeler, stockbrokers. The partnership was not a member of the stock exchange and so not subject to its restrictive practices. By doing business as jobbers -- then a separate occupation -- the partners were able to buy stock and shares and to advertise for business by circulating clients (customers) or potential buyers. The partnership was dissolved in 1910, when Blake became a member of the Nottingham stock exchange (later, as Sir Arthur Blake, he was its chairman). Wheeler continued in Leicester as what was called an outside broker. 
Wheeler's success was based on his recognition that in provincial towns such as Leicester, Birmingham, and Nottingham there were many substantial shareholdings from deceased estates languishing on the market. The handful of small local brokers in such places lacked the organization to market them because they were not allowed, by stock exchange rules, to make any kind of approach to potential clients. Very often such shareholdings were in sound local industrial and commercial enterprises that were nevertheless too small to find recognition in the City of London, where stockbrokers were slow to respond to the opportunities offered by smaller companies. Wheeler conceived the idea of mailing advertisement circulars on a selective basis to people who had the specific interest to understand the value of these shares and the means to purchase them. Thus his circulars for shares in drapery stores went to drapers, for breweries to publicans, for shares in hosiery and knitwear companies to people prominent in the midlands textile industry, and so forth. The result of this careful targeting of mailshots was a high response rate, with most of Wheeler's acquisitions being taken up very quickly and few shares left over. Other entrepreneurs imitated Wheeler but the biggest of them did not do one-twentieth of his business, so there was little effective competition for him. 
Wheeler steadily built up what would now be called a large database of customers, fed by shareholders' names from the companies registration office. In the early 1920s the list topped a quarter of a million names, and by the end of the decade it had reached three-quarters of a million. With such a rapidly growing clientele, Wheeler was able to circulate prospectuses of new issues and take large shareholdings in them. His marketing strength was such that if he recommended a new share issue a buoyant sale was assured, and several investment institutions sought his imprimatur before taking large lots from the merchant banks responsible for the issue. Beechams' share issue of 1927, to take just one example, could not have been undertaken without Wheeler's backing; in the event it was oversubscribed. 
Wheeler's growing familiarity with the needs of small companies and small investors led to further developments in the 1920s. In 1924 he launched a new venture in the City of London, the Gresham Investment Trust, to make small industrial issues, and the following year the Charterhouse Investment Trust Ltd, to undertake larger share issues. The City establishment did not altogether approve of Wheeler, but the two enterprises came to be recognized as pioneers in bridging what later (1931) became known as 'the Macmillan gap' -- the absence of financial organizations with the expertise to finance smaller businesses. In this period Wheeler became chairman or a director of a number of companies that he helped to finance, including Beecham Estates and Pills (then being built up by Philip Hill), Rolls Razor, Low Temperature Carbonization, United Drapery Stores, and the British Hosiery Trust, an attempt to amalgamate Wolsey, Byfords, and several other Leicester firms. 
Wheeler was created a baronet in 1920 for his work in selling war bonds, to which he devoted his entire energy during the First World War. He found time in his long working days for public and charitable causes, and was a generous subscriber to numerous local causes. He recruited several managers of outstanding ability, some of whom maintained the momentum of his financial initiatives after 1931; in particular Sir Nutcombe Hume (1893-1967) built up Charterhouse (later Charterhouse Japhet) as a leading investment house, while John Kinross (1904-1989) used his early career experience with Gresham to develop the Industrial and Commercial Finance Corporation Ltd (ICFC), the leading post-war investment bank for small firms, later called Investors for Industry or 3 i. 
As Wheeler's business increased, he found it necessary to finance it by bank overdrafts secured by the deposit of stocks and shares. This was easy while shares held their value, but the collapse in prices in 1929 compelled the banks to call for a reduction in overdrafts or increase in collateral, at which point Wheeler became embarrassed for want of working capital. Matters came to a head early in 1931, when he had no funds to pay for a war loan conversion for which he had accepted numerous orders and payments, and he filed his petition for bankruptcy in March. In October he was tried at Leicester assizes for fraudulent conversion and gaoled for twelve months. As an undischarged bankrupt, Wheeler was unable to rebuild his business, and was forced to retire to Norfolk. He died at Home Farm, Holme next the Sea, on 20 May 1943, following a cerebral thrombosis. 


@@@@@


doc= 48121


Serocold, Claude Pearce (1875-1959), stockbroker, was born in Taplow, Buckinghamshire, on 5 July 1875, the fourth son of Charles Pearce-Serocold (1827-1904) of Taplow, and his wife, Marie Emilie Grenfell, daughter of Colonel George St Leger Grenfell. His father was then the senior partner at Reid's brewery, which he had joined as a young man. Serocold was educated at Eton College, where he coxed the Eton crew for three successive years and was president of Pop. He went up to New College, Oxford, and coxed the winning boat race crew in 1895 but he spent only a year there, coming down without a degree. His father gave him $10,000 to start his business career and he joined Rowe and Pitman, and became a member of the stock exchange in 1901. Two years later he moved to Cazenove and Akroyds. 
Before the First World War, Serocold made little impact in the City of London. He was considered by his family to be something of a playboy, and a rather raffish one at that, because of his interests in music (he played the piano) and art and his love of France (particularly Cannes), and of the French language, which he spoke well. He nevertheless had a passion for the sea and was a member of the Royal Yacht Squadron. During the war he joined naval intelligence and, as one of Captain Reginald Hall's two personal assistants from 1915, was intimately involved in the code-breaking activities which contributed so much to the defeat of the Germans. After 'moving in a rare and mysterious world' (Beesly, 315) he returned to the firm a different man and soon became much more of a figure -- and a well-respected one -- in the City. 
During the inter-war years Serocold and Charles Micklem -- in a partnership described by Lionel Fraser as the ideal one -- dominated Cazenove and Akroyds and made the firm a force in the City: 'One [Serocold] shrewd and charming, opened the door, and the other [Micklem] detailed and able, did the work' (Fraser, 207). Physically rather small, always neat and well-dressed, and generous and entertaining, Serocold was, however, more than just an opener of doors. A reliable confidant and a born diplomat, he re-established and cultivated the firm's link with Baring Brothers, and acted as personal broker to Lord Revelstoke in the 1920s. He developed useful connections with other merchant banks, including Schroders and Morgan Grenfell, and his family connections with the Smiths, a ubiquitous banking family, meant that he had cousins at Morgan Grenfell, Hambros, and other City institutions. His elder brother, Oswald Pearce-Serocold (1865-1951), had joined their father in the brewing business, which by merger in 1898 became Watney, Combe, Reid & Co., and in 1932 he became its chairman. 
Serocold's social contacts brought new business to Cazenove and Akroyds, and he attracted significant clients such as Major M. E. W. Pope, a wealthy coalmine owner, and Sir Connop Guthrie, a Suffolk landowner. The firm could depend upon both Pope and Guthrie to invest if asked. His friends included the opera promoter and hotelier Richard D'Oyly Carte, and he often played bridge with the investment manager of the Prudential Insurance Company. From 1921 he served as a director of the Savoy Hotel, and he was also treasurer of King's College Hospital. 
By the late 1930s, when he was in his early sixties, Serocold began to wind down his business life and spend less time on the firm's affairs, though he remained its senior partner until 1947. A great Francophile, he spent more and more time at his home in the south of France and thus found himself, in 1940, trapped in the German-occupied part of the country from where he was, with considerable drama, rescued. At the end of the Second World War he sold his London house in Hyde Park Gate to Winston Churchill, and in 1947, when he retired from the firm, he went to live in Monaco. He died there, in hospital, on 17 June 1959. 


@@@@@


doc= 48123


Price, Sir William (1865-1938), milk retailer, was born in Llanwrtyd Wells, Brecknockshire, the sixth of at least nine children born to William Price, a farmer, and his wife, Magdalene. His origins were humble but, like many emigrants from south Wales he was able to turn his rural skills to good effect in the dairy industry of London. Energy and organizational ability hastened Price's promotion until eventually, as Sir William, he dominated the world of milk retailing and wholesaling. 
Price first came to London in the early 1880s, and on 23 March 1886 married Sarah Harries ('b'. 1862), of Llanwrtyd, with whom he had two sons, Ivor and Tudor, and two daughters. Lacking the confidence to approach one of the large companies such as the Aylesbury Dairy Company for employment, he decided instead to set up a small business of his own. He purchased a retail dairy in west London and prospered sufficiently to add a wholesaling function, before joining John Hopkins as a partner in Great Western and Metropolitan Dairies. In 1915 Price was responsible for the formation of the United Dairies wholesale combine (comprising Wiltshire United Dairies, Dairy Supply Company, F. W. Gilbert Ltd, and others) which soon expanded into retailing and very substantially changed the face of the London milk trade. 
Price was a networker with a very wide circle of friends and contacts. His confident and determined character, coupled with his remarkable communication skills made him quite formidable. Concerned first and foremost with the broad, strategic, and often controversial issues, he delegated the everyday details to assistants, earning the nickname of 'the General' in the trade. His courage and resourcefulness were tested to the limit during the First World War when the need to supply London with milk had to be balanced against the demand for milk products by the forces overseas. Price's contribution was to organize the collection of liquid milk from an army of small producers all over the country who had hitherto been butter or farmhouse cheese makers, drawing them into the ambit of urban supply for the first time. The geography of dairying was fundamentally restructured as a result. Price was knighted in 1922 for services to the nation's milk industry. 
Ironically the wartime shortages later turned to peacetime gluts and precipitated the crisis which eventually required legislation to create the Milk Marketing Board. This might have been avoided if Price's brainchild, the national scheme for the sale and purchase of milk, had been accepted in 1929. The smooth supply of milk to the capital was always Price's prime concern and during the national strike of 1926 he was a combative chairman of the London milk (emergency) committee and London's milk controller. He organized a milk pool in Hyde Park and kept the milk flowing. 
Price played a prominent role in the various dairy trade organizations. He was president of the Metropolitan Dairymen's Benevolent Institution, a delegate at the foundation of the National Milk Publicity Council in 1920, an initiator of the United Dairies Benefit Society, president of the National Federation of Dairymen's Associations, and leader of the distributors' side of the permanent joint milk committee. He was also a justice of the peace, treasurer of a small Christian mission in Notting Hill, and for a large part of his life deacon of a Welsh Presbyterian church in Paddington. 
In the early 1930s ill health forced Sir William's retirement from active business. He died at the Royal Northern Hospital, Holloway, on 16 April 1938 aged seventy-three, after an operation for an inflamed appendix. He was survived by his wife and sons. 


@@@@@


doc= 48129


Quilter, William (1808-1888), accountant, was born on 7 August 1808, the youngest of four sons of Samuel Sacker Quilter, a farmer, and his wife, Sarah May Chapman. Little is known of his early life other than that he went to London at the age of seventeen and joined the office of one of the leading public accountants of the day, Peter Harriss Abbott. Abbott was one of the first accountants whose value was recognized by the government, being appointed a commissioner inquiring into the method of keeping public accounts in 1829. Four years later he was appointed an official assignee in bankruptcy, leaving Quilter to enter into partnership with another of his former clerks, John Ball. The new firm benefited from a continued connection with Abbott who, in his new position, was able to commission the partnership to prepare financial statements for debtors prior to their appearance in court. Quilter married Elizabeth Harriot, 'nee' Cuthbert (died 1874), in 1834 and they had three sons, including the art collector and politician Sir William Cuthbert Quilter and the art critic Harry Quilter, and two daughters. 
A major stimulus for an already well-established practice was the collapse of the railway mania in 1847, resulting in shareholder committees engaging public accountants to help them to investigate the machinations of failed companies. The most famous revelations were contained in the report Quilter, Ball & Co. was called in to prepare on the affairs of the Eastern Counties Railway Company, whose chairman was George Hudson, the Railway King. The report showed that profit had been overstated by well over $400,000: $318,144 was wrongly omitted from the debit of the revenue account, $35,315 was wrongly credited to the revenue account, and interest amounting to $84,591 was charged to capital instead of revenue. Indications of the prominent role played by the firm in the handling of insolvency work are estimates that they were responsible for 8 of the 43 cases chronicled by D. M. Evans as arising out of the commercial crisis of 1847-8 and 31 of the 147 cases arising during a corresponding crisis ten years later ('DBB', 792). As organizations increasingly took advantage of the option for companies to register with limited liability under the 'Companies Act' of 1862, Quilter began to develop in addition a substantial audit practice. This may have compensated for a diminishing involvement in liquidations, with his firm placed sixth in an analysis made of the number and value of liquidations in the hands of leading London practices in 1866 ('DBB'). Quilter was invited to give evidence to the government select committee on the audit of railway accounts appointed in 1849 where he expressed the belief that his practice was the most extensive in England. A particular feature of Quilter's evidence was his opposition to any requirement that the auditors of railway companies should be shareholders, based on the belief that this compromised their independence. The gradual replacement of the shareholders as auditor by the professional is a notable feature of the history of auditing during the second half of the nineteenth century. 
Further evidence of government recognition was the appointment of Quilter's firm to undertake a large-scale investigation of the army clothing store in Weedon in 1859 while, together with William Turquand, he was appointed by the Board of Trade as an investigating inspector under the 'Joint Stock Companies Act' 1856. 
It may well be that Quilter's heavy personal investment in railway shares -- he owned shares valued at more than $276,000 at the time of his death -- explains the fact that his firm were never permanent auditors of any of the major British railways. It is known, however, that he did hold shares in railways where his partners were auditors. Quilter also benefited from family links with some of the companies of which he was auditor. His son Sir William Cuthbert Quilter was a director of several of these companies including the National Telephone Company and Swan United Electric Light. There was also Eley Brothers, the cartridge makers, of which the young Quilter was also a shareholder and director. Important audits undertaken by the firm included that of the Hudson Bay Company from 1863, the Birmingham Joint Stock Bank from 1866, the Alliance Bank (jointly with John Sutherland Harmood-Banner) from 1869, the London Joint Stock and the Eastern Telegraph (each jointly with Deloittes) and the Bank of Australia. At the time of his death Quilter's firm audited more than seventy quoted companies. 
In addition to being a successful practitioner, Quilter may be seen as a leading architect of the British accounting profession. It was he who called a meeting at his office of nine leading practitioners in 1870 to propose the formation of an institute of accountants in London. This action was part of an endeavour to achieve chartered status and so distinguish 'chartered accountants' from others who were seen to be bringing the practice of accountancy into disrepute. The new institute was formed in December 1870 with Quilter elected its first president. It was an elitist organization, insisting on high entrance fees and demanding entrance requirements. The resulting slow rate of growth and continued failure to obtain a royal charter, together with the more rapid expansion of rival professional associations, led to growing criticism of the institute's performance and, accordingly, Quilter's leadership. He resigned his position as president in January 1877 and both his seat on the council and membership of the institute the following May. Thus, when the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales was established in 1880 and a royal charter obtained, Quilter was no longer a member. 
Many leaders of the profession passed through the office of Quilter, Ball & Co.: they included the founders of Cooper Brothers, William and Arthur; and three of Quilter's clerks became president of the institute -- Thomas Abercrombie Welton, Arthur Cooper, and J. B. Ball. However, perhaps his best-known employee in the world of business was John Reeve Ellerman who, after refusing an offer of partnership, left in 1886 to found his shipping empire. 
Some fascinating insights into the man were provided by Ernest Cooper in an obituary. Quilter is described as: 'accountant, art collector, and something of a financier. I remember attending a meeting of creditors, when Mr. Quilter walked about the room, distributing copies of the statement of affairs. He had more the appearance of a farmer than a professional man. He sold his great collection to Christie's some years before his death for a very large sum, and left one of the largest professional fortunes, if not the largest, I have ever noticed, but not, it was said, mainly earned directly from our profession. (Cooper, 555)' His notable collection of watercolours fetched $58,000 at Christies in 1875; and the value of the remaining pictures at the time of his death was $31,486. Quilter died on 12 November 1888 at his home, 28 Norfolk Street, Park Lane, London, leaving well over half a million pounds, one of the largest known estates of any Victorian accountant. 


@@@@@


doc= 48133


Rae, George (1817-1902), banker, was born in Aberdeen on 21 October 1817, the son of George Rae (1782-1867), messenger at arms, and his wife, Jean Edmond Rae (1785-1862). He was educated at the Classical and Commercial Academy, Aberdeen, then briefly apprenticed to a local lawyer. In 1836 Rae was recruited as branch accountant at the Peterhead office of the newly established North of Scotland Bank, Aberdeen, and was subsequently moved to that bank's new branches at Keith and Elgin. Rae then looked for opportunities in England and Wales, where provincial banking was expanding at a rapid rate. In April 1839 he successfully applied for the post of inspector at the North and South Wales Bank, Liverpool, at an annual salary of $130. The 'Wales Bank' was one of the more enterprising new banks, operating both in agricultural and industrial districts and claiming that it 'combined the best features of the Scotch system' (HSBC Group Archives, M139, March 1836). By 1839 the Wales Bank had opened thirteen branches, mostly in north Wales. 
Rae's abilities and his experience of Scottish branch banking soon earned him promotion. On 13 March 1841 he married Elspet Kynoch of Keith, Banffshire. In 1842 he became manager at Oswestry, Shropshire, and in 1845 he was appointed general manager of the Wales Bank at the age of only twenty-eight. Within two years, however, he faced the largest single crisis in the bank's career. In the commercial crisis of October 1847 the London money market suspended the discount of bills drawn on country banks. In Liverpool this suspension led to the failures of the Royal Bank and the Liverpool Banking Company and, on 22 October, a London newspaper reported that the Wales Bank had also stopped payment. The report was false but the panic was renewed and two days later the Wales Bank was forced to stop payments. 
In the aftermath of the crisis Rae quickly set about the reconstruction of the bank. New preference shares were issued, depositors were asked to accept postdated bills, and a number of Welsh branches were closed. These efforts allowed the bank to re-open in January 1848 and to begin a gradual recovery. In particular Rae sought new earnings from Liverpool business rather than from the branch network in Wales. 'Town branches' were opened in the Liverpool region -- an early example of suburban branch banking outside London. Rae also pioneered a savings scheme for dockers in Birkenhead, giving the bank a local reputation as 'the tradesman's bank'. These initiatives, along with strict financial controls, stabilized earnings and allowed the Wales Bank to ride the severe banking crises of 1857 and 1865. Between 1850 and 1865, when Rae was promoted managing director at an annual salary of $2000, the bank's total deposits increased fivefold to $1.5 million. 
Rae's first wife died about 1851, leaving two sons, George Bertram and Edward (chairman of the Liverpool stock exchange, 1894-1915), and a daughter, Alice. On 26 April 1855 he married his second wife, Julia ('b'. 1834/5), daughter of John Williams of Ferryside, Carmarthenshire. 
Rae's career at the Wales Bank entered its most creative phase in the 1870s. In north Wales he negotiated the take-overs of the banking firms of Williams & Son in 1873, Cassons & Co. in 1875 and the Bala Banking Company in 1877. Then, as chairman and managing director from 1873, he upgraded the bank's financial systems and managerial structure. In the downturn after the City of Glasgow Bank collapse in 1878, he also reformed the Wales Bank's investment policies and took close control over advances and cash management. The bank's total deposits increased strongly from approximately $2 million in 1870 to $6.6 million by 1890, and shareholders received dividends of 17.5 per cent throughout that period. Meanwhile the bank's business continued to diversify away from its original agricultural base towards industrial, shipping, and commercial business in the Liverpool region. 
In the 1890s Rae took a less active role in the management of the bank and he retired in March 1898. By then the bank had established a network of seventy-seven branches and held total deposits of $7.8 million, placing it among the largest provincial banks in England and Wales. The bank was acquired by the Midland Bank (now HSBC Bank plc) in 1908. 
Rae was an authoritative figure in the Victorian banking community. In 1874 he was a founder of the Association of Country Bankers, where he remained a dominant influence until his retirement. He was also a founder and trustee of the Institute of Bankers in 1879 and four years later, as a vice-president, he inaugurated an institute prize for the best essay on bank bookkeeping. In later life he remained committed to the development of the banking profession; in 1902 he established a prize in practical banking for entrants in the institute's examinations and also endowed a lectureship in banking and currency at the University College of North Wales, Bangor. 
Rae was equally active as a spokesman for banking interests. He gave evidence to the 1875 parliamentary select committee on banks of issue and in 1879 he intervened to influence the 'reserved liability' legislation which was introduced after the City of Glasgow Bank failure, providing a bridge between limited liability and shareholder risk. He urged the more widespread publication of bank balance sheets as part of this legislation, believing that 'a strong balance sheet, I feel persuaded, attracts business' (HSBC Group Archives, M222, July 1891). 
Rae's most durable influence on banking was as an author. His anonymous contributions to the 'Bankers' Magazine' in the late 1840s were published as 'The Internal Management of a Country Bank' (1850) and then reappeared (in his own name) as part of his classic textbook 'The Country Banker: his Clients, Cares and Work' (1885). This guide to practical banking, written in a direct and persuasive style, won an international reputation -- several pirate editions appeared in the USA -- and it was published in ten editions between 1885 and 1976. 
Rae was popular with staff, shareholders, customers, and other bankers. 'His dignified courtesy and kindliness were universal', a junior colleague recalled; 'he had the rare gift of placing any young man entirely at his ease and to make him feel that he counted for something' (R. O. Williams to T. B. Handley, 26 March 1930, HSBC Group Archives, Rae personal file). His portrait by Frank Holl (1884) shows a bearded figure with a relaxed, almost expansive bearing. 
Outside banking, Rae's activities and interests were more colourful than those of many contemporary bankers. In the 1860s he was prominent in two companies which attempted to exploit shale and cannel deposits in Flintshire to produce paraffin oil. These enterprises had failed by the 1870s, costing Rae heavily in time and resources. In private life -- despite poor health from the 1860s onwards -- he was an enthusiastic traveller and student of the arts. He and his family undertook tours of Europe, Russia, and the Middle East and Rae's diary of these travels was published privately in 1891. He was also a champion of the Pre-Raphaelite school of painting. He was a friend and patron of Ford Madox Brown and Edward Burne-Jones and he was especially proud of his link with Dante Gabriel Rossetti: 'I was one of the few who recognized his genius from the first' (Macleod, 18). Rae's large collection included nineteen paintings by Rossetti (notably 'The Beloved', 1863), six by Madox Brown, and twenty-six by William Davis. The Raes' home, Redcourt, Devonshire Place, Claughton, Cheshire, was designed by Edmund Kirby and built between 1876 and 1879. Rae died there on 4 August 1902 and was buried at Flaybrick Hill cemetery on 6 August. 


@@@@@


doc= 48134


Max John Railing (b. 1868), had left Germany for England in 1892 and shortly after his arrival had joined the General Electric Company (GEC) in the accounts department. GEC was then a small but expanding electrical goods business run by two Bavarians, Gustav Byng and Hugo Hirst. With his quick grasp of figures and sound business sense, Max soon won promotion at GEC. He was particularly successful at winning orders from the electricity supply companies for GEC's heavy electrical machinery, and at the age of forty-two he became general manager at the firm's London head office -- a post he retained until he was promoted to joint managing director in 1929. Max became the right-hand man of Hugo Hirst, who had emerged as the driving force behind GEC. Hirst described Max Railing as 'my alter ego' (Whyte, 143). They were not only close in business matters; in 1900 Max had married Amanda, daughter of Herman Hirsch, whose sister Leontine had married Hugo (her cousin) in 1892, the year both Leontine and Max had left Germany. Max Railing was the obvious choice as Hirst's successor, but he predeceased Hirst on 14 January 1942, at Whiteknights, Shinfield Road, Reading; he was survived by his wife. They had two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 48135


Railing, Sir Harry (1878-1963), electrical equipment manufacturer, was born on 10 December 1878, the son of Isaac Railing, a Jewish hop merchant of Munich, and his wife, Hannah, 'nee' Bing. His first name was originally Adolf, which he later changed to Harry when he settled in England. He attended Munich University and graduated as a doctor of engineering in 1901, before acquiring experience in the USA. 
Sir Harry's elder brother, 
It was Harry who succeeded Hirst, at the age of sixty-three, having joined GEC in 1905 as chief of the test room at Witton, near Birmingham. His wide American and continental engineering experience marked him out for advancement, and in 1911 he joined the board of GEC. In 1933 he married, as a widower, his second wife, (Charlotte) Clare (1895/6-1959), an architect, and daughter of Joseph Ferdinand Nauheim, a bank clerk. There were no children. Nothing is known of his first wife. In 1942 he became vice-chairman, and then, on Hirst's death in 1942, chairman, of Britain's largest electrical manufacturing enterprise. At that time, the company had a capital of $7.8 million and nearly 40,000 employees. He was well suited to GEC's immediate task of responding to the war effort and, although company profits stagnated, he directed pioneering work on radar. He was knighted in 1944 and became an OBE in 1946. 
Once the war was over, Railing greatly expanded the productive capacity of GEC to meet the booming demand for electrical goods of all kinds. Enormous sums of money were expended on re-equipment and extensions. Between 1947 and 1955, the company spent $20 million on plant and buildings alone, and in 1952 its authorized and issued capital was increased to $23.6 million. Much of the increased capital was spent on engineering, which was Harry's chief interest. A completely new generating shop with testing plant was added at Witton and opened in 1950, while at the same time a new heavy turbine shop was completed at Erith. In the mid-1950s, under Railing's guidance, GEC moved into the nuclear power field, not on a consortium basis -- the means adopted by other electrical companies -- but as an extension of its own heavy engineering interests. When GEC began winning major orders for nuclear power stations (as at Hunterston on the Ayrshire coast for $60 million) its prestige was assured, but more heavy expenditure was incurred, and the company became highly dependent on government contracts. 
Harry Railing has been described as essentially a fine engineer, and his commitments outside GEC reflected that fact. He was president of the Institution of Electrical Engineers in 1944, for example, and served on the councils of several other professional bodies. But it has also been said that 'he did not have the broad outlook needed in the chairman of a large company' (Jones and Marriot, 198). Arguments with the other joint manager, Leslie Gamage, the autocratic GEC management style, the poor quality of executives below board level -- all a legacy of the Hugo Hirst-Max Railing era -- exacerbated these problems. GEC under Harry Railing was allowed to develop into a bloated, inefficient company, which unsuccessfully tried to mix both manufacturing and wholesaling functions. Harry Railing had boosted GEC's turnover to nearly $100 million by 1957, but, ominously, net profits had started to fall from $3.4 million in 1955 to $2.4 million in 1957. This decline was only remedied when the heavy loans of GEC's expansionist phase caused a major crisis and restructuring after Railing's retirement. 
In 1957, Harry Railing, now almost seventy-nine, decided to step down. His wife was ill with a brain tumour and died in 1959. He handed over to his seventy-year-old successor, Leslie Gamage. Railing himself died at his London home, 12 Gloucester Square, on 16 October 1963. 


@@@@@


doc= 48136


Ramsden, Sir James (1822-1896), civil engineer and civic leader, was probably born on 25 February 1822, at Bolton, Lancashire, and was baptized there on 31 March 1822, one of several children of William Ramsden (died 1840) and his wife, Jane Grandage. His father, a millwright and afterwards described as an engineer, subsequently moved to Liverpool; his mother later ran a tavern on behalf of her husband. Little is known of Ramsden's early years until he was apprenticed to the Liverpool firm of Bury, Curtis, and Kennedy. Edward Bury, a distinguished locomotive engineer, enabled him to gain further experience as assistant engineer in the works at Wolverton, Buckinghamshire. 
In January 1846 Ramsden was appointed locomotive superintendent of the new Furness Railway, which had ordered engines from Bury's works. He found the first line under construction: this was to carry slate from Kirkby in Furness to the coastal hamlet of Barrow. Ramsden's great energy and versatility soon enabled him to make progress in the railway's hierarchy: by December he had assumed the role of company secretary and he was soon delegated further different managerial responsibilities. He served as managing director from 1866 to 1895. He became a member of the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1856. 
Ramsden recognized the area's many opportunities for economic and municipal development, and he was to be pre-eminent among those responsible for the impressive growth of Barrow in Furness. He advocated the building of new housing to support the expanding population, and he drew up a detailed plan for new streets. By the 1860s he had inspired the creation of the town's early schools, churches, library, and other institutions. He supported the exploitation of local iron ore resources, and when the town's new iron and steel companies were amalgamated in 1866 he remained a director of the new firm. Ramsden promoted the building of the town's dock system, commencing with the Devonshire Dock, opened in 1867. As a logical development he encouraged the establishment of Barrow's shipbuilding company in 1870. Prosperity in other ventures was sometimes less evident, but the creation of a jute works served to stabilize the immigrant population by providing work for women. 
On 9 June 1853 Ramsden married Hannah Mary ('c'.1822-1899), daughter of Robert Edwards, gentleman, at Wallasey, Cheshire. Their unmarried only child, Frederic James (1859-1941), served as superintendent of the Furness railway. about 1859 Ramsden moved into Abbots Wood, a new mansion leased from the Furness railway. 
By the later 1860s Barrow's population had risen from a few hundred to about 20,000, and Ramsden successfully petitioned for its incorporation as a borough. From 1867 to 1872 he served as its first mayor. In 1870 the corporation launched an appeal to recognize his services; a statue by Matthew Noble was unveiled in 1872, in what became known as Ramsden Square. Ramsden was knighted in the same year and became high sheriff of Lancashire in 1873. 
Besides being a benefactor of hospitals, public baths, and numerous other local institutions, Sir James was an active member of the Barrow yacht club. While his original vision of a town that would rival Liverpool proved over-ambitious, he witnessed the diversification of shipping services from the port. Involved in civic affairs until the 1890s, he served five successive terms as mayor of the borough. 
Even though Ramsden was an extremely gifted municipal administrator and a competent engineer, he remained a purely local figure. When the borough selected its first MP in 1885, he declined calls to stand for the Liberals. He was a notable example of an energetic but perhaps opportunistic Victorian entrepreneur. His patron, the duke of Devonshire, together with other local luminaries -- such as the politician and industrialist H. W. Schneider -- undoubtedly viewed him with respect, but without obvious warmth. The local populace plainly regarded him with deference. Much of the documentary evidence for his life comes from newspaper reports or official records; the virtual disappearance of his private papers inevitably impedes assessment of his personality. In later life Ramsden suffered from diabetes, and following long infirmity he died of a diabetic coma at Abbots Wood, Barrow in Furness, on 19 October 1896. He was buried in Barrow cemetery four days later; his mausoleum bears the family arms but has no external inscription. 


@@@@@


doc= 48137


James Voase Rank (1881-1952), was born at Wilton Street in Hull on 10 May 1881. He was educated at Hymers College, Hull, and at Weston College, Harrogate. He trained with a firm of wheat merchants, and then joined the company on the commercial side, becoming a prominent wheat buyer on the Baltic exchange. In 1907 he was made a director, and on 9 April that year he married Ursula Mary, daughter of Evan Tadman Ferrier, with whom he had a daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 48139


James Edward Ransome (1839-1905), who was born on 13 July 1839 in Norwich Road, Ipswich. In 1856, aged seventeen, he entered upon his apprenticeship at the firm's Orwell works, and in 1868 he became one of the managing directors. On the death of his brother in 1886 he became joint chairman, with J. R. Jefferies, and was sole chairman from 1900 when Jefferies died. Ransome married Alice, daughter of Samuel Gross of Woodbridge, in 1863. The couple had four sons and three daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 48140


Ransome, Robert Charles (1830-1886), agricultural engineer, was born on 1 June 1830, at Carr Street, Ipswich, Suffolk, the eldest son of Robert Ransome (1795-1864), agricultural engineer, and his wife, Sarah Coleby (1794-1863). He was the grandson of Robert Ransome (1753-1830) ['see under 'Ransome family], the founder of the well-known firm of ironfounders and makers of agricultural implements in Ipswich. 
Educated at the Friends' schools in Hitchin and York, at the age of sixteen Robert Charles entered the Ransome firm as an apprentice. He was made a partner in 1856. During the 1860s he took over most of the general management of the firm as the health of his uncle James Allen Ransome, then senior partner, began to deteriorate. Subsequently Robert Charles became senior partner, until the business was converted into a limited liability company in 1884, when he became the first chairman of Ransomes, Sims, and Jefferies Ltd. 
Ransome's contributions to the firm's development were in general commercial management. He was credited by the 'Implement and Machinery Review' for 1885-6 with being 'the first of his firm to cultivate the foreign export'. There had been sales overseas before his time, but he actively sought them out. One of his first jobs after being admitted to the partnership was an extensive tour of Europe and Egypt. He subsequently travelled widely, visiting such countries as Russia, Austria, Hungary, Italy, and the United States. The strength of the contacts established by his efforts was reflected by the fact that his death was reported in newspapers and magazines in Europe and America. He was similarly assiduous in promoting the firm's business at home, and took a lead in establishing its main strengths in ploughs and cultivating implements, steam engines, and threshing machines. 
Ransome was a member of the council of the Smithfield Club and also of the council of the Royal Agricultural Society of England (1875-86). He was a founder member of the Agricultural Engineers' Association, established in 1875. Prominent in the local affairs of Ipswich, he was first elected to the borough council in 1859, served as mayor in 1867, and in 1877 became an alderman. He was president of the Ipswich Liberal Association from its foundation in 1873, and was invited on several occasions to stand for parliament but refused on the grounds that he would not be able to find time for parliamentary duties as well as managing his business. In his home town, however, Ransome was able to be chairman of the Ipswich school board for twelve years from its inception in 1871. A governor and a founder trustee of Framlingham College, he was also active in the founding of Ipswich middle school. He was a member of the Ipswich docks committee. He was appointed a justice of the peace for the borough in 1877, and for the county of Suffolk in 1883. 
In 1854 Ransome married Sarah Jane, daughter of Richard W. Baker of Cottesmore, and they had a daughter. His wife died in 1856. In 1864 he married Elizabeth, daughter of James Gibb of London and Calcutta. They had three daughters and two sons. Deteriorating health caused Ransome to take nine months away from work in 1879-80, which included a recuperative visit to Australia. He died, from aneurysm and asphyxia, at Belstead Road, Ipswich, on 5 March 1886, and was buried at Ipswich cemetery on 11 March. He was survived by his second wife. 
Ransome's successor as head of the firm was his younger brother 
Whereas his brother was noted for his commercial achievements in the business, James Edward Ransome was more involved in the engineering side. There are several patents for improvements to ploughs, harrows, and lawnmowers in his name, and he presented papers on ploughs and their development, two of which were published. He was recognized also as a shrewd man of business. His first responsibilities within the firm after completing his apprenticeship were with the plough and implement department. He worked on the development of new designs of plough and the promotion of them through agricultural shows and ploughing matches. One of the early successes with which he was associated was the winning of the top prizes at the Royal Agricultural Society's show at Newcastle in 1864. The 'Newcastle' design of plough subsequently became one of the most celebrated and commercially successful of the firm's ploughs. Ransome retained active interest and managerial control of the plough and implement department throughout his career, and took responsibility for the design of the new plough and implement shops at the Orwell works in 1900. 
James Edward Ransome's other particular contribution to the firm's development was his promotion of the lawnmower from a 'plaything' to a serious part of the firm's activities. New models were introduced from the late 1860s, and in 1876 Ransome oversaw the construction of a new lawnmower works. The culmination of his efforts was the successful introduction of the motor mower in 1902. The result of the commercial and technical leadership of Robert Charles and James Edward Ransome, together with J. R. Jefferies, was the success of their firm in withstanding the effects of the commercial and agricultural depression of the late nineteenth century. By the time James Edward Ransome died the company's workforce had grown to more than 2000. 
A member of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers from 1886 onwards, James Edward Ransome was also a member of the council of the Agricultural Engineers' Association. In addition he served on the councils of the Royal Agricultural Society of England (1886-1905), and of the Bath and West of England and Southern Counties Society; and he belonged to the Suffolk chamber of agriculture. He was a member of Ipswich borough council and devoted his energies in local affairs particularly to sanitary improvements and education. Chairman of the governors of Ipswich endowed schools, he gave strong support (including financial contributions) to the building of a new science block at the grammar school. He was appointed a magistrate for the borough of Ipswich, but died before he could take the oath. 
Ransome's political allegiances at first were with the Liberal Party, but he later became a Conservative. He was chairman of the Suffolk branch of the Tariff Reform League, and was elected president of the Ipswich Conservative Club a few weeks before he died. A keen huntsman, he was associated with the duke of Hamilton's harriers for some years. His other recreations included skating and golf. 
James Edward Ransome died from cancer on 30 January 1905 at 4 Upper Wimpole Street, London. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 48141


Raper, George Frederick (1909-1973), mechanical engineer and inventor of wool textile machinery, was born at 7 Cranbourne Road, Bradford, on 4 April 1909, the son of Arthur Ernest Raper (1870-1948) and his wife, Maggie Maud, 'nee' Smith (1878/9-1960). Arthur Raper was chairman and managing director of the long-established woolcombers Isaac Holden & Sons Ltd, Bradford, where his father had also been managing director. George attended the Leys School, Cambridge. He initially proposed to read medicine, and went to Jesus College, Cambridge, but he graduated in 1930 with a third-class honours degree in mechanical engineering. His early practical experience included a period as an engineer with the Cunard Line. He then joined Isaac Holden & Sons as a machine operator, the usual way for members of mill-owning families to learn the business. At this time he was also attending Bradford Technical College to learn about textiles. In 1937 he went on a world tour to study the wool textile industry and on his return to Holdens in 1938 he was appointed manager; in 1939 he was made a director. On 21 October 1939 he married Constance Joan (Nan) Williams ('b'. 1914/15), a schoolteacher, the daughter of William John Williams, ironmonger. 
During his early years at Holdens Raper made several improvements on the chemical and engineering side of wool-combing. He then turned his attention to the design and building of a new wool-combing machine. An experimental room was provided for him to work in, but the outbreak of war halted these activities. Raper was commissioned into the Territorial Army before the war, and during it his activities included work on the searchlight-aided interception of enemy aircraft; later he lectured on the subject. On demobilization in 1945 he held the rank of lieutenant-colonel. 
Raper returned to the Holden factory as mill manager, but the idea of a new approach to the preparation of wool slivers for the combing operation, later called the 'autoleveller', had remained in his mind since 1938, and took much of his effort and interest. In early 1948 his father died, and his cousin was appointed managing director. Support for his experiments was no longer so readily available and that same year he resigned from his $4000 a year position, although he retained his seat on the board. His annual income was now $400, and he took a cottage where he fitted out a bedroom as an engineering workshop. He worked single-handedly, taking responsibility for all calculations, designs, and patents. Friends in the industry provided facilities for proving his ideas, and in 1951 he perfected his machine. 
The autoleveller unit, originally intended for use in the wool-combing sector of the industry, was also employed in worsted yarn manufacture. The autoleveller measured the volume of wool entering the machine and recorded any variations on a memory wheel, which, at the appropriate time, controlled the subsequent attenuation given to the material. This significantly improved the uniformity of the product. Consequently the number of operations required to produce a yarn was reduced from eight to three, with savings in labour, energy, and floorspace, and when used in conjunction with Ambler's 'superdraft unit' it achieved one of the greatest advances in wool textile machinery of the century. 
Inventive success did not bring Raper riches, and he complained that the bulk of his income went in taxes. It did, however, bring him considerable respect. In 1955 he was awarded the Hoffman Wood Yorkshire gold medal for invention and was made an honorary member of the Wool Industries Research Association. In 1960 he was made an honorary fellow of the Textile Institute. He was also an honorary lecturer in textile engineering at Leeds University. After leaving Bradford he lived at Masham, North Riding of Yorkshire, Windermere, and Ross-on-Wye. Raper was a rare example of a businessman who, from a managerial perspective, identified a technical opportunity and shifted from management to engineering in order to seize that opportunity. At the time of his death he was working on an automated weaving device. He died on 7 September 1973 at Verlands, Llangarron, Ross-on-Wye, Herefordshire. He was survived by his wife and three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 48144


Reckitt, Sir James, first baronet (1833-1924), businessman and philanthropist, was born on 14 November 1833 in Nottingham, the sixth of seven children of Isaac Reckitt (1792-1862), miller and corn factor, and his wife, Anne (died 1874), daughter of Charles and Elizabeth Coleby of Hempstead, Norfolk. His formal education was at Packer's academy in Nottingham and the Society of Friends' Ackworth School, near Pontefract. In 1848 he joined his father's starch and blue business, which had been acquired in 1840, as a travelling salesman. After Isaac's death in 1862 James and two of his brothers carried on their father's business as a partnership. On 12 October 1865 he married Kathleen (died 1923), daughter of Robert Saunders, agent; they had two sons. 
Between 1879, when the business was incorporated as Reckitt & Sons Ltd, and 1917, Reckitt and his elder brother, Francis, were alternate chairmen; James was sole chairman between 1917 and 1924. Through innovative marketing, which included branding and heavy advertising, the production and sale of starch, blue, and boot and metal polish proved an international success. In 1888 the business became a private joint-stock company, and in 1899 it was reconstructed to form a new public company. Its capitalization was then $1.7 million, though it was still owned mainly by the family. By 1914 it had become a multinational manufacturing company employing more than 5000 people. 
During the 1890s Reckitt entered into negotiations with J. and J. Colman of Norwich, a competitor in the starch and blue trades. With a view to diversification, he proposed that Reckitt and Colman should become joint buyers of Keen Robinson, a successful mustard, spice, and cereal foods manufacturer, but support from the Colmans was not forthcoming. None the less, perceived common interests in limiting competition brought Reckitt and Colman together in 1913, when the two companies combined to form a joint exports committee, the first of several. This policy culminated, in 1938, in the formation of Reckitt and Colman Ltd, representing a merger of the trading interests of the two companies; Philip Reckitt, Sir James's younger son, was the first chairman. 
Sir James and Philip were active in the provision of welfare and environmental improvements affecting employees and others. In 1905-6 the company appointed full-time welfare workers for female and male employees; medical services for all Reckitt workers were introduced in 1907. A day continuation school for girls was established in 1910, and for boys in 1919. A non-contributory pension fund was set up in 1890. A major investment in the garden village, a private freehold estate consisting of 600 dwellings, was undertaken by a development company, The Garden Village (Hull) Ltd, set up by Reckitt and his fellow directors; two-thirds of the $150,000 capital was provided by the company, while during his lifetime Reckitt waived $50,000 in dividends to benefit the village. His objective was to create an environment within easy reach of the factory yet comprising high-quality houses at low rentals, with gardens and services. A recreation ground and hall were added after the village opened in 1907. 
In the wider community Reckitt was elected to Hull's first school board in 1870, was a supporter and benefactor of the Newland Homes for seamen's orphans, and established the James Reckitt Home for girls, opened in 1905. As a member of the board of management of Hull Infirmary, chairman of the finance and house committees, and chairman of the management board in 1900, he secured a charter of incorporation, led a successful appeal to build a major extension to the hospital, and financed the building of the Withernsea Consumptive Sanatorium and an annexe for the Hull Nursing Association. In 1891 he built and endowed a library for public use in order to prove that it could be financed on a penny rate. His last major philanthropic enterprise was the setting up of the Sir James Reckitt Trust devoted to those charitable purposes approved of by Quakers and to the benefit mainly of the local population. 
Reckitt was created a baronet in 1894 in recognition, in part, of public service but also in acknowledgement of Reckitt's political role in the East Riding. He was a county councillor, deputy lieutenant and JP, and from 1873 an effective chairman of the Hull Liberal Party. He received the freedom of Hull in 1908. He died at his home, Swanland Manor, Swanland, near Hull, on 18 March 1924; his estate was valued at $487,152. 




@@@@@


doc= 48150


Richardson, James Nicholson (1846-1921), industrialist and politician, was born on 7 February 1846 in Belfast, the only child of John Grubb Richardson, an industrialist, and his first wife, Helena Grubb, originally of Cahir Abbey, co. Tipperary. Helena died in childbirth in 1849 and John Grubb remarried in 1853; he had one son and seven daughters by his second wife. James lived with his father and stepmother, between 1853 and 1858 at Brookhill, Lisburn, co. Antrim, and then at Moyallon House near Lisburn. He was educated at home until 1857, and was then sent to a small private school, which closed nine months later. From 1858 to 1862 he attended Grove House School in Tottenham, Middlesex. He married Sophie Malcolmson of Portlaw near Waterford, Ireland, in 1867, after which he made his home at Mount Caulfield, Bessbrook, near Newry, on the border of counties Down and Armagh. 
Richardson was a member of a long established linen-manufacturing family in Ireland. Although his father was originally involved in linen bleaching, in 1846 he diversified into flax spinning, erecting a purpose-built mill and creating the model village of Bessbrook for the employees. Six years later he introduced power-loom weaving to Bessbrook. Finally in 1863 John Grubb Richardson bought out the entire business, works, and village of Bessbrook from its parent company, J. N. Richardson Sons and Owden, and formed the Bessbrook Spinning Company. The timing of the formation of the new company proved extremely fortuitous in that it coincided with a sudden and unexpected upturn in the fortunes of the Irish linen industry, caused by the cotton famine in Britain. In the first two years of its existence, annual profits rose from just over $8000 to over $41,000. 
James began his apprenticeship in his father's firm in the year of its formation. He was treated exactly the same way as any other apprentice, learning through practical experience about each of the processes involved in flax spinning -- hackling, sorting, preparing, and spinning -- as well as having to observe 'every rule as to hours and routine' (Smith, 199). He became especially good at judging and buying flax, and he showed an aptitude for 'industrial management and for dealing with men of all shades of opinion' (ibid., 42). As his competence to run the firm became increasingly apparent, his father left it more and more in his hands. 
Among the developments at Bessbrook in Richardson's early years of management was the introduction of damask weaving in 1867 and the consequent innovation of the 'Bessbrook machine' two years later. In 1868 the firm purchased the nearby Craigmore factory in order to extend its power-loom weaving operations. 
In 1878 the Bessbrook Spinning Company was incorporated as a limited company, with Richardson as its first chairman. This allowed him the freedom to participate in other interests. He had for a number of years been committed to land reform in Ireland. Because of this he was persuaded to stand for parliament in 1880. He was elected as Liberal MP for co. Armagh. In parliament he was very involved in promoting land purchase legislation (later achieved in the 'Ashbourne Act' of 1885. However, he found that public life 'was contrary to his own feelings and desires' (Smith, 62). Furthermore, during his years as an MP his wife's health deteriorated badly. By the beginning of 1884 the strain was beginning to tell and he felt he needed a break. He took a year travelling round the world, after which he decided to retire from politics. He had become disillusioned because of Gladstone's failure to address the temperance question and his support of Irish home rule. During the next five years Richardson suffered from 'temperamental depression', as in 1886 first his wife and in 1890 then his father died. After each bereavement he travelled abroad to find solace. In 1886-7 he toured the Holy Land and in 1890 he went on his second world trip. 
On his return to Ireland in 1891 Richardson became very actively involved in unionism, addressing a huge convention in the botanic gardens in Belfast in 1892 and another in Enniskillen in co. Fermanagh in 1893. In that year he remarried. His second wife was Sarah Alexander Bell of Lurgan, co. Armagh. After a honeymoon in Palestine the couple returned to Mount Caulfield. In 1916 Richardson resigned as chairman of Bessbrooks. His physical health began to fail, and he died on 11 October 1921 in a hospital in Edgbaston, Birmingham, after an unsuccessful operation. He had no children by either marriage. 
Throughout his life Richardson was a prominent member of the Society of Friends and was renowned for his altruism, especially towards the people of Bessbrook. He provided an orphanage for the children and a convalescent home for the working women. He also laid out a cricket field and built a pavilion, created a bowling green, and bought ground for a golf course. Furthermore, he sold some 5000 acres of his land to his tenants under the terms of the 'Wyndham Land Act' of 1903 and installed electric lighting in the village in 1911. 
Richardson had a sensitive and romantic nature and a love of poetry and art. He wrote many poems and published a variety of pamphlets for the people of Bessbrook. He was also a 'born mimic' and an excellent public speaker. His speeches 'were brimful of wit and humour' ('Belfast News-Letter', 12 Oct 1921). At his death his estate was estimated at $75,000 ($32,665 of it in England). 


@@@@@


doc= 48151


Richardson, John Wigham (1837-1908), shipbuilder, was born on 7 January 1837 in Torquay, Devon, where his family was spending the winter, the second son in the family of four sons and seven daughters of Edward Richardson (1806-1863), leather manufacturer, of Newcastle upon Tyne, from an old Yorkshire Quaker family in Whitby, and his wife, Jane, 'nee' Wigham (1808-1873) of Edinburgh. Richardson was educated at Dr Collingwood Bruce's academy in Newcastle, and at a private school in the home of J. D. Carr, the biscuit manufacturer, in Carlisle, before spending two years at Bootham School, the Quaker school in York. He left in 1852 to work as a ship's draughtsman for a few months for a relative, Senhouse Martindale, a Lloyds surveyor in Liverpool. In 1853 he took up an apprenticeship with Jonathan Robson, a builder of steam tugs in Gateshead, making iron ships and marine engines. After completing this in 1856, he spent a year at University College, London, studying Latin, German, English literature, and mathematics, and in the summer of 1857 he studied German in Tubingen. However, after the collapse of the Northumberland and District Bank, in which his father was a large shareholder, in the same year, he returned to Newcastle to a job in the machine-drawing office of the Forth Banks engine works of R. and W. Hawthorn (Robert Hawthorn was a neighbour). In 1864 he married Marian Henrietta ('b'. 'c'.1845), eldest daughter of J. P. Thol of Wycombe Marsh, Buckinghamshire; they had five sons and two daughters. 
In 1860, with his father's help, Richardson bought Coutts's yard, a small shipyard at Walker, where the first iron ship on the Tyne had been launched in 1842, and founded the Neptune Works. He appointed John Denham Christie, a naval architect, as his assistant: Christie became his partner in 1862. The Neptune Works occupied a 4 acre site, with 100 yards' river frontage and three building berths, and employment for 200 men. The first ship to be built, the 'Victoria', was a small ferry-steamer for the Isle of Wight-Portsmouth route, but business was slow in the early years. Relying mainly on overseas customers, Richardson persevered, and in 1865 secured an order from the Prussian government for a steamer to carry railway trains across the Rhine, the first of many such ferries built by the yard. As business grew, thanks to Richardson's energetic pursuit of new orders, he decided to open his own marine-engine and boiler works in 1872, and in 1879 he appointed a marine-engine designer, John Tweedy. By the 1880s the yard was building every kind of ship except warships, and despite the slump of the mid-1880s the Neptune yard prospered, launching the steel-hulled 'Alfonso XII' for the Spanish Compania Transatlantica in 1888, the largest non-warship built on the Tyne at that date. The yard built a number of Italian emigrant ships for the crossing from the Italian ports to South America, and in 1889 it launched its first refrigerated ship. By 1898, when the north yard was added, the firm had a workforce of 2000 and the capacity for 30,000 tons of shipping. In 1899 the company built the engines and boilers for the Russian ice-breaker 'Angara', which had to be transported out to Lake Baikal for fitting, and in 1902 it launched the 500 foot 'Colonia', a cable ship carrying 4000 miles of cable built for the Telegraph and Maintenance Company Ltd. 
In 1899 a limited liability company, Wigham Richardson & Co. Ltd, was formed, with Richardson as chairman, and in 1903 the company amalgamated with Swan, Hunter of Wallsend to become Swan, Hunter, and Wigham Richardson Ltd, the largest merchant shipbuilding concern on the Tyne, which survived until nationalization of the shipbuilding industry in 1977. Richardson became vice-chairman of the new company. Later in 1903 the company bought the Tyne Pontoons and Dry Dock Company to give 4000 feet of continuous frontage along the Tyne. 
Richardson was influential in the development of the shipbuilding industry in the north-east. As a result of his pamphlet 'Lloyd's Register of Shipping: its Effect... upon the Art of Shipbuilding' (1874), the rules of Lloyds were modified. He was one of those who founded the journal 'Shipping World' in Newcastle in 1882, and he was its first chairman. A founder member of the North East Coast Institution of Engineers and Shipbuilders in 1884, he served as president in 1890-92 and was a member of the North of England Institute of Mining Engineers and the Institution of Naval Architects, regularly contributing papers to all of these. He was president of the Newcastle Economic Society from 1896 to 1897. He also played an active part in local affairs as a member of Northumberland county council for many years, and as a JP for Northumberland he was chairman of the Castle ward licensing committee. An enthusiastic artist himself, he gave many paintings to the Walker Mechanics Institute, and donated a window in Christ Church, Walker, in memory of his elder sister, Anna Deborah Richardson. He was a director of the Walker and Wallsend Union Gas Company, and of the Tyne Pontoons and Dry Dock Company, and he was one of the first subscribers to the Tyneside Tramways and Tramroads Company, which opened in 1902. 
Richardson was widely read and cultured. He liked to write Latin verses, and in the 1880s he held a series of evenings reading and translating the works of Virgil with a group of friends including the shipbuilder Sir Benjamin Chapman Browne and the banker Thomas Hodgkin. His interests included political economy and sociology, military and naval history, architecture -- he designed a number of houses -- and chess, and he became an expert on the construction of sundials, contributing an appendix to a new edition of Mrs Alfred Gatty's 'Book of Sun-Dials' (1889). A good linguist, he travelled widely in Poland, Russia, Greece, and Turkey, and was particularly interested in visiting the battlefields of the Crimean and Franco-Prussian wars. He also went to North America, the West Indies, and Africa, making watercolour sketches of all his travels. As he grew older he turned to the Church of England, and attended Benwell church in Newcastle. 
Richardson died suddenly on 15 April 1908 at 11 Nottingham Place, London, following an operation, and was buried on 18 April at Kensal Green cemetery. His wife survived him. 'The Memoirs of John Wigham Richardson' were privately published in 1911. 


@@@@@


doc= 48154


Rootes, Sir Reginald Claud (1896-1977), motor vehicle manufacturer, was born in Goudhurst, Kent, on 20 October 1896, the younger son of William Rootes (1869-1955), a cycle and motor engineer, and his wife, Jane Catt. He was educated at Cranbrook School, where, unlike his elder brother William Edward Rootes, he excelled in academic studies and sports. After passing the intermediate civil service examination he joined the Admiralty in early 1915. In 1919 he was persuaded to leave the civil service to join his brother as joint managing director of Rootes Ltd, a motor distributor in Maidstone. For nearly fifty years he was a very active partner in the direction and management of the company. 
Throughout the 1920s as the motor distribution business was expanding, Rootes's main activity was in administering the company, for which his earlier experience in accounting was a valuable asset. The head office was moved to Long Acre, London, and then to the new Devonshire House in Piccadilly in 1926. The first-floor offices of the Rootes brothers, later known as the 'Green Belt' from the sage colour of the Wilton carpet, became the centre of a growing business empire. In 1929, with the backing of the Prudential Assurance Company, Rootes bought out the Humber group of companies, makers of Humber and Hillman cars and Commer trucks. 
From this time Rootes devoted much of his effort to the manufacturing arm of what became the Rootes Group. He made several visits to the United States, gleaning ideas of modern production methods at Ford and Chrysler in Detroit and purchasing machine tools and equipment for the British factories. By the late 1930s he had largely achieved the goal of integration by developing common components, creating a more identifiable 'house style' of vehicles and linking dispersed factories more closely. The acquisition of the Sunbeam group in 1935 and British Light Steel Pressings in Acton, Middlesex, in 1937 extended the range of vehicles and added some body-making capability. Under Rootes's management the output of the Rootes Group was increased from 9000 vehicles in 1929-30 to 20,000 in 1933-4 and 41,000 in 1937-9. By the late 1930s the company was clearly one of the 'big six' British vehicle manufacturers, with about 12 per cent of national production. 
As part of the rearmament programme Rootes was influential in the development of 'shadow' factories for airframe and aero-engine production. Speke, Liverpool, was selected as the site for a large bomber assembly plant in 1937 and new engine factories were built on the outskirts of Coventry. When William Rootes was seconded to work with the Ministry of Supply early in the Second World War, Reginald Rootes took over full direction of the firm. The Rootes contribution to the war effort was substantial -- 50,000 aero-engines, 4447 bombers, and tens of thousands of military vehicles. Rootes's war work earned him a knighthood in 1946. 
The post-war expansion of the company required a great deal of attention to the details of new designs of cars and trucks, retooling of factories, and the organization of supply systems to produce and then distribute finished vehicles. Production of cars and trucks was increased from 42,000 in 1946-7 to 90,000 in 1949-50. Rootes was very active in the export drive, especially in North America where a network of dealers supported by parts depots was established. Although William Rootes was the more visible world traveller, promoting Rootes in particular and British exports more generally, Reginald Rootes also made extended visits on behalf of the company. In early 1953 he made a 40,000 mile trip visiting sales and assembly organizations. The Melbourne assembly plant was an important stop on the Australian part of the journey. Also in 1953 an agreement with Isuzu Motors was significant for the export of British components and launching the Japanese firm as an independent vehicle manufacturer a decade later. During the 1950s Rootes continued to expand, acquiring other manufacturers such as Tilling Stevens in 1950, and Singer Motors in 1955. Production in 1960 reached 192,000 vehicles. 
The market success of the BMC Mini car launched in 1959 was a factor in the decision of Rootes to manufacture a small car, later named the Imp. Unlike all previous cars designed and manufactured by the company, the Imp had a rear engine and the engine block was made from aluminium in place of the standard form of cast iron. Government policy of decentralizing the motor industry to areas of high unemployment forced Rootes to build a new factory in Scotland. The assembly plant, with an annual capacity of 150,000 cars, never fulfilled the expectations. Sales of the Imp peaked at 50,000 in 1964, the year after opening, and over the next few years rarely exceeded one fifth of the designed capacity of the plant. 
A more competitive world environment, the cost of a prolonged strike in 1961, and the expenses of the new car resulted in a collapse of the firm's profitability and losses were made in 1962 and 1963. Rootes was compelled to seek new sources of capital. In June 1964 it was announced that Chrysler, then in a phase of world expansion, was taking a $12.3 million interest in Rootes. At this time Chrysler acquired 30 per cent of the ordinary (voting) shares and 50 per cent of the non-voting shares. Following the death of his brother later in the year, Reginald Rootes continued as a member of the board until he retired from Rootes Motors at the age of seventy. The transfer of control from the family to Chrysler took place in 1967, when Chrysler acquired additional shares and the new corporate symbol of the 'Pentastar' appeared on the vehicles and properties of the company. In 1970 Chrysler United Kingdom Ltd moved out of Devonshire House to a new office block in Knightsbridge. 
Rootes played a part in the wider activities of the British motor industry. Elected a vice-president of the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders in 1943, he became president in 1945-6 and served as deputy president until 1950. In 1952-3 he was president of the Motor Industry Research Association, which had recently opened a proving ground and laboratories at Lindley, near Nuneaton. Rootes also served as a vice-president of the Engineering and Allied Employers Federation in the 1950s. He always kept in touch with his old school at Cranbrook and in later years served as chairman of the board of governors. In 1969 he opened the Rootes block (for science) as a memorial to his brother. 
As the close business partner of his brother, Rootes played an important role in the family firm and in the industry. In physical characteristics and personality, he complemented William -- slightly taller, he had a quieter temperament and a discreet personality. Although the less visible partner in the Rootes Group, he was always involved in major decisions and was the key figure in its successful administration. He was aptly described as providing the 'steering and braking system to Sir William's power unit' ('Coventry Standard', 29 June 1956). 
Rootes was always interested in farming and maintained country residences in Kent, earlier at Rumwood Court, Langley, near Maidstone, and from the late 1950s at Polla House, Hothfield, near Ashford. He was married twice; first in 1922 to Ruth Joyce, daughter of William Harding Bensted, a stone merchant, whom he divorced in 1938, and then to Nancy Norris Beadle. A son of the first marriage, Timothy David ('b'. 1925), who was educated at Harrow, was also active in the Rootes Group from 1947 until his retirement from the board twenty years later. Rootes was a wealthy man with substantial holdings in Rootes Motors. He died of a stroke in King Edward VII Hospital, Easebourne, Midhurst, Sussex, on 20 December 1977. 


@@@@@


doc= 48158


Ruston, Joseph (1835-1897), engineer and manufacturer, was born in February 1835 at Chatteris, Cambridgeshire, son of Robert Ruston (died 1850/51), farmer. He was educated at Wesley College, Sheffield, and was apprenticed in the cutlery firm of Wolstenholme & Son. Opportunities for advancement in this old-established firm were limited, so he sought a partnership elsewhere, having some capital inherited from his father, who had died when Joseph was fifteen. 
On 1 January 1857 Ruston entered the partnership of Burton and Proctor at Lincoln. This firm, subsequently styled Ruston, Burton, and Proctor, was a small business of millwrights and general smiths. They made and repaired various types of machinery, including ploughs, threshing machines, and a few steam engines. Ruston brought energy, enthusiasm, and new business acumen to the firm. He persuaded his partners to make a more vigorous entry into the market for portable steam engines by building for stock. The first machines were well received at shows, and Ruston was keen to increase production. The pace of change was too great for Burton, who sold his share to Ruston in July 1857 for $8000. In 1864 Proctor retired, and Ruston became sole proprietor of Ruston, Proctor & Co. (and the firm retained that name until 1918). 
Joseph Ruston toured widely across Europe, and as far afield as Russia, to win business. He had a readiness to seize market opportunities and to innovate. As a result, while steam engines, threshing machines, and grinding mills remained principal products during the nineteenth century, there was early diversification into pumping and irrigation equipment for overseas, and into railway locomotives and pit winding engines. By the end of the century the firm had joined the leading manufacturers of gas and oil engines. The acquisition of the rights to manufacture mechanical excavators, known as steam navvies, led to a profitable development of the business. Their successful use in the construction of the Manchester Ship Canal established the reputation of these machines. The firm was turned into a limited liability company in 1889, with a capital of $500,000. Ruston served as chairman of the company until his death; but he also had other business activities, including the chairmanship of Joseph Rogers & Son Ltd, cutlers in Sheffield, and of the Lincolnshire Publishing Company Ltd, newspaper publishers. 
Elected to Lincoln city council in November 1865, Ruston represented the lower ward until 1874, when he was made an alderman. In 1869 he was appointed chief magistrate for the city, and he was a justice of the peace for the city from 1871 and for Lindsey from 1885. He was mayor of the city of Lincoln for the year 1869-70. He was appointed deputy lieutenant for Lincolnshire in 1889, and was high sheriff of Lincolnshire for 1891, in which year he was also made a freeman of the city, the first to be accorded such an honour. Ruston entered national politics in 1884, being returned as Liberal MP for Lincoln at a by-election. He was elected again at the general election the following year. However, he parted company with the Liberal Party over home rule for Ireland, voted against Gladstone's bill of 1886, and declined to stand at the election called that year. 
Ruston married Jane, daughter of Mr W. Brown of Sheffield, in 1859. The couple had two sons and six daughters. In 1873 Ruston bought Monks Manor, Lincoln, where he housed an extensive collection of art. A member of Newland Congregational Chapel, Ruston was a deacon of the church from 1865 onwards. He was a supporter of the church's mission work, and he made financial contributions for mission chapels at South Bar and Croft Street, Lincoln, and for the Newland chapel's new building. Other charitable work included involvement with the Lincoln branch of the YMCA -- he served as president and contributed to a new gymnasium. He was president of the Lincoln committee of the NSPCC. In 1892 he paid for a new children's ward at the city hospital. He provided a drill hall for the Lincoln Volunteers in 1890, and underwrote the restoration of Queen Eleanor's tomb in the cathedral. He was involved in educational development in Lincoln through his position on the city council. He encouraged the development of the city's grammar school, and supported the extension fund for elementary schools. He served as chairman of the Lincolnshire Agricultural Society in 1892. 
Joseph Ruston's spirit of enterprise became legendary in the late nineteenth-century engineering world. When he first became a partner in the firm in 1857 the business employed twenty-five men. At his death it employed more than 2500 people, and there was a branch in Budapest and agencies throughout the world. Ruston died of heart disease on 10 June 1897 at Monks Manor, Lincoln, survived by his wife. He was buried at Eastgate cemetery, Lincoln. One of his sons, Joseph Seward Ruston, was chairman of the engineering company from 1901 to 1939. 


@@@@@


doc= 48160


Rylands, Sir (William) Peter, baronet (1868-1948), wire manufacturer, was born at Bewsey House, Warrington, Lancashire, on 23 October 1868, third and youngest son of the politician Peter Rylands (1820-1887) of Massey Hall, Grappenhall, Thelwall, near Warrington, and his second wife, Caroline Wright (1841-1920), daughter of William Reynolds of Penketh House, Warrington, and Pinhoe, Devon. He was educated at Charterhouse School (1881-7) and at Trinity College, Cambridge (1887-90), and in 1891 visited Mashonaland in Africa to hunt big game. He was called to the bar at the Inner Temple, London, in 1894, and in that year he married Nora Mary (1865-1946), daughter of David de Angelis, a Parisian with business interests in the Bradford wool trade; they had no children. Rylands practised on the northern circuit and in 1895 edited 'Thomas Terrell on the Law and Practice Relating to Letters Patent for Inventions'. 
On his thirtieth birthday, following the death of his uncle John Rylands (1814-1898), Peter Rylands, as he was always known, became managing director of the family wire business of Rylands Bros. He was an intelligent, broad-minded, well-read, and adaptable businessman whose company faced a complicated market structure as well as strong German competition and obstructive trade unionism. He gave a full analysis of its business in evidence to the tariff commission on 1 June 1904: his testimony is that of a clear, persuasive speaker with considerable mental agility. In 1898 he also joined the board of the Pearson and Knowles Coal and Iron Company of Warrington and Wigan, in which his family had a large interest. It was proof of his belief in the necessity of large-scale amalgamated enterprise to maintain competitiveness that Rylands Bros. was bought in 1906-7 by Pearson Knowles. He ran Rylands Bros. as the wire department of Pearson Knowles, and was concerned in the erection of the group's new Partington steelworks in 1910-13. 
Rylands deplored the absence of business experience in British political leadership, and he advocated trade associations, manufacturing combinations, and tariff protection to prevent the diffusion of effort and wasting of resources. He was president of the Iron and Steel Wire Manufacturers' Association from 1900, and in 1912 was one of the promoters of the Employers' Parliamentary Association to lobby for the Lancashire business interest. He was a founder member of the Federation of British Industries (FBI) in 1916 and was a crucial figure in establishing it as a national institution, though he was not forgiven by some Lancashire leaders for his part in the absorption of the Employers' Parliamentary Association by the Birmingham-led FBI. He was chairman of the FBI's labour committee in 1917-18, of its overseas trade and consular committee in 1918-22, and president of the FBI for an unprecedented two-year stint in 1920-22. He was dexterous in seeking united expressions of business opinion on public issues, and was much involved in other forms of industrial politics. He was appointed to the government's tariff advisory committee in 1923 and to its committee on industry and trade of 1925-30 chaired by Sir Arthur Balfour. He was also president of the Iron and Steel Institute (1926-7) and the Federation of Iron and Steel Manufacturers (1930-31). He was not a mercenary man, but regarded money as a means of production rather than as an ultimate personal aim. His taste for paradox and philosophical speculation alarmed some of his cruder business colleagues. His opinions were independent and tenacious, but his outlook was moderate and constructive, and he disliked sectionalism of any kind. 
In 1920 Rylands Bros. and Pearson Knowles were bought by the Newcastle armourers Armstrong Whitworth. Armstrong's overbearing chairman, Sir Glynn West, excluded Rylands from the head board and managed these acquisitions so badly that by 1926 the Armstrong companies were insolvent. After intervention by the Bank of England, Pearson Knowles and Rylands Bros. were merged in 1930 in the new Lancashire Steel Corporation, of which Rylands became a director. He was nevertheless sceptical of the benefits of the 'rationalization' movement promoted by the Bank of England to rescue Britain's declining staple industries. 
Like his father and namesake Rylands was prominent in his district. He was a magistrate in Lancashire from 1905 and in Cheshire from 1906, and was high sheriff of Cheshire in 1935-6. He abandoned his father's political allegiances and was sometime chairman of the Warrington Conservative Association, though it is hard to imagine him at ease among diehards. Among many voluntary local offices he was president of the Warrington chamber of commerce and life governor and benefactor of Warrington Infirmary. Even in his social and sporting interests Rylands proved his talent as an initiator. He was the founder and first master of several masonic lodges, and founder secretary of Lymm Golf Club near his home. Keen on shooting and fishing, he was characteristically deliberative at croquet. In appearance he was quiet, dapper, and shrewd; for his portrait ('c'.1921) for the FBI he wore a pince-nez and spotted bow-tie. 
Rylands was knighted in 1921 and received a baronetcy in 1939. He died of heart failure on 22 October 1948 at his home, Massey Hall, Grappenhall, Thelwall. This was the eve of his eightieth birthday, which would also have been the fiftieth anniversary of his becoming managing director of Rylands Bros.; he had spent his last day at his office in Warrington finalizing arrangements for a celebratory party, but died at home. His baronetcy became extinct, and he was buried on 27 October at All Saints', Thelwall. 


@@@@@


doc= 48161


Grey, Henry, first Baron Grey of Groby (1547-1614), courtier and administrator, was the only surviving son of Lord John Grey (d. 1564) of Pirgo, Essex, and Mary, daughter of Anthony Browne, first Viscount Montagu of Cowdray, Sussex. He was probably educated at Christ Church, Oxford, where a Henry Grey graduated BA on 1 February 1565 and MA on 18 June 1568. He married Anne (1542-1605), daughter of William, second Lord Windsor of Bradenham, Buckinghamshire, about 1575 and was knighted on 11 November 1587. He was appointed one of the queen's gentleman pensioners in 1569 and was lieutenant of the band from 1589 to 1603. In 1596 he was also made master of the queen's buckhounds. James I raised him to the peerage on 21 July 1603, when he was created Baron Grey of Groby, Leicestershire, and as a quid pro quo he was forced to resign his lieutenancy of the gentleman pensioners in September. He served as knight of the shire for Essex in 1589. 
Grey's main ambition during Elizabeth's reign was to re-establish his family's position in Leicestershire. His father had suffered attainder in 1554 for his involvement in Wyatt's rebellion. Elizabeth released him from this in 1559 and also granted him the manor of Pirgo, which became his principal residence. Henry succeeded to the estate on his father's death in 1564 and divided his time between his duties at court -- where he was required to attend on the queen for six months of the year -- and local government in Essex. At court he enjoyed the favour of Lord Burghley and his son Sir Robert Cecil, and in 1588 he figured in a list of those considered suitable for baronies. Nothing came of this, but by the end of Elizabeth's reign he had managed to reacquire most of his family's estates in Leicestershire, centred on Bradgate Park and the manor of Groby. As a local governor he provided a valuable link between the court and the localities. Grey was put on to the commission of the peace for Essex ('c'.1573), served as deputy lieutenant (1586-90), and was described in 1600 as the county's senior justice. His election to parliament for Essex in 1589 was secured by the intervention of the privy council, which dissuaded Lord Rich from backing a rival candidate. At Westminster he participated in the committee on purveyance and attended the queen with a petition from the Commons to curb abuses by purveyors. 
After his promotion to a barony and his resignation from the gentleman pensioners Grey took up residence at Bradgate and devoted most of his energies to strengthening his family's position in Leicestershire. This involved reviving the feud between the Greys and the Hastings earls of Huntingdon which had divided the shire for much of the early sixteenth century. When the fourth earl of Huntingdon died in December 1604, Grey immediately wrote to Cecil asking that he be granted his lord lieutenancy and other county offices as compensation for surrendering his lieutenancy of the gentleman pensioners. The fifth earl, who was a minor, protested and Cecil sided with him, agreeing to put the lord lieutenancy in abeyance until he came of age. In the meantime Grey joined forces with the Beaumont family and sought to dominate the county in other ways. He became the leading spokesman for the justices in their dealings with central government and engineered changes in the commission of the peace at the expense of the Hastings faction. The struggle intensified when Huntingdon reached his majority in 1607 and took over the main posts in local government. Grey attacked him on two fronts, questioning his management of purveyance in the county during 1610 and 1611 and then in 1612 backing an inquiry into the earl's nomination of John Bale to the commission of the peace. His cause was badly damaged by the sudden death from smallpox of his son Sir John Grey in October 1611, which removed his main source of support at court. In both instances Huntingdon was successful in seeing off the challenge and by the time of Grey's death Huntingdon was firmly in control of the shire. Grey's wife having died in 1605 (she was buried on 28 June at St Mary's, Broughton Astley, Leicestershire), he was reported as seeking to marry the widow of Sir John Wood (McClure, 314). 
There is little direct evidence about Grey's religious views, but he appears to have inherited the staunchly protestant attitude of his father. When a group of puritan ministers in Leicestershire was threatened with deprivation in January 1605, his name headed the list of local JPs petitioning Cecil for leniency. He was also closely associated with Francis White, minister at the Grey living of Broughton Astley. White was later to become an apologist for Arminianism, but at this stage in his career was making his reputation as an anti-papal polemicist. 
Grey had four sons and four daughters. He died on 26 July 1614 at Bradgate Park and was buried in the family chapel there. He was succeeded by his grandson, Henry, a minor who later became earl of Stamford. 


@@@@@


doc= 48166


Piercy, William (bap. 1744, d. 1819), Church of England clergyman and evangelist in the United States of America, was probably born at Sow, near Coventry, Warwickshire (not Bedworth, as often stated, much less Bedford, as given on a contemporary memorial at Charles Town, South Carolina), where he was baptized on 15 September 1744, the eldest son of William Pearcy, or Piercy, gentleman, and his wife, Ann. 'Piercy' was then a long-established Warwickshire surname. Piercy, however, came to believe that he was descended from the Percys of Northumberland, and in later life changed his surname accordingly. 
Piercy matriculated a commoner from St Edmund Hall, Oxford, on 10 July 1767. His choice of St Edmund Hall suggested that he was already aligned with evangelicals, towards whom the principal, George Dixon, was more sympathetic than most heads of houses. Nevertheless, when in 1768 six of the hall's evangelical undergraduates were sent down by Vice-Chancellor David Durell, as visitor, Piercy was able to remain in residence. Although he apparently did not take a degree, he continued to reside, to some extent intermittently, until 1771, and kept his name on the books as a senior non-resident until 1775. 
Piercy was made deacon at Eccleshall parish church, Staffordshire, by Frederick Cornwallis, bishop of Lichfield and Coventry, newly elected archbishop of Canterbury, on 18 September 1768. His first parish was Bickenhill, near Birmingham, where the vicar, John Howlette, was apparently non-resident, but he also served as curate of West Bromwich, Staffordshire, of which the rector was Edward Stillingfleet, a well-known evangelical. In spite of a further set of ordination papers (April 1769) relating to Piercy's prospective ordination as priest, Bishop John Egerton's ordination register for 1769-71 does not include his name. He was ordained priest on letters dimissory of 1 May 1769, by the bishop of Worcester, James Johnson, following subscription to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles' on 21 April 1769. It has been said that Piercy locally and openly criticized Stillingfleet. On the other hand it was under Piercy's influence at West Bromwich that Matthew Wilkes, subsequently a leading nonconformist, was called to be a minister. In the autumn of 1770, Piercy passed on to London, where he assisted Martin Madan at the Lock Hospital chapel. He also preached in London pulpits associated with George Whitefield, whose Bethesda orphanage, near Savannah, Georgia, was inherited by another evangelical leader, Selina Hastings, countess of Huntingdon, a friend of Madan, following Whitefield's death in September 1770. 
On 15 September 1772 Piercy became one of Lady Huntingdon's domestic chaplains, acting as minister of her new chapel at Woolwich. She then appointed him president of Bethesda, with a view to reviving it as a school as well as an orphanage, with John Crosse, a senior contemporary of Piercy at St Edmund Hall, as chaplain. Two sermons delivered in London by Piercy before the embarkation of this Georgia expedition and published in 1772, are apparently the only surviving examples of his gift for preaching. In order to continue their training, seven young men from Lady Huntingdon's college at Trefeca, Brecknockshire, sailed for Savannah late in 1772, followed by Piercy, with his brother Richard, who was to be manager of the estates with which Bethesda was endowed. After an auspicious beginning in Georgia, discouragement set in, particularly as in March 1773 Bethesda was partly destroyed by fire. Some rebuilding began, but Piercy and the young men -- who are said to have found their leader autocratic and unsympathetic (although he found them happy) -- had also been charged to move around the Georgia outback to preach the gospel to the Native Americans, a project which occupied much of their time. After two years the Trefeca ordinands had apparently returned to England. 
It was on an evangelistic expedition to the Augusta area that in August 1773, Piercy met an evangelical layman, Colonel Barnard Elliott of Charles Town, South Carolina. Together with two young men they took the Christian gospel to the Creek Indians, outraging local clergy by their disregard of Anglican formalities. With the same evangelistic zeal, Piercy preached not only in Charles Town (in nonconformist pulpits, as others were not then open to him), but also in Philadelphia and New York. Theologically he was a moderate Calvinist, in accord with the Anglican article seventeen, as appears from his association with the 'New Spiritual Magazine', which published in 1775 an engraving of his portrait by John Russell. 
On 18 May 1776 Piercy married -- at St Philip's, Charles Town -- Catherine (1748-1818), sister of Colonel Elliott. They had six daughters and two sons. From 1777 to 1780 he officiated regularly at St Michael's, Charles Town, as one of three co-equal ministers. Piercy and his wife set up house in the remaining part of Bethesda, where their eldest child, a girl, was born, and where they lived and achieved what they could until civil unrest made their continued residence impossible. The Elliott family were decidedly opposed to the current forms of colonial rule. Moreover Piercy himself preached at Christ Church, Savannah (hitherto closed to him), at the opening of the Georgia Provincial Congress on 22 January 1776. Six months later he preached after the 'Declaration of Independence' was first made public in Charles Town. When British forces captured Charles Town in 1780, Piercy found himself -- like other colonial clergy -- in a complicated situation, and he was banned from officiating by the British commanding officer. He was however allowed, on 5 October 1780, with his wife and two daughters, to board a transit vessel, 'Mary and Charlotte', to return to England. The ship foundered after a month at sea; but her passengers had already been taken on board 'Hydra', leading the convoy. Bad weather and lack of provisions compelled 'Hydra' to put into Cork, on 4 December, where Catherine Piercy's poor health involved further delay. 
Piercy returned to an irate patron. Lady Huntingdon accused him of failing to keep in touch with her while he was at Bethesda and of failing to send accounts in connection with her Georgia property. Piercy had apparently given up a small but adequate private income to leave England, which Lady Huntingdon had agreed to make good. Nevertheless the countess became increasingly demanding, and distant. Piercy had in fact written fairly frequent letters to her from Bethesda, most of which survive, and he had kept accounts, though possibly less informative than expected by an absentee owner. Much of this material was already in Lady Huntingdon's hands. Her unlooked-for aversion to Piercy perhaps derived from the adverse attitude of other, more stolid supporters, who may not have appreciated the lively side of Piercy's character. 
During 1781 the countess became satisfied by her former favourite's account of his American activities, and Piercy was ministering regularly at her Spa Fields Chapel, in Clerkenwell, next door to her London residence. He continued to do so into 1782, the year that Lady Huntingdon seceded from the established church. She asked Piercy to act as bishop for her ordinands and followers in general. On his refusal, she allegedly ceased to have personal dealings with him, but he was allowed to resume his ministry at her Woolwich chapel, although it was unlicensed. Here he ministered to an increasingly large congregation until 1796 when the rector of Woolwich, George Thomas, brought a case against him for officiating in an unlicensed chapel in his parish. Piercy preferred to hand over this chapel to his brother Joseph, already a nonconformist minister, and to seek a licensed pulpit elsewhere rather than leave the Church of England. Piercy then returned to the United States to claim again his arrears from the trustees of Bethesda. Once more he was unsuccessful. 
From 1797 to 1799 Piercy ministered at the Westminster chapel in Princes Street, Westminster, where Henry Peckwell (a junior contemporary of his at St Edmund Hall) had preached from 1774 to 1787, still then popularly known as 'Dr Peckwell's'. This was doubtless opportune, as by 1796 and 1798 his two sons, William ('b'. 1783) and Barnard ('b'. 1784), had been elected king's scholars at Westminster School. Greater proximity, in addition to more pews, may have influenced Piercy's move in 1799 to the larger Queen Square Chapel, Westminster, next to which he was able to buy a house, later 50 Queen Anne's Gate. William's alarming debts during his first year at Lincoln College, Oxford (1799-1800), resulted in a speedy transfer to the Indian army. Barnard, however, also at Lincoln from 1801, reading law, became a distinguished London barrister, who subsequently took holy orders. Piercy still owned his Queen Square house when he made his will in 1818. 
In 1804 Percy (as he now called himself) returned once more to Charles Town (now renamed Charleston). In the following year he again sought belated compensation from the trustees of Bethesda. His claim (originally larger), was recognized in 1809, when he received $500. Meanwhile, in 1805, Percy had been elected 'third minister' of St Philip's and St Michael's, an arrangement which prevailed until 1809. Although his appointment at St Philip's had been made permanent, in 1809 the electors decided not to renew his appointment at St Michael's. This was due to prejudice against his evangelical teaching. In 1810 he was also passed over for the post of first minister at St Philip's. Nevertheless in 1805 he had been made one of the first honorary doctors (in his case of divinity) of the College of South Carolina. 
It is perhaps surprising that in 1809 Percy should have been elected president of the standing committee of the diocese of South Carolina. Encouraged probably by this development, in 1810 Percy's friends began to work towards a new parish in Charleston, raising funds to build a church in the Radcliffeborough area of the city, where Percy Street still recalls his local associations. Meanwhile Percy's followers worshipped in a disused Huguenot chapel. His election as diocesan president had been preceded by publication of a substantial theological work, 'The Clergyman's and People's Remembrancer', followed by a second part in 1809. He also wrote 'An Apology for the Episcopal Church'. 
St Peter's Church -- a large building in colonial-classical style, with galleries, capable of holding 1250 people -- was not ready for consecration until 1816, when Percy was duly elected rector. At first communicants numbered about fifty; but before long there was a much larger congregation, including members of some of the leading families in Charleston. Percy continued to preach strongly evangelical sermons, which seem to have been the principal means of his influence. 'It is certain that he was the instrument of bringing many to Christ,... William Percy was one of the few Anglican evangelicals to preach and minister in these colonies for any length of time' (Williams, 'Early Ministers at St Michael's', 10). 
In 1819, his wife having died in the previous year, Percy resigned and returned to England. A few days after his arrival in Seymour Street, London, a neighbouring building caught fire during the night. Without warm clothing, Percy went outside. He died shortly afterwards, on 13 July, and was interred on 20 July in a catacomb of the newly rebuilt parish church of St Marylebone. His two sons appear to have been childless, but his daughters left descendants. His legacy included St Peter's Church, which in 1963 became the episcopalian cathedral of the South Carolina diocese. In 1997 his remains were reinterred at Brookwood cemetery, Woking, Surrey. 


@@@@@


doc= 48167


Trelawny, Sir Harry, seventh baronet (bap. 1756, d. 1834), dissenting minister, Church of England clergyman, and Roman Catholic priest, was baptized at St Budeaux, Devon, on 26 June 1756, the only son of Sir William Trelawny, sixth baronet (1722/3-1772) ['see under 'Trelawny, Edward], and his wife and first cousin, Laetitia ('bap'. 1728, died 1772), daughter of Sir Harry Trelawny, fifth baronet. He attended Plympton grammar school before 1770, and entered Westminster School that year when his father left Britain to become governor of Jamaica. On his father's death on 11 December 1772, he succeeded to the baronetcy and inherited the family estates in south-west England, including the family seat at Trelawne, in the parish of Pelynt, Cornwall. He matriculated as a commoner at Christ Church, Oxford, on 2 July 1773, and graduated BA on 26 April 1776. He married, on 28 April 1778, at Kingston St Mary, Ann (died 1822), daughter of the Revd James Brown, rector of Portishead and vicar of Kingston St Mary, both in Somerset. They had four sons and two daughters. 
Trelawny from an early age felt himself called to the Christian ministry but could not in conscience subscribe to the Church of England's formularies. After Oxford, having become intimate with Rowland Hill and undertaken itinerant preaching in Cornwall, Trelawny chose to be ordained as a Presbyterian minister on 22 April 1777 at the Above Bar chapel, Southampton, where he made a Calvinist confession of faith. He returned to Cornwall after ordination where he helped establish a chapel at West Looe. His pulpit message became progressively moderate as he fell under the influence of the more 'rational' faith of the Revd Micaiah Towgood. On 26 May 1779, in a sermon at Taunton, he pleaded for generous behaviour towards Christians of all dispensations, and insisted that even pious Unitarians were not necessarily beyond salvation. In fact Trelawny had moved into that camp, a preference underlined when he participated in an ordination service with Joseph Priestley at Lympstone, Devon, in July 1779. Theophilus Lindsey reported accurately on 27 March 1780 that 'he is now an Arian of a very liberal cast, not holding the doctrine of the Atonement' (T. Lindsey, letter to William Tayleur). But Trelawny was drifting back to Anglicanism. Sir Harry was unable to withstand pressure from his family and 'tampering' by Bishop John Ross of Exeter (T. Lindsey, letter to William Tayleur, 18 July 1780). It was clearly a considerable embarrassment to the hierarchy that the great-grandson of one of the seven bishops should be assorting with rational dissenters. He was still holding out early in 1780, opining that: 'I must think, that religion is a personal concern, and that every man, by the laws of God and reason, is obliged to enquire for himself, to form the best opinions he is able, and to act honestly, according to them. (Trelawny, 'A Letter... to... Alcock', 5-6)' But his protestations only encouraged more answers, and two months later he was back in the establishment fold, his problems with the 'Thirty-Nine Articles' apparently surmounted. 
After keeping term at Christ Church to fulfil residency requirements, Trelawny took his MA and received Anglican holy orders from Bishop Ross of Exeter in one day, 22 June 1781. He quickly made his way in the Church of England. On 27 January 1789 he was named a prebendary of Exeter; in 1791 he became vicar of St Allen, Cornwall, and exchanged it for the living of Egloshayle in the same county two years later. He restored the church there and his sermons were so popular that he had to provide additional galleries. He resigned the benefice in 1804 from a combination of ill health and inability to fulfil conditions of residency under the 1803 legislation. He gave up his prebendal stall at Exeter in 1810. Trelawny's parochial duties did not inhibit him from being a successful estate owner at Trelawne. He corresponded with Robert Bakewell over cattle breeds and was a friend of the Revd Robert Walker of St Winnow, a well-known Cornish agriculturist. 
Trelawny's religious restlessness was a recurrent part of his life, but it never seems to have affected the esteem in which most people regarded him. His goodwill towards his former dissenting colleagues was never in doubt, and his tergiversations were forgiven. As Job Orton ruefully observed: 'I never expected any steadiness from him' (Orton to the Revd Mr Hughes, 13 Sept 1780, Orton, 2.20). Preaching was Trelawny's lifelong passion, and he invariably attracted a fair-sized congregation, perhaps because 'his countenance was particularly prepossessing' ('GM', 2nd ser., 1/1, 1834, 653). His daughters Mary and Ann Letitia became Catholics and turned the family chapel at Trelawne into a Roman Catholic one. Following the death of his wife (who remained an Anglican) at Trelawne on 18 November 1822, he was persuaded by his daughters to convert to Catholicism in the mid-1820s. By that date he was permanently resident in Rome. He was ordained as a Catholic priest by Cardinal Carlo Odescalchi on 30 May 1830. Trelawny died on 25 February 1834 after an illness of ten days at Laveno on Lake Maggiore in Italy, and was buried at Laveno in a ceremony attended by all the local clergy. 


@@@@@


doc= 48169


John Benjamin Sainsbury (1871-1956), the eldest, was taken into partnership on 27 March 1915. The other sons were given responsibility appropriate to their abilities. George, the second son, looked after the firm's accounts, office administration, and distribution, while Arthur and Alfred -- the fourth and fifth sons -- took on buying roles. Arthur also had responsibility for the production of cooked meats in the firm's 'kitchens'. The youngest son, Paul, was involved in building works and design. Frank, the third son, worked on the retail side of the business for a while, but in 1902 he became a farmer, and supplied his father's shops. He improved the quality of the products purchased for the shops by holding agricultural shows and setting up a breeding centre for prize pigs at Haverhill in Suffolk. He also introduced an egg collection scheme which provided a guaranteed market for local producers provided they conformed to specified quality controls. 
J. Sainsbury Ltd was incorporated as a joint stock company on 10 November 1922 with an original share capital of $1.3 million. Only members of the Sainsbury family and their descendants were eligible to hold shares. John James became life chairman and governing director. At his death, six years later, his personal holding was reported to be about $300,000. 
John James Sainsbury disliked personal publicity and there is little evidence of his private life. His devotion to the business was such that taking his wife for a drive invariably involved a round of branch visits. He continued to attend the office until a month before his death at Bishopsfield on 3 January 1928. Mary Ann had died six months earlier also at Bishopsfield, on 9 June 1927. They were buried at Putney Vale cemetery on 13 June 1927 and 9 January 1928. 
John Benjamin Sainsbury succeeded his father as chairman of J. Sainsbury Ltd. He was born above the original Drury Lane shop on 8 January 1871 and educated in Kentish Town, close to his parents' second shop. As soon as he could count, he began to earn pocket money as an 'egg boy' and helped to drive his father's single-horse van. He progressed to salesman, learning the business alongside his father and, by 1915, was managing the day-to-day running of the firm's 122 branches. He married Mabel Miriam (1876-1941), daughter of Jacob Van den Bergh, the margarine magnate, in 1896; they had two sons, Robert James Sainsbury and Alan John Sainsbury, Baron Sainsbury, and a daughter. 
John Benjamin was, like his father, a natural retailer who spent as much time as possible in the branches. He took the novel step of appointing female branch clerical staff to release managers from administration so that they too could devote themselves to trading matters. During his chairmanship the number of Sainsbury's branches increased from 180 to 248. He took an interest in the individual performance of each branch. Fred Salisbury, his former personal assistant and the first non-Sainsbury to become a director, described him as a 'benevolent dictator' who was known for his impetuosity and explosive temper. 
John Benjamin's benevolence was most apparent in his concern for staff welfare. At a time when shop work was notoriously insecure and poorly remunerated, Sainsbury's wages were well ahead of competitors such as Lipton, Home and Colonial, and the Co-operatives. He introduced sickness payments, first through the 'good fellowship fund' on a discretionary basis in 1922, and subsequently through an insurance and pensions scheme twelve years later. The good fellowship fund also provided payments for employees in adversity. The purchase of a sports ground in 1922 and the setting up of libraries in each branch were further examples of John Benjamin's concern for his staff. 
At a time when the alleged loss of skill in the grocer's art had led trade bodies to advocate increased professionalism and practical examinations, Sainsbury's was already providing a structured career progression for promising young men. John Benjamin had introduced a training school at the company's Blackfriars headquarters as early as 1915. This foresight was appreciated by competitors, who advertised for 'Sainsbury trained men'. John Benjamin Sainsbury built on his father's successful formula of offering a wide range of high-quality provisions to a broad spectrum of society. This policy provided a more secure basis for the business than the major national multiples could command and gave Sainsbury's an advantage in the inter-war years over Lipton, Home and Colonial, and the International Stores. He also foresaw the retailing opportunities provided by the expansion of London during the inter-war years. He spent hours observing possible locations for new branches and even took his family out at weekends on picnics looking for prospective sites. He was adept at negotiating favourable terms, even boasting that developers had 'given' him sites in order to attract Sainsbury's to their locations. 
Under John Benjamin's management the business grew in both scale and complexity. The product range expanded threefold over his period of management, with the most notable additions being fresh meat and groceries. However, fresh provisions remained its mainstay. John Benjamin retired at the age of sixty-seven in 1938 following a heart attack, and moved to the Thatched House, Little Common, Bexhill, Sussex. Although he recovered fully, he felt the time was right to pass executive control to his sons, Alan John Sainsbury (1902-1998) and Robert James Sainsbury (1906-2000), who became joint general managers. He retained the title of chairman until his death in 1956. He and his wife took a keen interest in the work of several charitable institutions, most notably the Pioneer Health Centre at Peckham, Queen Charlotte's Hospital, and the Mothercraft Training Centre at Highgate. His keen horsemanship was almost the only activity which would tear him away from the business. He rode with the Middlesex Farmers' Draghounds and the Whaddon Chase and, in his earlier days, drove tandems and phaetons. He continued to attend the office in later years and took an active interest in the firm's affairs. When the company ventured into self-service shopping in 1950 he instantly understood the potential of the new retailing method. After viewing the first self-service shop he demanded to know why every branch was not already undergoing conversion. John Benjamin Sainsbury died at the London Clinic, Marylebone, after injuries sustained in a fall, on 23 May 1956. He was cremated at Golders Green crematorium and his ashes buried at Putney Vale cemetery on 29 May; a memorial service was held at Southwark Cathedral on 5 June. 
Alan and Robert Sainsbury, as general managers, each specialized in different aspects of the business: Alan on the retailing and trading side, Robert with responsibility for finance and general administration. After the Second World War, and the ending of both food rationing and the restrictions on new building, the brothers made Sainsbury's a leader in the introduction of self-service stores, supported by computerized stock control. Alan Sainsbury took over from his father as chairman in 1956, and served in that role until 1967; he was given a life peerage in 1962. 
J. Sainsbury Ltd remained wholly in the ownership of its founding family until 1973, when it underwent public flotation. The Sainsbury family remained major shareholders, however, and retained executive responsibility until 1998. John Sainsbury, who served as chairman from 1969 to 1992, and his cousin David Sainsbury, who succeeded him and retired from the business in 1998, were great-grandsons of the founders. After the flotation the Sainsbury group, J Sainsbury plc, diversified into other retailing activities and operated four store chains in the UK and USA. Sainsbury's Bank, a joint venture with the Bank of Scotland, was established in 1997. 


