@@@@@


doc= 48172


Samuel, Frank (1889-1954), gramophone manufacturer and industrialist, was born on 19 January 1889 at 20 Marlborough Place, London, the youngest of three children in the Jewish family of Nelson Samuel and his wife, Harriett Hymans. Nelson headed the prosperous family business of Barnett Samuel, an old established firm of London piano manufacturers and musical instrument dealers. Frank Samuel was educated at Clifton College and subsequently studied in Lausanne and Berlin. 
In 1904, Samuel, together with his brother Edgar and two cousins, entered the family business, then undergoing a transformation caused by the new recording industry. A decade later, the four -- by this time presiding over one of the largest record wholesalers and dealerships in London -- patented the first portable gramophone which they called the Decca Dulcephone. This major breakthrough in the technology of recorded sound gave good-quality reproduction and the convenience of portability: the Decca could be carried around like a briefcase. 
Poor eyesight excluded Samuel from war service in 1914, and he ran the business with his father while the other partners went off to fight. The essentially static nature of trench warfare meant that gramophones and records quickly became a feature of life on the western front. As a consequence, there was a brisk trade in Barnett Samuel's 'Trench' model Decca, which allowed the company to prosper during these difficult years. The death of Edgar Samuel on active service in Flanders in 1916 meant that on his father's death in 1920 Frank Samuel became head of the company. He married Esther Marie, daughter of A. D. Benjamin on 20 December 1916, but the marriage did not produce any children. 
During the ensuing decade sales of the Decca range of gramophones rocketed to become the most profitable area of the business. By 1928 turnover was seven times its pre-war level. In that year, Frank Samuel calculated that sales of Decca gramophones had probably peaked, and that in order to remain competitive his company had to expand and diversify. In addition, he and his family wanted to realize a part of their company fortunes. This led Samuel and the other directors to take Barnett Samuel to a successful flotation on the London stock exchange in 1928. In those boom days, the shares were over-subscribed by a factor of twenty, with Samuel's own share in the new business, renamed the Decca Gramophone Company Ltd, worth over $100,000. At this juncture, Samuel sold his shares and severed his links with the business. 
Freed from the demands of day-to-day management of a large concern, Samuel embarked on a world cruise. However this was cut short when he accepted the offer of a position as joint managing director with the United Africa Company (UAC), a commodity trading subsidiary of Unilever. Over the next decade, Samuel nursed this business through the ravages of the depression, diversifying its interests into heavy industry, motor vehicles, refrigerated food, and cargo shipping (the origins of the Palm Line). However, by 1938, although UAC remained in a poor financial condition, it had gained a reputation for exploitation and monopolistic practices, and Samuel's own expansionist aims of creating manufacturing and trading organizations from within the local African population themselves had foundered upon problems of capital and resource scarcity. 
The coming of war in 1939 saw Samuel left to run the business while his colleagues went to war. The Second World War provided him with the opportunity to transform the company's fortunes. Also at this time other responsibilities came his way, specifically his appointment in 1940 to the main Unilever board. Like many other companies, UAC was co-opted by the Ministry of Food into the business of commodity requisition. Although this move deprived UAC of its usual speculative trading business, the company was able to shrug off its exploitative image; it also expanded its retailing, processing, and manufacturing sectors, opening up factories and stores across west Africa. Meanwhile, Samuel was recruiting younger men such as Arthur Smith and George (later Lord) Cole, both of whom went on to be chairmen of UAC and Unilever respectively. 
Ironically, the Tanganyika groundnut scheme of 1946-51 proved to be Samuel's major career failure and the first venture to bring him into the public eye. Born out of the worldwide shortage of edible oils and fats and Britain's own shortage of hard currency in the mid-1940s, the scheme saw Samuel uncharacteristically back a venture without sufficient investigation of the enormous risks involved. It all but collapsed in 1948, overburdened by soaring costs and local difficulties of labour procurement and transportation. Nevertheless, Samuel became chairman of UAC in 1953 and continued to establish new industries in west Africa. Under his direction UAC was transformed from a loss-making liability to a corporation with pre-tax profits of over $14 million. Samuel's colleagues later praised his 'strong sense of justice' and 'intensity of concentration', together with his 'great gift for developing subordinates, always seeking to give them confidence in their own powers' ('DBB', 42). 
Samuel died suddenly at his home, 25 Harley House, Regent's Park, Marylebone, London, on 25 February 1954, while still active in business life. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 48173


Sangster, John Young (1896-1977), motorcycle manufacturer, was born on 29 May 1896 at Northfield, near Birmingham, the second of three sons of Charles Thomas Brock Sangster, a Birmingham engineer and businessman of Scottish origin and his wife, Louisa, 'nee' Wicks. He was educated at Hurstpierpoint College in Sussex. Then it is believed he underwent apprenticeship in French and German cycle and car factories, where he acquired linguistic ability. The outbreak of war terminated this training and he served in the City of Birmingham battalion of the 14th Royal Warwickshire regiment from 1914 to 1918. 
About 1896, Sangster's father had joined the Cycle Components Manufacturing Company in Birmingham, becoming managing director in 1897. This firm acquired the Ariel Cycle Company, also in Birmingham, and the first Ariel motor tricycle was exhibited in 1898, followed by a car in 1900 and a motorcycle in 1905. After the war, Jack Sangster, as he was known, developed a motor quadricycle at a factory in Tyseley belonging to his father's company. The design was taken over by the Rover Company in Coventry and became the Rover Eight car, a 'simple, yet efficient, little air-cooled, flat-twinned' 1000 cc or 8 hp car (Holliday, 63). Rover gave Sangster a job in Coventry producing the car where 'he won a good name for himself' ('The Times', 29 March 1977). He left in 1923 to join his father at Components and by 1930 was its joint managing director with his father. The Ariel Nine and Ten cars were his idea though inappropriate for a firm already doing badly in the depression and facing competition from Morris and Austin. 
A better future appeared to lie with motorcycles. Edward Turner, Val Page, and Bert Hopwood were on the design staff at this time. However, Components was driven into receivership in 1932, and Sangster was able to buy the machinery and part of the premises at Dale Road in Bournbrook, Selly Oak, beside the university, to form Ariel Motors. He was the chairman and main shareholder, assisted in a minor way by his brother Harvey; his father died in 1935. Ariel went on making motorcycles, for the army during the war, until Sangster sold out to the Birmingham Small Arms Company (BSA) in 1944 for $376,257. The factory closed in 1963. 
Sangster's ambition led him to acquire other, bigger, interests. In 1935 he bought the Triumph motorcycle business (not the car side) and its Priory works in Coventry for $50,000 from the receiver. He was chairman from 1936 to 1964. He brought across Edward Turner and Bert Hopwood from Ariel as manager and designer. Sangster drove the Triumph Engineering Company hard: staff either left or took a pay cut, sales managers were pushed out on to the road to sell, and new models were produced, including the famous Speed Twin and the Tiger. One model, in 1937, could do 90 m.p.h. In 1936, the New Imperial motorcycle company was absorbed. Success was achieved. 
The war brought changes. Priory works was only 200 yards from Coventry Cathedral and was destroyed during the same air raid in November 1940. Production continued in temporary premises and a new works was built at Meriden on the edge of Coventry in 1942. Peace brought a modest expansion at Meriden and the firm went from strength to strength. Triumph produced 5000 motorcycles a year very profitably (in contrast to BSA which produced 50,000 much less profitably). 
However, Sangster became concerned at the impact his death duties could have on the firm and he and Turner decided to sell out to BSA in 1951 for $2.5 million. Sangster became a director, bringing much needed motorcycle expertise to the BSA board, then chaired by Sir Bernard Docker and managed by James Leek. Sangster and Leek led the attack on Docker's mistaken emphasis on the Daimler car side and his (and his wife's) flamboyant extravagances. As a result, Sangster became chairman from 1956 until 1961, retiring when he reached sixty-five. Although he guided BSA through a period of good profitability, he failed to update the technology in production and design or to expand production sufficiently to meet demand, let alone the potential demand that subsequent new models and sympathetic marketing generated in the 1970s. As a result, BSA and Triumph gradually yielded their place as world leaders to France and Italy (in mopeds and scooters) in the 1950s and to Japan (in under-350 cc and finally the 500-1000 cc motorcycles) in the 1960s. The failure seems to have lain with the main board and not with middle management. Apart from Sangster, Edward Turner and Sangster's successor, Eric Turner, have a great deal to answer for in this decline to extinction in the early 1970s. Sangster remained as a director of BSA until he was seventy-two. However, he had been living in London from about 1953 and so was seldom seen at either BSA's works at Small Heath or Triumph's at Meriden. 
Bob Holliday described Sangster as having a 'clever head for business with a trained mechanical mind, attributes that enabled him to select the right men as his lieutenants and to evaluate the potentialities of a good design when he saw one' (Holliday, 63). Even Hopwood considered him 'needlesharp' (Hopwood, 13) and 'The Times' called him 'a formidable leader of design and production teams'. Subsequent history casts some doubt on whether this acumen continued into the late 1950s. A rather different impression is given by the 'Birmingham Mail''s 'shy millionaire' dictum of 1 June 1956. 
Motorcycling was one of Sangster's recreations, along with motoring, skiing, and yachting. He married three times, first in 1923 to Kathleen Burns; they had one daughter, Heather. His second marriage was in 1951, to Phyllis, daughter of Frederick K. Hamer, a retired colonel, and the third, in 1963, to Margery, daughter of Robert Cheney Hart, a company director. Margery and Heather survived him. He died of cancer at his home, 34 Ennismore Gardens, Westminster, London, on 26 March 1977. 


@@@@@


doc= 48178


Schroder, (Rudolph) Bruno, Baron Schroder in the Prussian nobility (1867-1940), merchant banker, was born on 14 March 1867 in Hamburg, Germany, the eighth of the nine children of Johann Rudolph Schroder (1821-1887), merchant and merchant banker, and his wife, Clara Louise, a daughter of John Henry Schroder (1784-1883), who in 1818 founded the London merchant bank J. Henry Schroder & Co. Bruno was educated in Hamburg and performed his military service in the second Mecklenburg dragoons, achieving the rank of captain. 
In 1888, aged twenty-one, Schroder began his training with the family firm, Schroder Gebruder. Established in 1846 by his father and uncle, it was a Hamburg merchant and merchant-banking firm, specializing in trade in sugar, coffee, and saltpetre. For three years he worked as an unpaid 'volunteer' at J. Henry Schroder & Co., London, by then one of the City's leading merchant banks and the most important of the international nexus of Schroder family firms. In 1891-2 he toured the USA and Central America, familiarizing himself with clients and conditions. After his return to Hamburg in July 1892 he joined Schroder Gebruder, but a few months later 'the exceptional chance of a lifetime', as a nephew put it, came his way ('DBB', 71). His childless uncle, Baron Sir John Henry William Schroder (1825-1910), the senior partner of J. Henry Schroder & Co., invited him to join the London firm with a view to succeeding him as senior partner. 
Schroder's move revitalized the bonds between the Schroder firms and families in Hamburg and London. For half a century thereafter, years when the ties to Germany of other Anglo-German houses loosened and the younger generation was distracted from business by politics and society, Schroders continued to be strongly committed to German clients. When the senior partner was not at his desk, inspired by his uncle's example he devoted himself to family and private pastimes, orchid cultivation, and art collection, notably German Renaissance silver. He regarded himself as a trustee charged on behalf of his ancestors and family with a duty to continue the firm and its traditions and to enhance its standing. He was a devout Lutheran and a staunch supporter of London's Lutheran churches and their charitable works, especially the German Hospital at Dalston. For these works and for his charitable activities in his native Hamburg, he was made a Prussian baron ('Freiherr') in July 1904, and henceforth was known as Baron Bruno. 
Bruno Schroder started at J. Henry Schroder & Co. on 1 January 1893. Two years later, aged twenty-seven, he joined his uncle and Henry Tiarks in the partnership. Both these partners were in their sixties and executive management of the firm was soon assumed by Bruno Schroder. He was joined in the partnership in 1902 by Frank Tiarks (1874-1952), the son of Henry Tiarks, thereby continuing the business association of their families for a second generation. Bruno Schroder and Frank Tiarks, though in many ways temperamentally opposites, made a formidable team. So thoroughly had the younger generation taken control of the firm that the retirement of Henry Tiarks in 1905 and Baron Sir John Henry William Schroder in 1909 made almost no difference to the day-to-day conduct of business. 
The 1890s and 1900s were prosperous times for City firms, especially Schroders. The volume of the firm's core international trade finance business more than doubled in these decades, and balance sheet acceptances outstanding at year end rose from $5 million in 1893 to $11 million in 1913, the second largest level of activity in the City. Underlying the expansion was the rapid growth of German international trade, though Schroders' success in winning business owed much to Bruno Schroder's outstanding capabilities as a commercial banker. His strengths were his ability to make sound judgements regarding people and propositions, and his mastery of the technicalities of the bill of exchange. Above all he had an expert knowledge of the trades that Schroders financed, and he kept a careful eye on the business of clients. The tale is told of his meeting with Caesar Czarnikow, the sugar magnate, when he insisted that Czarnikow should accept a larger credit line than he had asked for and was proved justified by developments in the sugar market. Such was his standing as a money market expert that in the 1920s he was consulted by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and the Banque de France for advice on the development of discount markets in New York and Paris. 
Schroder's personality inspired faith in his judgement and dependability. He was quiet and sober in manner, but possessed of such dignity and authority that his very presence commanded respect. His integrity was beyond question and he was tempted neither by an apparently easy profit nor to compromise on a strict standard of straightforwardness. He was outraged, for instance, when in the 1920s it was suggested that the firm might very profitably join an issuing syndicate for a new bond issue for the Romanian government before compensation had been arranged for the holders of pre-war bonds, and he flatly refused to add a first-class name to the prospectus of a second-class borrower. His practice in business was to listen carefully and courteously to the requests of clients and to make an immediate decision upon which a client could rely with absolute confidence. 'I do not think it can have occurred to anyone', wrote Henry Andrews, a manager at Schroders between the wars: 'that Baron Schroder could let him down... he was a great gentleman and without doubt one of the very small company on whom depended the good name of London in the world of finance and the leadership of London in that world. ('DBB', 73)' 

Schroders was already well-established as an issuing house specializing in finance for overseas railway construction and for Latin American governments. Under Baron Bruno's leadership, the firm participated energetically and profitably in London's issuing boom of the years 1905-14. Schroder became closely involved in some of the enterprises, notably in devising the San Paulo coffee valorization scheme of 1908, and he became chairman of the committee responsible for the sale of the collateral coffee. The sovereign bond issues that the firm made for Bulgaria and Romania just before the First World War marked the extension of Schroders' issuing business into central Europe, a development resulting from Baron Bruno's contacts with continental cousins and friends which was to be taken much further after 1919. 
Baron Bruno's ties to Germany remained strong despite his move to England. On 5 April 1894 he had married Emma, 'nee' Deichmann, the daughter of a Cologne banker; they had two sons and two daughters. His principal interest apart from business was the extensive and largely German Schroder family. Both at his Hamburg home, which he visited each July, and at Dell Park, Englefield Green (near Windsor), the estate he purchased in 1900, the visitors were predominantly relatives. In the inter-war period, especially during the inflation of 1923 and the depression of the 1930s, he gave financial assistance to family members, and in October 1931 he created the Rudolph-Clara Schroder Stiftung, a charitable foundation designed to help impoverished descendants of his parents. He continued to support the charities established by his uncle to care for indigent Germans in London. His charitable work was publicly acknowledged not only when he was made a baron in 1904, but again in 1937 when on his seventieth birthday he was awarded an honorary DMed by the University of Hamburg. 
As the antagonism between Britain and Germany intensified during the decade prior to 1914, Baron Bruno remained resolutely Anglo-German and actively fostered understanding between the two nations; in 1905 he joined with other Anglo-German financiers including Sir Ernest Cassel, Alfred Beit, and Edgar Speyer to found the Anglo-German Union Club; in 1907 he entertained a group of visiting British journalists at his mother's home in Hamburg; in 1910 he endowed a chair in German at Cambridge University. 
The outbreak of war between Britain and Germany in August 1914 posed not only commercial problems for Schroders but an immediate threat to the firm's continued existence. Schroder himself was a German citizen, raising the danger that the firm would be seized as enemy property. He was promptly naturalized by the home secretary, Reginald McKenna, who had received urgent representations to do so from the governor of the Bank of England. McKenna explained to the House of Commons that prompt action was essential because: 'It is a very large, I believe the largest, accepting house in the City of London, and the very highest commercial authority in the City represented to me that it would be a disaster -- no less a word was used -- if the doors of Baron Schroder did not open on the following morning, and, unless he had been naturalised at once, they would not have opened. ('DBB', 74)' Anti-German sentiment ran high in England during the war and Schroder and his family suffered much abuse and even threats. The court of aldermen of the City of London protested against his naturalization as did a number of MPs, some of whom called for his internment. Schroder's position as a trustee for various German charities, particularly the Kaiser Jubilee Fund, established in 1913, and his contributions to the funds of the emergency committee formed to relieve the plight of German nationals interned in England were cited as evidence of his disloyalty. Another purported justification for suspicion was that his eldest son, who was on holiday in Germany when war broke out, was called up into the German army. The news of his disappearance on the Russian front in 1915 was a cruel blow. When challenged to reveal his loyalties in the conflict he replied, 'I feel as if my father and my mother have had a quarrel' ('DBB', 74). 
If the German connections of firm and family led to difficulty and tragedy during the hostilities, in the post-war period they once again created opportunities. The seizure of the City subsidiaries of German banks by the British authorities during the war created problems for the clearance of their transactions in London after 1919, particularly during the period of the German hyperinflation. Much of this business came to Schroders, briefly swelling the firm's staff from some 200 to more than 600 in 1924. 
Baron Bruno's close connections with central European banks led Schroders to participate in the placement of their shares during the 1920s, and to his appointment to the board of the Osterreichische Boden Creditanstalt. His links with the Deutsche Bank led to the controversial episode in 1923 when a British syndicate led by Schroders took control of the Baghdad Railway through the acquisition of the Deutsche Bank's interest. The following year, Baron Bruno played a crucial part in the re-establishment of the creditworthiness of the Deutsche Bank after the devastation of its balance sheet during the period of inflation. 
Schroders worked closely with other leading City firms both before and after the war. The celebrated Barings-Rothschild-Schroders syndicate started in 1921, though issues continued with other merchant banks. Baron Bruno, like his uncle, preferred to keep distractions from Schroder business to a minimum. Outside directorships were taken only in firms with which Schroders had close commercial connections, such as the North British Mercantile Insurance Company or the New Zealand Loan and Mercantile Agency. Unlike his partner, Frank Tiarks, Schroder did not play a prominent part in the institutions of the City or in public life. 
The early 1920s saw the emergence of New York as an important centre for international trade finance and the international capital market. In October 1923 Schroder and Tiarks established a New York bank with a capital of $3 million, the J. Henry Schroder Banking Corporation, the only London merchant bank to take such an initiative. Baron Bruno became chairman of the board, and he visited the concern annually in the 1920s. The Schroder banks specialized in fund-raising for clients in Germany and in the other countries of central Europe. Schroder's name became particularly closely associated with the rationalization of the German potash industry and Schroders made several large issues for the German potash syndicate in the years between the wars. 
As German trade revived after 1924 German merchants turned once again to London for trade finance. The volume of Schroders' German acceptances grew rapidly and by the end of the 1920s it had the biggest international trade finance business in the City. Working capital for German industry was also in short supply as a result of the depredations of the hyper-inflation of 1923. In 1924 Baron Bruno organized the formation of the Continental and Industrial Trust to meet the demand for equity and loan capital to medium-sized industrial firms in Germany. 
While the international economy remained buoyant Schroders prospered. However, the virtual collapse of the central European banking system in the summer of 1931 and the ensuing suspension of the settlement of international obligations posed a grave threat, since the amount owing was several times the firm's capital. The 'standstill agreements' of the 1930s, in which the leading negotiator on the part of the creditors was Frank Tiarks, averted the immediate danger of failure, but it was not until the early 1950s that the funds were recovered, severely curtailing the business of the firm in the 1930s and 1940s. 
Although remaining senior partner until his death, Baron Bruno played a less active part in the firm in the 1930s. While consulted on major matters, he left the day-to-day running of the business to his partners, who since 1926 had included his son, Helmut (1901-1969), and Frank Tiarks's son, Henry (1900-1995). Baron Bruno died on 10 December 1940 at his home, Dell Park, Englefield Green, Surrey, being laid to rest at St Jude's, Englefield Green. He was succeeded in the firm as senior partner by his son Helmut. 


@@@@@


doc= 48179


Sears, John George (1870-1916), shoe manufacturer and retailer, was born on 6 February 1870 in Northampton, the eldest child of James Sears, leather seller and shoe manufacturer, and Amelia ('nee' Cushion), both of Northampton. After attending a local elementary school Sears was apprenticed in the shoe trade, working for the Manfield company in Northampton. In 1891 he began a business with his younger brother William Thomas Sears, under the name J. Sears & Co. Production was initially small-scale with the company able to take outwork for the strike-bound Manfields during the great shoe dispute of 1895. A year later, with his business prospering, Sears married Caroline Wooding, of Northampton, with whom he had one daughter and two sons. 
The company soon began to make a bigger mark. According to an obituarist, 'it was not alone in the manufacture of boots and shoes that Mr. Sears won his way.... He was the pioneer of the modern multiple business which caters for the middle class man and makes specialities lines at fixed prices. ('Northampton Daily Chronicle', 19 Feb 1916)' In 1897 Sears opened his first branch shop, and in 1900 a branch in Fleet Street, London. By 1912 the company had eighty branches, forty-seven of which were in the London area. Production was continually expanded with moves to bigger works and then extensions to a purpose-built factory. In January 1912 the company was floated as a public company under the name J. Sears & Co. (Trueform Boot Company) Ltd. In 1913 it took over another local manufacturing company run by Frank Panther who joined the Sears board. The war brought further prosperity from government orders and when Sears died the company was employing some 1000 workers in production and 1000 in retailing. 
Sears was renowned for his capacity for work, and some felt that overwork contributed to his early death at the age of forty-six. However, the company success was the result of a team effort, including that of his brother, Frank Panther, and others, and for this reason the firm continued to prosper after his death. Sears's own flair lay in the retailing side, especially in selecting sites for high-street shops that would prove attractive to middle-class customers, and in overseeing the development of the retailing strategy. 
It was expected that local manufacturers would play a role in the regulation of the shoe industry, and Sears served on the clicking arbitration board. In 1913 he also became president of the Northampton Shoe Manufacturers Association. However, the ill health that was to dog his last years and lead to his early death forced him to step down. This perhaps also prevented him from playing a more prominent political role. He was a Liberal in politics but refused to stand for local office. Like other manufacturers he supported local philanthropic causes. His ill health was such that he finally withdrew from real influence on the business in the last year of his life. 
During his lifetime Sears rose from being a humble 'clicker' (or leather cutter) in the shoe industry to the position of a great manufacturer and retailer. As he became more prominent, his lifestyle inevitably changed. He had been born into a Congregationalist family, but later switched to the Church of England. In 1913-14 he bought and extended Collingtree Grange in Northamptonshire, the former estate of a prominent local brewer, and there he spent his last years collecting books and works of art, and taking an interest in breeding pedigree cattle. He was a prominent mason and served as a provincial grand master. 
Sears died on 19 February 1916 at Collingtree Grange, survived by his wife; he was buried at St Columba's Church, Collingtree, on 23 February. The firm which he and his brother founded was to experience dramatic growth in the early twentieth century. It eventually became Sears plc, a conglomerate which played a major role in the retailing of shoes and clothing in the UK in the second half of the twentieth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 48180


McColvin, Lionel Roy (1896-1976), librarian, was born on 30 November 1896 at Heaton, Newcastle upon Tyne. He was the second son and third child of John Andrew McColvin, a portrait painter, and his wife, Isabel ('nee' Stewart); there were two more children, of whom one, Eric Raymond ('b'. 1904), was afterwards librarian at the polytechnic, Regent Street. In 1901 the family moved to London and finally settled at 38 Lebanon Road, East Croydon. McColvin attended Portland Road primary school, and, at the age of eleven, won a scholarship to Croydon Council Boys' Secondary School, later part of Selhurst grammar school. In 1911 he became a junior assistant in the central library in Katharine Street, following his elder brother, Norman. McColvin enlisted in the 24th Middlesex regiment in 1915, transferred to the 2nd Border regiment, and fought in the third battle of Ypres in October 1917. He returned to Croydon public libraries in 1919 and was later appointed reference librarian. He attended the school of librarianship at University College, London, and passed the Library Association examinations in 1920-21; his diploma thesis, 'Music in Public Libraries', completed and approved in 1923, was published in 1924. Appointed chief assistant at Wigan Public Library on 1 April 1921, he there met and on 18 April 1922 married Mary Carter, the only daughter of William and Esther Carter. 
McColvin became chief librarian at Ipswich in the summer of 1924 and the new central library opened in September 1924. He took an active part in planning the interior, and made much of it open-access for the first time. Helped by William Paul, a local corn merchant, he secured enough money to restock the shelves; he promoted musical activities, created a children's library, encouraged extension work and the drama, and actively publicized the library service. A keen amateur musician, he organized celebrity concerts in Ipswich and through them met many famous musical figures. He contributed to 'The Sackbut', the 'Musical Times', and other musical papers. Between 1920 and 1929 McColvin contributed to 'Library World' under the pseudonym Aristonymous, and, under another pseudonym, John Molvin, wrote plays, two of which were published, and most of which were produced by the Ipswich library players. This culminated in his Ipswich pageant play 'To Kill the Queen', produced between 17 and 20 June 1931. 
In 1931 McColvin was appointed chief librarian at Hampstead and curator of the Keats House Museum. His principal achievement was the new Belsize Library, but he also rejuvenated the lending library stock and introduced chamber music concerts. In 1936 he undertook a survey of public libraries in the United States, part of an international project undertaken by the Library Association, and the results, edited by McColvin, appeared in 1938. While at Hampstead he published a number of influential books: 'Library Stock and Assistance to Readers' (1936); 'Libraries and the Public' (1937); and 'Music Libraries' (2 vols., 1937-8). On 1 April 1938 he became city librarian at Westminster and remained there until his retirement on 30 November 1961. In 1940 he was put in charge of the civil defence report centre for Westminster, but still found opportunity, granted six months' paid leave of absence, to undertake extended tours around the country for an inquiry into the public library service, published as 'The Public Library System of Great Britain' (1942): the McColvin report. But its recommendations were not then accepted. 
McColvin served on the Library Association's council from 1925; he was also a member of the wartime emergency committee, honorary secretary (1934-51), editor of the 'Library Association Record' (1941-5), president (1952), and honorary fellow (1961). He was made CBE in 1951. McColvin worked for UNESCO and was a member of its British co-operating committee; he also worked for the British Council and travelled extensively on its behalf, and was a member of the International Federation of Library Associations (IFLA) as vice-president and chairman of the public libraries section, and of the Society of Municipal and County Chief Librarians, which he was instrumental in establishing. In Westminster, in the post-war period, he opened a new branch library in Charing Cross Road and founded the central music library. He was a member of the Roberts committee, whose report (1959) led to the 1964 'Public Libraries and Museums Act'. He was forced to retire in 1961, affected by defective memory caused by two strokes, and died on 16 January 1976 at Southgate. He was cremated at Golders Green. 
McColvin (Mac) was personally unassuming and not especially gregarious. A pipe-smoker and beer-drinker, he was always accessible to colleagues, no matter how junior, and was willing to listen, quick-witted, a fluent speaker, and an excellent committee man; he wrote and published prolifically. He was agnostic, although his wife was a Roman Catholic. His eldest son, (Kenneth) Roy, later became librarian of Lambeth. McColvin was the most influential British public librarian of the twentieth century. He was best-known for his promotion of cultural extension activities in libraries, and his insistence on the key role of public libraries in community life. 


@@@@@


doc= 48184


Shippam, Alfred Ernest Cooper (1874-1947), meat and fish paste manufacturer, was born on 19 May 1874 in East Street, Chichester, Sussex, the seventh child and fifth son in the family of eight sons and three daughters of Charles Shippam (1828-1897), pork butcher, of Chichester, and his wife, Caroline, 'nee' Cooper (1840-1915). He was educated at Hurstpierpoint College, leaving in 1891 to join the wool-stapling firm Priors, of East Walls, Chichester. In 1899 he married Mary Prior; they had one son and one daughter. Before his engagement Shippam had hoped to move to Australia as Priors' representative, but by 1897 he had left the firm to join five of his brothers in the Shippam family business. 
Shippams had been founded in 1786 by Charles Shippam, who opened a grocery business in Westgate, Chichester, which later moved to 48 East Street. His grandson, also Charles (Alfred's father), was established there as a pork butcher and bacon curer by 1851. As the reputation of its 'Chichester' sausages grew, Shippams supplied an increasing market, and in 1892 the first factory was built. In the 1890s they began making potted meats and pastes, which were cooked and minced before being put into earthenware jars and covered with melted lard. In 1896 Chichester brand potted meats and pastes were shown at the Royal Agricultural Hall in London, and British troops fighting in the South African War (1899-1902) were supplied with Shippams canned sausages. Charles Shippam died in 1897, and in 1899 five of his six sons who worked in the business formed a partnership, with shares allocated according to age. This changed in 1905 when they placed themselves on an equal basis, each with supervision of a different department: Alfred Shippam was in charge of production. In 1906 Upton Sinclair's 'The Jungle' exposed the unsanitary conditions in the Chicago stockyards. In the resulting scandal, the 'Daily Mail', which had printed extracts, expressed concern about the use by English sausage-makers of American canned meat and encouraged domestic firms to invite its team of medical inspectors into their factories. At Shippams, the inspectors found 'an ideally clean and well-managed factory for providing the public with first-class foodstuffs, cleanly and carefully handled throughout all procedures and stages of preparation' ('Daily Mail', 23 June 1906). Thanks to this endorsement, Shippams suffered very little from the general slump in the sale of cooked meats following Sinclair's revelations. In 1905 the company began to sell meat and fish pastes in glass jars with airtight metal lids, a transition which was completed by 1909 and which greatly increased the life of the products. In 1910, for example, Captain Robert Scott took several cases of Shippams potted meats as well as soups and tins of Christmas puddings to the Antarctic. Potted meats and pastes, which provided 40 per cent of sales in 1910, accounted for over 70 per cent by 1914. As the business grew, the range of products and flavours increased, and with the completion of a new factory at East Walls, Chichester, in 1913, the company offered thirteen meat and thirteen fish pastes, as well as other products including galantine of wild boar's head and yachting pies. 
In 1913 C. Shippam Ltd replaced the partnership, with the five brothers as managing directors, equal in status but paid according to age. As the older brothers retired, members of the younger generation were brought in, and the board of directors and shareholders continued to be exclusively family members. In 1923 Alfred Shippam took on the role of general manager. He had always been particularly concerned with the well-being of the employees, and they held him in great affection. Shippams was a family business, which prided itself on treating its employees as members of an extended family. A bonus scheme started in 1921, and annual company outings in 1924. In 1927 an employee club house opened; profit sharing was introduced a year later; and a pension plan followed in 1939. Most of the staff spent their whole working lives with the firm, which never made anyone redundant and always found jobs for the children and grandchildren of employees, even if there was no need for extra labour. C. Shippam Ltd survived another scare over food hygiene in 1922, when eight people died from botulism poisoning after eating duck paste sandwiches (not Shippams) on a fishing trip in Loch Maree. Although sales of paste fell, public confidence was restored after a report by the Scottish board of health in 1923, and helped further in 1924 by a visit to the factory by Queen Mary, when she was presented with a miniature paste jar, filled with anchovy paste, for the royal doll's house. Production doubled during the 1920s to over 1,100,000 dozen jars of paste in 1929, but sales fell during the depression. In 1934 Alfred Shippam proposed to the board, which had always resisted advertising, that the firm embark on a national marketing scheme organized through the London Press Exchange. His initiative proved successful and advertisements appeared in newspapers and magazines; in 1938 the firm sponsored 'Mrs Celebrity', a series on Radio Normandy. 
During the Second World War many of the workforce were called up, and women were first employed in the factory in 1942. Alfred, the last of the original five partners still active in the business, managed the company with the help of his nephew Bassil, and despite the shortage of raw materials, sales of paste grew, and the company survived the war in the same financial condition as before. He continued to attend board meetings until two weeks before his death. In 1947 C. Shippam Ltd received a royal warrant of appointment as suppliers of meat and fish pastes to HM King George VI. 
In addition to his business life, Alfred Shippam was a churchwarden of All Saints' Church, Chichester, and an active member of Chichester Cathedral. He served as a JP from 1922 until his death, and was a governor of Hurstpierpoint College from 1933. He died of a coronary thrombosis on 13 April 1947 at his home, 2 Cawley Road, Chichester, and was buried three days later, after a funeral at Chichester Cathedral. The Shippam family lost control of the business in 1974 when C. Shippam Ltd was taken over by an American company, William Underwood of Boston. After changing hands several times, it became part of the Princes Foods Manufacturing Group. 


@@@@@


doc= 48185


Robinson, Sir (Edward) Stanley Gotch (1887-1976), numismatist, was born on 4 July 1887 at 23 Westfield Park, Clifton, Bristol, the sixth of the seven children of Edward Robinson, paper merchant, and his wife, Katherine Frances, the daughter of the Revd Dr Gotch. He was born into a large and well-established Baptist, Bristol family, whose fortune was founded on paper manufacture. Of a gentle and retiring nature, Robinson developed an early stammer: he was consequently sent to London to stay in the house of a speech therapist, E. J. Seltman, who was by chance also a dealer in coins. Thereafter, Robinson attended Clifton College before winning a scholarship to Christ Church, Oxford, in 1906. At Oxford his formative academic influences were Professor Percy Gardner and his college Greek history tutor, Robin Dundas. Robinson won firsts in moderations and in Greats in 1910, and then visited Greece, staying at the British School in Athens. In 1911 he travelled for some months on horseback in Lycia, Turkey, and his diary from this time survives. This experience fitted him well to take up the post of assistant keeper in the department of coins and medals at the British Museum in June 1912, but his life's work there was soon interrupted by the outbreak of war. He joined the Northamptonshire regiment in 1914 and served in France in 1915-16, until he was incapacitated by a very severe leg wound. This put a stop to the riding and dancing of his youth, and in later life seriously limited his mobility. In convalescence on 27 October 1917 he married Pamela Comfrey, the daughter of Sir Victor Horsley, an eminent surgeon. The marriage was to provide the foundation of a deeply happy and satisfying family life with two sons and four daughters. 
In the course of the 1930s Robinson established himself as an authority of international renown on Greek coinage. In 1938 he succeeded to the post of reader in numismatics at Oxford, which he held simultaneously with his post in the British Museum. He used to stay the night with Dundas in Christ Church, allowing him to spend almost two days a week in the Heberden coin room of the Ashmolean Museum. Colin Kraay and Kenneth Jenkins, later keepers in Oxford and at the British Museum, were both taught by Robinson in this way. Pupils recalled that tutorials often seemed like the preparatory study for a learned article, as the evidence for a particular topic was weighed from every viewpoint, and in the light of the most up-to-date research. Robinson certainly combined a life of hugely influential teaching with a scholarly output of the highest quality. He produced a stream of monographs and papers on coinage that are listed in the bibliography of the Festschrift presented to him in 1968: his Cyrenaica volume of the British Museum catalogue of Greek coins, and the development of the 'Sylloge Nummorum Graecorum' project were his most outstanding achievements. 
Robinson was made deputy keeper of the department at the British Museum in 1936, and he spent the Second World War, together with the evacuated collections, in the Warwickshire house of Compton Wynyates. In 1948 his scholarly contribution was recognized by his election to a fellowship of the British Academy and he was made keeper at the British Museum in 1949. In 1951 -- shortly before his retirement and his appointment as CBE in 1952 -- he took up a house at Stepleton Iwerne, near Blandford Forum, Dorset. The home and gardens he made there were to provide the focus of his long and extremely happy retirement. In 1955 he was made an honorary DLitt and an honorary student of Christ Church, and he continued to hold his Oxford readership until 1958. An outstanding portrait by Anthony Devas (1954) captures much of the spirit of the man about this time: a scholar with his coins, regarding the spectator with a relaxed, humane, and kindly gaze. Robinson was also an enormously distinguished collector of coins in his own right -- his collecting grew from his experience that there is no substitute for handling and examining the coins themselves. Often the British Museum benefited directly from his personal collecting, but it is his gifts to the Heberden coin room which reveal the full extent of his extraordinary generosity. In all he gave over 5500 Greek coins of the first importance to the Heberden coin room during his lifetime. In addition, the family trust that he established continues to donate funds to the Ashmolean Museum for the purchase of Greek coins and the promotion of numismatics. 
Stanley Robinson was unquestionably the greatest Greek numismatist of his time, and he was knighted for 'services to numismatics and the Ashmolean Museum' in 1972. He was also a deeply patient and serene human being. As immobility and deafness began to limit his world, he returned to 89 Great Russell Street, his house near the British Museum, where he died on 13 June 1976. He was buried in the little churchyard at Stepleton within yards of his former home. 


@@@@@


doc= 48187


Siddeley, John Davenport, first Baron Kenilworth (1866-1953), manufacturer of motor vehicles and aero-engines, was born on 5 August 1866 at Cheadle Hulme, the eldest son of William Siddeley and Elizabeth, 'nee' Davenport. He was no academic, and left school to work in his father's business as an apprentice hosier. The meagre rewards led him to enrol in evening classes, where he developed his mechanical acumen to the extent that in 1885 he began designing bicycles. On 9 March 1893 he married Sarah Mabel Goodier (died 1953), daughter of James Goodier of Macclesfield. They had three sons and two daughters. 
Siddeley's design work took him to Beeston with the Humber cycle company, whence he became Dunlop's sales manager in Belfast, before returning to the midlands to run Dunlop's subsidiary, the Clipper Tyre Company. For publicity, Siddeley became the first person to ride a bicycle from John o' Groats to Land's End. He then became involved with motor cars, at first through pneumatic tyres, which led him to form the Siddeley Autocar Company in 1902, utilizing Peugeot designs under licence. His success persuaded Wolseley to hire him and there he honed his management skills before resigning as general manager in 1909. He became managing director of the struggling Deasy Motor Car Manufacturing Company in Coventry and so transformed its position that the marque was renamed Siddeley-Deasy. 
The war was the making of the company, leading first to government orders for lorries and motor cars and then, most significantly, to aero-engine and airframe production. Siddeley persuaded the directors to sanction a move into the aviation field. Siddeley's engineers resolved the teething problems of the Beardmore-Halford-Pullinger aero-engine and it became the Siddeley Puma; it proved so reliable that it was the principal design in use by British bombers at the war's conclusion. The engineering staff was considerably strengthened when a number of distinguished personnel arrived from the Royal Aircraft Factory at Farnborough in 1917. 
To support his ambitious post-war plans, Siddeley arranged a take-over by the armaments and shipbuilding giant Armstrong Whitworth, in April 1919, with Siddeley-Deasy becoming Armstrong Siddeley Motors. Later, in July 1920, Sir W. G. Armstrong, Whitworth Aircraft Ltd was formed. Both companies were under the umbrella of a holding company, the Armstrong Whitworth Development Company. During the 1920s Armstrong Siddeley compensated for depressed home sales through overseas demand, especially from the Australasian dominions. Siddeley was also always willing to explore new fields -- Armstrong Siddeley even brought out an electric cinema projector with a patented device to eliminate flicker. Siddeley made successful strides into the armaments field, receiving a knighthood in 1932 for the tank engine supplied to Vickers. 
The major success story of the decade was with the Jaguar air-cooled aero-engine, which was developed from a Farnborough design with Siddeley insistently prodding on the project. Its success was such that until the late 1920s Armstrong Siddeley was the major recipient of government orders for military aero-engines. Siddeley utilized this favourable position to full advantage by having airframes designed around the Jaguar. The Siskin 3A single-seater fighter aircraft was a notable outcome. The Jaguar was also a huge success abroad, with orders generated by record-breaking flights orchestrated by Siddeley. In civil aviation, the Armstrong Whitworth Argosy entered service with Imperial Airways in 1926 powered by three Jaguars. 
The ailing fortunes of the parent company provided Siddeley with the opportunity to gain control of his companies. This was achieved with a loan of $1.5 million, most of which was arranged by Reginald McKenna, chairman of the Midland Bank. By February 1927 Siddeley was chairman of all three, with the holding company renamed the Armstrong Siddeley Development Company. In his final years, Siddeley expanded his business empire through a number of astute take-overs, which included the aeronautics firm A. V. Roe, the piston supplier Peter Hooker (which became High Duty Alloys), and Improved Gears Ltd (later Self-Changing Gears), whose gearbox was highly successful. 
While Siddeley was enjoying his success with the Jaguar engine his rivals, especially Bristol and Rolls-Royce, were busy producing high-power designs which Armstrong Siddeley was unable to match in the 1930s. Siddeley has been accused of complacency, of not devoting sufficient funds to research and development, and of undue interference with engine design, which led two of his major designers to leave. The death of two other critical engine staff was also crucial in diminishing Armstrong Siddeley's design capabilities, while Siddeley's reputation as a domineering employer deterred others of similar calibre from filling the vacancies. A major blow was sustained in 1934 when the Air Ministry preferred the Bristol-powered Gloster Gauntlet to the Armstrong Whitworth Scimitar. 
Fortunately for Armstrong Whitworth the Air Ministry, concerned at German re-armament, decided to place orders straight from the drawing board without awaiting the results of prototype trials, and asked the company to supply its Whitley bomber on this basis. It was not a happy choice; the aircraft was late going into production and Lord Weir, industrial adviser to the Air Ministry, wanted outside assistance brought in, but doubted if Siddeley would accept. Although the Whitley was eventually mass-produced, its shortcomings were soon exposed when war came. 
By 1935 Siddeley was nearing seventy. He had accumulated a large personal fortune and had no need to continue working. He arranged a merger with Hawker, for which he received $1 million and numerous benefits, officially retiring from his executive positions on 30 September 1936. Siddeley became a tax exile in Jersey, while maintaining several British homes. In 1937 he purchased Kenilworth Castle and the same year was created Baron Kenilworth. 
A rigid disciplinarian at home, as he was at work, Siddeley had a lighter side, indulging in painting and gardening. His gifts to charity were considerable, totalling over $300,000 in his last eighteen years. He died at the Bon Air Nursing Home, St Saviour, Jersey, on 3 November 1953, heartbroken by the death of his wife a fortnight earlier. His estate in England was valued at $354,597 (though his total wealth was probably much greater). He was succeeded as second baron by his son Cyril (1894-1971), who in 1958 presented Kenilworth Castle to the local council, which transferred responsibility for its upkeep to English Heritage in 1984. 


@@@@@


doc= 48188


Sutherland, (Carol) Humphrey Vivian (1908-1986), classical scholar and numismatist, was born on 5 May 1908 at Merton Park in Surrey, the second of the three children of George Humphrey Vivian Sutherland (1873-1952) and his wife, Elsie (1877-1957), daughter of James Foster. He was known by his second name, Humphrey. His father spent his career in the Board of Education; Graham Sutherland, the distinguished painter, was his elder brother. 
Humphrey Sutherland was educated at Homefield preparatory school, Sutton, Surrey, and at Westminster School, where he was a king's scholar and, in his final year, captain of the school. A Westminster scholarship took him to Christ Church, Oxford, where he took a first in moderations, in 1929, and a second in Greats, in 1931. He worked briefly at the Hellenic Society's library in London before returning to Oxford in 1932, at the invitation of J. G. Milne, to work as a part-time assistant keeper in the newly founded Heberden coin room, in the Ashmolean Museum, at a salary of $200 a year. He began a lifetime's work in numismatics with no previous knowledge of coins. 
In 1933 Sutherland married Monica Porter (died 1982), a widow with three young children, and the family soon moved to Westfield House, Cumnor, where Humphrey and Monica Sutherland were to remain to the end of their lives; the garden there, and classical music, were Sutherland's particular delights. At work he quickly developed an expertise in Roman numismatics and won the Barclay Head prize for ancient numismatics in 1934; he published 'Romano-British Imitations of Bronze Coins of Claudius I' in 1935 and 'Coinage and Currency in Roman Britain' in 1937. During the Second World War he served with the fire service and took on additional teaching duties within the university and at St Edward's School, in Oxford, but his work at the Ashmolean continued. His swift response to the auction of Lord Grantley's collection secured, in 1944, the Crondall hoard of early Anglo-Saxon gold coins. Although the jewellery associated with this hoard had disappeared all the coins were acquired and these provided the basis for Sutherland's 1948 publication, 'Anglo-Saxon Gold Coinage in the Light of the Crondall Hoard', which remains an essential source on this topic. It was characteristic of the breadth of Sutherland's vision that he should have recognized the importance of such material outside his own specialization and moved so energetically to acquire it. 
After the war Sutherland was elected a student of Christ Church and was appointed to a permanent and full-time assistant keepership at the Ashmolean. He also served as a university lecturer in numismatics from 1939 until his retirement and, in his college, as curator of pictures from 1947 to 1955 and from 1970 to 1975. He had a fine, aesthetic eye and a well-developed sense of style, which he employed to good advantage both in the coin room and in the Christ Church picture gallery. He also took care to ensure that his own appearance was never less than spruce, even dapper, which, combined with his polished and courteous manner and rather dashing Jaguar car, enabled him to cut a figure of considerable panache. Despite the minutely detailed and exacting standards of his scholarship Sutherland never allowed numismatics to seem dull. This may account for the great influence of his teaching; many of his pupils went on to museum and university posts with a greatly enhanced understanding of the importance of coins for the study of history. 
Sutherland's assured and urbane style may also explain how he managed to carve out a growing share of the university's resources for the Heberden coin room. As an adjunct to the department of antiquities the coin room was staffed, in the 1930s, by 'a man and a boy', as Sutherland used to say. By the time of his appointment as keeper, in 1957, the coin room had achieved the status of an independent department in its own right, and when he retired, in 1975, the establishment consisted of five full-time academics, a part-time assistant, and two secretaries. The original coin room had expanded through the addition of a library, a teaching room, and a suite of offices. 
If Sutherland's greatest work was the creation of a thriving department which was securely enough established to continue to flourish after his departure his scholarly publications also constituted an enduring legacy. In addition to hundreds of articles and reviews he published a number of longer works, including two volumes of the important 'Roman Imperial Coinage' series: volume 1, '31 BC'-AD 69 (1986), and 6, 'From Diocletian's Reform (AD' 294) to the Death of Maximinus (AD 313) (1967). Heelped to edit this series and the 'Numismatic Chronicle' as well as serving as president of the Royal Numismatic Society (1948-1953), of the International Numismatic Commission (1960-73), and as 'consiglio' of the Centro Internazionale di Studi Numismatici in Naples (1966-73). He was honoured by all the leading European and American numismatic societies and in 1970 was created a CBE and elected a fellow of the British Academy. Sutherland died at his home, Westfield House, Cumnor, Oxford, on 14 May 1986, working to the end on the proofs of his 'Roman History and Coinage, 44 BC'-AD 69. 


@@@@@


doc= 48189


Siemens, Alexander (1847-1928), electrical engineer, was born on 22 January 1847 in Hanover, Germany, the son of Gustav Siemens, a judge, and his wife, Sophie, 'nee' Heisse. His father was a third cousin of the engineers Charles and William Siemens, and, after his education at the polytechnic in Hanover, Alexander arrived in England in 1867 to gain practical experience working with William at Siemens Brothers, Woolwich. In the following years he travelled extensively in Europe, the Middle East, and North America. In 1868 he returned to Germany to study at the University of Berlin, although his studies were interrupted when he was sent to Persia to assist with the building of the Indo-European telegraph. In 1869 he was working on cable-laying in the Black Sea. 
When Prussia annexed Hanover, Siemens became a Prussian citizen, and he served as a private in the Prussian army in the Franco-Prussian War of 1870-71. He was wounded at the battle of Beaune la Rolande, and was awarded the Iron Cross. After the war he returned to England, and again worked with William Siemens, assisting with the building of regenerative gas furnaces for producing wrought iron and steel direct from the iron ore. He was also involved in the development of the furnace for cremation. In 1875 he joined the cable ship 'Faraday' and took part in several cable-laying and cable-repairing expeditions, mainly in the north Atlantic. In 1876 and 1877 he spent some time in Canada and the USA, building furnaces there. 
Siemens returned to England in 1877, and became a naturalized British subject in 1878. Most of his work thereafter was electrical, and he became manager of the electric light department of Siemens Brothers in 1879. The company manufactured electric generators, arc lamps, and cables for the lighting industry, but was not initially involved in the manufacture of filament lamps. 
In 1881 Alexander Siemens married Louisa Frances Dodwell of Campden, Gloucestershire; they had three daughters. In the autumn of that year the world's first public electricity supply system, supplying electricity to a small number of private houses as well as street lighting, opened in Godalming, Surrey. Siemens Brothers' initial involvement was just to supply the equipment. Later they took over the enterprise, which was never viable, in order to gain practical experience of the emerging electric lighting industry. Alexander Siemens continued to be involved in submarine telegraphy, including laying a telegraph cable in the Amazon River in 1896. 
Practical electric motors for railway traction were being developed from about 1890. In 1892 Siemens read a paper to the British Association on 'Electric locomotives on the City and South London Railway', the first deep-level 'tube' underground railway. 
When Siemens Brothers became a limited company in 1880, Siemens became a director, and he was made managing director in 1889, a post he held until 1899. In that year the firm was reorganized, with new capital being brought in. George von Chauvin became managing director, although Siemens remained on the board until his retirement in 1918. 
In 1871 Siemens was a founder member of the Society of Telegraph Engineers and Electricians, which became the Institution of Electrical Engineers (IEE) in 1888. His contributions to discussions on papers read at the institution showed a grasp both of technical detail and of the wider commercial and legal considerations affecting the electrical industry. He became president of the institution in 1894, and again in 1904, and he was president of the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1910-11. His first presidential address to the IEE included an analysis of the various orders and licences granted under the 'Electric Lighting Acts', 1882 and 1888. The acts had been much criticized for retarding the development of the electrical industry, but Siemens argued that considerable blame lay with those promoting electrical enterprises, who had had exaggerated expectations and made reckless assertions. In his second presidential address he made a strong plea for the introduction of the metric system, so that everyone would enjoy the benefit, which electrical engineers already had, of standard units of measurement. 
As a leading figure in the electrical industry, and with a known interest in standards, Siemens was appointed by the British government as one of the British delegates to the International Electrical Congress at Chicago in 1893. In 1901 he was appointed a delegate to the similar congress in Paris. His interest in standards of measurement also led in 1897 to his appointment to a government committee considering the desirability of setting up a national physical laboratory. When the laboratory was established, in 1901, he served on its executive board. In retirement he lived at Westover, Milford-on-Sea, Hampshire, where he died, from heart failure, on 16 February 1928. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 48190


Simon, Henry (1835-1899), industrialist and inventor, was born Gustav Heinrich Victor Amandus Simon at Brieg, Silesia, then a province of Prussia, on 7 June 1835, the son of Friedrich Gustav Simon (1807-1867), a Jewish civil servant and railway director, and his wife, Antonie Theodora, 'nee' Stockel (1814-1893), a Christian, who published three novels. Although his father's career gave Henry access to railways, his unmarried uncle Heinrich Simon (1805-1860) was the most influential figure in his education and choice of career. A lawyer who had grown up surrounded by ideas of the German-Jewish Enlightenment, and a champion of German national unity, Heinrich was secretary of the liberal Frankfurt parliament of 1848-9 and after its forced dissolution was obliged to flee to Switzerland in exile. 
Simon and his parents joined Heinrich in Zurich, where he attended the Zurich School of Industry, which prepared pupils from the age of thirteen for careers in science and technology. He attended the University of Breslau for two years, studying science and mathematics, and may have also been apprenticed to an engineering works at Reichenhall. In 1853 he joined the first cohort of students at the newly established Zurich Polytechnic which was modelled on the technical universities of Stuttgart and Karlsruhe. He studied machine construction, technical physics, building construction, and higher mathematics, besides other practical engineering-related subjects. On graduation in 1858 he was required, as a Prussian citizen, to undertake military service and served with the Berlin artillery and then in the guards, subsequently joining a manufacturer of turbines and sugar works machinery in Magdeburg. 
In 1860 Simon moved to Manchester, where there had been a thriving German mercantile community for over a century. His uncle had encouraged him to leave Germany in the previous year, and contacted German expatriate residents of Manchester on his nephew's behalf, including Dr Louis Borchardt and Henry M. Steinthal, who were partners in Heinrich Simon's copper mine business and fellow fugitives of the revolutions of 1848. Heinrich's death in a swimming accident hastened the move and Henry Simon went on to establish himself in Manchester as a consulting engineer. He was appointed to represent the Jametel company in their Russian railway contracts, spending much of 1861 and 1862 in Russia, supervising the construction of the railway between Warsaw and Vilna. In 1863 he was engaged in engineering work in Italy and France. He became a naturalized British subject and lived first in Greenheys, a Manchester suburb much favoured by German immigrants. 
Henry Simon's first office premises were at 28 Deansgate and in 1868 he moved to St Peter's Square, Manchester. Starting with little capital, he had no manufacturing facility of his own but established a small experimental workshop in East Street, later transferring both office and workshop to an imposing building in Mount Street, Manchester. Inspired by his uncle, he believed in independence and honesty in all business, professional, and family relationships. Fluent in French and German, besides English, and an able networker, he built on connections made at Zurich Polytechnic, as well as within the German community in Manchester. He was a founder member of the Schiller Anstalt, founded by and for German immigrants to Manchester in the year he arrived in England. 
Simon married, first, at Strangeways Unitarian Chapel, Manchester, on 25 January 1871, an Australian woman, Mary Jane Lane (1847/8-1877), daughter of William Lane. They had a son, born in 1875. Following her death, he married, second, on 30 November 1878, Emily Ann Stoehr (1858-1920), eldest daughter of his uncle's friend and business partner Emile M. Stoehr. There were seven children born of his second marriage. On his first marriage he moved to Fallowfield and, in the late 1870s, to Didsbury, remaining in Palatine Road, in a house he named Darwin (one of Henry Simon's heroes) until he built himself Lawnhurst on land acquired in Didsbury. 
From the late 1860s Simon was seeking an industrial sector on which to focus and had kept abreast of flour milling developments in continental Europe where, by 1875, all the main flour mills in Austria and Hungary had introduced roller plant. From 1862 there had been attempts in Britain to apply roller technology to flour milling, but none had been successful. Instead, flour milling continued to be undertaken by the centuries-old method of millstones, although British port millers feared that traditional stone milling was not the most effective technology for processing imported American wheat, while customers were demanding fine white flour. 
The German engineer Gustav Buchholz had begun working in England in the 1840s and, in 1862, was granted a patent for a roller mill with grooved steel rolls, installing his first known plant in an Ipswich mill in the same year. The second phase of roller milling technology innovation in Britain was initiated by Friedrich Wegmann, partner in a Naples engineering firm who experimented with rollers in a number of different materials, porcelain being the material adopted in Britain. His first patent was granted in 1874. But this phase in the diffusion of roller mills was short-lived, since porcelain rollers required regular regrinding with diamond cutters. 
In the late 1870s Henry Simon contributed the most decisive stage in the third phase of the diffusion of roller milling, namely an integrated system of rollers and purifiers to sift and grade the milled flour. Simon's firm in Manchester was one of three (the other two were in Ipswich and Rochdale) that initiated the most decisive stage in the introduction of roller milling. Of the three firms Simon achieved the largest market share, partly because his customer feedback was consistently good, but also because he was an effective self-publicist. 
Simon introduced the roller mill made by the Swiss engineering firm Daverio, Siessardt, and Geisler, claiming that it was the first complete gradual reduction plant which completely dispensed with the use of stones. He described his system in papers to the Institution of Civil Engineers and the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, published in their proceedings in 1882 and 1889. By 1882 Simon was developing his own designs, and claimed twenty-five millers had adopted 'the Simon system' by May that year. In October 1883 he published the first of an annual series of maps depicting the sites of his roller mill systems. The first map showed a concentration of Simon plant in Lancashire and Yorkshire with other installations in London, Gloucester, Belfast, and Carlow. The fifth map of 1887 showed a total of 143 complete roller plant and 90 combined mills, well over half of the roller mills being in the north of England and a preponderance of combined plant in East Anglia and the south. There were, in addition, 24 overseas installations, the total rising to 47 in 1888 and 63 in 1889. The largest remaining stone miller in London, a keen advocate of the older milling method, changed to a complete Simon system in 1884. By 1892 two-thirds of greater London's flour and most of the flour in other parts of the UK was being milled on the Simon system. In addition the Simon system had diffused to Japan, India, Australia (where a branch office was opened in 1893), New Zealand, Brazil, and Germany. In 1897 the milling business became a limited liability company, Henry Simon Ltd, with a nominal capital of $100,000. 
The second industrial process introduced to Britain by Henry Simon was by-product coking, which he had seen in operation in France in 1879 at the works developed by Francois Carves. British producers were using the uneconomic and crude 'beehive' oven method which produced polluting waste products. Simon formed a partnership with Carves, securing the British patent rights to the invention and, in 1881, installed twenty-five ovens at a Durham colliery of Pease & Partners. British ironmasters were reluctant to invest in the process since they continued to make adequate profits from the older technology. To encourage them to adopt by-product coking, Simon introduced an innovative business method, by offering to cover the entire capital cost, handing the completed facility to the customer and taking a share in the by-products produced. This speeded up adoption to some extent, but it was not until the 1890s that wider adoption took place after Simon and Carves formed a company to build and operate two batteries of ovens for a colliery in Lanchester, co. Durham. They provided most of the capital and accepted payment by taking shares in the by-products, establishing a demonstration plant while earning a dividend of about 20 per cent. The business became a limited liability company, Simon-Carves, in 1896 with a nominal capital of $100,000. Although four more plants were built towards the end of the century, the conservatism of British ironmasters, who remained attached to beehives, together with cheaper foreign competition, reduced market opportunities. 
Simon's design and consulting engineering business was run from a five-storey office building in Manchester. By not investing directly in large engineering works, he spread his business risk. His machines, often incorporating his innovations, were built by leading continental firms, which he identified and visited while undertaking his consulting engineering contracts. From 1892 he produced monthly circulars illustrated with photographs and diagrams, which provided a means of keeping in touch with clients and publishing customer feedback. In the 1890s he was involved in patent litigation. In 1893 he initiated proceedings against the makers of a straight copy of his Cyclone Dust Collector, which cleaned fine dust from the mills, important for the health of mill workers besides reducing the threat of fire. Judgment was given in favour of Simon but he complained at the considerable cost of enforcing his claim. In the second case, heard in 1894, he was the defendant, accusations of infringement being alleged against his Reform purifier, but the court found in his favour, a judgment that was upheld on appeal to the House of Lords. The cases, though, took their toll on him. 
Simon played a full part in Manchester public life. Concerned to ensure an enlightened education for his daughters he founded, together with C. P. Scott, a school which became Withington Girls' School. Passionate about living standards, he was first chair of the Manchester Labourers' Dwellings Company, besides being one of the initiators and first directors of the Manchester Pure Milk Supply Company. He took a leading part in the establishment of a crematorium in Manchester, acting as honorary technical adviser, designing the furnace, and becoming chair of the board. There was only one other crematorium in England, at Woking, and Simon visited Paris and Milan to collect information on best practice. He was a keen supporter of the Halle Concert Society, being a member of the management committee and, in due course, was influential in Hans Richter's appointment as Sir Charles Halle's successor. In 1895 Simon made a substantial donation to Owens College (from 1903 the University of Manchester) to establish a chair of German literature, and was subsequently a leading benefactor of a new physics laboratory which was completed after his death. He was a member of the Institution of Civil Engineers, the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, and the Iron and Steel Institute, and a fellow of the Royal Geographical Society and the Society of Arts. 
Simon successfully applied scientific principles to practical business problems, transforming corn milling in Britain during his lifetime. He was a bearded man of imposing stature, 'of strong individuality and commanding presence, [and] courteous... in his business' dealings (Tweedale, 177). Of no religious faith, he believed that freedom for individual action was crucial in human affairs, being prepared to take a stand even when risks were involved. Believing that 'it is possible to live splendidly and without vulgar ostentation', he exhorted his children to 'understand that the only justification for man's existence' is 'to undertake to do useful work' (Simon, 131). He died, at his home, Lawnhurst, Didsbury, on 22 July 1899, of gouty heart, pulmonary oedema, and cardiac failure, occasioned by overwork and nervous strain. He was cremated at the Manchester crematorium, Didsbury. His eldest son, Ernest Emil Darwin Simon, became first Baron Simon of Wythenshaw. 


@@@@@


doc= 48191


Frederick Adolphus Simonds (1881-1953), brewer. Born in Reading on 2 January 1881, he was the eldest son of Louis de Luze Simonds (1852-1916) and his wife, Mary Elizabeth (1857-1930), daughter of Gavin Turnbull, an army surgeon. Eric had three younger brothers and a sister. His brother Gavin Turnbull Simonds (1881-1971), a lawyer of distinction, served as lord chancellor in Winston Churchill's second government from 1951 to 1954. 
Frederick William Simonds (1819-1896), a younger grandson of William Blackall Simonds, had emigrated to New York in 1845 and in the following year married Sophie de Luze, the Swiss consul's daughter. Their son, Louis de Luze Simonds, was recalled by his childless great-uncle, Henry Adolphus, to Reading, where he became the first company secretary when H. and G. Simonds Ltd was registered in 1885 and then managing director, and later still Henry's heir. 
Educated at Eton and at Magdalen College, Oxford, Eric Simonds served with the Royal Berkshire regiment in the South African War of 1899-1902 before becoming a trainee with the company. He was made a director in 1905. He initially focused on building up business in Gibraltar, Malta, Cairo, Belgium, and other overseas branches, with considerable success, although the joint venture with East African Breweries Ltd in Kenya did not turn out to be profitable. In 1909 he married Amy FitzGerald (1883-1969), daughter of John Sheriff Hill, a banker. They had a daughter who died in infancy, and three sons, Louis, Duncan, and Kenneth, all of whom became directors of Simonds companies. He succeeded his father as managing director in 1916. The company had hitherto relied entirely on internal growth, all its 350 outlets being in or close to Reading. He took advantage of developments in motor transport, and the ever increasing network of trunk roads, to plan the company's expansion by means of outside acquisitions. 
Eric Simonds began that strategy by purchasing breweries mainly in south-west England, including the Tamar Brewery in Devonport, W. J. Rogers in Bristol, and R. H. Stiles at Bridgend in Glamorgan. In the home counties around London he bought Ashby's in Staines and Wheeler's in High Wycombe. By the beginning of the Second World War in 1939 H. and G. Simonds was recognized as one of the most rapidly expanding breweries in the whole of southern England, at a time when regional brewery companies were becoming common throughout the British industry. In 1938 Eric Simonds took over the chairmanship from Stephen Shea-Simonds. 
After 1945 he resumed his ambitious programme of acquisitions; those included Phillips' brewery in Newport, Monmouthshire, May's brewery in Basingstoke, and Pool & Sons in Penzance. With the four acquired breweries that were maintained in production, H. and G. Simonds' output in 1953 reached almost 500,000 barrels, up from 175,000 barrels in 1900. Retaining the company's capital structure intact, he paid for these acquisitions by a series of debenture issues. After a final acquisition in 1955 of the Octagon Brewery in Plymouth, by the time of its merger the company had 1132 public houses and 63 off-licences. Eric was high sheriff of Berkshire in 1928-9 and president of the Royal Warrant Holders' Association in 1937 and 1945. A full-bodied man with a florid complexion, he would have made a 'good model for John Bull' ('The Times', 25 Aug 1953), revelling in his many sporting activities and friendships. He died in a London nursing home, 30 Devonshire Place, Marylebone, on 17 August 1953 and was buried at Cliddesden, Hampshire. 
His successor was the first non-family chairman, General Sir Miles Dempsey, who had commanded the British 2nd Army from Normandy to the Rhine in the Second World War, and was colonel of the Royal Berkshire Regiment. Dempsey had joined the Simonds board in 1947 as vice-chairman on retirement from the army. His fellow directors included members of the sixth Simonds generation, including Eric's son Duncan Simonds (1916-2002) and Richard Quarry (1912-2003) as joint managing directors. In 1960 the company's board agreed to a merger on equal terms with the two great and recently merged London breweries, Courage and Barclay Perkins, which together had net operating assets of $21 million, compared with H. and G. Simonds' $9.8 million. 
Initially registered as Courage Barclay and Simonds Ltd, the new company later adopted the first of those names, one of the three main subsidiaries, Courage (Central) Ltd having its head office in Reading. Then in 1980 all the latter's operations were moved from William Blackall Simonds's original site on Bridge Street to a new brewery on the southern outskirts of the town, close to the M4 motorway at Worton Grange. 
The brewery the Simonds family had founded and managed in Reading remained under its control throughout a period of almost two hundred years. Thanks to a large supply of able family members, financial prudence in husbanding their corporate capital, a drive to innovate, and marketing skills, the Simondses achieved the very rare feat among large-scale British manufacturing industry of continuous profitability and growth into the sixth family generation. 


@@@@@


doc= 48193


Samuel Leonard Simpson (1900-1983), known in the firm as the Doctor. Although he was educated like his brother at Westminster City School, his career had taken a different path. A Cambridge scholar and prizeman with a double first in the natural science tripos, he was also a boxing blue and in 1922 captain of the university boxing team. However, he refused the invitation to become a professional boxer. After qualifying as a doctor at the London Hospital in 1926, he worked at the Mayo Clinic in New York, as well as in Berlin and at the Lister Institute in London. He became a specialist in endocrinology and his book, 'Major Endocrine Disorders' (1938; 3rd edn, 1959), became a standard work. He was already a distinguished and established physician so the decision to run the clothing business could not have been an easy one. On the advice of his Cambridge professor, he decided to divide his time between his practice and the family firm. He was fortunate in that, as part of a close family, not only had he already absorbed many of the essentials of the family business, he also had the help of long-standing employees of the firm. Solomon Klein (Mr Solly), for instance, had been apprentice and assistant to his grandfather, a director of the parent company from 1935, of Simpson Piccadilly from 1936, and was to become managing director in 1940 and joint managing director in 1949. In 1940 Simpson married Heddy Monique, Baroness de Podmansky (1908-1994); they had one daughter. 
Urbane, considerate, and very organized, as adept in staff management as his father and brother, Samuel Leonard Simpson spent Tuesdays and Thursdays at Simpsons, the last week of every month at meetings, and combined research, business, and lecture trips overseas. His medical interests also extended to metabolic research. A generous donation in 1964 to the medical school at St Mary's Hospital, London, where he was to become honorary consultant endocrinologist, was instrumental in founding the Alexander and Leonard Simpson Laboratory for Metabolic Research, a memorial to his brother. His industrial psychological work was relevant when he became director of personnel and chairman of the appointments board of Simpsons. His joint consultation committee on staff matters (1947) was as effective in staff management in the difficult post-war period as his brother's earlier concept, 'Partners in Progress', had been with staff and retailers in the economically fraught years of the 1920s and 1930s. 
Initially vice-chairman, Samuel Leonard Simpson was precluded by his profession from taking up the chairmanship of S. Simpson Ltd, Simpsons (Piccadilly) Ltd, and Daks Simpson Ltd, until 1957. He then held these positions until retirement in 1983, his international as well as his sporting interests suggesting useful new directions for the firm. He is credited with the 1940 formation of the Simpson Service Club which performed an important public service role for the allied forces as well as providing a venue for prestige patriotic entertaining and exhibitions, events which were to continue as features of Simpson publicity. Simpson also developed a concerted export plan: Simpson Imports Incorporated was established in New York in 1941 and Daks Canada in 1950. From 1948 to 1952 he was a member of the grand council of the Federation of British Industries. He was also a member of the Carlton Club. By 1966 Daks Simpson were the biggest exporters of British menswear. The manufacturing side was similarly well served. The Stoke Newington factory, damaged by bombing in 1940, was finally replaced with a purpose-built factory at Larkhall, near Glasgow, in 1949, and was extended in 1963. 
Golf, another of Samuel Leonard Simpson's pursuits, also became a Simpson speciality. Tournaments were regularly sponsored, most notably from 1961 the Walter Hagen annual award, which he was himself to receive in 1977. His interest in horses, which he bred on his estate at Grouselands, Sussex, and which he shared with his family, led the firm to sponsor many equestrian events. The Doctor was also an amateur painter of some skill but though he exhibited, this was in the main a private pleasure. His interest in the arts led to an important gift of current fashions to the Victoria and Albert Museum in 1979. 
Heddy Simpson, who became a director in 1947, was vivacious and elegant. She was notable hostess at their London home (formerly that of Winston Churchill), 28 Hyde Park Gate, and was influential in the fashion focus of the Jermyn Street extension of the Piccadilly store opened in 1957. It was a role her daughter Georgina, who became a director in 1976, was to perform with great flair in 1977 for the opening of 'SJS' and 'Young and Gay', new Simpson departments aimed at the youth market. 
Sports sponsorship, export achievement, and a traditional English quality image became the Daks Simpson hallmark. As their prestige grew, they were awarded a royal warrant by the duke of Edinburgh in 1954, by the queen in 1962, and the prince of Wales in 1982. Samuel Leonard Simpson died peacefully at Crawley Hospital, Sussex, on 3 August 1983. On the sale of the firm to Sankyo Seiko Osaka in 1990, for $65 million, the formal family association with the firm ceased. The Simpson Family Charity Trust, founded in the same year, nevertheless perpetuated the family's philanthropic commitment. 


@@@@@


doc= 48194


Slaughter, Sir William Capel (1857-1917), lawyer, was born at 9 Langton Place, Vassall Road, Kennington, London, on 11 May 1857 and was the sixth and youngest child, and second son, of Mihill Slaughter (died 1880), the secretary of the railways' department of the stock exchange, and his wife, Ann Erskine, 'nee' Capel. Little is known about the kind of education the Slaughter children received; the biographical notes that survive suggest that he was educated privately, a euphemism of the period suggesting education at home by a governess or tutor. He did not attend university and his legal training, common at the time, was a five-year period as an articled clerk to a solicitor. Slaughter was articled to the firm of Benjamin Gay Wilkinson and George Bernard Harvey Drew in Bermondsey Street. Although he learned the fundamentals of law with this firm, it did no commercial work, and Slaughter's first professional exposure to the field of work in which he would make his name occurred in 1879 when he joined the leading firm of solicitors Ashurst Morris Crisp & Co. Here John Morris, a highly respected commercial lawyer, became his mentor. 
In 1880 Slaughter's father died and he left $40,000 to be divided among his children, his wife having predeceased him. This gave him a degree of financial security, and together with his legal work enabled him to marry, on 22 September 1881, Ida Mabel (1855/6-1889), daughter of Loraine Wearer, a surgeon. The couple produced four children between 1882 and 1887, two sons and two daughters, although one daughter died of meningitis aged eighteen months. Shortly after his marriage Slaughter was made a freeman of the Clothworkers' Company. 
In 1887 Slaughter left Ashurst Morris Crisp to set up his own practice. By an agreement with Morris, Slaughter continued to handle the affairs of some of his clients as agent of Ashurst Morris Crisp but the rest Slaughter was able to keep as his own. It appears that in addition Slaughter had clients who were unrelated to his work for the firm, but acquired mainly through family connections. It was also at this time that Slaughter began his connection with William May, who had also undertaken his articles at Ashurst Morris Crisp. By the end of 1888 they had decided to go into partnership together. On 1 January 1889 they opened a joint bank account and the legal firm of Slaughter and May was established. Shortly afterwards Slaughter's wife Ida died, leaving him with three small children, but his sister Mary stepped in to look after the children and the household, allowing Slaughter to concentrate on his legal practice. On 9 December 1899 he married his second wife, Hester Mary ('b'. 1867/8), daughter of William Duff Bruce, a civil engineer and vice-chairman of the port of Calcutta; they had one son. 
Slaughter's pre-eminence in the legal world arose through his legal knowledge and practical experience of finance and commerce. It was said that there was no man in the City whose advice was valued more on any complicated question of law and finance: 'Ten minutes' consultation with him was worth more than an hour with most men. His brain worked with extraordinary rapidity, and with a fine sense of proportion' ('The Times', 13 March 1917). His experience of business was vast, typified by his long connection with the Home and Colonial Stores (a highly successful chain of low-cost but good-quality food retailers), whose founding partner, Julius Charles Drew (formerly Drewe) was his sister's brother-in-law. Slaughter became chairman of Home and Colonial Stores in 1888 and remained so until his death in 1917. He reconstructed the company in 1893 so as to facilitate its expansion, and in 1895 the company was reconstituted again, this time with a capital of $100,000. Although a managing director was appointed in 1899, Slaughter continued his detailed involvement with the company, remaining its primary negotiator with suppliers. 
Slaughter's high profile and reputation as a businessman prompted his appointment to the royal commission on sugar supplies, established in August 1914 under the chairmanship of Reginald McKenna. The commission had a mandate to 'purchase, sell, and control the delivery of sugar on behalf of the government', and it was one of the first examples of central control over food resources, a matter which became more prevalent as the war progressed. Slaughter gave 'arduous assistance' to the commission and other government departments, especially the Board of Trade, and was rewarded by the king with a knighthood in the birthday honours list of 1915. 
Slaughter appears to have had few interests outside law and business. He founded Kingsgate Golf Club on the Kent coast in the first decade of the twentieth century but it is not known whether he played, although the Sir William Capel Slaughter cup was played for at the club for many years after his death. 
Slaughter had always made great demands upon himself and by the middle of the war these were beginning to take their toll. He had suffered bouts of illness since the 1890s, not surprisingly, given that a contemporary described him as working 'unremittingly, allowing no rest by night or day' (Dennett, 145). The end, however, was brought about by cancer: in 1916 he was diagnosed as suffering from cancer of the prostate, and was very ill by Christmas. He died on 10 March 1917 at his London home, 3 Berkeley House, Hay Hill, Mayfair, after a stroke had sent him into a coma, and was buried at Kensal Green cemetery. His wife survived him. 
Slaughter was typical of the breed of Victorian solicitors familiar with business yet determined to create and maintain professional respect for the solicitors' profession. Many such solicitors fell victim to the recession of the late 1890s, but those that survived did so with an enhanced professional reputation. At the time of his death, Slaughter and May was established as one of the leading commercial firms, a position that it has retained up to the present day and for which it owes much to its original founder. 


@@@@@


doc= 48196


Smith, Sir Allan MacGregor (1871-1941), employers' leader and politician, was born on 19 May 1871 at 236 Dumbarton Road, Glasgow, the second of eight children of Alexander Smith, master house-painter and a native of Elgin, and his wife, Agnes Welsh Campbell, from Glen Orchy in Inverness-shire. He was educated at Glasgow Academy and at the University of Glasgow, where he took an MA ordinary degree in 1890. He went on to read law, graduating LLB in 1896. His subsequent career, initially as a practising solicitor, and then as the leading figure in the Engineering Employers' Federation (EEF) and as a member of parliament, was to take him to the very centre of industrial politics in Britain. 
Smith's apprenticeship began in Glasgow, when he joined the legal practice of Biggart and Lumsden as a managing clerk. Through this firm, which acted for the EEF and some of the chief engineering and shipbuilding companies on Clydeside, Smith was introduced to the world of employers' organizations and to the politics of labour relations. In 1901 his legal and administrative capabilities were recognized when he was made a partner in the firm. In the same year he was named as parliamentary solicitor to the EEF, and he also became assistant secretary to the North-West of Scotland Engineering Employers' Federation and to the Clyde Shipbuilders' Association. In 1908 Smith was made joint assistant secretary to the EEF and two years later, when the federation moved to new headquarters in London, he was appointed sole secretary and treasurer. 
Smith first attracted public notice in 1912 when he presented the federation's evidence on trade union agreements to the Industrial Council, a government-sponsored body designed to promote industrial peace. However, with the outbreak of war in 1914, he rose rapidly to national prominence as an employers' leader. In 1916 he was appointed chairman of the EEF's newly formed management committee, effectively becoming the federation's chief executive. During the war Smith served on more than thirty official government committees and acted as an adviser to various ministries and departments, notably the Ministry of Munitions and the ministries of Labour and Reconstruction. At the end of 1918 he was created KBE for his wartime services, and further official recognition soon followed, which confirmed his authority in industry. In February 1919 he was appointed spokesman for the employers' delegation at the National Industrial Conference; in April 1919 he joined the Sankey coal enquiry and a few months later he was chosen as the British employers' delegate on the governing body of the newly formed International Labour Organization, which he served until 1922. 
During and immediately after the First World War Smith made several important and lasting contributions to the organization of employers in Britain. Under his efficient direction the EEF increased its membership and influence in the metal industries to become one of the premier employers' organizations in the country and a major force in industrial affairs. Smith was also the leading personality behind the setting up of the National Confederation of Employers' Organizations in April 1919, of which he was chairman between 1919 and 1922 and then an active ex-officio member of its executive council. In addition he played an instrumental role in the establishment in March 1920 of the International Organization of Industrial Employers, based in Brussels, in which he held the post of president during 1921 and 1922. In February 1923 he was elected a companion member of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers in recognition of his services to industry. 
Smith's work for the EEF, and on behalf of the employers' movement generally, drew him into active politics. During these years he was a prominent and influential member of several political bodies, notably the British Commonwealth Union (BCU) and the Economic League. In December 1919, with the support of the BCU, he was elected as the Conservative MP for Croydon South; he held the seat until the general election in 1923, when he chose to stand down. Subsequently, he stood unsuccessfully for the Partick division of Glasgow. In the House of Commons, Smith was a member of the parliamentary industrial group, an influential back-bench organization sponsored by the BCU, and served as its chairman between 1921 and 1923. In this role Smith spoke on trade and industrial matters and enjoyed the intimacy of some of the important political figures of the day, including David Lloyd George (his chief political patron), Winston Churchill, and Sir Robert Horne. After the war Smith was also able to continue his role as a government adviser, joining the British delegation to the Cannes conference in 1922 as an industrial expert, serving on the Balfour committee on industry and trade between 1924 and 1929, and providing the second Labour government of 1929-31 with advice on trade and employment policy matters. In October 1934 he resigned from the EEF on the grounds of ill health and retired from public life. 
In 1919 Smith, at the height of his powers, had been described by one contemporary as a 'star among the professional representatives of capitalism' (Cole, 160-61), and he remained wholly dedicated to this cause. Throughout his career his approach to economic issues was guided by a deep-seated belief in free enterprise and by a ferocious determination to assert the interests of Britain's staple heavy industries. In the arena of industrial relations, where his influence was strongly felt, notably in the engineering dispute of 1922 and in the events surrounding the 1926 general strike and its aftermath, he was opposed to all forms of government intervention and vigorously expounded an approach to labour relations based on the principle of the employer's 'right to manage'. His firm and frequently heard views on these issues, in numerous speeches and in print, earned him a reputation for clear thinking and honesty but also for inflexibility; they also brought him into disagreement with some of the more consensus-minded employers of his day, as well as with Labour leaders and the trade union movement. 
A religious and intense man, short in stature but physically strong 'with a face of granite and steel-blue eyes' (Wigham, 291), Smith commanded attention from those around him, if not affection. His closest friends and associates, who were drawn mainly from the engineering industry and from business circles, included Lord Weir, Sir Andrew Duncan, and Patrick Hannon. In December 1901 Smith married Isabella Clow (1869-1933), the daughter of John A. McCallum, one of Scotland's chief coalmasters, and they had a son and two daughters. Smith's social and leisure activities reflected his strong and continuing links with Scotland, which he visited regularly. His interests included music -- he was a bagpiper -- and sailing, on the west coast of Scotland and as a member of the Royal Thames Yacht Club, as well as deerstalking and fishing. For most of his active career Smith lived with his family in Hampstead, London. He died there on 21 February 1941 at 9 Greenaway Gardens, Hampstead, from coronary failure, and was buried on 26 February at St Andrew's Presbytery Church, Frognal, London. 
A pioneering and controversial employers' leader, Sir Allan MacGregor Smith was one of several outstanding business figures from Scottish backgrounds who made a mark upon industrial and political affairs in Britain during and after the First World War. 


@@@@@


doc= 48197


Smith, George Samuel Fereday (1812-1891), industrialist and canal manager, was born on 7 May 1812, at Tipton, Staffordshire, the elder son of the ironmaster Richard Smith (died 1868), and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Samuel Fereday, the most prominent ironmaster of the region. Smith was educated at Charterhouse from 1821 to 1830 and Queen's College, Oxford, from 1830 to 1835, where he graduated in maths and physics. He also attended University College, London, and studied mining and geology in Germany. 
After working as a railway engineer, Fereday Smith (as he was often called) was appointed deputy superintendent of the Bridgewater Trust at the age of twenty-four. The superintendent, James Loch, had tried to recruit his father, Richard Smith, then mine agent to the earl of Dudley. The son was available; the father was not. Appointed deputy superintendent, G. S. F. Smith served the trust in a senior managerial capacity for over fifty years. In his late thirties he enrolled as a student at the Inner Temple, and was called to the bar in 1852. 
Fereday Smith became extremely prosperous, partly through his salary, which increased from $600 a year in 1837 to $1500 by 1864. On 5 March 1845 Smith married Mary Jane, daughter of Richard Hampson of Manchester, who had a private income of about $1000 a year. The couple had two daughters and a son. Smith and his wife benefited from the will of a maternal uncle, and also from that of his father, Richard Smith. 
The Bridgewater Canal, administered by the trustees, faced growing competition from the railways, and Fereday Smith's influence was consistently exerted in favour of a strategy of meeting such competition with great vigour. He was a strong supporter of increased capital investment, particularly in terminal facilities at Liverpool, Runcorn, and Manchester, which he pursued against the reluctance of Loch. The results included the Egerton Dock at Liverpool, opened in 1840, to accommodate the trade in imported timber. Runcorn was developed from the late 1850s as a canal port for both coastal and sea-going ships. The salt trade from the River Weaver was facilitated by a new canal parallel to the Mersey, between Runcorn and Weston Point (1859). The Alfred Dock at Runcorn was completed in 1860 to handle the Irish grain trade, and in 1865-7 major improvements were made to the Mersey above Runcorn. Fereday Smith also decided to install the electric telegraph along the banks of the canal. He made a practice of delegating to subordinates and seeking their advice. The one policy issue on which he held firmly traditional views was that of steam traction, which he opposed. 
Fereday Smith's firm stance against the railway companies was significant, in that from the mid-1840s a sale of the Bridgewater undertaking to railway interests was periodically contemplated by his trustees. Between 1855 and 1857 the North Staffordshire Railway made a serious attempt to lease the trust's properties, which Smith was instrumental in defeating. The death in 1855 of James Loch, usually suspicious of his subordinate's expansionist approach, considerably increased the influence of Fereday Smith. From that date he became, in effect, general manager, although nominally subject to Loch's less experienced successor, Algernon Egerton. Under Smith's guidance the profits of the canal and its carrying trade rose from $29,857 in 1855 to about $54,000 in 1871, and those of the Bridgewater collieries from $15,075 to about $34,500. Control of the canal passed to the Cheshire lines committee in 1872 following a further growth of railway competition in the 1860s. Smith stayed on until 1887, when the Manchester Ship Canal Company acquired the Bridgewater. 
Fereday Smith had wide interests outside the trust. He was a fellow of the Geological Society and the Royal Geographical Society, and a member of the Chetham Society (historical and literary). In politics he was a Conservative, sitting as a member of the police commission in Manchester from 1839 to 1842, and later as a councillor from 1846 to 1849. His public service also included a spell as a borough magistrate, and an active association with both the Manchester Commercial Association, and then the chamber of commerce (after a merger in 1858). In the early 1870s Fereday Smith bought Grovehurst, a country house in Kent, and became high sheriff of the county in 1884. He died from influenza and exhaustion on 26 May 1891 at 7 Sackville Street, Piccadilly, London. Smith was survived by his wife. His son, Richard Clifford Smith, succeeded him as general manager of the Bridgewater Trust in 1887. 


@@@@@


doc= 48198


Smith, Sir Prince, first baronet (1840-1922), worsted machinery manufacturer, was born on 3 September 1840 at Keighley, West Riding of Yorkshire, the only son of Prince Smith (1819-1890), a mechanic, and his wife, Martha, the daughter of John Edmondson, a Keighley contractor. He was educated at Wesley College, Sheffield, until about the age of sixteen and then entered the family business of William Smith & Sons at Waggon Fold, Keighley. William, his grandfather, had commenced business in Keighley in 1795, making precision parts for spinning machines. The firm was expanded in the early 1830s, with the opening of a foundry to provide castings. William had seven sons, of whom two died in their twenties; the others were all apprenticed within the firm and joined their father, and in due course were taken into partnership. Prince Smith's father was the fourth son, and perhaps the most dynamic of William's offspring. At William's death in 1850 the brothers continued the partnership, but it was dissolved in 1865, leaving Prince Smith senior and his brother William in control of the textile machine-making business. They built the large Worth Valley works in Keighley, but dissolved their partnership in 1869. 
Prince Smith senior continued the business on his own account, taking his son Prince junior into partnership and acquiring the large Burlington Shed in Keighley from Samuel Cunliffe Lister. Prince Smith junior progressively took charge, and finally assumed control of the firm on the death of his father in 1890. By that stage it had developed into one of the biggest manufacturing firms in the worsted trade. In 1878 it employed around 750 people; by the 1890s the workforce had doubled, making Smiths the largest employer in Keighley and district, a major centre of machinery manufacture. The firm extended its products to the full range of manufacturing for the preparation and spinning of worsted yarn. Smith exerted firm control over the business, believing that success was highly dependent on a trustworthy product and the confidence of his clientele. He relied on the reputation of his machines and on personal contact with his customers. Unlike many of the other textile machine manufacturers of the day, he avoided exhibitions and gave little attention to advertising his products. Much of his business was local to Yorkshire, where the British worsted industry was largely concentrated, but by the 1890s his machines were being exported to all centres of worsted manufacture in the world, as part of what was by then a major trade for the British economy. 
Smith married Martha Ann (died 1913), the daughter of John Greenwood, a corn miller, of Skipton in Craven, Yorkshire, in 1864. They had one son and two daughters. Their son, also Prince Smith, born on 13 October 1869, married Maud Mary, the daughter of Henry Wright of Keighley, in 1894, entered his father's business in 1887, and became increasingly responsible for its management in the years before the First World War. During the war he was one of the managers of the national shell factory in Keighley. 
Smith himself appears to have been technically very able, but it is not clear that he made any very significant contributions to the development of worsted preparatory and spinning machinery. As a businessman he appears to have shown initiative and judgement, providing direction and purpose in the years of major expansion of the firm. His involvement in other affairs was minimal. Of the Liberal persuasion, he took little interest in local or national politics. Like many in his industry he supported free trade, but was not active in the campaign for it. He was a Wesleyan, and supported local organizations in Keighley -- notably Keighley Victoria Hospital. At various times he was a member of the Bradford exchange, a director of the Bradford District Bank, and a JP first for the West Riding and then, on his retirement, for the East Riding. He was created a baronet for his service to industry in 1911. His leisure interests included music and golf. In the 1890s he acquired an estate in Kirkcudbrightshire, Scotland, and about 1907 retired from his home at Hillbrook, Keighley, to an estate at Southburn, near Driffield, East Riding of Yorkshire, where he died on 20 October 1922, following a heavy cold. He was buried in Keighley cemetery on 23 October. 
At the time of Smith's death the family firm was at the peak of its business activity. Having engaged in munitions work during the war, it recovered its markets and in 1922 employed 1800 people, making it one of the largest manufacturers of worsted combing and spinning machinery in the world. However, like other textile machinery firms at the period, it later suffered from declining business. Smith's son, the third Prince Smith, who on inheriting the baronetcy changed his name to Sir Prince Prince-Smith by deed poll, took the firm into an amalgamation with Hall and Stells Ltd in 1931, creating Prince Smith and Stells Ltd, of which he served as president until his death in 1940. 


@@@@@


doc= 48200


Smith, Sir William Reardon, first baronet (1856-1935), shipowner and philanthropist, was born at Appledore, Devon, on 7 August 1856, the youngest of nine children of Thomas Smith (1810-1859), master of the schooner 'Hazard', and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1906), the daughter of Captain Phillip Green. His mother was widowed after the 'Hazard' sank during a storm in the Burry estuary on 31 October 1859. After a basic education at the Wesleyan Methodist day school, Smith left Appledore as deck-boy and cook in the coasting smack 'Unity' on 6 September 1870. He undertook his first deep-sea voyage in the 'Ocean Pearl' from Newport, Monmouthshire, to New Orleans with a cargo of rails in 1872, followed by a voyage in the Swansea copper ore trade to Chile in the 'Scout' in 1872-3. He spent much of 1875 on Prince Edward Island, Canada, rigging wooden sailing vessels under construction for the Yeo family, who had extensive business interests on the island as well as owning the Richmond dry dock in Appledore. 
After studying briefly at a Leith nautical academy Smith obtained his second mate's certificate on 11 August 1876. Just seven months later he obtained his first mate's certificate after studying at the Plymouth Navigation School and he then joined the noted Scottish shipowners Hugh Hogarth & Sons of Ardrossan, with whom he remained for the next eighteen years. Having obtained his master's certificate (again at Plymouth) in June 1879, he went on to command some of Hogarth's sailing ships trading worldwide, particularly the 'Macrihanish' (1883-4) and the 'Ochtertyre' (1885-90). He then spent a further six years in command of some of Hogarth's earliest tramp steamers before taking command of the steamer 'Starcross' in November 1896; this vessel was owned by Anning Brothers of Cardiff, a family whose roots were in the village of Kenton near Exeter. The following year he assumed command of the 'Lady Lewis', owned by a Cardiff company established by a fellow native of Appledore, William James Tatem. He commanded another Tatem vessel, the 'Shandon', before retiring from active seafaring in 1900, in which year he and his family moved from Appledore to settle in Cardiff. 
Smith had married, on 16 May 1880, Ellen Hamlyn (1857-1939) of Appledore. A year younger than her husband, she was the daughter of Thomas Hamlyn, a coal merchant with numerous interests in local shipping, and his wife, Elizabeth, who ran a grocery shop and bakery in Market Street. The Smiths had three sons and four daughters; their eldest son died of hydrocephalus in 1883, aged just sixteen months. Ellen inherited her parents' business acumen in no small measure, and her diligent management of financial assets was crucial to the establishment of the family business in 1905-6. 
Smith made some investments in property in Cardiff before his first venture into shipowning in 1904, in partnership with the Cardiff chandler William Seager; together they set up the Tempus Shipping Co. Ltd to acquire the new steamship of that name, completed at Stockton-on-Tees in that year. The partnership proved short-lived, however; within a year Smith had resigned to initiate the shipping venture that would become his life's work. On 19 May 1905 he set up a new company, the Instow Steamship Co. Ltd, and placed an order with the Teesside shipbuilder Ropner's for a new steamship to be named 'City of Cardiff'; almost all the family's assets were sunk into this firm. Smith only just managed to secure sufficient capital -- much of it from the West Riding of Yorkshire and industrial Lancashire -- to ensure the delivery of the new ship on 17 March 1906. However, her first voyage to La Plata in Argentina with coal, returning with grain to Genoa -- a typical 'coal out, grain home' voyage of the time -- was a resounding commercial success and laid the basis for the venture's subsequent expansion. 
Before the First World War, Smith established three further shipping companies which again relied upon capital from the north of England and also from the St Just area of industrial Cornwall; in 1914 these companies owned a total of nine steamers, all six or less years old. A further twelve vessels were acquired during the hostilities, but ten vessels were lost to enemy action. After the war he was created a baronet, of Appledore, Devon, on 1 July 1920, 'for public and local services' ('London Gazette', 4 June 1920, 6314). 
Buoyed up by the immediate post-war boom and feeling sure that improved trading conditions would continue into the 1920s, Smith created four new companies between 1919 and 1921 for which he ordered new tonnage at vastly inflated prices, as well as purchasing former German merchant tonnage surrendered to the allies after the war. The collapse of the boom in the late spring of 1920 caught him unawares, however; he was later forced to wind up one of the post-war companies, the Cornborough Line Ltd, in a state of insolvency in 1923 and thereafter pursued a more cautious course in his shipping activities. 
Despite the economic difficulties of the period, Reardon Smith (as he became publicly known in this period) emerged as a considerable philanthropist during the 1920s; this doubtless stemmed from the fact that he had known hardship and poverty as a child following the loss of his father. In 1916 he had contributed 10,000 guineas to the King Edward VII Hospital (later the Cardiff Royal Infirmary) in Cardiff and he also contributed about a half of the $5000 raised to build a new cottage hospital at Bideford, which he himself opened in September 1925. Education was another cause close to his heart. In September 1920 he initiated a fund-raising campaign among his fellow shipowners at Cardiff which raised $18,000 to fund the Smith Junior Nautical School, later the Reardon Smith Nautical School. Opened on 3 October 1921, it provided an appropriate three-year curriculum for boys in their early teens who had their sights set upon a career as deck officers, teaching navigation and business practice alongside practical subjects such as boat-handling or ropework. The facilities available to boys at the school were enhanced considerably in February 1925 with the purchase by Reardon Smith of the substantial schooner-rigged steel yacht 'Margherita', which served as both cadet training vessel and family yacht until 1932. In 1926 he also endowed the chair of geography at Exeter University and established three scholarships at the university for students from north Devon. 
The philanthropic cause with which Reardon Smith was most closely associated, however, was the National Museum of Wales. Despite being a proud Devonian (he was a pillar and sometime president of the Cardiff Devonshire Society), he was a dynamic and tireless officer (as council member, treasurer, and president) of the museum from 1921 until 1933. The museum was in severe financial difficulties in the 1920s and construction work on the building in Cathays Park, Cardiff, was at a standstill. Reardon Smith was appointed treasurer in 1925 and within days of his appointment called in to see the director, Mortimer Wheeler (they subsequently became firm friends). Having ascertained that the museum had an overdraft of exactly $21,367 4's'. 9died, he instantly wrote out a cheque for that sum and initiated a vigorous fund-raising campaign with a target of $100,000 to complete the museum's eastern wing. He succeeded to the presidency in 1928, and his successful term of office came to a conclusion in October 1932 with the opening of the museum's new wing by Prince George; apart from gallery space, the wing also comprised a lecture theatre named in Reardon Smith's honour. 
Alongside his philanthropic activities, Reardon Smith continued to run what was by the late 1920s one of the UK's biggest tramp shipping companies, owning some thirty-five vessels. The shipping market remained sluggish throughout the inter-war years and he worked hard with his fellow directors (two sons and three sons-in-law) to improve the economy and flexibility of the vessels that he ordered from shipyards in the north-east of England, Belfast, and the Clyde. From 1922 onwards all new steamships supplied to the company were capable of burning either coal or oil in their fireboxes and in 1928 he ordered his first two motor vessels, taking delivery of a further four such vessels during his lifetime. These motor vessels soon proved their worth on a new cargo liner service initiated in the spring of 1928 to the Pacific coast of Canada and the USA. But even Reardon Smith could not avoid the worst of the post-Wall Street crash recession -- in June 1933 a third of the fleet was laid up on the River Fal and in Milford Haven. Despite the economic difficulties of the period, however, Reardon Smith -- a lifelong Liberal -- remained a firm adherent of 'laissez-faire' economics and was an opponent of the notion of governmental assistance for the tramp shipping sector, which was under discussion in the early 1930s. 
Having forged such an outstanding career himself, Reardon Smith was a tough employer; an office boy who started working for the company in the early 1930s recalled being rebuked by him for using the lift, rather than the stairs, at Merthyr House, the company's Cardiff dockland office. While expecting total commitment from those who worked for him, both at sea and ashore, he repaid that commitment in many ways, not least with the introduction of company pension schemes. Unlike many major shipowners, he did not seek to acquire a landed estate and was content with a large and comfortable residence in a Cardiff suburb. Loath to spend the proceeds of his enterprise on his own indulgence, he supported hospitals, schools, universities, religious causes, and above all the National Museum of Wales, to which he gave a total of some $50,000. 
Reardon Smith died at his home, Cornborough, Ty Gwyn Road, Penylan, Cardiff, on 23 December 1935. After a service at the Roath Park Wesleyan Methodist Church (where the family worshipped), he was interred in the Cathays cemetery on 27 December. He was succeeded in the baronetcy by his eldest surviving son, Willie (1887-1950), who in 1929 had assumed the surname Reardon-Smith in lieu of Smith. 


@@@@@


doc= 48202


Spagnoletti, Charles Ernest Paolo della Diana (1832-1915), electrical inventor, was born at Brompton, London, on 12 July 1832, the eldest son of Ernesto Spagnoletti, a musician, and his wife, Charlotte, 'nee' Stohwasser (1809-1901). The family was descended from the ancient Italian noble house of della Diana. The surname Spagnoletti originated as a variant of Spagnoletto, a nickname bestowed on one of his ancestors. Charles attended Blemmell House School, Brompton, until the age of fourteen, when he left to take up a post in the National Debt Office. After a few months he became a pupil of the electrical and telegraph engineer Alexander Bain. In 1847 Spagnoletti joined the Electric Telegraph Company, and in 1855 became telegraph superintendent of the Great Western Railway (GWR) at a salary of $100 per annum. His main achievement there was to introduce the block system whereby train movements were controlled by electric telegraph. Following a serious illness, he retired from the GWR in 1892, but remained consulting electrical engineer to the company. Spagnoletti made many electrical inventions. Besides signalling and telegraph equipment, he designed bells, bridges, clocks, and a fire alarm, all worked by electricity. He installed the first electric light at several London termini, and advised on the use of electricity at the Crystal Palace. For Ascot racecourse he designed a board to show the starters, winners, and prices. In 1890 the City and South London Railway, acting on Spagnoletti's advice, became Britain's first electric underground railway. He was also consultant to the London Electrical Omnibus Company, and invented a new system of road building, using pre-cast concrete blocks, which was widely used by the London county council. 
After leaving the GWR, Spagnoletti became managing director of the Phonophore Company, and worked on telephone development. Following the act of 1868 to nationalize the telegraph system, Spagnoletti had advised the government on the compensation to be paid. In 1872 he became a founder member of the Society of Telegraph Engineers, served on its council from 1874 to 1880, and as its vice-president from 1880 to 1884. Meanwhile the title had been changed to the Society of Telegraph Engineers and Electricians, and it was of that body that Spagnoletti became president in 1885. In 1912 he was made an honorary member of the society's successor, the Institution of Electrical Engineers. He had become a member of the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1875, and belonged to several other scientific bodies. In 1884 he was elected president of the Conference of Railway Companies' Telegraph Superintendents. From 1878, when he served as a member of the international jury on electrical exhibits at the Paris Universal Exhibition, he was much involved in work of this type. 
Spagnoletti continued the musical interests of his father and grandfather. He wrote and composed many songs, and had a good tenor voice. When Sir William Preece showed the first Edison phonograph at a meeting of the Society of Telegraph Engineers in 1878, Spagnoletti sang the national anthem into it. He was one of the first supporters of the Electro-Harmonic Society. As 'Mr Sprigalilly' he appears in Simmons's 'Memoirs of a Station Master'. The portrait is vivid and malicious, but not necessarily accurate. In 1853 Spagnoletti married a widow, Caroline Charlotte Duffield (1829-1903), daughter of Robert Vincent Dawson, a veterinary surgeon. They had two sons and three daughters. Spagnoletti died of pneumonia on 28 June 1915 at 16 Frognal Lane, Hampstead, where he had lived for more than ten years. He was buried on 2 July at Hampstead cemetery. At least four other members of the family made careers in electricity. They were Charles's son, James, his brother, Hylton, his great-nephew, Philip, and Philip's son, Robert. When in 1907, James transformed his business into a private company, he gave $2000 worth of shares from his own allocation to his father, who thus became the second largest shareholder. 


@@@@@


doc= 48204


Spicer, Sir Albert, first baronet (1847-1934), paper merchant and wholesale stationer, was born on 16 March 1847 at Clapham, Surrey, the second of four sons and sixth of ten children of James Spicer (1807-1888), a wholesale stationer of Woodford Green, Essex, and his wife, Louisa ('nee' Edwards). He was educated at Mill Hill School and was then sent to Heidelberg where he learned to speak German fluently. 
Shortly after Spicer returned to England in 1864 his grandfather, John Edward Spicer, died leaving his stationer's business at 182 New Bridge Street, London, to his three sons. They fell out, however, and James started another paper merchant firm, James Spicer & Sons, at 50 Upper Thames Street, London. His two brothers, meanwhile, continued the existing business in New Bridge Street under the name Spicer Bros. Both branches of the Spicer family were influential Congregationalists. On James Spicer's side they were linked to the Unwins, the publishing family, through the marriage of two of his daughters, one of whom, Elizabeth, became mother of Sir Stanley Unwin. 
Albert Spicer became the dynamic figure in James Spicer & Sons. With just eight employees in 1865, the firm tapped new markets for printing and writing paper by acting as an intermediary between the paper manufacturers on one side and retailers and consuming organizations on the other. The company developed a regional branch house system, moved swiftly when new markets (such as school boards or county councils) appeared, and vigorously sought foreign markets, mostly in the British empire, Albert himself making overseas tours. In 1879 he married Jessie Stewart Dykes (1857-1934); they had three sons and eight daughters. 
Albert and his brother Evan (1849-1937) strengthened their competitive position by increasing the capital investment in their London facilities, rebuilding the Upper Thames Street premises, and in 1886 acquiring an envelope factory in Southwark. In 1910 the partnership was converted into a private company, James Spicer & Sons Ltd, with an authorized capital of $450,000. It continued to build up its British and empire distribution network so that in 1913 it had warehouses in London, Birmingham, Manchester, Leeds, Glasgow, Bristol, Melbourne, and Durban, and offices in Belfast, Liverpool, Edinburgh, Sydney, Brisbane, Adelaide, Perth, Wellington (New Zealand), Cape Town, and Paris. 
The slump after the First World War increased the pressures on specialist wholesalers and dealers. James Spicer & Sons protected their position by reuniting with their cousins. The two Spicer firms merged in 1922 with the formation of Spicers Ltd with an authorized and issued capital of $1.15 million. It owned Eynsford Mills in Kent and the Sawston Mills, Cambridgeshire; two factories in Southwark; and a new factory at Brimsdown, Middlesex. Albert Spicer received 4966 of the 50,000 $10 ordinary shares and 5162 of the 65,000 5 per cent $10 preference shares in Spicers and, in addition, an annuity of $3000 for five years. He remained chairman of the new company for one year before retiring from business in 1923. 
In London's business community Albert Spicer was a considerable figure. He was president of the London chamber of commerce from 1907 to 1910 and in 1909 visited Sydney as president of the Chambers of Commerce of the Empire. For ten years, from 1907, he sat on the commercial intelligence advisory committee of the Board of Trade. During the First World War he was a member of the royal commission on paper supplies. 
Outside business Spicer's interests centred on Congregationalism and Liberal politics. He was elected to the Essex Congregational Union and then, in 1873, to the London Missionary Society's board, serving as chairman from 1882 and as treasurer from 1885 to 1910. Spicer was also instrumental in the building of Mansfield College, Oxford, a Congregational theological college, of which he was treasurer from 1888 to 1921. In 1892 Spicer was elected the second lay chairman of the Congregational Union of England and Wales and in 1899 moderator of the International Congregational Council held at Boston. He attempted to inject greater social concern into his denomination but made little headway. In 1919-20, as chairman of the laymen's commission on ministerial stipends, he visited local Congregational churches, encouraging lay support for the local ministry. It was calculated that his gifts, chiefly but not only to the Congregational cause, averaged 26 per cent of his income during his active life. He became vice-president of the British and Foreign Bible Society in 1896, president of the Sunday School Union in 1900, and for seven years served on the army council's advisory committee on the spiritual and moral welfare of the army. 
Spicer entered politics by sitting on the Woodford school board from 1877 to 1892. By 1888 he had held every official position connected with Liberal organizations in Essex. He founded and was vice-president of the London and Counties Liberal Union and by 1888 was a trustee of the National Liberal Club. He unsuccessfully contested the Walthamstow division of Essex in 1886 but sat as Liberal MP for Monmouth Boroughs from 1892 to 1900, and for Central Hackney from 1906 to 1918. For public services Spicer was created a baronet in 1906 and sworn of the privy council in 1912. 
In 1912 Spicer chaired the Marconi inquiry committee which investigated the dealings between Godfrey Isaacs and leading Liberal politicians. Partly because of his deafness he failed to dominate the committee, and the Liberal members glossed over what all agreed was at least ministerial impropriety, and what tories saw as corruption. To his credit, Spicer issued his own report departing from both sides. He died on 20 December 1934, at his home, 24 Palace Court, Bayswater, London, his wife having died before him, in May 1934. He was cremated at Golders Green crematorium. 


@@@@@


doc= 48206


Lyell, James Patrick Ronaldson (1871-1948), book collector, was born on 1 September 1871 at 50 South Hill Park, Hampstead, London, the son of John Ronaldson Lyell, solicitor and chief clerk of the Thames police court, and his wife, Martha Elizabeth Groom. He was educated at Merchant Taylors' School and at University College, London, and was admitted solicitor in April 1894. He eventually became senior partner of Gard, Lyell & Co. He was a member of the Metropolitan Water Board (1910-26) and in 1900 contested East Marylebone unsuccessfully as a Liberal. He served as an elder in the Presbyterian church at Hampstead, where he was also a justice of the peace and for many years chairman of the magistrates' bench. 
Lyell was moderately well off but not rich. He married on 17 April 1901 Agnes Stuart (1863/4-1949), daughter of James Stuart Balmer, civil servant, and they had one daughter, Agnes, who predeceased her parents. He began to collect books as early as 1889, and from 1891 to 1911 was especially interested in acquiring incunabula. In 1914 he began to take an interest in early Spanish books, and it was the lucky purchase, for only $4, of a copy of the great Complutensian polyglot 'Bible' (Alcala de Henares, 1514-17) which inspired him to write and publish in 1917 his first book, a life of Cardinal Francisco Jimenez de Cisneros, archbishop of Toledo (died November 1517), followed in 1926 by his best-known work, 'Early Book Illustration in Spain'. The preparation of this book caused him to visit Spain several times and to learn Spanish. A new translation, with up-to-date notes, entitled 'La ilustracion del libro antiguo en Espana', edited by J. Martin Abad, was published in Madrid in 1997. These two books on Spanish subjects are still standard works in their field. Lyell's Spanish and Armada collections are both now in America, mainly in Harvard University Library. He also collected Greek and oriental manuscripts, as well as English books printed abroad. While living in Hampstead he made a small collection of local topography and gave it to the public library there when he decided in 1927 to move to Oxford. He seems to have had little direct contact with the British Museum, except that in November 1943 he presented one French incunable to the museum, the library having bought three of his Italian incunables as early as 1920; but he was so devoted to the Bodleian that he made Oxford his headquarters and in 1932, at the age of sixty-one, having become a member of New College, he took the degree of BLitt for a thesis 'based on my collection of books relating to the Spanish Armada'. About 1936 he changed his taste in collecting, and began to acquire medieval manuscripts, eventually accumulating about 250, of which in his will he bequeathed a choice of 100 to the Bodleian. These became the subject of the detailed catalogue published by A. C. de la Mare in 1971. 
Lyell and his wife moved to Abingdon at some time before 1940. He died at the Warneford Hospital in Oxford on 23 December 1948, and his wife died a short time later. He was cremated and his ashes interred at Hampstead cemetery. Under the terms of his will, a Lyell readership in bibliography was established in Oxford, and the first lectures were delivered by his friend Neil R. Ker, university reader in palaeography and fellow of Magdalen College. In a paper which Lyell read to a society at Radley College in 1939, he remarked: 'I have written numerous articles and brochures on other books of mine'; and 'I am at present engaged in the preparation of an annotated catalogue of some of my remaining manuscripts and books' (Lyell, 281). Lyell's personal and bibliographical papers, including his own miscellaneous notes on his manuscripts and their acquisition, were bequeathed to the Bodleian Library. As R. W. Hunt of the Bodleian noted in 1951: 'Lyell was never a social success, and made no attempt to ingratiate himself with anyone... His complete indifference to the ordinary standards of success may explain why his name is not even mentioned in books of reference' (Hunt, 69). Nevertheless, he was a self-taught bibliophile and scholar of extraordinary enthusiasm and discrimination, and one who deserves to be remembered not only by Oxford but by the whole bibliographical world. 


@@@@@


doc= 48207


Spurrier, Sir Henry (1898-1964), motor vehicle manufacturer, was born at Leyland, Lancashire, on 16 June 1898, son of Henry Spurrier (died 1942), a mechanical engineer, and his American wife, Jessie Albro. His grandfather, also called Henry, was a brilliant engineer and contractor with a financial interest in the Lancashire Steam Motor Company, of which Spurrier's father became a director and which in 1907 became Leyland Motors Ltd. Spurrier, or Henry III as he later came to be known throughout Leyland Motors, apparently became interested in motor vehicles through playing in its workshops during his holidays from Repton School. On leaving school, he joined Leyland as an engineering apprentice and received a thorough training in all its engineering departments. 
During the First World War Spurrier joined the Royal Flying Corps as a pilot lieutenant and served overseas in Mesopotamia, India, and the Middle East. During this period he contracted dysentery and typhoid which continued to affect his health throughout the rest of his life. He was demobilized in 1919 and subsequently returned to Leyland Motors, where his father had become chairman. In 1920 he married Winifred Mary, daughter of Alfred Cope, an accountant of Ewell, Surrey; they had two daughters. She outlived him. 
At Leyland, Spurrier joined forces with the chief engineer, J. H. Parry-Thomas, and his assistant, Reld Railton, to develop the Leyland 'straight-eight' motor car. Priced at about $7000 this car was more expensive than a Rolls-Royce, and only eighteen were made. Although it was the most expensive motor car on the market at the time, it incorporated a number of advanced features which, many years later, were to become standard on most, if not, all cars -- overhead cams, anti-roll bar technology, and single-plate dry clutch. Following the car's commercial failure it was developed for racing purposes and gained a number of world records with Thomas at the wheel, before his death in 1923 at Pendine (Pen-tywyn) Sands, Carmarthenshire. 
The main production activity at Leyland during the inter-war years, however, centred not on cars but on commercial vehicles. In 1925 Spurrier became assistant to the general manager and helped design a new range of trucks and buses which re-established the fortunes of the company following a period when they had been at a low ebb. As assistant general manager between 1930 and 1942, Spurrier had particular responsibility for overseas sales, where he proved to be highly successful. In 1942, shortly after his father's death, he was promoted to general manager and took personal charge of Leyland's tank production for the war effort. In 1949 he became managing director and in 1957, company chairman. In 1962 he suffered a brain tumour and effectively retired from active business, relinquishing the posts of company chairman and managing director in June 1963 when he became instead the company's president. The reins of the business were handed over to his protege, Donald Stokes ('b'. 1914). 
Spurrier was considered to be a most forceful personality, whose control was often exercised in an autocratic manner. Overall, however, he should be judged by his actions rather than his words. The financial problems of Leyland during the immediate post-First World War period and throughout the 1920s, resulting from some questionable decisions by the Leyland board, left a lasting impression on him. He subsequently developed an aversion to waste as strong as his father's aversion to thrift; the wasteful practices existing at Standard-Triumph at the time of the Leyland take-over in 1961 particularly appalled him. 
During his period at the Leyland helm following the Second World War he recognized the need for the company to become fully vertically integrated and to grow bigger if it was to survive. He achieved both aims through a policy of acquisition, succeeding, despite some self-doubts and his acquired caution, in building up Leyland into the largest exporter of heavy-duty vehicles in the world. The process started with an agreed take-over of Albion Motors Ltd in 1952, and continued, in June 1955, with Leyland's absorption of Scammell Lorries Ltd. In 1962, the company acquired Associated Commercial Vehicles Ltd, a group dominated by the Associated Equipment Company (AEC), comprising the former lorry-making firms of Maudslay, Thornycroft, and Crossley. His most ambitious coup, however, came with his decision to acquire Standard-Triumph International in April 1961, so that Leyland could enter the volume car business. Having paid a high price for a company in financial difficulties, the Leyland management under Spurrier commenced to turn Standard-Triumph's fortunes round, although he did not live long enough to see it. 
In the course of his career, which was mainly devoted to Leyland Motors, Spurrier was also a director of the District Bank, a part-time member of the Iron and Steel Board (from 1958), president of the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders from 1952 to 1953, and a member of the National Advisory Council of the Motor Industry. He was knighted in 1955 for his services to British exports. Away from his work he was fond of yachting and shooting. Spurrier died at his home, Ingol Cottage, Walker Lane, Fulwood, Lancashire, on 17 June 1964, aged sixty-six. 


@@@@@


doc= 48208


Starley, John Kemp (1855-1901), bicycle manufacturer, was born on 24 December 1855 in Walthamstow, Essex, the son of John Starley, market gardener, and his wife, Mary Ann Cippen. Starley won a grammar school scholarship and proved good at mathematics. His drawings of a steam engine with an oscillating piston so much impressed his uncle, the inventor and cycle maker James Starley, that in 1872 James offered to train him in Coventry, taking him to live in his own house. Four years later, John Starley married nineteen-year-old Abigail, daughter of George Statham, a ribbon manufacturer and city councillor. The first of their six sons and four daughters, also John Kemp Starley, followed his father into the business he founded, eventually becoming managing director of the Rover Company. 
John Starley worked for cycle makers Haynes and Jeffries (later Rudge) from 1877, with responsibility for the machinery. The following year he founded his own cycle manufacturing company, with capital supplied by William Sutton, the young owner of a small Coventry haberdashery shop. Starley exhibited his innovative Rover safety bicycle in 1885. This soon replaced the 'ordinary' or 'penny-farthing' bicycle with its huge front wheel, which was only suitable for the very fit and anyway was less efficient than the new design. Starley claimed to be the inventor of the safety bicycle, with the key features of a diamond frame, a rear acting crank, and equal size wheels. He wrote that he wanted to use effort more economically, which entailed a configuration in which essentials such as the crank shaft, pedals, seat, and handles were easily adjustable. Other inventors brought out similar designs around the same time and so Starley's claim has been disputed, but there is no doubt that his design was the best on the market, as the road race he organized in 1885 demonstrated; the Rover beat the best time achieved earlier over the same route on a Hillman bicycle. 
Less commercially successful was Starley's experimental electrically driven tricar, which he tested three years later in Deauville, France, to avoid the prohibitions of the 1878 'Locomotive (or 'Red Flag') Act'. It ran at 8 m.p.h. and was subsequently hailed as the first Coventry-made motor car. Business was erratic, with severe slumps in 1891-2 and after 1896. Starley was keen on employing the latest machinery but was often constrained by the financial position of the firm. He developed sales abroad, in particular in France, but found that bad debts in the United States limited his expansion in that direction. He attempted to improve his tyre supply and quality by acquiring interests in various tyre companies, until Dunlop's pneumatic tyres answered his requirements. In 1889 Starley adopted limited liability, and he floated J. K. Starley & Co. as the public Rover Cycle Company in 1896. He received $100,000 for the business, kept one-fifth of the ordinary shares, and remained as managing director. The new capital financed the construction of the largest cycle works in Coventry for Rover. 
As a minority, but substantial, shareholder in the company, Starley proved cautious. He was still required, as managing director, to surrender the deeds of his house and other assets as security for the bank overdraft facilities that Rover utilized. Starley's rather austere character prevented his being caught up in the speculative frenzy that brought down a good part of the Coventry cycle industry when the bicycle boom burst. His cousins' cycle firm, Starley Brothers, and many other Coventry cycle businesses went into receivership after 1898, thanks to extravagance and over-capitalization by the financier Terah Hooley. Rover's financial results were poor after 1896, and as late as 1901 Starley was resisting his board's wishes to spend more on motor car experiments. He had, however, imported Peugeot motor bicycles in 1899 with a view to introducing a Rover model, and the company began manufacturing them a year after his death. Two years later, Rover moved into car making, finding it so profitable that it abandoned the by then loss-making cycle business altogether in 1912. 
Starley followed in the inventive tradition of his uncle James, taking out eighty-seven patents in his own name. Between 1890 and 1896 Starley was a Liberal member of Coventry council, and was invited to stand for Warwickshire constituencies. He held strong, if unorthodox, views on religious matters, regularly attending a Congregational church, conducting a Sunday school class, and believing denominations should be abolished. The spiritual priority of the 'New Testament', Starley maintained, warranted reversing the conventional order of the 'Bible'. He sent a copy of this 'Starley Bible', in which the 'New Testament' preceded the 'Old', to Lev Tolstoy, whose religious views at the time he greatly admired. 
A genuine philanthropist, Starley was president of the Coventry YMCA in 1895, a school board member, and a supporter of the Salvation Army. When General Booth and his staff visited Coventry, they stayed with Starley. His popularity and contribution to Coventry life was underlined by the 20,000 people estimated to have attended his funeral. A memorial fund in his name was established to promote 'road locomotion', and administered by the Institution of Mechanical Engineers. In 1901 Starley suddenly developed gallstones, and, his heart being judged too weak to risk an operation, died at his home, Barrs Hill House, in Radford Road, Coventry, on 29 October. 


@@@@@


doc= 48209


Markham, Ernest (1881-1937), gardener and writer on horticulture, was born at Newbottle, Northamptonshire, on 8 March 1881, the third son in the family of at least three sons and four daughters of William Markham (1852/3-1946), agricultural labourer and shepherd, and his wife, Dinah Diana, 'nee' Astley (1853-1922). From his youth he worked in a succession of large gardens: Newbottle Manor, Northamptonshire; Crown Court East, Worcester; The Dell, King's Norton, Birmingham; and Wortley Hall, Sheffield. Having been the leading foreman at King's Walden Bury, Hitchin, he became head gardener to Lady Chichester at Arlington Court, Devon, about 1900. From 1905 to 1910 he worked for Lady Marcus Beresford at Bishopsgate, Englefield Green, Surrey. He was a widower at the time of his marriage, at Whittlesey, Cambridgeshire, on 10 July 1912, to Miriam Elizabeth (1887-1953), daughter of William Price, coachman. 
In 1914 Markham became head gardener to William Robinson (1838-1935) of Gravetye Manor, near East Grinstead, Sussex, living with Miriam, his wife, at The Moat, a cottage on the estate. He loved Gravetye and directed more than a dozen gardeners in the productive and ornamental departments. From 1928 the ageing Robinson conferred upon him sole responsibility for managing and developing the garden, and at Robinson's death Markham was left with the life possession of Moat cottage. He continued to manage the famous Gravetye Garden, refusing many offers of employment elsewhere. In 1933 the Royal Horticultural Society recognized his services to horticulture by making him an associate of honour, and in June 1935 he read a paper on ornamental climbing plants to the society. 
Markham contributed regularly to 'Gardening Illustrated' and wrote two books, 'The Large and Small Flowered Clematis and their Cultivation in the Open Air' (1935) and 'Raspberries and Kindred Fruits' (1936). His contributions to the later editions of William Robinson's 'English Flower Garden' included sections on lilies and clematis. He kept a large collection of clematis varieties and is commemorated by the hybrid clematis 'Ernest Markham' and 'Clematis macropetala' 'Markham's Pink'. He died of a heart attack on 6 December 1937 at the Queen Victoria Cottage Hospital, East Grinstead, survived by his wife; he was buried at West Hoathly, Sussex, on 9 December. Obituaries described him as a modest and diffident man with an encyclopaedic knowledge of plants. 


@@@@@


doc= 48211


Bailey, Sir John (1898-1969), politician and co-operative movement activist, was born on 1 January 1898 in Miskin, Mountain Ash, Glamorgan, one of six children of John Bailey, miner, and his wife, Sarah Ann. Bailey attended Gwyn Ivor School, Miskin, until he was twelve. Working initially in a cobbler's shop, he entered the mines as a collier's boy. An accident in 1915 forced him to take a surface job, and in 1917 he enlisted in the South Wales Borderers and served in France. 
Bailey returned to the mines in 1919. He studied economics through a correspondence course, administered at Ruskin College, Oxford, and joined the Independent Labour Party. Born into a Wesleyan Methodist family, Bailey considered entering the ministry. In 1921, however, he received a South Wales Miners' Federation scholarship to the Central Labour College in London. He unsuccessfully contested his first local government election, at Kensington, in 1922. Bailey also met Anne Glaser, whom he later married, in 1926; they had one son and two daughters. After returning home in 1923, Bailey was elected to Mountain Ash urban district council. In 1925 he was appointed as political secretary to the Co-operative Party in Bradford, Yorkshire. He served on Bradford city council (in 1928-31 and 1933-8), leading the juvenile employment and education committees. 
Declining opportunities to stand for parliament, Bailey became a London-based national organizer for the Co-operative Party in 1936. In 1942 he succeeded S. F. Perry as the party's general secretary. Bailey was unsuccessful in recruiting candidates from among co-operative traders and initially the Co-operative Party hardly distinguished itself from its Labour parliamentary allies. However, post-war nationalization led co-operators, including Bailey, to question the apparent growth of centralized and bureaucratic state control, advocating instead democratic social ownership through co-operative and municipal enterprise. Tensions were heightened by the co-operative movement's defence of its own insurance society against Labour proposals of 1949 for nationalization of industrial insurance. Throughout the 1950s Labour policy was criticized as neglectful of consumer interests and of co-operation's potential role in economic and social regeneration. Bailey was instrumental in establishing the Co-operative Party's distinctive voice. 
Bailey led negotiations concerning organizational relations between the Co-operative and Labour parties. In 1946 it was agreed that Co-operative parliamentarians would stand as 'Co-operative and Labour' candidates and, on election, join the Parliamentary Labour Party (PLP). However, while co-operators resented the lack of consultation on Labour policy development, other interested groups sought to curb Co-operative nomination of parliamentary candidates and impose greater discipline over Co-operative members of the PLP. Bailey actively opposed the 1956 proposal that individual co-operative societies affiliate directly to constituency Labour parties. In 1958, however, he conceded limits on the number of Co-operative parliamentary candidates. 
Bailey wrote extensively, in Co-operative Party policy statements, as editor of the party's 'Monthly Newsletter', in other journals, and as author of a popular textbook, 'The British Co-operative Movement' (1955, revised edn 1960). His interests embraced the global, including work for the International Co-operative Alliance in eastern Europe and Africa, and the local, as secretary of Cheshunt and Waltham Cross Co-operative Party and vice-chairman of the East Hertfordshire Labour Party. He was also a director of the Enfield Highway Co-operative Society from 1952 and became president in 1968. 
After retirement as Co-operative Party secretary in 1962 Bailey served on the national federation negotiating committee which considered amalgamation of national co-operative institutions to form a single focus for the movement. He presided at the Co-operative Congress of 1964 and was knighted in 1965. Bailey died in hospital at Enfield after a short illness on 18 January 1969. His funeral was held on 24 January at Enfield crematorium; Bailey was survived by his wife and children. 
Self-discipline and hard work, combined with a belief in co-operative democracy as an economic and political philosophy, made Bailey a formidable political operator. Yet he also had 'some of the mystique (and occasional vagueness) of the visionary' (Carbery, 52). Bailey secured the constitutional relationship between the Labour and Co-operative parties and ensured a co-operative contribution to British politics. 


@@@@@


doc= 48212


Ashton, William (c.1806-1877), Chartist, was born in the Yorkshire linen-weaving and coal-mining town of Barnsley about 1806. His father was an Englishman, and a linen weaver, and his mother was an Irish Catholic. Ashton always identified strongly with his mother's nation and faith and often spoke of himself as an Irishman. 
Although linen weaving was still a hand trade, the number of workers coming from other branches of textile manufacture and from the declining Irish industry, as well as the continual pressure to lower prices, led to a series of conflicts between weavers and employers on questions of prices, wages, and working practices. By his early twenties Ashton was among the leaders of the weavers and was arrested for his part in a strike and in a series of riots in 1829. At the York assizes in August 1830 he and another young weaver, Francis Mirfield, were sentenced to fourteen years' transportation, and were sent to a penal colony in Australia. A memorial for their release was organized in Barnsley, and after seven years both men were released and returned to England, their fares having been raised by the Barnsley people. 
Ashton and Mirfield arrived back in the spring of 1838 and were immediately involved in the local Chartist movement. Barnsley had one of the earliest and most active Chartist groups in the country, and Ashton soon became a prominent leader. In the troubled summer of 1839 he escaped briefly to France, but returned after a few months and was arrested in the autumn of 1839. At the York assize of March 1840 he and two other Barnsley Chartists were sentenced to two years' imprisonment for sedition. 
Ashton gave an account of the Newport rising of November 1839, and of the various plots which undoubtedly existed in other parts of the country, which has been taken seriously by some historians; but the events have never been entirely elucidated. Ashton claimed, in letters and at a public meeting held after his release from prison, that he had acquired advance information about the lack of enthusiasm among provincial leaders for the proposed rising, and sent a message to Feargus O'Connor asking him to warn John Frost of the potential lack of support. The message was never delivered to Frost, who was taken and sentenced to death. There are many problems with the story, not least the fact that Frost appears never to have relinquished his friendship with O'Connor, and so could hardly have felt betrayed in the way Ashton suggested. At the public meeting Ashton was howled down by his fellow Chartists and left immediately afterwards with his family for the United States, financed on his journey by the government, who were offering imprisoned Chartists assisted passages on their release. Ashton did not settle in the United States, however, but returned to Barnsley after less than a year away, and soon became active again in Barnsley politics. 
In spite of the controversy aroused by his accusations against O'Connor, which he renewed in a letter to the 'Northern Star' newspaper on 3 May 1845, Ashton seems to have continued to be an active and leading member of the Barnsley Chartists, and he represented them at the 1848 Chartist convention. Soon after this, however, about 1850, Ashton again emigrated with his family, this time to Australia. He spent the rest of his life there, dying at Craigie, Victoria, on 26 September 1877. He made his living in Australia mainly as a shopkeeper, but still wrote regularly to the 'Barnsley Chronicle' about Australian life, as well as recounting his memories of the Chartist movement. Like many Chartist emigrants, he was disappointed by the experience of life in a more democratic system, commenting in a letter of March 1866 that 'The same system prevails here as is the general rule at home -- the rich get richer whilst the poor get poorer' ('DLB', 3.7). 


@@@@@


doc= 48213


Birtwistle, Thomas (1833-1912), trade unionist and factory inspector, was born at Great Harwood, Lancashire, on 16 October 1833, the son of Jonathan Birtwistle, a calico printer, and Ann Birtwistle, a hand-loom weaver. Put to the hand-loom at the age of six, he became a power-loom weaver when he was fourteen and married a fellow weaver, Ellen Butterworth (who predeceased him), when he was twenty. Despite only a rudimentary formal education, Birtwistle showed a natural facility for mathematics, and became expert at calculating the complex piece-rates which formed the basis of a cotton weaver's wages. It was this rare ability which led to his involvement in the nascent trade union movement of the north Lancashire weaving towns during the later 1850s. 
The aim of the early cotton weavers' unions, which Birtwistle later pursued consistently, was to secure an agreed list of weaving piece-rates from the leading employers and to enforce its uniform observance throughout the weaving districts. For this purpose, close co-operation between weavers' organizations in the different towns was essential. Having become a leading figure in his local union during the 1858 lock-out at Great Harwood, Birtwistle was elected to the council of the newly established North-East Lancashire Powerloom Weavers' Association (the so-called 'first amalgamation') during subsequent strikes at Padiham (1859) and Colne (1860), and in February 1861 he was appointed its full-time secretary, a post which he held for the next thirty-one years. 
Birtwistle's union career could hardly have begun at a less opportune time. The year-long Colne strike had ended in defeat, and the cotton famine of the early 1860s caused a sharp decline in the amalgamation's membership. However, it escaped complete collapse, and the subsequent revival and expansion of cotton weavers' unionism owed much to Birtwistle's quiet, pragmatic persistence. Growth was slow and erratic, none the less: the industry-wide lock-out during the depression of 1878 demonstrated yet again both the fragility of inter-union co-operation and the hostility of many employers to collective bargaining. The Northern Counties Amalgamated Weavers' Association of 1884 (the 'second amalgamation') eventually provided the strong central organization the weavers needed for effective wage negotiations. Birtwistle served as its secretary during its early months, and although he was later overshadowed by the association's more assertive president, David Holmes, he had the ultimate satisfaction of negotiating the first uniform weaving price-list for the cotton industry in 1892. 
Birtwistle's role in trade union history went far beyond brokering intricate back-stage deals between high-handed employers and truculent local union officials in Lancashire's smaller mill-towns. He represented the first amalgamation at the Trades Union Congress from 1872, served continuously on its parliamentary committee between 1875 and 1889, and took his turn as its chairman in 1882. Along with his younger counterpart, James Mawdsley, the spinners' leader, Birtwistle helped to forge the alliance between coal and cotton unions which largely determined the TUC's cautious and 'anti-political' stance in the 1880s and 1890s. Finally, he was a leading figure in the cotton workers' repeated attempts to extend the scope of the 'Factory Acts'. Beginning with the nine-hours movement, Birtwistle successfully developed the art of lobbying local MPs which extracted favourable legislation from both Conservative and Liberal administrations in the 1870s and 1880s. As secretary of the United Textile Factory Workers' Association, he was mainly responsible for securing -- in collaboration with Sir Henry James, the Unionist MP for Bury (later Lord James of Hereford) -- the 'Factory Acts' extensions of 1889 (which regulated the unhealthy practice of 'steaming' to increase the humidity of cotton-weaving factories) and 1891 (which obliged employers to provide their weavers with detailed printed 'particulars' of each piece of work they received). At the same time, he became increasingly hostile to the idea -- frequently mooted at the TUC in the late 1880s -- of a legally-enforced eight-hour working day, on the grounds that it would either lead to lower wages or damage the cotton industry's international competitiveness. 
Birtwistle's growing importance in industrial affairs, both locally and nationally, earned him public recognition in the course of the 1880s. He was appointed to the royal commission on the depression of trade and industry in 1885, and became one of the country's first working-class JPs in the same year. In the immediate aftermath of the third reform act there were suggestions that he might stand as a 'labour' candidate for a Lancashire constituency; but his well-known Conservative sympathies were at odds with the predominant radical-Liberal tendencies of the weaving communities. In June 1892, however, he surprised his fellow union leaders (and offended some) by accepting a government appointment as a factory inspector, with specific responsibility for implementing the 'particulars clause' of the 1891 'Factory Act'. Although this was an appropriate and adventurous appointment, given his long experience of the intricacies of piece-rates in the cotton industry, the suspicion remained that it was a political reward for services rendered to class collaboration in general, and to Lancashire Conservatism in particular. Despite this, his subsequent work as a factory inspector seems to have given satisfaction to his superiors and to employers and workers alike in the cotton industry. 
Birtwistle retired as an inspector on reaching his seventieth birthday in 1903, and died at his home, 17 St James's Street, Accrington, on 22 March 1912; he was buried in Accrington cemetery on the 26th. He was survived by his second wife, Mary. By that time, although he was still something of a local celebrity, the details of his earlier record as a union leader had been effectively written out of the weavers' collective memory. Nevertheless, to have linked the worlds of Joseph Raynor Stephens (1805-1879) and David Shackleton (1863-1938), as Birtwistle did, was no mean achievement; and few careers better illustrate the extent to which British trade unions gained recognition, respectability, and responsibility during the second half of the nineteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 48214


Clarke, John Smith (1885-1959), politician, lion-tamer, and newspaper editor, was born on 4 February 1885 at 66 Albert Street, Jarrow, co. Durham, the thirteenth child of John Smith Clarke, circus entertainer, and his wife, Sally Ann Chiswell, who came from Gypsy stock. Only seven of the children survived childhood, and poverty stalked the family. Clarke's father relied on casual work, interspersed with spells of unemployment, which necessitated travelling about Britain in search of employment. As a consequence, his son John received little formal education. 
Clarke was proud that his family had been pioneers of the circus, performing in the open air before there was a giant top. He boasted that he was the country's youngest lion-tamer, starting in the ring when he was seventeen, and continuing almost until his death. His body had many scars, inflicted by wild animals, that testified to his labours. Eager for adventure and new experiences, Clarke spent some years as a sailor. In a series of autobiographical articles later published in the 'Sunday Mail' under the title 'Roughing it round the world' he described witnessing a crew member killing a mate, being stuck on a sandbank off the German coast, and gun-running to Russian revolutionaries. On one occasion he jumped ship in Durban and started hitch-hiking from South Africa back to Tyneside. Along with his fund of fascinating stories he acquired, in a haphazard manner, an immense knowledge of a range of subjects. This gave him an entry to the world of writing and lecturing. He married Sarah Millicent Balkind before 1911; they had one son. 
Opposed to what he saw as the dull conformity and poverty of contemporary society, Clarke became a fervent socialist. He edited 'The Socialist' and contributed to other left-wing journals, including 'Forward', 'Plebs', and the 'Reform Journal'. In the First World War, he was lucky not to be imprisoned for strongly expressed anti-war writings. He joined the so-called 'flying corps', flying away from the police and military to avoid arrest. Many of his poems became well known among the disenchanted workers of Clydeside. 
In 1920 Scottish shop stewards elected Clarke as their delegate to the Second Congress of the Communist International. After accomplishing a hazardous journey, going up into the Arctic circle and then through the front lines in the civil war, he eventually reached Moscow. There he met leading Bolsheviks, including Lenin, whose dog he cured of an ailment. On his way back from Russia, he was arrested. Escaping from his captors, he took a boat and single-handedly navigated it across the North Sea. Though impressed by the Soviet Union, Clarke did not consider Bolshevik methods could be applied en bloc in Britain. Nor did he believe in hero-worship of Lenin or Stalin. For these reasons he never joined the Communist Party. Clarke gave a vivid account of his Russian visit in 'Pen Pictures of Russia under the 'Red Terror'' (1921). 
Clarke's politics became more moderate in the late 1920s. He joined the Independent Labour Party (ILP) and served on Glasgow city council. Proud of public enterprise, in 1928 he wrote a pamphlet extolling the new municipal Loch Katrine Reservoir. In 1929, standing for the ILP he was elected MP for Glasgow Maryhill; but parliament was not congenial to him and in his two years there almost all he seems to have done was to enliven proceedings with scurrilous poems and pranks. On one occasion he persuaded twenty other MPs to join him aboard the airship R101; on the next voyage it crashed, killing forty-five passengers and crew. An extremely vivid and entertaining speaker, at the height of his popularity he could fill a cinema for one of his lectures. 
One of Clarke's infuriating amusements was penning mock epitaphs of his fellow MPs. His victims included Ramsay MacDonald, singled out for this treatment at the time of his departure from the Labour Party in August 1931; the piece was later published ('Bulletin of the Society for Labour History', 27, 1973, 35). Clarke stood again for Maryhill in the 1931 election, but was defeated, and in 1932 he left the ILP when it disaffiliated from the Labour Party. Thereafter he was active only in local politics, serving again on Glasgow city council from 1941 to 1951. 
In his later years Clarke was increasingly occupied with the arts in Scotland. By 1925 he was a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland. He later became an expert on early primitive and Renaissance art, and was involved with the purchase by Glasgow corporation of the famous Morten portrait of Mary queen of Scots. He served as a member of the Royal Fine Art Commission for Scotland, and from 1930 to 1933 was a trustee of the Scottish National Portrait Gallery. A magistrate, he also was a member of the Clyde Navigation Trust and of the board of government of Glasgow School of Art. 
Because of his encyclopaedic knowledge of Scotland, Clarke was often consulted as an authority, while among the young he acquired popularity on the 'Scottish Daily Express', writing as Uncle Mac of the Sachel Club. His many writings included 'Satires, Lyrics and Poems' (1919), 'Robert Burns and his Politics' (1921), and a lucid exposition of historical materialism, 'Marxism and History' (1938). 
Clarke lived in a small rented house in the Ibrox area of Glasgow. There he kept his large collection of antiques and curios, including Marie Antoinette's snuff-box, Harry Lauder's walking-stick, a signed photograph of Lenin addressed 'To Comrade Clarke, Vladimir Oulianoff 6.8.1920', and an array of torture instruments. He died on 30 January 1959 at the Southern General Hospital, 1301 Govan Road, Glasgow. His wife predeceased him. 


@@@@@


doc= 48215


Clery, William Edward (1861-1931), trade unionist and writer, was born in Ireland but emigrated to London in 1877 taking with him, as he later recalled, little more than his brogue. In 1888 he passed the civil service examination and became a sorter at the chief post office in St Martin's-le-Grand in the City of London. At the same time he began to write plays and to publish articles in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' under the 'nom de plume' 'Austin Fryers', which he used for the rest of his life. 
This was the period which saw the founding of numerous 'new' unions, including for the various grades of Post Office workers, and involvement in union activities frequently resulted in dismissal, especially in the very traditionally minded Post Office. Clery's impulsive character brought him to the fore when the 'Fawcett Scheme Committee' in April 1889 obtained support from London sorters by arguing that W. E. Gladstone's postmaster-general Henry Fawcett had promised in 1881 to improve their conditions to the level of those of telegraphists. 
Clery published 'An Exposition of the Fawcett Scheme' (1889), which brought a summons to meet tory postmaster-general Henry Raikes. Subsequently the authorities considered but did not accept the demands of the sorters while acknowledging the right to combine within the service. On 10 February 1890 the first number of the sorters' journal, 'The Post', appeared with Clery as editor and the Fawcett Association (FA) began with Clery as secretary. 
The first trial for the new association came in July 1890 when the London postmen struck in defence of their union which was run by an 'outsider', J. L. Mahon. Clery did not want to get involved and initiated the sorters' decision to 'follow official routine' (Clinton, 'DLB') as the Postmen's Union was destroyed and 400 strikers were dismissed. After this defeat, postal workers achieved little in the following months. Clery then urged FA members to lobby candidates in the July 1892 general election, despite an explicit Post Office ban against such representations. Clery argued that they were only calling for an inquiry. However, when Postmaster-General Sir James Fergusson returned from the polls where the Conservatives were defeated, he dismissed Clery and his union colleague W. B. Cheesman for the crime of proposing and seconding the resolution advocating lobbying. 
Clery and Cheesman immediately became full-time officials of the Fawcett Association, respectively as chairman and secretary, but they never got their jobs back, despite furious lobbying and many parliamentary discussions. In the next period while Cheesman ran the FA, Clery represented it on the London Trades Council, the Trades Union Congress, and elsewhere. He became interested in parliamentary representation, which he thought should be through the Liberal Party. He led the FA into becoming an early affiliate of the Labour Representation Committee in 1900. In 1902 he was adopted as Liberal-Labour candidate for Deptford. 
By this time, however, Clery's other interests were impinging on his trade union activities. He was an effective chairman of the FA during the 1890s, leading its rather conservative membership in many new directions. On 20 June 1897 he married the actress Elva Dearen. The FA tolerated Clery's extra-mural activities, but concern grew when his mounting personal debts were visited on the association itself in August 1902. In 1903 after a series of bitter and difficult disputes, Clery's Deptford candidature was repudiated and he lost his position in the FA. 
During the following years, Clery continued to write plays, novels, and books about the theatre. These included 'A Pauper Millionaire' (1899), 'A Guide to the Stage' (1904), 'A New Rip Van Winkle' (1905), and also a popular life of Henry Irving (1906). Clery became ill in 1911, and the FA awarded him a pension, an arrangement continued by the Union of Post Office Workers after 1920. He then disappeared from view, and was found in extreme poverty in February 1930. He wrote some articles about his early struggles and died on 20 October 1931 at 81 Lupus Street, Westminster, London. He was survived by his wife and a stepson. At his pauper's funeral, there was no representative of the trade union organizations which he had done so much to build. A pioneer of and 'martyr' for Post Office trade unionism, Clery was also a journalist (he edited the 'Crystal Palace Magazine'), popular novelist, playwright, and actor-manager. His achievements in his many activities were tragically squandered and the admiration and loyalty he won were lost by dishonesty and self-deception. Yet after his death there was a moving obituary in 'The Post'. G. H. Stuart-Binning, a former general secretary of the Postman's Federation, wrote that 'his courage was abundant to the point of recklessness... his personal fascination was amazing. Men would go to meetings determined to oppose him and come away having agreed to all he proposed' (Clinton, 'DLB'). 


@@@@@


doc= 48216


Collison, William (1865-1938), workers' leader, was born on 22 June 1865 at 22 Greenfield Street, Mile End, London, the eldest of twelve children of William Collison, policeman, and his wife, Leah ('nee' Brett). Collison's formal education did not progress beyond elementary school; it must be presumed that his later fluency with the pen was the result of his own efforts at self-improvement. A long series of casual jobs, punctuated by a two-year period of service in the British army, took him into the world of London's dockland. His talents as an agitator and as an organizer soon became apparent. In 1886 he was elected as a delegate to the Mansion House Unemployed Relief Committee, where he was befriended by Cardinal Manning. Later he became a paid official of the Tramway and Omnibus Employees' Trade Union. 
Collison's early enthusiasm for trade unions began to wane. In 1890 he declined to support a strike called by the Tramway Union in protest against moves by the employers to counter dishonesty among their workers. He left the union, and attempted to obtain casual work again in the London docks, but was refused employment. This was because he was not a member of the dockers' trade union formed the previous year, when the great dock strike had marked the beginning of trade union organization (the so-called 'new unionism') among unskilled manual workers. Collison's anti-union views now took on a definite shape. He resented the manner in which (as he argued) professional socialists were exploiting the plight of the poor for their own political ends. The tactics of the closed shop, of which he now found himself a victim, were one of the hallmarks of new unionism; another was the use of the strike as a weapon of first rather than last resort. Collison regarded new unionism as a form of socialist tyranny, and he determined to fight it. He knew that there were many other like-minded members of the working classes who shared his views. On 16 May 1893, at Ye Olde Roebuck public house, Aldgate, he called a 'General Conference of men interested in Free Labour': this became the National Free Labour Association (NFLA). 
Collison hoped that the NFLA would become the free labour equivalent of the Trades Union Congress. The NFLA held annual conferences, open to the press and lavishly advertised. It is clear from revelations subsequently made by some of Collison's former associates that these annual gatherings were heavily stage-managed. But the 'Free Labour Gazette' (later 'Free Labour Press') which the NFLA published between 1894 and 1907 was professionally produced, its editor from 1896 being John Charles Manning, an experienced journalist. Collison himself branched out into journalism of a sort: it was he who supplied 'The Times' with the material used in the sensational series of attacks on trade union practices which appeared anonymously in that paper between 18 November 1901 and 16 January 1902. 
The ostensible purpose of the NFLA was to maintain a network of free labour exchanges, by means of which non-union labour might be supplied wherever it was needed. In practice, this network acted as the major supplier of blackleg labour to British industry in the period from the NFLA's foundation until the First World War. Most of Collison's interventions were small-scale; he could not hope to replace craftsmen, though the sight of his blacklegs, protected by the police, undoubtedly had an effect on the morale of strikers. In 1900, however, he scored a coup. Asked by the Taff Vale Railway Company to organize a supply of railwaymen to break a strike called by the Amalgamated Society of Railway Servants, Collison made certain that every free labourer had signed an agreement to enter into the service of the company, which was thus enabled to obtain damages from the railwaymen's union for inducing breaches of contract. 
The Taff Vale dispute established the principle that trade unions were liable to pay damages in respect of industrial action. The case convinced many trade unions, hitherto lukewarm in their response to the Labour Representation Committee (forerunner of the Labour Party), that they must now support it to obtain legislative reversal of the legal judgment. This was effected through the 'Trade Disputes Act' of 1906, enacted by the incoming Liberal government. No less important was the reluctance of that Liberal administration to sanction the use of the police to protect blacklegs. More fundamentally, although it was the case that some groups of employers (most notoriously, the railway companies) undoubtedly shared Collison's anti-union sentiments, they were in a decided minority. Spurred by the 'Conciliation Act' passed by the Unionist government in 1896, most large employers of labour had come to accept the reality of organized labour and to recognize the benefits and conveniences of collective bargaining. What most employers wanted, even in the 1890s, was conciliation, not the politics of confrontation which Collison offered them. Certainly after 1906 the political and industrial climates in which the NFLA had flourished rapidly disappeared. However, the organization continued to exist, certainly until 1929, operating from offices in the City of London. 
It is easy to dismiss Collison as a tool of those employers whose counter-offensive against new unionism was at its height in the period from 1890 to 1906. But the surviving archival evidence suggests otherwise. Collison was paid by employers, but mainly for services rendered. It seems safer to regard him as a particularly vivid example of working-class hostility to new unionism and to socialism at this time. 
An accomplished self-publicist, sporting curly hair, wide-brimmed hat, and bow-tie, Collison rubbed shoulders with the powerful but never forgot his proletarian origins. Practically nothing is known of his private life. He died at his home, 160 Eccleston Crescent, Ilford, on 8 March 1938, of heart disease, bronchitis, and emphysema; he was survived by a daughter, Emilie. 


@@@@@


doc= 48217


Edwards, Sir George (1850-1933), trade unionist and politician, was born on 5 March 1850 at Marsham in Norfolk, the son of Thomas Edwards and his wife, Mary. His father, a discharged soldier, was a bullock feeder and his mother a handloom weaver. He was the youngest of four children of his mother's second marriage. He had two older brothers and a sister, and three stepbrothers, who did not live with the family. 
Edwards's childhood was spent in terrible poverty, including a spell in the workhouse when his father was imprisoned for stealing turnips from a field; and the only schooling he received was at a Church of England Sunday school which he attended briefly in Marsham. At the age of six he started work scaring crows. Between 1856 and 1869 he followed a series of trades in agriculture, while working periodically as a brick maker, the trade his father followed from the mid-1840s. In 1869, in one of the most important changes in his life, he was converted to Primitive Methodism, the religious cause to which he remained attached until his death. 
On 21 June 1872 Edwards married Charlotte Corke (died 1912), who lived in Alby, Norfolk, where he had gone to work on the brick-fields. Taught to read and write by his wife, in the summer of 1873 he was taken onto the plan of Aylsham Primitive Methodist circuit as a lay preacher. He conducted his first service by learning the text (1 John: 29) and the hymns of the day by heart from his wife's dictation. Alongside his religious development he began his lifelong involvement in politics and trade unionism. In his own words, the 'terrible sufferings I had undergone in my boyhood burnt themselves into my soul like hot iron' (G. Edwards, 36), and when the first agricultural trade unions appeared in Norfolk in 1872 Edwards was an early convert. For the next fifteen years he remained a loyal and dedicated member of the rank and file, first of the local East Dereham district union and then as a member of Joseph Arch's National Agricultural Labourers' Union. He took an active part in the election campaign of 1885, the first one at which farm labourers had the vote, and was sacked and blacklisted for his beliefs. In 1889, after a period of decline, the trade union movement revived in Norfolk and Edwards became secretary of the newly formed Norfolk Federal Union, Cromer district; and then, in 1890, full time organizer for the union. However, the continuing agricultural depression and bitter, well-organized opposition from the employers led to the total collapse of the union in 1896. 
For the next ten years Edwards returned to his trade as a brick maker. In 1906, following the Liberal election victory, he was instrumental in re-forming a trade union for farmworkers. This was to become the National Union of Agricultural and Allied Workers, later the agricultural trades section of the Transport and General Workers Union. He remained secretary and organizer until 1913 when he retired, following his wife's death and his own increasing ill health, and became union president. However, his work for the union and for labourers continued. He served on the Norfolk War Agriculture Committee, and as a labourers' representative on the central wages board and the Norfolk county wages board from 1917 to 1921. In 1923 he took an active role in the bitter strike in Norfolk against wage reductions. 
Alongside his union work Edwards was always active in the broader world of politics. He became in the 1870s, as he put it, 'an advanced Liberal' (G. Edwards, 43), and as such served as a parish, district, and county councillor. Unusually for her time and class, his wife, Charlotte, was also active in local politics, serving as a parish and district councillor. She made a particular mark on the Erpingham board of guardians, devoting her time and care to fighting for better conditions for women inmates, especially single mothers. In 1918 Edwards left the Liberal Party and joined the Labour Party, fighting the general election of that year as a Labour candidate for South Norfolk. He lost but was elected for the same seat at a by-election in July 1920. He made his maiden speech on 21 October 1920 on unemployment and the poor law. He lost his seat at the general election of 1922 but regained it in 1923. He was again defeated in 1924 when the 'red scare' caused nationally by the fabricated Zinoviev letter was used against him by local Conservatives to suggest that he was a long-term, if lukewarm, supporter of the Soviet Union. 
Although no longer active in national politics after his defeat in 1924, Edwards, unlike Arch, remained firm in his beliefs and returned to the local sphere as a Labour alderman on Norfolk county council and as a parish councillor for Fakenham, where he had lived since 1910. In 1919 he was appointed OBE for his wartime service to agriculture, and he was given a knighthood in the 1930 birthday honours. Fittingly the citation simply said 'For services to agricultural workers'. Despite increasing ill health and constant urging from doctors and his family, Edwards continued active until the last weeks of his life. He attended the Walsingham board of guardians two weeks before his death, where he argued forcefully on a case of forcible eviction of a farmworker and his family. He died after a series of heart attacks on the evening of 6 December 1933 and was buried in Fakenham cemetery on 11 December. Although Edwards had no children, in the 1920s he adopted the son of his niece Elizabeth, Noel Kernick, who took his uncle's name. 
Years of hard work and poverty left their mark on Edwards physically. Never tall, he became bent in late middle age, yet continued to cycle hundreds of miles a week on union work during the years between 1906 and 1913. In his later years he was regarded by many as a moderate within the labour movement, yet he remained absolutely unswerving in its cause and even in 1931 fought hard against what he regarded as MacDonald's 'betrayal of the whole working class movement' (N. Edwards). He also remained an active Primitive Methodist, despite the fact that his own uncompromising Christian socialism was increasingly out of place in a Church which had forgotten its radical past. He was remembered, even in the 1970s, with enormous affection and respect by the generation of Norfolk farmworkers who had grown up in the bitter years before 1930. The fact that Norfolk continued to return a Labour MP until 1970 -- the only rural area so to do -- is perhaps some reflection of the importance of Edwards's contribution to the history of farmworkers' trade unionism and rural labour in the area. 


@@@@@


doc= 48218


Fox, Albert (1857-1914), trade union leader and politician, was born at Farnborough, Hampshire, on 7 April 1857, the son of Charles Fox, a private in the 22nd regiment, and his wife, Marcia. He attended the board school at Farnborough until he was twelve, and in his early years was drawn towards railway life. In the early 1880s Fox got a job as an engine cleaner at the Mexborough railway depot. The Associated Society of Locomotive Engineers and Firemen (ASLEF) did not admit engine cleaners as members at that time, but in 1886 when he was promoted to fireman he immediately joined the union and played an active role, becoming secretary of the local branch. He noticed that every year some five new orphans resulted from accidental, or other, deaths of members, and in 1889, when he was member of the national executive for Yorkshire, he carried a resolution establishing an orphan fund. When Thomas G. Sunter, the union's general secretary, died on 20 September 1901, a ballot was held to determine his successor and on 8 December Fox was elected. 
With new leadership there were important changes in policy. At the union's triennial conference held in Swansea in 1903 it was resolved that membership should be open to engine cleaners and electric motormen. Funds were to be centralized, and an organizing secretary was to be appointed. It was also agreed that the society should affiliate to the Labour Representation Committee and contest a parliamentary constituency. In accordance with the new forward-looking policy, Fox stood in the 1906 general election as the Labour candidate for the South Leeds constituency, where the ASLEF head office was located. In the light of his late adoption he did well to poll 4030 votes to the victorious Liberal's 6200. In a by-election in the same constituency in 1908 he did less well, being beaten into third place by the tory candidate. 
Throughout his years as general secretary Fox claimed that it was essential for locomotive men to be organized separately from other railway workers. He expressed this view in evidence given to the royal commission on the railway conciliation scheme of 1907. At a conference with the Amalgamated Society of Railway Servants (ASRS) in 1903 to discuss closer co-operation he said: 'It was not merely a question of hours and wages with enginemen. There are 101 ways in which they need protection in their calling which are not known to other workers and which can only be taken in hand by themselves' (McKillop, 79). Fox's policy was summed up in the words 'Organise your craft: federate your union'. At about this time J. H. Thomas of the ASRS pointed out that his union had more locomotive grade members than ASLEF. Not surprisingly the ASRS favoured amalgamation rather than federation, and the negotiations broke down. Nevertheless, during Albert Fox's time as general secretary ASLEF membership rose steadily (from 10,502 in 1901 to 32,200 in 1913), thus strengthening the society's claim to speak for a majority of the 62,000 members of the locomotive grades. 
Although ASLEF's programme before 1914 included a maximum eight-hour working day, Fox told a conference called in support of Walter Hudson's 'Eight Hours Bill' that he had no mandate to go to the House of Commons to secure it 'since they felt that if they asked the companies they would get it' ('Report of a Conference', 10). Fox could, however, act decisively when events required, as happened in August 1911, when the companies refused to recognize the unions and he moved the resolution at ASLEF's Liverpool conference for a national railway strike at twenty-four hours' notice. 
Albert Fox was an enthusiastic leader of the locomotive engineer and fireman, but as the union's historian admitted 'he lacked the gift of directing others to share the burden of great administration' (Raynes, 161). Fox's health collapsed in 1912, and he was granted an increase in salary of $50 p.a. and three months' leave, but he failed to recover. He died of pernicious anaemia at his home at 33 Spencer Place, Leeds, on 22 March 1914, and was buried at Beeston cemetery in south Leeds on 27 March 1914. He was survived by his wife, Mary E. Fox, and by one son and one daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 48219


Gill, Alfred Henry (1856-1914), trade union leader and politician, was born on 3 December 1856 at 36 Oldham Road, Rochdale, the son of John Gill, a cotton spinner, and his wife, Mary Stott. He received an elementary education, curtailed from the age of ten when he was employed as a half-timer in a local cotton mill; full-time work began at thirteen. On 4 January 1876 he married Sarah Ellen ('b'. 1855/6), daughter of John Greenwood of Rochdale, painter. In 1879 he moved to Oldham, still as a cotton operative, and in 1887 to Pendlebury to take up a better position. 
Gill's upbringing imbued him with a desire for self-improvement. He was raised as, and remained a Wesleyan Methodist. He joined the Band of Hope at the age of twelve, and stayed true to its temperance principles; he took part in the co-operative movement, becoming chairman of his local society; and in 1896, after attending evening classes in scientific and technical subjects, he was appointed assistant secretary of the Bolton and District Operative Spinners' Association. Eight months later he progressed to the post of secretary, which he held for the remainder of his life. As a full-time trade union official, Gill was known for his mastery of the complicated system of wage rates then operating in cotton mills, and for a conciliatory approach to industrial relations. His moderation made him acceptable as a member of the Bolton magistrates' bench, to which he was appointed in 1899, and as a representative on a number of other local bodies. 
The Amalgamated Association of Operative Cotton Spinners, in which the Bolton district was prominent, sent Gill as one of its two delegates to the founding conference of the Labour Representation Committee in 1900. The long-established unions in the cotton industry occupied an influential, somewhat cautious, position within the labour movement, but the election of David Shackleton as a member of parliament in 1902 gave the impetus to independent political activity among the leaders of Lancashire's textile workers. Gill was already a member of the committee of the United Textile Factory Workers' Association (UTFWA), one purpose of which was to lobby on political issues of concern to the various trade unions in the textile industry. When in 1903 the UTFWA affiliated to the Labour Representation Committee it became the largest body in that organization. Gill was adopted in 1903 as a parliamentary candidate, sponsored by the textile workers, for the Bolton constituency, which returned two MPs and came within the pact made by Herbert Gladstone and Ramsay MacDonald to ensure electoral co-operation. At the general election of 1906 Gill and the Liberal George Harwood were returned. A similar arrangement ensured his success in the general elections of 1910. 
In parliament, like other Labour MPs from the trade union wing of the party, he maintained a role in the affairs of his union. In 1903 he had been elected as one of the thirteen members of the parliamentary committee of the Trades Union Congress, a term of office that continued until 1907 when he presided over the congress of the TUC held that year in Bath. He again sat on the TUC's parliamentary committee in 1913-14. In the House of Commons he called for better ventilation of factories, a more efficient system of inspection, and measures to reduce accidents. He made the practice of 'time-cribbing', by which employers added on a few minutes to the working day, the subject of regular questions. He was especially concerned to improve workmen's compensation, and it was on this issue that he spoke for the last time in the House of Commons, on 20 May 1914. 
Gill suffered a heart attack in June 1913, and although he recovered sufficiently to resume his parliamentary duties, he never regained full health. He died on 27 August 1914 at his home, 61 Hampden Street, Bolton. After a funeral service at Halliwell Road Wesleyan Church, Bolton, on 31 August, he was buried in the nonconformist section of Heaton cemetery. He was survived by his wife and by a son and four daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 48221


Hall, George Henry, Viscount Hall (1881-1965), trade unionist and politician, was born at Penrhiw-ceibr, Glamorgan, on 31 December 1881, the son of George and Ann Hall. At the age of twelve, after a basic education at Penrhiw-ceibr elementary school, Hall began work at Penrikyber colliery; he remained a collier until 1911, when he was elected to the position of checkweighman. This was a key post, entailing the recording of the daily output by the workmen, which determined their weekly wages. As with other leaders to emerge from the south Wales coalfield, Hall's position as checkweighman served as a springboard to a full-time trade union career within the South Wales Miners' Federation, in which he became miners' agent for his local area. 
Hall's political career had already been launched in 1909 when he was elected as member for the Penrhiw-ceibr ward in local council elections. He remained a member of Mountain Ash town council and its education committee for eighteen years. He had a lasting interest in education, and in later life served as a governor of University College, Cardiff. In 1910 he married Margaret Jones, the marriage lasting until her death in 1941. They had two sons, Leonard and Bruce, the latter killed on active service in the Second World War. 
In 1922 Hall defeated C. B. Stanton to win the Aberdar division of the Merthyr Tudful constituency as a Labour candidate, with a majority of 5217. Hall retained this seat for twenty-four years, and had the distinction of being returned unopposed in 1931 and 1935 when his popularity was at its height as the result of his uncompromising stand against the means test. His work as a constituency MP was always as important to him as the more prominent government duties he later assumed. In particular, he was always keen to encourage new employment opportunities in the area to replace the declining coal industry. He was, for example, able to attract a new cable works to Aberdar, of which he became a director. 
In 1929 Hall began a long association with the Admiralty when Ramsay MacDonald appointed him to the post of civil lord of the Admiralty, which he held until the creation of the National Government in 1931. His next appointment, as a member of the wartime coalition government, was as parliamentary under-secretary of state for the Colonial Office from 1941 to 1942. He only agreed to take this post in return for a promise by Churchill to establish a Royal Ordnance factory at Hirwaun, near Aberdar, to alleviate continuing unemployment. In 1943 Hall returned to the Admiralty as financial secretary, his major duty being to oversee production during the battle of the Atlantic. Later the same year he moved to the post of parliamentary under-secretary of state for foreign affairs, remaining in this office until the end of the war. 
With the return of a Labour government in 1945, and Hall's successful retention of his seat with a majority of 27,969, he was given a position in Attlee's cabinet as secretary of state for the colonies. He had refused the first of two offers of a peerage to mark his wartime achievements, but Attlee prevailed on him in 1946 to accept the title of Viscount Hall, of Cynon Valley, and with it the post of first lord of the Admiralty. This was designed to boost Labour representation in the upper house, but the move caused bitterness among die-hard Labour Party activists in Aberdar. Hall agonized long over the decision before resolving that, for someone who had always considered himself in the mainstream of the Labour Party, loyalty to that party must come above any recriminations over supposed compromise of socialist principles. 
In 1947 Hall became deputy leader of the House of Lords, holding both this and his position at the Admiralty until he retired, in poor health, at the general election of 1951. During this period he supervised the transition of the navy to a peacetime footing, ensuring that the service began adapting itself to the new demands of the atomic age. In February 1964 Hall married Alice Martha Walker. He died at Leicester on 8 November 1965, survived by his second wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 48223


Harford, Edward (1837/8-1898), railwayman and trade unionist, was born in Bristol on 21 March 1837 or 1838, the son of Edward Harford, a policeman. When he was five years old the family moved to Tiverton in Devon and Edward was educated until the age of fourteen at the Tiverton factory school from which he was apprenticed to the confectionery trade. He disliked this employment and after enduring it for five years, transferred to the recently established Devonshire county constabulary. In Hatherleigh, on 26 October 1857, he married Fanny Ann Reed Sanders, a domestic servant; they had five sons and two daughters. 
Shortly after this Harford began his railway career as a porter employed by the Bristol and Exeter Railway Company. For nearly twenty years thereafter he was employed in a variety of grades in the goods departments, first of the Midland and then of the Manchester, Sheffield, and Lincolnshire Railways. Harford became a keen trade unionist and on 24 June 1872 represented Grimsby at the first great delegate meeting of the Amalgamated Society of Railway Servants (ASRS), held in London. In 1873 colleagues in the Sheffield area persuaded him to become a full-time, locally paid, organizer. He accepted the proposal, but subscriptions from the branches were so uncertain that for some months he felt obliged to take employment in an iron foundry. However, by 1881 he was again active for the union as joint secretary of the movement for a nine-hour working day. 
At that time union organization presented many difficulties. The directors of the railway companies, with the partial exception of the North Eastern Railway, were vehemently opposed to union recognition. Victimization was widespread and it was not until the annual general meeting of October 1889 that delegates decided to give their personal, as well as their branch name, to reporters. In 1882 Harford was appointed by the union's executive as paid national organizer, and in February 1883, when his predecessor, Frederick Evans, had a nervous breakdown and deserted his post, he was chosen as the only person legally qualified to be general secretary. Apart from this, his good organizing abilities and his wide range of experience in railway employment ensured his succession. 
Harford's policy after election was to increase the union's membership and hence its bargaining strength. He detested strikes, declaring at a public meeting in Birkenhead on 12 February 1897 that strikes would be a thing of the past as soon as every man was a member of his trade society. He campaigned vigorously for reduced working hours in the belief that overwork was an important cause of the horrendous level of railway accidents. He gave well-prepared evidence to both the royal commission on labour of 1890 and the select committee on railway servants' hours of labour of 1890-91. 
Harford played an active role in the establishment of the labour electoral committee in 1886, and served as its treasurer. His union decided in 1892 that it should be represented in parliament through the general secretary, and Harford subsequently stood as a Liberal for Northampton in the general election of 1895, but was defeated because of a split opposition vote. He served on the parliamentary committee of the TUC from 1887 to 1892 (chairman in 1890) and from 1894 to 1897. 
By 1898 the union was in a much stronger position than it had been when Harford took over in 1883. Membership had risen from 8077 to 54,426, and reserve funds had grown from $37,000 to nearly $200,000. It was well established in Ireland and strong in the north-east and Scotland, following the merger of the Scottish ASRS with the main body after the defeat of the Scottish rail strike in 1892. Above all it had become an industrial organization, or, as Harford described it, 'a trade union with benefit funds, not a friendly society with a few mutual protection benefits' (Bagwell, 1.149). 
In 1897 Harford defied his executive by settling disputes with the boards of the North Eastern Railway and the London and North Western Railway. He was also drunk at an important stage of negotiations. The union dismissed him in October 1897 with a pension of $100 a year. Harford died of pneumonia on board the SS 'St Paul' on 4 January 1898 while returning from a conference in the USA. His funeral took place in Abney Park cemetery in London on 11 January 1898, and was attended by large numbers of railway workers walking beneath their banners. Harford was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 48224


Holmes, David (1843-1906), trade unionist, was born on 16 November 1843 at Nelson Street, Manchester, the illegitimate son of Mary Holmes, a hand-loom weaver. His mother came from north-east Lancashire, and Holmes was weaving by the time he was eight. At the age of ten he absconded to live with an uncle in Padiham. Here, he turned to power-loom weaving, made up for his earlier lack of schooling by attending Sunday and evening classes at the Unitarian chapel, and in 1859 became involved in his first strike. He married in the early 1860s and removed to nearby Burnley, where he lived for the rest of his life. 
The 1850s had seen both the final transition from outwork to factory production in cotton and the first attempts by weavers' unions in the different Lancashire towns to secure uniform lists of piece-rates for their industry. However, the cotton 'famine' of the early 1860s seriously damaged the fledgeling unions, and when industrial expansion was resumed the task of devising a regular system of industrial relations had to begin all over again. Holmes played a leading part in setting up the Burnley Weavers' Association, and served as its president from 1871 until his death. During the union's early years, the peculiarly fragmented structure of the weaving industry around Burnley meant difficulties in persuading employers and weavers alike of the merits of collective bargaining. Holmes was blacklisted for his activities, and the union, too poor to pay a regular salary, set him up as a rag-and-bone man. A lengthy, violent, and unsuccessful county-wide strike to prevent wage reductions during the recession of 1878 demonstrated the need for more effective co-operation between the weavers of the different towns. How this might be achieved became apparent when the employers demanded a further cut at the end of 1883: the Burnley weavers were persuaded by Holmes to accept the reduction and remain at work in order to be able to subsidize the Blackburn weavers, who struck against it. This tactic convinced both the local unions and the leading employers of the advantages of uniform wage-rates agreed by formal negotiation and enforced by the threat of partial strike action. The Northern Counties Amalgamated Association of Weavers, set up under Holmes's presidency in 1884 to pursue these objectives, steadily increased its membership and built up an impressive strike fund. In 1892 collective bargaining finally produced a comprehensive uniform list of piece-rates for cotton weaving, and the industry remained free from further major strikes until after Holmes's death. 
By the early 1890s the cotton industry was held up as a model of good labour relations and David Holmes was the acknowledged master of one of the country's largest, richest, and most effectively organized trade unions. At home in Burnley he had become a figure of considerable consequence: member of the school board, town councillor, JP, vice-president of the Liberal Association, and a man whose name was seriously discussed on several occasions as a possible parliamentary candidate. His impact on the national trade union movement was even more significant, thanks to his role on the parliamentary committee of the Trades Union Congress, on which he served almost continuously between 1892 and 1904 and which he chaired in 1894-5. A zealous opponent of socialism and a hard-nosed critic of both the pretensions and the practices of the so-called 'new unions' which had emerged in 1889-90, Holmes was the key figure in the back-stage 'coup' which forced the system of card-voting on the 1895 congress and thereby demonstrated the weakness of the new unions, compared with the real 'mass unions' in coal and cotton. His stature within British trade unionism was reflected in the international conferences and delegations in which he was involved during the 1890s. 
After 1900 Holmes gradually withdrew from many of his outside activities in favour of his protege, David Shackleton, and by the time he died he was regarded in the rapidly changing labour movement as a relic of an earlier age. He remained personally loyal to the Liberal Party, while insisting that political partisanship and state intervention had no place in the narrow world of industrial relations. Tough, pragmatic, and unimaginative, Holmes took most of the traditions and assumptions of the cotton trade as he found them. Because an exporting industry such as cotton had to remain internationally competitive, he opposed the statutory eight-hour working day and compulsory arbitration. At the same time, he accepted the industry's need for a largely female and juvenile labour force which, although protected from the worst forms of exploitation by the 'Factory Acts', was both over-worked and -- relative to men -- under-paid. Such a limited vision was increasingly criticized at a time when class war, public ownership, and women's rights were becoming prominent on the political agenda; the wave of labour unrest which struck the cotton industry just before the First World War marked the widespread rejection of the cautious and compromising tactics which Holmes and his generation had pursued. 
David Holmes was taken ill while attending the Trades Union Congress at Hanley in September 1905, and died of cardiac disease and dropsy at his home, 11 Lawn Street, Burnley, on 14 January 1906. He left a widow and eleven surviving children out of a family of fourteen. His quasi-public funeral at Burnley cemetery made an appropriate end to a career which symbolized the growth of mass trade unionism and its gradual incorporation into the mainstream of British public life during the last thirty years of the nineteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 48227


Jude, Martin (1803-1860), trade unionist, came to prominence during disputes in the Northumberland and Durham coalfields in the late 1830s, but nothing is known about his parentage or upbringing. He belonged to a small coterie of young men who assisted Thomas Hepburn, the miners' leader, during the unsuccessful disputes of 1831-2 in the great northern coalfields. Though there is no evidence he received any formal education, Jude demonstrated impressive skill and ability in formulating a cogent case and expressing ideas coherently. Consequently when another, more successful, attempt was made in 1842 to succeed where Hepburn failed, Jude emerged as a prominent figure. 
The Miners' Association was formed at the end of 1842 and quickly grew into a trade union of unprecedented power, with 100,000 members. In March 1843, six months after its formation, when Jude became its treasurer, the association had attained national dimensions, and was represented in every coalfield. Remarkably, Jude ran its financial affairs in his spare time, working as a publican to secure his livelihood. This was an age when trade unions did not possess either strong leaderships or coherent policies, and Jude's difficulties were compounded by the fact that pitmen in each coalfield were preoccupied by their own particular grievances -- such as the 'bond', the 'butty system', child labour, and the 'tommy shops' -- to the exclusion of the overall national situation. Getting a policy that would be followed throughout the coalfields proved virtually impossible. 
This was one reason why Jude counselled caution. He sought to dampen the ardour of pitmen in Northumberland and Durham, where the union was strongest, when they wanted to strike against the 'bond'. This was the year-long contract entered into by miners, who increasingly felt that the system unduly favoured the coal owners, and should be scrapped. At the Manchester and Glasgow union conferences in 1844, Jude cast doubt on the legality of the contemplated strike, questioning whether all avenues of negotiation had been exhausted, and if the ultimate outcome was likely to be what they desired. When the pitmen disregarded his strictures and stopped work, however, Jude threw himself wholeheartedly into the fight. Besides addressing mass meetings and writing to other workers' organizations for financial support, he even let the union borrow his life savings of $100 which it never repaid. 
After five months Jude's prediction proved correct. The union treasury exhausted, and donations from elsewhere drying up, the 34,000 north-east pitmen, some of whom had been evicted from their cottages and forced to subsist in roadside encampments, admitted defeat and sought their old jobs back. But the influx of strikebreakers during the dispute, combined with the dislocation of coal sales, meant fewer miners were needed. The labour surplus led to the imposition of wage cuts which, Jude calculated, varied between 15 and 33 per cent. 
Wanting where possible to eschew industrial conflict, Jude sought to direct pitmen towards campaigning for mining legislation. He addressed many public meetings, wrote widely, and appeared before numerous parliamentary inquiries. He always advanced his arguments in a clear, rational manner. Assisted by W. P. Roberts, the miners' attorney-general, and Thomas Duncombe MP, in 1847 he arranged for the 'Mines and Collieries Bill' to be introduced to parliament. Containing a comprehensive list of pitmen's demands, which every miner could endorse, although it was not passed by parliament, the bill represented an attempt to secure change through legislation, and had the effect of broadening miners' mental horizons, making them think of themselves on a national rather than local level. It also made them behave in a more respectable, moderate way, hopeful that it would influence parliament. Jude repeatedly stressed that better wages and shorter hours would also have beneficial knock-on effects, improving family life and providing an opportunity for educational pursuits. 
Jude was aware of the coercive control of colliery owners, and argued that pitmen, fearful of losing their jobs, were often reluctant to raise safety matters. He therefore advocated the appointment of mines inspectors on a permanent basis, assisted by scientists where needed. Such an informed and independent body would, he argued, be able to express an impartial opinion on vital health and safety issues. The soundness of his argument was in time recognized. 
Bringing pressure to bear on parliament was only part of Jude's strategy. He also sought to secure democratic rights for working people, which would give them the vote and allow them to elect their own representatives. In 1842 he was one of those nominated by Byker, a suburb of Newcastle upon Tyne, to the Chartist grand council, and in 1847 he was elected by Newcastle as delegate to the Chartist convention. In the 1850s he joined the short-lived Northern Political Union and then the much more influential Northern Reform Union, both of which strove to obtain political rights for working people. 
The effects of the failure of the strike were long-lasting. Despite many attempts, Jude failed to restore union organization in the great northern coalfields to its pre-1844 strength. He was due to speak, along with W. P. Roberts, at a rally in 1858 which could be regarded as the beginning of the ultimately successful campaign, but was taken ill. Two years later, on 30 August 1860, Jude died in very abject circumstances at the Old Highlander public house in Liddell Street, North Shields, Northumberland. The ceremony marking his burial three days later at Elswick cemetery, Newcastle upon Tyne, was attended by only a few personal friends. 
Revival of interest in Martin Jude came with the publication in 1873 of 'The Miners of Northumberland and Durham'. Its author, Richard Fynes, knew Jude personally and refers to him as a moving spirit among the pitmen for nearly a quarter of a century. He ends his tribute: 'Of great and varied intelligence, his conduct was characterised by an entire lack of egotism. Firm yet conciliatory to opponents, his modest and respectful manner gained him many friends amongst those who differed with him in opinion.' (Fynes, 186). 


@@@@@


doc= 48228


Juggins, Richard (1843-1895), trade unionist, was born on 16 July 1843 at New Street, Darlaston, Staffordshire, the son of a miner, Samuel Jugins, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Emery. His father was killed in an accident at work when Richard was only eleven. His only education was at Sunday school and night school. He started work as a nut and bolt maker at the age of seven and followed this occupation for the next twenty years. In November 1870 he played a leading part in forming the Nut and Bolt Makers' Association and was elected its part-time secretary. Fourteen months later, in January 1872, he was dismissed from his job for organizing a strike and became full-time secretary of the union. Under his leadership the union grew steadily and expanded far beyond its Black Country heartland. By 1877 it had 2000 members in 31 branches as far apart as Glasgow, Cwmbran, and Wolverton. 
The other Black Country metal-using trades remained largely unorganized: constant downward pressure on employment volumes and wage levels generated by intense competition in product markets meant that most attempts at association were foredoomed to failure. In a bid to bolster such unions as existed and to foster new ones Juggins formed the Midland Counties Trades Federation in May 1886. He was appointed its secretary and combined this position with that of union secretary. Initially, only his own association and two others joined the federation, but by the time of its fourth annual meeting 66 unions with 10,000 members were affiliated. This success was due very largely to Juggins's dedicated work and in 1889 the executive council of the federation voted him a salary of $52 per annum. In the following year the members presented him with a purse of 100 gold sovereigns, a clock, and an illuminated address in appreciation of his efforts. 
The spread of organization, and hence discipline, among workers encouraged Juggins to initiate discussions with employers about establishing conciliation machinery in some industries: hitherto even minor disputes had often led to strikes or lock-outs, sometimes accompanied by violence. His first success came, appropriately, in the nut and bolt industry. In February 1889 the employers agreed to participate with the union in the south Staffordshire nut and bolt wages board. This set the pattern for other industries and within a few years there was a sprinkling of such boards across the Black Country. 
In March 1889 Juggins gave evidence to the select committee of the House of Lords on the sweating system and three years later he was called before the royal commission on labour. He also represented the Nut and Bolt Makers' Association and the Midland Counties Trades Federation at the annual conference of the Trades Union Congress many times and attended some meetings of the International Labour Congress. 
Juggins was among those trade union leaders who believed that industrial organization should be supported by direct labour representation in parliament and from 1886 he was a member of the TUC's labour electoral committee for the Birmingham area. In 1891 the executive council of the Midland Federation resolved that Juggins himself 'be recommended to the electors of Dudley as the labour candidate' at the next general election ('Dudley Herald', 30 May 1891), but this came to nothing. There was opposition from within the federation and from Dudley Liberal Association so the proposal was dropped. 
Juggins did, however, make an important contribution to public life in his local community. He served on the Walsall board of guardians, the Darlaston urban district council and the Darlaston school board, as well as being a member of the local court of the Ancient Order of Foresters and a Methodist lay preacher. 
Juggins died at his home, 60 New Street, Darlaston, on 5 March 1895 and was buried at James Bridge cemetery, Darlaston, on 11 March 1895. He was married twice. His second wife survived him, together with five sons and two daughters, apparently from both marriages. In November 1896 a marble headstone was erected over his grave, paid for by contributions from members of the Nut and Bolt Makers' Association and the Midland Counties Trades Federation. 


@@@@@


doc= 48229


Kendall, George (1808/9-1886), Chartist and trade unionist, was baptized in the village of Hoton on the Hill near Loughborough on 26 July 1811, the son of George and Sarah Kendall. Starting work in the local hosiery industry at the age of five years, he moved to Sutton in Ashfield as a young man and worked as a framework knitter, making stockings and socks on a hand frame. He married, and with his wife, Sarah, had two children, Elizabeth, born in 1834, and George, born in 1836. 
Industrial villages like Sutton were the location of most organized Chartist activity and Kendall became a recognized leader of the Sutton framework knitters during the early 1840s. He spoke at or presided over many of the larger meetings in the locality, and represented his village at delegate meetings. In addition he was called to give evidence to the 1845 commission on the condition of the framework knitters. 
The origins of Nottinghamshire discontent sprang from a depression in the framework knitting trade. The introduction of new marketing techniques and the pressure to reduce standards of work, together with a labour force for which there was not enough work in times of slack trade, had led to the continual lowering of wages and speeding up of work. The operatives had, by the Chartist period, been involved in machine breaking and in various forms of trade union activity in their attempts to reverse the continual downward trend of their wages and conditions, but without success. 
As well as pursuing the political programme of the six points of the 'People's Charter', Kendall and his group campaigned against wage reductions and against the 'truck system' (the payment of wages in goods). In his evidence before the commission of 1845 Kendall stressed the evils of this system. He became the secretary of an anti-truck association formed by some of the local Chartists which took many employers to court. The result of his activity led to his being blacklisted by employers in the locality, but had little effect on reducing the prevalence of truck payment. 
In the second half of the century the hosiery trade began to improve, and trade union organization became more possible. Kendall became the secretary of the local wide-hand framework knitters' trade society. His first wife died of tuberculosis and he married his second wife, Mary Ann, who was eighteen years his junior. There were two more children from this marriage, Eliza, born in 1859, and William, born in 1861. 
During the 1850s and 1860s the Sutton operatives, under Kendall's continued leadership, took part in an experiment in industrial relations: this involved the establishment of an arbitration board on which workers and employers could discuss problems before they reached a phase of industrial dispute. The first chairman of the board was A. J. Mundella, the radical politician and hosiery manufacturer. The board seems to have maintained a degree of tranquillity in the relations between the two sides of the industry, and truck payment was finally abolished altogether. Unfortunately, the experiment did not establish a model for other industries as its originators had hoped, and it broke down in the harsher competitive conditions of the 1870s, finally coming to an end in 1884. 
Apart from his political and industrial activities, Kendall, like many other ex-Chartists, was an active supporter of the 1870 'Education Act'. He served on the local school board for eight years, using his position to make the service available to the poorer children by the waiving of fees and encouraging families to keep the children in full- or half-time education in spite of the availability of juvenile employment. In 1879 when illness forced him to give up his work in the hosiery trade, Kendall resigned his chairmanship of the Sutton school board in order to become its employee as a school caretaker. He worked in this post for seven years, but continued his association with his trade and with local affairs generally. 
Kendall died of cancer on 14 October 1886 at 21 Union Street, Sutton in Ashfield, and was buried in the churchyard of St Mary's Church, Sutton, on 16 October. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 48232


McGurk, John (1874-1944), trade unionist, was born at Hoyle Mill, Barnsley, on 17 September 1874, the eldest of fifteen children of John McGurk, a miner, and his wife, Hannah ('nee' Lord). Six months later the family moved to Pendlebury, near Manchester, and at the age of twelve McGurk went to work in a local colliery. He soon began to be active in the Lancashire and Cheshire Miners' Federation, and secured election as delegate to the federation's monthly conference, and then to its executive. 
On 22 February 1908 McGurk was elected to the full-time post of miners' agent covering pits in north-east Lancashire from Oldham round to Burnley and Accrington. His prominence within the coalfield grew; in 1912, he sat as its representative on the executive of the Miners' Federation of Great Britain (MFGB), a position he held on five later occasions. Like almost all miners' officials he was a strong supporter of the allies during the First World War. 
McGurk was typical of his generation of mining trade union officials in seeing a commitment to the Labour Party as an integral element in his work. In the general election of December 1918 he stood as the Labour Party candidate in Darwen, sponsored by the miners. His line was firmly patriotic: Germany should be made to pay and the Kaiser should be punished. Yet his revanchism incorporated a class antagonism -- 'it would not surprise him... to see the late heads of the German people being entertained at Buckingham Palace before twelve months was over' ('Northern Daily Telegraph', 9 Dec 1918). McGurk finished third in the poll, as he did again in the contest of November 1922. He fought no further parliamentary contests; his one successful electoral campaign was for a seat on the Bury town council. 
McGurk's address from the chair at the Labour Party conference in June 1919 involved an attack on 'direct action' and a presentation of the Labour Party and parliament as the way forward. This intervention was particularly significant in the context of debates about the use of industrial methods for political objectives. McGurk's counsel of caution came at a moment of optimism for the MFGB; two years later the federation fought a three-month lock-out in an ultimately unsuccessful attempt to protect wartime and immediate post-war gains. During this 1921 struggle, McGurk became a controversial figure with his public assertion that the MFGB had no hope of obtaining one of its principal objects, the national profits pool. 
In the 1920s Lancashire as a declining coalfield could be militant on industrial issues and McGurk appeared sometimes within the MFGB as the advocate of a more forward policy. During the 1926 dispute, he played the leading part in the attempt by some of the miners' delegation at that year's TUC to shout down the locomotive men's leader, John Bromley (1876-1945), who had been critical of the MFGB leaders. 
After the 1926 defeat McGurk played his part in attempting to maintain effective trade unionism in the depressed Lancashire coalfield; he also stood with the other Lancashire officials to block attempts by the Communist Party to expand their influence in Lancashire. In April 1929 he became Lancashire president; in 1932-3 he sat on the general council of the TUC. 
Soon after the outbreak of war in 1939, McGurk's health began to deteriorate. He resigned the Lancashire presidency in January 1944 and his agent's post eight months later. He died at his home, 92 Haig Road, in Bury, on 22 November 1944. His wife, Eliza, an active member of the Labour Party, had died in July 1943. They had two daughters. 
McGurk was a characteristic miners' leader of his generation, a hard but flexible negotiator, a thorough opponent of the left who viewed the Labour Party as the custodian of trade union interests. This pragmatic bargainer was known for his quick temper; Lancashire conferences could be subjected to what one critic described as 'language not becoming to a person of his standing' ('DLB'). His power base in a decentralized federation lay in a specific coalfield and his attitudes were influenced by its priorities. 


@@@@@


doc= 48234


Muir, John William (1879-1931), trade unionist and politician, was born at 202 North Woodside Road, Glasgow, on 15 December 1879, the son of John Muir, a journeyman farrier, and his wife, Annie ('nee' Doyle). He became a skilled tradesman at the precision engineering firm of Barr and Stroud, of Anniesland, Glasgow. On 30 October 1918 he married Catherine McMillan Fraser ('b'. 1882/3), daughter of Alexander Fraser, a shipbuilder's clerk; they had two children. 
Little is known about Muir's intellectual development before the outbreak of war in 1914, when he was the editor of 'The Socialist', the organ of a small Marxist and syndicalist sect, the Socialist Labour Party. He was drawn at some point into the shop stewards' movement, which expressed the opposition of (especially skilled) workmen on Clydeside to the dilution of labour and to government controls over the munitions workforce. The movement became the Clyde Workers' Committee (CWC), and Barr and Stroud was one of its strongholds. From October 1915 to March 1916 the Clyde Workers' Committee threatened to disrupt munitions production, and Muir, who was regarded as its intellectual leader, presented its case for workplace control of production at famous meetings with Lloyd George as minister of munitions at Christmas 1915. The Clyde Workers' Committee actually disrupted the war effort far less than did more conservative groups of workmen, but in February 1916 the government moved against it. Muir, together with the future communist William Gallacher, was gaoled in April for twelve months for publishing an article entitled 'Should the workers arm?' in the CWC journal 'The Worker' (29 January 1916, 73-4); the article said that they should not, and neither Muir nor Gallacher wrote it. The arrests of Muir and Gallacher, and the simultaneous deportation of other leaders of the CWC to Edinburgh, succeeded in breaking up the committee. 
Muir's journey away from Marxism may have begun in September 1914, when he resigned his editorship of 'The Socialist' because of his support for British participation in the war. It accelerated on his release from prison in 1917, when he came under the influence of John Wheatley, the chief local organizer and ideologue of the Independent Labour Party, which Muir joined. His revolutionary syndicalism had by this time mutated into non-revolutionary guild socialism. Muir subsequently stood unsuccessfully as Labour candidate for the marginal seat of Glasgow (Maryhill) in 1918. He won the seat in 1922, however, and held it until 1924. Muir was one of the ten Glasgow Labour MPs who were sent off to London by a mass meeting at which, appropriately, 'The Red Flag' and 'Psalm 124' were sung. Like other Clydeside Labour MPs, he spoke passionately in parliament about poverty and unemployment, and was an instinctive supporter of Scottish home rule. During 1923 he persistently attacked the government, especially on pensions and the organized emigration of the children of the unemployed to the dominions, and he delighted in gadfly attacks over alleged scandals. In the 1924 Labour government, he became parliamentary under-secretary at the Ministry of Pensions. His minister was not in the cabinet, however, and the Ministry of Pensions had little influence at a time when Philip Snowden and William Graham (respectively chancellor and financial secretary to the Treasury) insisted on a balanced budget. Muir's role was largely confined to answering parliamentary questions, but he did serve on a committee to examine the draft 'Pre-War Pensions Bill' of the previous government, which the Labour government endorsed. Lack of time, money, new ideas, and a parliamentary majority all prevented the Labour government from making any significant innovations in social policy. 
After losing his seat in 1924, Muir was picked by G. D. H. Cole to run the Workers' Education Association, which was deeply split between Marxist and non-Marxist wings. Muir had been firmly in the latter camp since his switch from syndicalism to guild socialism, and he served as a faithful ally to Cole until forced by ill health to retire in 1930. He then returned to Glasgow, where he died in Robroyston Hospital of a spinal tumour on 11 January 1931; he was buried at the western necropolis. In obituaries Muir was described as a 'humble and unassuming man' ('The Scotsman') and also 'of singularly gentle and lovable disposition' ('Forward', 10 Jan 1931). He was of slight build, and his friends thought his health had been permanently damaged by his wartime imprisonment. Muir was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 48235


Osborne, Walter Victor (1870-1950), trade unionist, was born at Wilby, Norfolk, on 1 September 1870, the son of James Osborne (or Osborn), a shepherd, and his wife, Emily, 'nee' Frost. From about 1890 he worked for the Great Eastern railway, his employers for twenty-two years. On 15 October 1896, at the Wesleyan Methodist centenary chapel, York, he married Naomi Wright, a native of Norfolk who was working as a domestic servant in York; she was the daughter of John Wright, a farm labourer. At the time of his marriage Osborne was a foreman railway porter living in Stoke Newington, London; by 1901 the couple had settled with a two-year-old daughter in Walthamstow, their long-term residence. 
As a young man Osborne had been a member of the extreme Social Democratic Federation at some time in the late 1880s or early 1890s, but had soon left and become a consistent anti-socialist. Among those who knew him personally he had a reputation for being honest and humorous, though somewhat lethargic and excessively devoted to his personal freedom, refusing, for example, to work overtime for the Great Eastern railway. However, he rose to the position of head porter at Clapton station in north London while remaining a member of the Amalgamated Society of Railway Servants, which he had joined in 1892. Indeed, in 1897 he organized a local branch of the union in Walthamstow and served as branch secretary. Along with many of his contemporaries in the trade union movement of the 1900s he combined approval for the labour representation committee (LRC) with a continued commitment to Liberalism, and was consequently a warm supporter of the railway servants' general secretary, Richard Bell, one of the first LRC candidates to be elected to parliament, where he worked closely with the Liberal Party. 
Osborne, however, began to feel unhappy about developments in labour politics in 1903. In the first place the LRC decided to impose a pledge on its candidates to form a distinct group in parliament separate from other parties, a pledge which Bell refused to accept and in which he was supported by a majority at the railway servants' conference in 1904. In the second place the general meeting of the railway servants decided to make the political levy compulsory for all members, and the socialist dominated executive committee chose three socialists as the union's next candidates for parliament. Osborne carried a motion at the Walthamstow branch to discontinue paying the political levy and fifty-three other branches of the union called for a ballot on the question of affiliation to the LRC. However, when such a ballot was held in 1905, 81 per cent of those voting were in favour of maintaining the existing levy arrangements. Osborne seems to have had an exaggerated idea of the extent to which the emerging Labour Party was dominated by socialists, perhaps because of his experience of the executive of his own union, and although his views were not unique they were clearly shared by only a minority. 
Osborne pressed stubbornly ahead with legal action against the railway servants' political levy in 1907, supported by money raised by readers of the tory newspaper, the 'Daily Express'. His case was defeated in the High Court but was successful in the Court of Appeal in 1908 on the grounds that the definition of a trade union in the 1876 act did not include the support of a political party. This time Osborne was supported by money raised not only through the national press, but apparently also through small subscriptions from sympathetic union branches. The railway servants backed by the Trades Union Congress and the Labour Party, which stood to lose the bulk of its financial base if denied trade union support, then took the case to the House of Lords where the Osborne judgment was upheld in November 1909. Not satisfied with this Osborne instructed his solicitor to take legal action over the use of the railwaymen's already accumulated political fund; the union's executive retaliated by expelling him, but this only led Osborne to start another legal action for his reinstatement, which was dismissed in the High Court but upheld in the Court of Appeal. Once again the railwaymen prepared to take the case as far as the House of Lords, but reached a settlement with Osborne's solicitor before the hearing. Osborne was by then such a well-known figure that he was able to launch a brief career as a writer on trade union issues, publishing two books defending his activities, 'My Case' (1910) and 'Sane Trade Unionism' (1913), and also to secure appointment as the chief clerk of the anti-socialist British Constitution Association. 
The success of Osborne's campaign was short-lived, however, for, while the Liberal government could hardly denounce one of its own supporters who had pursued his right to freedom of conscience, it was increasingly dependent on the Labour Party for its small majority in the House of Commons after the 1910 general election. As a result the Liberals softened the impact of the Osborne judgment by introducing the payment of MPs in the budget of 1911; and then reversed it in the 'Trade Union Act' of 1913, by legalizing the financing of political action provided that the payments came from a special political fund from which individual members should have the right to contract out. The Labour Party meanwhile became the undisputed focus for trade union political representation as a result of its leading role in securing the legislation to remedy the Osborne judgment. In this way Osborne's activities may have strengthened the Labour Party and certainly initiated an important party division over British trade union law. In 1927 the Conservatives put the burden on those who wished to contract in to political levies. Labour repealed this legislation in 1946, thus restoring the 1913 position. The Conservatives imposed regular ballots on the continuation of union political funds in 1984. 
During the 1920s Osborne continued to campaign against what he described, at a meeting of the National League of Liberal Trade Unionists and Cooperatives, as 'socialist tyranny'. By fighting Liberals, he complained, the Labour Party had divided the progressive vote ('Walthamstow Guardian', 20 April 1928). By then, however, he had disappeared from national view. No obituary has been traced following his death, at the City General Hospital, York, on 15 June 1950. 


@@@@@


doc= 48236


Pilling, Richard (1799-1874), hand-loom weaver and Chartist, was born on 15 December 1799 in Bolton, Lancashire, the son of a cotton weaver. He started work around ten years of age during the boom of the French wars. He was then, he claimed, able to earn 16's'. a week. In the post-war depression and with the decline of hand-loom weaving, however, his wages dropped sharply. By the early 1830s, although a married man with young children, he was earning only 6's'. 6died for a full working week. In 1833 he took work in a cotton mill as a power-loom weaver. 
Like many of his contemporaries Pilling took part in the post-war movement for parliamentary reform; he later claimed that he missed the Peterloo massacre by a shade, since his contingent was warned of the trouble before they arrived at the meeting-place. He was among the agitators for the 1832 'Reform Bill', and soon after his entry into the factory became a leading member of the power-loom weavers' trade society. He was already by then an organizer and speaker for the Ten Hours Movement, which advocated a ten-hour day in the factories. The aim was ostensibly to protect the child and female workers, but also, as was generally admitted, to put a legal restraint on the hours of factory work for all employees. 
In the years immediately following the 1832 'Reform Bill', Pilling lived and worked in Stockport. With fellow trade unionists he organized resistance to wage reductions and to the dismissal of trade society organizers and members. He was concerned with local and national agitation, both among Stockport ratepayers and in the national movement of protest against the sentence of transportation passed on the committee of the Glasgow Cotton Spinners' Union early in 1838. He was a founder member of the Stockport Chartist Working Men's Association in 1838 and from that time onwards appeared regularly on the platform at public meetings of the radicals and Chartists. He was arrested for his activities in the summer of 1839. After his arrest Pilling showed a good understanding of the judicial system. Although unable to find the high sureties demanded, he was still able to exercise his right to traverse and to be released on his own recognizances until the next assizes. The conditions of his release do not seem to have prevented him from taking an active part in Chartist activities during the winter of 1839-40. At the Chester assizes in April 1840 he was discharged; the terms of his discharge do not seem to have inhibited him in the least, as he was soon engaged in organizing an eight-week strike of Stockport power-loom weavers against a wage reduction. 
As the result of his part in the strike Pilling and his family were blacklisted by Stockport employers and moved to Ashton under Lyne in search of work. By this time Pilling and his wife, Elizabeth (whom he had married in the early 1820s), had seven children, of whom the three oldest were able to get factory work. Wages continued to be reduced, and early in 1842 the second son, James, had to leave his work as he was suffering from tuberculosis, from which he died shortly afterwards. In the summer of 1842 a threatened general reduction of wages led to a series of strikes in the cotton districts, which escalated into the general turnout which became known as the 'plug' riots. Pilling and other local Chartists took the lead in widening the strike throughout Lancashire and the West Riding of Yorkshire. They demanded not only the return to the wage levels of 1840, but the adoption of the 'Charter' as the law of the land. Pilling believed, in common with most Chartists, that 'a fair day's pay for a fair day's work' could be achieved only when working men had access to the machinery of law-making, and their trade societies were given legal recognition. 
Pilling was arrested and brought to trial with Feargus O'Connor and fifty-seven other Chartists at the Lancaster assizes of April 1843. He made a famous speech from the dock, in which he described the tragedy of his own and his family's life; this was said to have reduced members of the jury and court officials to tears, and rendered his virtual acquittal inevitable. His speech was undoubtedly a masterpiece of controlled forensic rhetoric. However, by the time of the trial the intensity of the previous year had subsided, and Feargus O'Connor also made a strong defence of the strikers by emphasizing the industrial grievances which provoked their actions. This emphasis was encouraged by the judge in charge of the case, Baron Rolfe. It is in this context that Pilling's famous defence speech has to be read. In the assizes of the previous year more Chartist offenders had been sentenced to transportation and to heavy sentences than at any other time in the movement's history, and those in the dock in 1843 had good reason to expect heavy sentences. In fact, however, many, including Pilling, were acquitted on all counts and those against whom guilty verdicts were found were not called up for judgment and were in effect acquitted. 
Pilling continued to be prominent in activities of the Chartists and of the weavers in Ashton and Stockport during the rest of the decade. He was delegate to the Chartist convention in 1844 and in 1846; at the 1844 convention he proposed a petition to parliament against the 'Master and Servant Bill' and also urged Chartists to take part in local government activities of all kinds. He became a member and active supporter of the Chartist Land Plan when it was established in 1845. In March 1848 he chaired a meeting at Oldham Edge in which Chartists and Irish repealers welcomed the February revolution in France. In that year the tensions in the cotton districts were again extremely high, and on 14 August a clash in the streets of Ashton resulted in the death of a policeman. Pilling was not among the local Chartists who were rounded up after this event because he had on the same day left the town on his way to the United States of America. He found wages in the USA low and the working day in cotton mills excessively long; moreover, the trade there was overcrowded and dominated by cheap female and child labour. He returned in 1850, although some of his sons seem to have stayed on in the USA. 
Back in Ashton, Pilling seems to have made a living, as did many former Chartists, from small trading and retailing activities. On his death certificate he was described as a tea dealer. He retained his loyalty to Chartism until the movement faded, and like many others, transferred his loyalties to popular Liberalism. He died at 211 Fleet Street, Ashton under Lyne, on 29 November 1874. 


@@@@@


doc= 48238


Steadman, William Charles (1851-1911), trade unionist and politician, was born on 12 July 1851 at 24 Pennyfields in the Poplar district of London, the eldest of the three children of William Daniel Steadman and his wife, Jane Ruth Steadman, 'nee' Anson. While his father, a shipwright, served in the Royal Navy, he spent part of his boyhood with relatives amid the almost endemic poverty of the East End. Educated at a nearby national school, at the age of eight he began to make a contribution to the family income: he ran errands, sold newspapers, and worked as a pot-boy in a public house. Just before his fifteenth birthday he was apprenticed to the barge-building trade; he improved his education at evening classes. In 1875 he married Jessie Wall; they had four daughters. 
On completing his apprenticeship in 1873, Steadman joined the barge builders' trade union, a small craft society formed in the previous year, and was soon an active member; in 1879 he became the union's general secretary, a post he held until 1908. Steadman's leading part in an eighteen-week strike of barge builders in 1890 enhanced his standing in London working-class politics. In March 1892 he successfully contested Hackney as a Progressive for a seat on the London county council (LCC). A few months later he stood with Liberal support as a candidate for Mid Kent in the general election, but was defeated, as he was in 1895 when he contested Hammersmith. By this time he had become a full-time activist, maintained in part by modest payments from his union and a committee of supporters. This gave him the freedom to work with the small Labour group on the LCC which included Ben Tillett, Will Crooks, and John Burns, and to become a poor-law guardian in Mile End. During his membership of the LCC, on which he sat until 1907, he specialized in housing and public health. The Fabian Society was another organization of which he was an active member, and his study entitled 'Overcrowding in London and its Remedy' was published as Fabian tract 103 in 1900. He was involved with Toynbee Hall and various campaigns on such issues as old-age pensions, unemployment, and the eight-hour day, some of which were organized by the London Trades Council on which he was also prominent. In 1899 he was elected to the parliamentary committee of the Trades Union Congress; he presided over the congress of 1902, which met in London. 
Steadman became MP for the Stepney division of Tower Hamlets at a by-election in March 1898. The Liberal Party financed his campaign, a consideration which helped to make him cautious towards independent labour representation. In parliament he asked numerous questions about working conditions, especially those of Post Office employees in whom he took a special interest, and compulsory vaccination which he opposed, but he lost the seat in the general election of 1900. At the inaugural conference of the Labour Representation Committee (LRC) in February 1900 he was elected to the chair; whether 'they formed a Labour Party or allied themselves to other political parties in the House of Commons', he told the delegates, 'let them be represented by men of character, men who had borne the heat and burden of the day' ('Report of the Conference on Labour Representation', 10). He became an approved candidate of the LRC, for the Central Finsbury constituency, only to break away when required not to identify with any other party. He was then president of the Stepney Liberal, Radical, and Progressive Association and financially dependent on the Liberal Party at Central Finsbury, which he won in the general election of 1906. In the House of Commons he often co-operated with the Labour Party, many of whose members had similar origins and attitudes to his. His secretaryship of the parliamentary committee of the TUC -- he succeeded Sam Woods in 1904 -- led to pressure for him to switch to the Labour Party, but he resisted it. The post was a salaried one ($250 a year, $300 from 1907) and so reduced his financial worries, though he was not comfortable with the administrative demands of the office (a factor which influenced the appointment of his successor, C. W. Bowerman, who had a reputation for efficiency). 
Steadman went to the poll at Central Finsbury as a Liberal in the general election of January 1910, but was defeated. Not long after intimating his intention to resign as secretary of the parliamentary committee, he died at 29 Wilmington Gardens, Barking, on 20 July 1911. He was buried on 26 July in the East London cemetery. He was survived by his wife. Stockily built and with a ready wit, Steadman was a cockney of cockneys and a London character after the heart of Dickens, according to Ben Tillett. His personal popularity overcame much of the criticism directed at his continued 'Lib-Labism'. Frederick Rogers recalled him as a 'man distinguished for the simple honesty of his character' ('Labour, Life and Literature', 219). That he could as leader of only a tiny union take a prominent part in the TUC was another tribute to the force of his personality. 


@@@@@


doc= 48239


Trow, Edward (1833-1899), ironworker and trade unionist, was born at Wolverhampton on 29 June 1833, the son of an ironworker. He attended a dame-school in nearby Wednesbury for a few years and at the age of ten entered the iron industry. At thirteen he became an underhand puddler and followed this occupation in a number of places, including Glasgow and Consett, for about fifteen years. By 1863 he had returned to the Black Country and became a lodge secretary in the local puddlers' union which was formed in that year. He held his position until 1867, when he moved to work as a forehand puddler at the Springfield works of Barningham & Co. in Darlington, co. Durham. 
The north of England was the preserve of a rival union, the National Association of Ironworkers led by John Kane, but Trow apparently had no qualms about changing his allegiance: perhaps his long absence from the area had softened the local chauvinism characteristic of Black Country people. He joined the northern union's Springfield lodge and was promptly appointed its secretary. When the National Association was reconstituted as the ironworkers' only union in 1868, following the collapse of organization in the Black Country, Trow was elected to the general council. Four years later he became president and assistant secretary and held both offices until 1874. He then relinquished the presidency and took over the combined and paid position of assistant secretary and treasurer. 
When Kane died in 1876 Trow succeeded him as general secretary of the union at a salary of $160 per year. He held this post until the National Association was superseded by the Associated Iron and Steel Workers in 1887. He then became general secretary of the new union and remained in this position until his death. Under his leadership the internal friction which had carried over from the regional origins of unionism into the successive national associations was progressively eliminated and his successor, James Cox, took over an organization which was largely free of sectional conflict. 
Trow also succeeded Kane as the paid secretary to the workmen's panel of the board of arbitration and conciliation for the manufactured iron trade of the north of England. The success of the board confirmed his belief that industrial relations should be organized on a purely voluntary basis. He said as much in his evidence to the royal commission on labour in 1892, when he dismissed suggestions that the board might consider using statutory arbitration. He was also a member of the commission and his manner of questioning indicated a strong commitment to bringing the two sides of industry closer together. This led him to join Sir David Dale, the chairman of the commission and of the north of England board, in efforts to establish a union of employers and employed. The proposed union was formally constituted in 1895 but it attracted little support and was quickly abandoned. 
The political concomitant of these industrial attitudes was 'Lib-Labism' and Trow was vice-president of Darlington Liberal Association for many years. His influence among working men was an important factor in holding Darlington for the Gladstonian candidate in the closely contested elections of 1886 and 1892 but Trow never had any political ambitions himself. He was a trustee of the Sons of Temperance Society and a member of the Darlington school board and served as a magistrate from 1892 but otherwise devoted himself exclusively to his union work. Trow's single-minded dedication to his members' interests was acknowledged by gifts from several groups of ironworkers over the years; he also received tributes from foreign trade union delegations to whom he gave advice and assistance. 
Trow died suddenly on 9 February 1899 at his home, 6 Paradise Terrace, Darlington. He was survived by his second wife, Mary, 'nee' Batty, and a grown-up family. He was buried in the west cemetery, Darlington, on 14 February 1899, following a service in the cemetery chapel. 


@@@@@


doc= 48240


Williams, Thomas Edward, Baron Williams (1892-1966), Co-operative Society administrator and politician, was born on 26 July 1892 at 62 Ynys-hir Road, Ynys-hir, in the Rhondda valley, Glamorgan, the son of William Williams, a colliery timberman at Wattstown collieries, and his wife, Mary Davies. Educated at Ynys-hir Boys' School and Porth county school, Williams began what was to prove a long and illustrious career with the Co-operative Wholesale Society by gaining a post, at the age of fourteen, as a junior clerk in its Ynys-hir branch. The co-operative movement then occupied an important place in working-class community life and, alongside the Labour Party and the trade unions, formed the third pillar of the labour movement. Co-operative retail societies offered low prices and profit-sharing dividends to customers and also played a social and educational role, through the Co-operative Union, within the community. The Co-operative Wholesale Society, to whom the retail societies were federated, was formed in 1863 to offer banking and trading facilities. Although a Co-operative Party was established in 1917, many societies became directly affiliated to Labour at an early date. 
After attending evening classes for several years at nearby Tonypandy Williams secured a two-year scholarship to Ruskin College, Oxford, where he obtained diplomas in economics and industrial history. This was a familiar route for many young men from south Wales, some of whom returned home afterwards to take up political office or trade union posts, while others moved on to fresh fields. Williams was one of the latter for, on leaving Ruskin, he entered the Woolwich Arsenal Co-operative Society. However, with the onset of the First World War, he joined the Middlesex regiment pioneer corps where he attained the rank of quartermaster sergeant. While serving in Salonika he contracted malaria and dysentery and spent eighteen months in military hospitals abroad and in Dublin before recovery. On 14 May 1921 he married Lavinia Mary Northam of Plumstead; they had one daughter, Gweneth Mary, in 1927. 
Williams resumed his career with the Co-operative Wholesale Society and eventually worked his way up through the ranks to become its national president in 1951. In addition, he became chairman or director of various bodies such as the English and Scottish Joint Co-operative Wholesale Society and the New Zealand Produce Association Limited. His work in this field also brought him international as well as national recognition, not least in the shape of his appointment as a commander of the order of Dannebrog by the government of Denmark. 
Williams was prominent in both local and national politics. A member of Woolwich borough council from 1919 to 1922, Williams was also a member of the London county council between 1932 and 1935, becoming chairman of its parliamentary committee and vice-chairman of the public assistance committee. He was also a justice of the peace. On a national level, Williams was a member of the national executive of the Labour Party between 1931 and 1935. He contested the constituency of Finsbury Park for Labour at the general election of 1931 but was defeated by over 7000 votes by the National Labour candidate. 
During the Second World War Williams's particular expertise saw him appointed to serve on the Ministry of Food's tea distribution committee. In recognition of his lifelong commitment to the co-operative movement he was awarded a barony in the king's birthday honours list of 1948. He took as his title Baron Williams of Ynyshir to the delight of that village's inhabitants who presented him with an illuminated scroll to mark the event at a ceremony held in Moriah Chapel, Ynys-hir, where he had worshipped as a boy. 
Williams's post-war offices included serving as a part-time member of the London Transport executive, as president of the Co-operative Congress in 1953, and as a commissioner for the crown estates from 1956 to 1966. He died at his home, 35 Foxes Dale, Blackheath, London, on 18 February 1966. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 48244


Adrian [i] Hope (1709-1781), but Archibald's contribution was cut short by his untimely death in Rotterdam on 28 March 1733. In consequence, the merchant banking house was restyled Thomas and Adrian Hope. These two brothers developed the business so that during the Seven Years' War (1756-62) it became one of Amsterdam's most successful. Thomas married in 1727 Margareta Marcelis, daughter of an Amsterdam merchant and soap boiler, and they had one son, John. Adrian did not marry. 
Thomas achieved great commercial influence and overshadowed Adrian. The newly restored stadholder, William IV, appointed him his representative director of the major trading company the West Indische Compagnie, and also to his committee to plan for Dutch economic resurgence. Thomas proposed limited free trade as a stimulus to regeneration, but his plans were cut short by William's death in 1751. He then withdrew from the company but in 1756 joined the more important Oost Indische Compagnie and from 1766 to 1770 represented on its board the new stadholder, William V. 
In mid-1762 Thomas and Adrian restyled their firm Hope & Co. and admitted as partners the former's only son, 


@@@@@


doc= 48245


Huth, (John) Frederick Andrew (1777-1864), merchant and merchant banker, was born at Stade, Hanover, on 29 October 1777, the second son of Johann Friedrich Huth (died 1801), a soldier of the Scharnhorst regiment, and his wife, Marie Amelia (died 1812), daughter of Johann Thee, farmer. The family settled in 1781 at nearby Harsefeld, where Johann Huth worked as a tailor and where Friedrich attended local schools. 
In 1791 Huth was apprenticed to the Spanish merchants at Hamburg, Brentano Urbieta & Co., led by Juan Antonio Urbieta, and twice weekly he attended the Handelsakademie to receive a formal education in commerce. Urbieta promoted him to a senior clerkship and in 1796 took him on his annual linen-buying tour of Silesia. A year later, when a change in Spanish law enabled foreign protestants both to live and to work in Spain, Urbieta dispatched Huth to his Corunna house which was managed by his brother, Cypriano. Germany's trade with Spain was then expanding rapidly, while liberalization of Spain's trade with South America presented further opportunities. From 1799 to 1803 Huth, acting as Urbieta's supercargo, made two voyages to the west coast of South America, taking out German manufactures and bringing back hides from Buenos Aires. On his return he was appointed chief clerk in Corunna. 
Notwithstanding his strong commitment to the Lutheran church, in January 1805 Huth married, at Corunna, Manuela Felipa Mayfren (1785-1856), a Catholic and an orphan believed to be the daughter of a senior member of the king of Spain's court; the duke of Veragua was then her guardian. Between 1805 and 1821 they had five sons and six daughters. 
Following his marriage Huth set up in business on his own account but this was short-lived. In 1809 the invasion of Spain by France and the subsequent attack on Corunna forced the Huths' evacuation to London; apparently they took with them, for safe keeping, jewels and money belonging to the recently deposed king of Spain. In London, Huth established himself as a commission merchant, initially working with a capital of $700 and doing business with Spain, in particular supplying the British army there. His business prospered and in 1815 he took into partnership a Bremen merchant, John Frederick Gruning, formerly of De Jaslet & Co. As Frederick Huth & Co., they moved to South Place, off Finsbury Square. Later on Huth was to move his family home to Clapton, on the outskirts of London, and then, in the late 1830s, to the fashionable residential district of Upper Harley Street in London's West End. As confirmation of the family's long-term commitment to Britain, in 1815 Huth's wife and children gave up Roman Catholicism and joined the Church of England; in 1819 the family also became naturalized British citizens by act of parliament. 
By 1832 Huths' capital was $32,000, of which $22,000 was owned by Huth. In the mid-1820s the business was described as being much connected with Spain and Norway, whence arrived consignments of wool and timber respectively. 'Colonial produce' was also exported occasionally to the continent; an important link existed in South America with a Lima house; and coffee cargoes were handled for a firm at San Domingo. 'There is no doubt but that their means are most ample for anything they may undertake', concluded Barings in the 1820s; 'Mr Huth is a most prudent & circumspect man and highly thought of' (Baring archives, HC 16.1). Huths' South American business was becoming a noted specialization, following the establishment of sister houses at Lima and Valparaiso in the 1820s. 
Huth's prestige was considerably enhanced in 1829 when the Spanish queen, Maria Christina, later queen regent, appointed him her financial adviser and banker in London; by 1836 Huth had invested $300,000 of her assets in British government securities. Also in these years, Huths became financial agents for the Spanish government, charged in particular with making diplomatic payments around the world. Huth's personal reward came in 1834 with his appointment as knight of the order of Charles III; in 1852 he was advanced to commander 'de numero extraordinario'. 
In 1833 Huth took into partnership his clerk and future son-in-law, Daniel Meinertzhagen, originally of Bremen. This served to reinforce the German character of the firm, but it also marked Huths' commencement of new areas of business and in a new part of the world. The company was now emerging as a major accepting house concerned with financing international trade and as a house which marketed securities. An important focus of this new business was North America, and in 1839, to facilitate north Atlantic merchanting and trade finance, especially in cotton, a Liverpool house was opened. By the end of 1839 Huths' American business accounted for $430,000 out of a total balance of $1.2 million. 
Huths became a 'major conduit' (M. Wilkins, 'The History of Foreign Investment in the United States', 1989, 56) for the passage of American securities to Europe, for the most part placing them with rich private investors in Spain and Germany. But it steered clear of public issues; no public prospectus carried its name. Its American business was damaged by the financial crisis of 1841, which resulted in a lock-up of funds, but elsewhere headway continued to be made. By the late 1840s capital had grown to over $300,000 and Huths were now one of London's leading houses, ranking immediately below such companies as Barings and Rothschilds. 
In 1850 Huth retired from day-to-day management, leaving the business in the hands of Meinertzhagen, who was assisted by Huth's first, third, and fifth sons, Charles Frederick, Henry Huth, and Louis. Huth's reputation was then second to none. Notwithstanding his small, slight stature, he had great presence; an obituary states that he had been known as 'Napoleon of the City'. 
Huth maintained links with his native Germany. At least two of his sons, Fernando and Henry, worked in Hamburg when young. In retirement he himself returned regularly to the country, and at Harsefeld in the 1840s he paid for the establishment of a library and a continuation school for able children; in 1855 he created a fund to support the village's poor; and in the late-1850s he funded the reconstruction of the local church. 
Frederick Huth died at his residence at 33 Upper Harley Street, London, on 14 January 1864, and was buried in the family mausoleum he had had constructed in 1837 at Kensal Green cemetery. His firm remained one of the City's most prestigious houses, but after Meinertzhagen's death in 1869 it went into relative decline; it was eventually wound up in 1936, when led by Huth's great-grandsons. 


@@@@@


doc= 48246


Stone, Andrew (d. 1711), banker, born probably in Winchester, was the son of Andrew Stone, a gaoler and licensed victualler, and his wife, Elizabeth. The Stones were a well-known Winchester family, involved in innkeeping and property ownership as well as the management of the city's prison. By the mid-seventeenth century the elder Andrew Stone had been made a freeman of the city and was accorded the title of gentleman. Little is known about the younger Andrew Stone's early life, but in the early 1690s he obtained an apprenticeship in London to Richard Smith, senior partner in the important City banking house known as the Grasshopper, which conducted business from 68 Lombard Street. The key influence in his appointment seems to have been the exercise of the perquisites of his father's office in Winchester, though it is also probable that the family had personal relations with Smith, who was closely connected with Carisbrooke, on the Isle of Wight. 
Stone was apprenticed at a time when the Grasshopper, building upon its continuous history of goldsmith activity begun by Sir Thomas Gresham in the mid-sixteenth century, was transforming itself into a bona fide banking house. On 24 March 1697 Stone married Anne Holbrooke (died 1725) at St Mary Abchurch in the City of London. The fact that his wife was also Smith's niece suggests the pattern of close ties between business and blood that had long been a key feature of England's great banking families. Shortly after the marriage Stone was taken into partnership by Smith and when the latter died in 1699 he became senior partner in the firm, then known as Stone & Co. Early in his career at the Grasshopper he developed a close friendship with Thomas Martin, who was made a partner in 1703. From this time on the fortunes of the two families were closely linked, shaping the growth of the firm into one of the foremost London private banking houses over the eighteenth century. Indeed, Stone was the first of nine generations at the Grasshopper and no less than twenty-one of his descendants became bankers there. 
Of his own children -- he and his wife had three sons and three daughters -- only his second son, Richard, took up a position in the bank, becoming a partner in the Grasshopper between 1731 and 1761. Andrew Stone, his eldest son, entered the service of the duke of Newcastle and later became commissioner of trade, customs, and treasures of the queen's household. George Stone, his youngest son, was made bishop of Ferns, co. Wexford, in 1731 and later, in 1747, became primate of Ireland. Andrew Stone died in London, probably at 68 Lombard Street, in 1711, in or before April. Significantly, he made a provision in his will for his share of the banking business to be offered to Thomas Martin (bap. 1680, d. 1765) ['see under 'Martin family (per. c.1700-1832)] for the sum of $9000, his sons all being under ten years of age at the time of his death. Thus, the continuity of the bank's business was assured and the lease on the premises passed to Martin. Following her husband's death Anne Stone returned to Winchester and was known to be leasing the porter's lodge at the city's Westgate in 1716. She died in 1725. 


@@@@@


doc= 48247


Ford, Charles Bell (1784-1860), insurance company manager, was baptized on 24 May 1784 at Pitcombe, Somerset, the ninth child of John Ford, barrister of the Middle Temple, and Margaret Ford. His father was a man of considerable means, a benefactor of charities in Bath and probably a director of Bath Fire Office. His brothers, John and William, went up to Oxford and followed their father into the Middle Temple. However, nothing is known of Charles's early career. He was appointed secretary to the Sun Fire Office in 1814 at the age of thirty. Unlike most of Sun's salaried officers, he had not come up through the ranks of clerical staff, nor, like previous secretaries, did he belong to the closed circle of existing managers. He was brought in to fill the vacancy left by the death of Philip Bewicke only after no internal volunteer for the onerous post of secretary could be found. One of the terms of his appointment, and what marked him as an outsider, was that he had to relinquish his seat on Sun's self-electing management committee if he gave up the post of secretary. Although Ford never married, his family did in time become 'insiders': his nephew Harry, son of his sister Eliza and Sir Robert Chester, was a Sun manager from 1835 to 1868. 
At the time of Ford's appointment, Sun was the largest fire insurer in Britain, but had entered a difficult stage in its history. The new offices of the 1800s had eroded its market share, particularly in the north of England. One of Ford's principal achievements was to reverse this decline, so that the office continued to dominate British fire insurance long after his death. Ford proved ruthless in pursuit of market power. Particularly during the period of intensified competition in the late 1820s and 1830s, he undercut the premium rates of weaker opposition in a range of markets, and forced the other major offices to follow suit. The company take-over, however, proved to be his most potent device for maintaining Sun's competitive position. In seventeen successful take-overs during his term as secretary, including an extraordinary average of one each year between 1835 and 1848, he revealed himself as a great tactician, and a shrewd and tough negotiator. He would keep a close eye on the movements of his competitors, would carefully gauge the probability of persuading a majority of shareholders to sell, and would make great efforts to win the loyalty, sometimes through financial enticements, of a key insider -- a director or manager -- in the company targeted for purchase. In three, ultimately successful, attempts to buy the Bath Fire Office, Ford even recruited his father, his elder sister, and the family physician, all resident in Bath, to collect information and canvas support on Sun's behalf. 
To his counterparts in other insurance offices, Ford could seem somewhat cold and aloof. He had a rather caustic sense of humour and did not tolerate fools gladly, but he clearly had a taste for the corporate battlefield, as well as a sense of fairness. A late convert to the cause of co-operation between insurers, he drafted the plan of the London Fire Engine Establishment in 1833, and he was the regular chairman of the Fire Offices' tariff committee from 1842. In 1836 he rather belatedly took Sun into foreign underwriting. The frequent generous bonuses awarded to Ford by Sun's board marked the high regard in which they held his managerial skills. He was appointed deputy chairman in 1845 and held this post, as well as the chairmanship of the Sun Life Office, until his death. He retired from the post of secretary in 1856 on an annual pension of $1000, though he retained his title of manager. He died on 2 April 1860, aged seventy-six, at his home, 18 Grafton Street, Piccadilly, London, and was buried in Highgate cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 48248


Jones, Jenkin (1779-1837), insurance company manager, was the son of Jenkin Jones and Sophia Jones (died 1823) of Molesey, Surrey. In 1792, at the age of twelve, he joined the staff of the Phoenix Fire Office, Britain's second largest fire insurer, and the world's leading insurance exporter, and rose rapidly through the clerical ranks to become assistant secretary in 1802. In 1805, aged only twenty-five, he was appointed secretary to the company. He became assistant director in 1833. 
Within two months of his appointment as secretary, Jones travelled to Germany and Scandinavia on the first of several trouble-shooting missions abroad, which became landmarks in his career. In 1807, following a huge fire on the Caribbean island of St Thomas, which nearly bankrupted Phoenix, with its extensive insurances of the sugar trade, Jones set sail for Barbados on his lengthiest and most difficult tour. Recognizing the danger of this wartime mission, Phoenix granted Jones $1000 in advance for his services, and effected an assurance on his life to provide a $150 annuity for his mother. Between November 1807 and July 1809 he visited some twenty cities and towns in the West Indies, Canada, and the eastern seaboard of the United States. In Grenada he fell ill with malaria, in Washington he was introduced to President Jefferson, and while in New York, Philadelphia, and Baltimore he negotiated tariff agreements with local offices, the first such agreements concluded anywhere abroad by a British insurer. On behalf of Phoenix's sister office, Pelican Life, he also appointed Phoenix's agent in Philadelphia as the first life-assurance agent in the United States. 
Jones's reports to the Phoenix board, often accompanied by detailed drawings, were notable for their clarity and vigorous comment on the quality of the company's agents, the spread of risks insured, the standards of urban construction, and the level of competition from other insurance offices. The overall result of his work was to rationalize the system of foreign underwriting and to reinforce the company's belief in the market opportunities offered by the New World. Partly as a result of this, Phoenix, and by extension Britain, retained its dominance of the world's insurance exports well into the nineteenth century. Acknowledged as the foremost expert on overseas insurance, at home Jones worked for greater co-operation between provincial and London insurers. In 1830 and 1833, over months of arduous negotiations, he brought together nearly two dozen fire offices in local tariff agreements for Scotland and Liverpool, a success which foreshadowed the more comprehensive tariff co-operation of the 1840s and beyond. Jones also pioneered the development of the modern merger strategy. Beginning with Phoenix's purchase of the Glasgow Fire Office in 1811, he negotiated eight further take-overs, culminating in the purchase of the Protector Fire Office in 1837, probably Britain's biggest corporate merger of the first half of the nineteenth century. Although his underwriting instincts were not always sound, Jones had the charm and tactical judgement of a successful diplomat. His greatest strength lay in his awareness that good information is the lifeblood of good insurance practice, and that such information must be managed effectively. 
From about 1820 Jones lived with his wife, Hannah Elizabeth (died 1834), and widowed mother in the 'neat Gothic Cottage' on Holders Hill, Hendon, Middlesex. On 11 April 1837, during the final stages of the Protector negotiations, he collapsed suddenly in the street, while walking home from the London coach, and died 'almost immediately'. An exhumation and inquest were only narrowly averted by Jones's relatives after two anonymous letters were received by the Middlesex coroner from 'an old inhabitant of Hendon' demanding, on behalf of Hendon residents, and in the name of 'legality', an inquest into the sudden death. Jones was interred in Hendon churchyard next to his wife and near his mother, both of whom had predeceased him. 


@@@@@


doc= 48249


Bignold, Thomas (1761-1835), founder of the Norwich Union insurance company, was born in Westerham in Kent, the second of the eight surviving children of John Bignold ('c'.1734-1795), a prosperous tenant farmer, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Outram, also of Westerham. It is not known where he attended school, but he was sufficiently well educated to become an exciseman before moving to Norwich in the early 1780s. By 1785 he had married Sarah Long, 'nee' Cocksedge (1752-1821), and taken over the shop premises which Sarah's first husband had rented until his death in 1783 and which she had since managed as a widow. Between 1786 and 1793 they had three sons and three daughters. Bignold became a churchwarden and a freeman grocer, with an increasingly prosperous small business as a wine and hop dealer. 
In 1792 Bignold also became the first secretary of Norwich General Assurance, a joint-stock fire insurance company backed by wealthy local merchants and manufacturers. Apart from his bookkeeping skills, he was probably chosen because he had avoided the bitter partisanship of Norwich politics and never became actively involved with either the local whigs and radicals or the tories. Indeed, he switched political allegiance to exploit business opportunities, having voted for the whigs until 1806, then converting to the tories in line with changes on the Norwich Union board. Meanwhile, in 1797 he had parted with a Norwich General board intent on controlling the scale of their risks, and had founded the Norwich Union Fire Insurance Society with support from the city's extreme radicals, who were chiefly local shopkeepers. Norwich Union was a mutual institution, in which its policyholders shared in all profits. In return they also funded the society's risks with their premiums, which were retained for seven years to pay any losses before profits were redistributed as a septennial bonus. 
Freed from influential local restraint and any need to raise capital, Bignold launched Norwich Union on a remarkable course of expansion. When his early directors objected in 1806, he ousted them by persuading local tory policyholders to back his ambitious attack on an insurance market dominated by London joint-stock companies which viewed provincial rivals as upstarts worthy only of a takeover. Bignold defied them by appointing some 500 agents across Britain over the next decade and introducing profit sharing to fire insurance on a far larger scale than any previous firm. The same agency network offered life insurance after he founded a mutual Norwich Union Life Insurance Society in 1808, threatening other rivals in a traditionally conservative business with tireless canvassing and press advertising to emphasize that fire insurance was cheaper with Norwich Union and that life policies were not only for the wealthy. Control remained within Bignold's family, with key posts for his three sons and two sons-in-law. He also persuaded prominent individuals throughout Britain to become trustees, which gave the largely unknown Norwich Union vital respectability. 
By then, however, Bignold was well known for his eccentric behaviour when challenged. He had forced those Norwich Union directors who disagreed with him out of head office in 1806 by threatening them with a pair of pistols, which he later alleged were not loaded. On a later occasion, his truculent answers to the 1817 parliamentary select committee investigating misuse of extents in aid (crown writs to recover land) verged on open contempt. This trait continued with claimants. By 1818 Norwich Union had recruited 70,000 fire policyholders by applying the mutual principle on a massive and unprecedented scale. But claims had also increased after 1815 and were threatening bonuses during the post-war recession. Bignold could have retrenched, because Norwich Union still held sufficient reserves and agencies to sustain business after discontinuing bad risks. Most agents also took Norwich Union Life Society premium commissions and wanted to continue. But he had already overreacted, having moved to London in 1816 and resisted claims which he believed fraudulent with costly lawsuits. The 'moral risk' of insurance was widely appreciated, and he justifiably doubted many claims made in difficult years. However, rivals were paying up quietly, while tightening up on underwriting. Bignold did neither, and legal costs rose while new business slumped. Rather than sink with their intransigent father, his sons backed Norwich Union's directors and took over. Norwich Union continued growing, itself a tribute to Bignold, who was informally offered reconciliation with a generous retirement income by his sons. Instead, he began further lawsuits to overturn his dismissal and also embarked on a bizarre range of businesses, including the manufacture and retail of shoes with revolving heels, which led in 1823 to his bankruptcy. He spent sixteen stubborn months in the king's bench prison before compromising with his third son, Sir Samuel Bignold, who secured his release and retirement in comfort to Westerham. Bignold died there on 11 August 1835 after prolonged ill health, which began six years earlier when he fell from a horse and broke his leg. He was buried at Old Catton church near Norwich, beside his wife, who had died in 1821. 


@@@@@


doc= 48250


Meinertzhagen, Daniel (V) (1801-1869), merchant and merchant banker, was born at Bremen, Germany, on 8 December 1801, the eldest of at least four sons and four daughters of Daniel (IV) Meinertzhagen (1772-1859) and his wife, Meta Rebecca, daughter of George von Groning, who married in December 1800. The name of Daniel was traditionally given to the eldest son, one being differentiated from another by the addition of a roman numeral. Thus Meinertzhagen was known as Daniel (V). 
The Meinertzhagens were a leading, if not prosperous, Bremen family. Daniel (I), a merchant, originally from Cologne, had settled there at the end of the seventeenth century and had become a senator in Bremen's legislative council; both his son and his grandson, Daniel (II) and Daniel (III), were to follow him in this office. Daniel (V)'s father was a Bremen merchant and at least two of his brothers held important positions in the city, George as a clergyman and Emile as a lawyer. Three of his sisters were still unmarried by 1859; a fourth was the wife of a local merchant, Johannus Tibeman. Daniel (V) followed his father into merchanting and in 1820 took up a clerkship at Nantes; in 1822 he moved to Bordeaux, which did more trade with Bremen than any other French port. A third brother, Heinrich Albrecht (known outside Germany as Henry Albert), also became a merchant; by 1859 he had settled at Melbourne, Australia, and appears to have been linked in business with Daniel, who by then had lent him $3000. 
When the family firm, along with many others, failed during the economic downturn of 1826, Meinertzhagen moved to London and sought employment with Frederick Huth & Co., merchants, where a contact of his mother and grandmother, John Frederick Gruning, was a partner and where a friend from Nantes, Jules Dufou, was a clerk. Four years earlier, Dufou had written to Meinertzhagen telling him that 'for learning commerce, London is without exception the best school' (Meinertzhagen, 252). Huths recruited Meinertzhagen as a clerk and his rapid progress was consolidated when in June 1833 he married Amelia Huth (1810-1887), daughter of Frederick Huth, at St John's Church, Hackney, Middlesex. They had eight daughters and three sons, the eldest of whom was Daniel (VI), born in 1842. His betrothal resulted in his admission to the Huth partnership in January 1833, despite his modest wealth; by 1836 he still contributed only $4200 of his firm's capital of $123,000. In 1837 he became a naturalized British subject. 
The Huth business had been formed by Frederick Huth in London in 1809. He had come from Hamburg via Spain and initially his firm, widely recognized as a leading 'German' house, did business with Europe and especially with Germany, Spain, and the Baltic. Its interests were extended to the west coast of South America in the mid-1820s, when local houses were established at Lima and Valparaiso. By the time of Meinertzhagen's admission, Huths was a major London merchant bank, ranking immediately below firms such as Barings and Rothschilds. Barings recorded in the 1820s that 'there is no doubt that their means are most complete for anything they may undertake' and that 'Mr Huth is a most prudent & circumspect man and thought highly of' (Baring Brothers & Co. archives, HC16.1). 
Frederick Huth, who retired in 1850 aged seventy-three, and who died in 1864, almost outlived Meinertzhagen, which makes distinction of their individual achievements difficult. However, Meinertzhagen, who succeeded as senior partner of a partnership largely comprising Huth's sons, appears to have had little regard for the entrepreneurial skills of the junior Huths. 'I often wish the counting house was again in our house and that you could come sometimes and be by my side... so as to gain an interest in the business', he confided to his wife in 1843, but adding 'it is not in your family and [I] do not like to talk about it then' (Meinertzhagen, 277). Under Meinertzhagen's leadership, the Huth business made steady progress; by 1845 its capital was $312,000, and it rose to about $500,000 by 1870. 
It seems fair to attribute Huths' important diversification into North American trade and finance to Meinertzhagen, though he came to this with no obvious qualification. As a major accepting house, in 1839 Huths established a Liverpool firm to handle its cotton finance business and in 1837 it became co-financier, with Barings, of the Bank of the United States; later, however, unlike Barings, it made substantial losses when the bank collapsed. By the 1850s important business was done in financing the export of railway materials to the United States. 
If accepting was one leg of Huths' business in the USA, then trading in securities was the second. The firm became a major conduit for the flow of United States securities to Europe, but it specialized in placing them privately, often among rich continental investors, rather than making public issues. By the mid-1830s, important positions were taken in Morris Canal and Banking Company bonds, New Orleans City stock, and New York 5 per cents. In 1839 Meinertzhagen reached agreement with the Bank of Missouri for the sale of Missouri state and bank bonds. 
When financial crisis overwhelmed the United States in 1841, Huths was badly damaged and Meinertzhagen, along with the young Louis Huth, was dispatched to rescue what he could. Despite having 'hardly anything but bad business to attend to, constant discussions with debtors and lawyers, and nothing very cheering from London', he appears to have done well, and stated that in Florida 'I have been rather fortunate in settling one of our heaviest claims.... In Texas I have also secured a small claim which we had considered as lost' (Meinertzhagen, 291). 
In extending Huths' securities business to Europe in 1863, Meinertzhagen 'was much in favour' of joining a consortium of seven of London's second-division houses to form the International Financial Society, but in doing so he had to overcome the opposition of 'old Huth' who had 'said nay' (Kynaston, 221). This combination aimed to compete with more powerful forces in winning a share in arranging finance for infrastructure projects and governments largely in central Europe. 
Throughout his life Meinertzhagen maintained close links with his native Bremen, where his wider family continued to live. By 1859 he had provided a house and land at nearby Grohn for use by his mother and three unmarried sisters, and in the same year Bremen granted him its freedom in recognition of his assistance during the financial crisis of 1857. In London Meinertzhagen's leading role in the German community was illustrated by his treasurership, taken up by 1862, of the German Hospital. His daughter-in-law described him as 'a delightful personality, a hard worker, enterprising and far seeing and generous almost to a fault' (Meinertzhagen, 16). 
Early on Meinertzhagen lived above Huths' City offices in South Place, but later he settled at Devonshire Place in London's West End. Later still he acquired Belmont House, a country home at Wimbledon, where he died on 12 July 1869; he was buried in Mottisfont churchyard, Hampshire. Daniel (VI) succeeded him as a partner at Huths, and subsequent generations of Meinertzhagens played a prominent role both in the affairs of Huths, until their winding up in 1936, and in the City of London generally. 
Although few details of his achievements are now known, Meinertzhagen was one of London's greatest merchants during the mid-nineteenth century. On his death, 'The Times', then not noted for carrying obituaries of merchants, described him as 'a leading and greatly esteemed member of the mercantile world' ('The Times', 13 July 1869). 


@@@@@


doc= 48255


Cuff, John (1708?-1772?), optician and microscope maker, was the son of Peter Cuff ('b'. 1676), watchmaker and member of the Broderers' Company. It is possible that his mother was Rebecca, 'nee' Crichlow ('b'. 1675), who married a Peter Cuff, watchmaker, of the parish of St Martin Ludgate, London, at St Benet Paul's Wharf in 1698. Cuff was apprenticed to James Mann, optical instrument maker, in April 1722 and admitted into the freedom of the Spectacle Makers' Company in January 1730. It is from his likely ages on these dates (thirteen and twenty-one respectively) that the year of his birth has been estimated, though it is possible that he served a previous apprenticeship, perhaps with a clock- or watchmaker given his father's profession and the reputation he later gained for microscopes of all-metal construction. 
For nearly twenty years from 1738 Cuff occupied a shop under the sign of the Reflecting Microscope and Spectacles on the north side of Fleet Street, London, three doors east of Crane Court, where the Royal Society had met since 1710. There he made and sold, both retail and wholesale, optical instruments, barometers, thermometers, mathematical instruments, and other curiosities. The microscopes he made included the standard models of the day and several innovative designs, including the perfected 'microscope for viewing opake objects' and the solar or camera obscura microscope, both of which were invented by Johannes Lieberkuhn and first demonstrated in London in 1739. Cuff's solar microscopes, with their ability to project a magnified image onto a screen, proved popular and were widely used in public lectures of the time. 
Cuff was closely associated with Henry Baker FRS, his advocate if not patron, who included descriptions and plates of Cuff's instruments in his works on microscopy, including the highly successful 'Microscope Made Easy' (1742). It was for Baker that Cuff made his double reflecting microscope in 1743. This was a great improvement on its predecessors, being made entirely of brass, supported by a single side-pillar of rectangular cross-section, and having a fine-threaded focus: it was widely copied at home and abroad, and had a strong influence on subsequent designs, microscopes with such characteristics now being referred to as 'Cuff-type'. Cuff also made an aquatic microscope, which was used to study the properties of specimens in water -- an activity made all the more popular in salons and drawing-rooms of the time after Abraham Trembley's discovery of the amazing regenerative properties of the polypus in 1740. It was this type of microscope that John Ellis used to compile his 'Natural History of the Corallines' (1755). 
Cuff was a frequent visitor to meetings of the Royal Society, but failed to secure the required number of votes for election when put up in 1743. He had as little success in the commercial sphere, though his excellence as a workman was highly regarded. He was declared bankrupt in 1750, but raised enough money from the sale of his household effects to continue trading. The arrival in 1757 of Benjamin Martin in the shop next door prompted him to flee some time between July and September from the sign of the Reflecting Microscope and Spectacles, and he moved along Fleet Street to the sign of the Double Microscope, Three Pair of Golden Spectacles, and Hadley's Quadrant, opposite Salisbury Court. He was there for little more than a year before being forced to give up shopkeeping and sell his stock-in-trade at auction. However, he continued to make instruments to order and to take on apprentices. In 1764 he was a signatory to the petition against John Dollond's patent for achromatic lenses. 
Cuff had a number of trade cards and advertisements printed, along with several pamphlets, many of which were also translated into French (this was unusual for the time, but possibly not unconnected with Henry Baker's enthusiasm for the language), where he appears as 'Jean Cuff, opticien, faiseur de lunettes & de microscope'. The pamphlets are mainly illustrated descriptions of his microscopes, but also include a 'description of a Gregorian telescope' and a poetic piece of 1747 entitled 'Verses Occasion'd by the Sight of a Chamera Obscura'. 
Details of Cuff's death are as uncertain as those of his birth. He served as an assistant at the court of the Spectacle Makers' Company from 1749, having served as its master for one year, to 5 October 1770, when he was discharged at his own request. William Cox, his last apprentice, had been with him since 1767, and was turned over to Charles Lincoln in 1771. A John Cuff was a member from December 1768 to March 1772 of masonic lodge 125, which met at the Bishop's Blaze in Shoreditch. In May 1772 letters of administration were issued for a John Cuff of West Dawlish in Somerset, a county in which there were several clockmakers by the name of Cuff. 
Signed examples of Cuff's instruments can be found in the principal collections: they include not only microscopes and other optical instruments but also barometers, which he may have made himself or more likely sold on after adding his signature. Cuff has long been identified as one of the sitters in a portrait by Zoffany now in the Royal Collection, Windsor Castle. There is little evidence to support this identification: when first exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1772 the portrait was called 'An Optician with his Attendant'; in a rough draft of the inventory of Kew ('c'.1800) it appears as 'Mr Cuff', but in the published inventory as 'A Mathematician'; when lent to the Royal Institution in 1827 it was hung as 'Two Old Men'; subsequently it has been known as 'The Lapidaries'. In 1859 a pencil note was visible on the stretcher reading 'Dollond the Optician in the Strand London'. 


@@@@@


doc= 48258


Herries, Sir Robert (c.1731-1815), merchant and banker, was the eldest son of William Herries of Halldykes in Dryfesdale, Dumfriesshire, a distant descendant of the lords Herries of Terregles, and his first wife, Catherine, 'nee' Henderson. He had two brothers, two half-brothers, and one half-sister. 
In 1750 Herries was sent out as an apprentice to his uncles Robert and Charles, who were merchants in Rotterdam. His ability was noted by the Amsterdam bankers and traders Hope & Co., whose connections were to serve him well. In 1754 he set himself up in Barcelona as a brandy merchant and took out his two younger brothers, Charles and William. He also acquired business interests in Montpellier and Valencia. While visiting Edinburgh in 1761 he was persuaded by John Coutts to become a partner in the Coutts' London commission house in Jeffrey's Square. This firm became Herries, Cochrane & Co. in 1762 with a sudden loss of Coutts family interests, caused partly by their attention to the new Coutts Bank in the Strand. 
Herries soon quarrelled with the Coutts brothers over control at Jeffrey's Square. The brothers had retained a right of recruiting to the partnership, but Herries felt they were no more entitled to appoint him a colleague than to choose him a wife. In January 1766, with Cochrane removed, the firm was restyled Herries & Co., in which the Coutts' Edinburgh house was represented by William Forbes and James Hunter. With Forbes as a confidant, Herries evolved his idea for a new monetary service for the grand tour, a market which he estimated as worth $1.5 million per annum. Bills of exchange and the more usual letters of credit were both disadvantaged, the former by inflexibility, the latter by fees paid at each withdrawal. A network of agencies was to be set up across Europe where travellers could encash sterling 'circular notes' (forerunners of travellers' cheques) without deduction. The agents were paid commission by Herries, whose own profit was in the use of money taken for the notes before a journey began. Other types of instrument, especially a 'transferable note', were also introduced. 
In 1769 Herries tried to implement his plan through Messrs Coutts. Rebuffed, he set up the London Exchange Banking Company at 16 St James's Street, and advertised his new service; partners included his uncle Robert Herries, and Forbes and Hunter. With the help of Hope & Co., some eighty agencies were established across Europe by 1770, rising to 141 some twenty years later, with two in Asia. Herries was at first resented by other bankers, who feared, quite rightly, that he was also poaching a client base for a conventional private bank. When he was knighted in 1774, the Exchange Bank became known as Sir Robert Herries & Co. The circular note scheme, soon widely copied, was temporarily checked by the French wars, but restarted in 1815. 
Within Britain and the West Indies, Herries tried other monetary innovations, all abortive. He also pursued mercantile interests, especially in Barcelona, while his English commission house acquired a contract from the Farmers-General of France to buy for them tobacco, which was imported via Glasgow from North America. This was a volatile arrangement, with allegations of intrigue and price manipulation on all sides. In 1775 the French made a sly contract with a different intermediary, and Herries failed to negotiate an equally sly private deal with their leader. His reputation was already suffering: Joshua Johnson, a London merchant, referred to Herries & Co. in 1774 as 'damned rascals' (Price, 141). Sharp practice was too much for Forbes and Hunter, who resigned from Herries's commission house, as well as from the bank. In most affairs Herries can be accused of acting without scruple and too independently of his colleagues. 
By 1793 Herries was married to Catherine Foote (1762-1808) of Charlton Place, Bishopsbourne, Kent; she was some thirty years his junior but predeceased him. They had no children. In 1793 Captain Edward James Foote, Catherine's brother, married Nina, whom Herries described in his will as 'my natural daughter by Martha Scott'. Foote divorced Nina in 1803 and remarried immediately; Herries took virtual custody of Caroline Foote, one of his three grandchildren. In 1798 Herries retired from his bank (which then became known as Herries, Farquhar & Co.) but not from wider business. He bought a small estate at Cheltenham, where he died in February 1815, some $340 in debt to his old firm. He also owed $400 to Forbes, whose friendship he had never forfeited. An untypically sensitive request was that his executor (Foote, by then a rear-admiral) should send Forbes two hampers, each of four dozen bottles of cider and perry, as there was no money in the estate to repay him. The bank, still at 16 St James's Street, was absorbed by Lloyds Bank in 1893. 


@@@@@


doc= 48259


Hofmann, August Wilhelm, Baron von Hofmann in the Prussian nobility (1818-1892), chemist, was born in Giessen (in the state of Hesse) on 8 April 1818, the youngest of the six children of Johann Philipp Hofmann (1776-1843), a government architect, and (Friederike) Wilhelmine Badenius (1780-1854). After attending local schools and studying while living with an uncle, in 1836 he matriculated at Giessen, but was uncertain whether to study law, philology, or architecture. The most celebrated member of the Giessen faculty at this time was the chemist Justus Liebig, whose revolutionary scientific work and innovative educational methods were making him world famous. Liebig's success was such that repeated expansions of his laboratory were necessary, the crucial one of 1839 having been designed and directed by Hofmann's father. Hofmann studied with Liebig, earned the doctorate in 1841, then continued in Giessen with his research. Hofmann's first scientific paper (1843) was the earliest competent investigation of coal tar; this work provided the foundation of much of his future career. Concentrating on the organic bases, Hofmann isolated and identified aniline (phenylamine, a centrally important aromatic substance), and took the first steps towards an understanding of its constitution and chemical relationships. In the same year Liebig made Hofmann his private assistant, and the young chemist began planning a scholarly career. Since a chemical professorship was unlikely to become available to him in Giessen, in the spring of 1845 Hofmann transferred to the University of Bonn. He was anxious to achieve the financial means to marry his intended, Helene Moldenhauer (1824-1852), Liebig's niece. 
Meanwhile, in London, plans were being laid for a new private college of chemistry. The impetus for this development came from Liebig himself, who visited England in 1837 and again in 1842, effectively publicizing the usefulness of chemistry to technology. A group of technically knowledgeable investors in London sought the advice of Liebig and the help of the British government for this plan; Prince Albert played an instrumental role. Liebig recommended Hofmann to lead the new enterprise. Hofmann wanted assurance from the Prussian authorities that he could return to Bonn if the new school were to collapse. To ensure this, Prince Albert used his German connections to arrange that Hofmann be promoted to 'extraordinarius' (associate professor) in order to be eligible for a two-year leave of absence from the university. Thus Hofmann became sole professor and director of the Royal College of Chemistry, established in October 1845 in rented rooms in a house on George Street, Hanover Square. Twenty-six students enrolled for the first session, among them several who later achieved recognition in the science, such as Warren De la Rue, Frederick Abel, and Edward Nicholson. The following summer a new building for the college was erected nearby, in Oxford Street, the cornerstone being laid by the prince consort. In the same year, on 12 August, Hofmann married Helene Moldenhauer. 
The two guiding ideas behind the Royal College of Chemistry were the transplantation of the highly acclaimed Liebigian science pedagogy into Great Britain, and the establishment of an institution where students could be trained for practical careers in agriculture, pharmacy, and chemical industry. There was tension between these goals, for the former, strongly favoured by Hofmann, stressed the value of basic research, while the latter, preferred by the shareholders and members of the council, emphasized practical applications. The pecuniary arrangements with Hofmann were generous, but a shortage of student customers meant that the council had increasing difficulty meeting its contractual obligations. Consequently, the college gradually sank into insolvency. 
Meanwhile, Hofmann's boundless energy, captivating teaching talent, and scientific brilliance began to lay the foundation of his future fame. After a pause in his research while establishing the college, he continued his investigations of organic compounds containing nitrogen. Hofmann's phenomenal burst of creative work from 1848 to 1851 has few parallels in the history of chemistry. This is all the more remarkable when it is considered -- as all witnesses uniformly testify -- that he was unskilled in manual laboratory operations. However, he had an uncanny knack for selecting outstandingly talented experimentalists among his students and junior colleagues, and was always careful publicly to acknowledge their important assistance. 
In compensation for his own lack of manual dexterity Hofmann held his laboratory to rigorous working standards, and he possessed superb scientific skills, including remarkable chemical intuition. If it was often the hands of students and junior colleagues doing the manipulating in Hofmann's lab, they were usually being guided by the ideas of their leader. This is not to suggest that Hofmann was a high theorist -- indeed, he was more inclined towards a conventionalist or instrumentalist stance toward scientific theories -- but he was exquisitely responsive to leading ideas in the science, and he developed a nearly unerring sense of fruitful directions to explore. 
This was, indeed, a labile period in chemical theory. In the 1830s and 1840s the French chemists Auguste Laurent and Charles Gerhardt pointed to emergent weaknesses in the prevailing dualistic theory of organic compounds, in which molecules were depicted as held together by polar electrochemical forces. Laurent and Gerhardt sought to build a more holistic, non-electrochemical theory, based upon the substitutability of atoms and emphasizing the presumed arrangements of atoms within molecules. In the period of Hofmann's education and early career, these ideas were largely ignored by the leaders of French, English, and German chemistry -- including Hofmann's mentor, Liebig. 
Hofmann's conversion to the ideas of Laurent and Gerhardt dates from 1848, when he encountered a chemical phenomenon that could be explained only by the French theory: the inability of aniline to form a nitrile (organic cyanide). Hofmann's new substitutionist viewpoint, together with the nearly simultaneous and similarly inspired work of his collegial friends Adolphe Wurtz (of the Paris Faculte de Medecine) and Alexander Williamson (of University College, London), provided the starting point for Hofmann's masterwork. The theories of Laurent and Gerhardt had been largely schematic; Hofmann's studies substantiated them through experimental evidence. In papers published in 1849, 1850, and 1851, Hofmann described the preparation and studied the properties of dozens of new substituted ammonias, including mono-, di-, tri-, and tetra-methyl, ethyl, and amyl amines and anilines. Just as Williamson succeeded in outlining a new 'water type' based on what soon would be referred to as the divalence of oxygen atoms, so Wurtz and especially Hofmann created the 'ammonia type', which was based on the ability of nitrogen atoms to create connections to three different atoms or groups. These developments utterly transformed the science of chemistry during the 1850s, leading to the formulation of the theory of atomic valence (with the participation of Edward Frankland and others) and the theory of chemical structure (proposed formally by August Kekule and Archibald Couper in 1858). 
Hofmann's novel nitrogenous aromatic compounds proved as momentous for industrial research as they had for theoretical chemistry. After Hofmann's young student William Henry Perkin dropped out of the college (against Hofmann's advice) and made a fortune on his newly discovered aniline purple (mauve), the first successful dye derived from coal tar, Hofmann himself became interested in similar substances. From 1862 he studied reactions connected with rosaniline (magenta), the second major synthetic organic dye; in 1863 he created two new hues in collaboration with his former student Nicholson, who like Perkin had become a chemical industrialist. These colours, called 'Hofmann violets', were the first commercially successful fine chemicals developed with the aid of specific knowledge derived from basic research, and their licensed production made both Nicholson and Hofmann a great deal of money. The age of synthetic chemicals, behind which lay Hofmann's pedagogy and research, had begun. However, although he ever after derived significant income from his work with coal-tar dyes, he never became an entrepreneur or an industrialist himself, always preferring the roles of the pure scientist and the consultant. 
In his London years Hofmann became a central player in British chemistry, indeed in British science. His growing international fame led to several offers from German universities. In the early 1860s, Hofmann found himself negotiating simultaneously with two major universities, Berlin and Bonn; in their efforts to attract Hofmann both institutions built magnificent new chemical institutes. These were the first of a new generation of academic laboratory buildings, representing a quantum leap in scale and outfitting. It was Berlin that Hofmann chose, partly because of his attraction to the Prussian capital. Although he began teaching there in April 1865, his international prestige and negotiating power was such that he held exclusive options on all three positions (including London) from late 1863 until the end of 1866. England had lost Hofmann to his homeland, but his two decades in London had had a decisive impact on the teaching and practice of British laboratory science, as well as on British chemical technology. 
Just as he had succeeded in transplanting effective Liebig-style group research to Great Britain, Hofmann's Berlin laboratory served as the rallying point for a rejuvenation of the chemical sciences in Prussia. The research productivity was enormous, indeed unprecedented in scope. Hofmann supervised more than 150 doctoral dissertations, and a total of about 900 papers emerged from the laboratory during his time there -- about 150 by Hofmann himself. In addition to these contributions, Hofmann wrote an elementary textbook, a number of occasional pieces, and over fifty important biographies of his colleagues. In April 1888 he was raised to the Prussian hereditary nobility; he was thereafter called von Hofmann. 
Hofmann became the unofficial (but universally acknowledged) leader of German chemistry. His scientific success contrasts with his private misfortunes, for his first wife's early death in 1852 was followed by those of his second, Rosamund Wilson (1838-1860), an Englishwoman, whom he married 13 December 1856, and third, Elise Moldenhauer (1845-1871), whom he married on 19 May 1866, both of whom died before the age of thirty. His fourth wife, however, Bertha Tiemann (1854-1922), whom he married on 11 August 1873, outlived him by thirty years. Possessed of outstanding health himself, Hofmann was hardly ill until suddenly struck down on 5 May 1892 with a heart attack. He was buried, amid great splendour, in the Dorotheenstadtischer cemetery in Berlin. 


@@@@@


doc= 48260


Fletcher, Sir Lazarus (1854-1921), museum director and mineralogist, was born at 11 Williamson Street, Salford, on 3 March 1854, the eldest child of six sons and two daughters of Stewart Fletcher of Salford and his wife, Betty, 'nee' Gregory. He was educated at Manchester grammar school (1865-72) and gained the gold medal for mechanics and the bronze medal for mathematics, as well as several certificates in other subjects, in the national examinations of the Department of Science and Art at South Kensington Museum in 1872. He won an open science scholarship, the Brackenbury, to Balliol College, Oxford, the same year. He took a distinguished first class in mathematical moderations in 1874 and in the final examinations in both the mathematical (1875) and natural science (1876) schools. 
Fletcher was appointed a demonstrator in physics, under Professor R. B. Clifton, at the Clarendon Physical Laboratory (1875-7). He was elected to the Millard lectureship in physics at Trinity College, Oxford (1877-8), and in 1877 he was also elected to a fellowship at University College, Oxford. This last position he had to resign when, on 1 September 1880, at the parish church of Moorside, near Oldham, he married Agnes Ward Holme (died 1915), the daughter of Thomas Holme, the vicar of Moorside. They had one daughter, Elizabeth Gregory Fletcher. 
When at the Clarendon Laboratory, Fletcher read Groth's 'Physikalische Krystallographie'. Thereafter Clifton drew Fletcher to the attention of Professor Story-Maskelyne, keeper of the mineralogy department at the British Museum. In 1878 Fletcher succeeded W. J. Lewis as assistant in that department. Upon Story-Maskelyne's resignation in 1880 he was promoted to keeper, a position he held until 1909. Shortly after his appointment he had to organize the moving of the collection of minerals and meteorites from Bloomsbury to the new buildings in South Kensington. This was a huge task owing to the vast number of specimens involved, to their value and fragility, and to their having to be completely rearranged. Fletcher also had to design new showcases, and he prepared guides and handbooks to the collections -- deemed 'masterpieces of lucid and precise exposition' -- not to mention some 17,000 labels for objects, printed labels now replacing the manuscript labels of old. Of particular note were his introductions to the study of meteorites (1881), of minerals (1884), and of rocks (1895). He also appointed guide-lecturers, but had difficulty appointing well-qualified assistants. He did, though, establish a well-equipped laboratory. He also travelled abroad, to Russia (to the International Geological Congress) and Sweden in 1897 and to Switzerland and Italy in 1902. 
In 1906 Fletcher developed a severe heart-related illness; he was never again fully to regain good health. However, in July 1909 he succeeded Sir Ray Lankester, who retired in December 1907, as director of the British Museum (Natural History). Fletcher had been overlooked as director when Sir W. H. Flower retired in 1898. This was largely through pressure brought about by certain members of the Royal Society, who, in addition to being strongly pro-Lankester, were against both a mineralogist and an internal candidate being promoted to the position, thereby overruling the museum's trustees. Fletcher was still able to carry out scientific research, particularly regarding meteorites and crystallography. Of greatest importance was his investigation of the transmission of light through crystals, published both in the 'Mineralogical Magazine' (9, 1891, 278-388) and in book form (1892), which revolutionized the teaching of physical optics, bringing him international renown: 'This paper alone is sufficient evidence that he possessed unrivalled powers of elucidation and exposition which would have placed him in the front rank of teachers' ('Mineralogical Magazine', 186). In his career Fletcher wrote over forty articles, most being read before the Mineralogical Society before appearing in the 'Mineralogical Magazine', as well as numerous contributions to other works. He also wrote the entry on meteorites in 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' (11th edn, 1910-11). In 1911 he directed an exhibition on animals, plants, and minerals mentioned in the 'Bible', held to commemorate the tercentenary of the Authorized Version, and contributed an essay on biblical minerals, an area of personal interest. Illness often kept Fletcher away from the museum. He did not think too highly of his own tenure of the directorship. To Sir Frederic Kenyon, director of the British Museum, he wrote in 1919: 'as for the last ten years, there is nothing to show except the keeping of the peace, and keeping people at peace with each other so far as that is possible' (Stearn, 111). 
Fletcher was an examiner in natural science at the Oxford public examinations in 1880, and for the Cambridge natural science tripos in 1882-3, 1889-91, and 1896-7. He was also a member of the boards of electors of Oxford and Cambridge universities to the professorships of mineralogy. In 1895 and in 1904 he gave a course of lectures on meteorites at the Royal Institution. He was elected a fellow of the Geological Society in 1879 and served as vice-president (1890-93); he was made a fellow of the Royal Society in 1889 and served on its council (1895-7 and 1910-12, for the latter period as a vice-president); and he was president of the Mineralogical Society (1885-8) and its general secretary from 1888 to 1909. His service to this society was rewarded by the presentation of his portrait, subscribed to by members, in 1912. He was also president of the geological section of the British Association at Oxford in 1894, to which he gave a notable address 'On the progress of mineralogy and crystallography'. He was a vice-president of the Physical Society (1895-7), and received numerous honours. He was made an honorary fellow of University College, Oxford, in 1910, and two years later was awarded the Wollaston medal of the Geological Society. He was a corresponding or honorary member of numerous societies and institutions, both abroad and at home. He also received honorary degrees from the universities of St Andrews (LLD) and Berlin (PhD). 
In 1915 Fletcher's wife, for many years an invalid, died. The following year, on 15 August, he married her sister, (Martha Thomasina) Edith Holme, then aged fifty-two, at the parish church of Barnard Castle in co. Durham. He also received a knighthood in 1916. Upon his retirement in 1919 his reduced income necessitated moving from London, and he went to live in Ravenstonedale, a village near Kirkby Stephen, Westmorland. A particular interest was gardening. He also hoped to realize a long-held ambition to write a comprehensive treatise on the classification of minerals, but he did not live long enough. On 6 January 1921, while on a brief holiday in Grange-over-Sands with his family, he died of a heart attack at the Tents Hotel; he had also been suffering from arteriosclerosis and diabetes. He was buried in Ravenstonedale on 11 January. 


@@@@@


doc= 48262


Walton, Philippa (1674/5-1749), gunpowder manufacturer, was the fourth of five daughters and the coheir of John Bourchier of Ipswich, MD. She married William Walton, a London merchant, who in 1702 set up as a gunpowder manufacturer at Waltham Abbey in Essex, and at Balham in Surrey where they lived. Her husband became one of the largest suppliers of gunpowder to the government's Ordnance board, and when William died intestate in 1711 Philippa became the sole administrator of his estate. She was then thirty-six and the mother of ten young children, nine of whom were to survive her. 
Philippa Walton took over the management of the gunpowder business, initially on her own; then in 1723 she brought in her second eldest son, John, as a partner with a quarter share. In 1730 they formed an equal partnership, a partnership valued in 1732 at $10,000. The evidence suggests that Philippa Walton retained a close interest in the business thereafter, and that she did not immediately become a sleeping partner. It was not until the mid-1740s that she retired to Ongar in Essex to live with her sister, Jane Bourchier. The period when she took control was a difficult one for the gunpowder industry. The end of the War of Spanish Succession in 1714 and the long period of peace until the 1740s meant a drop in demand from the largest customer, the Ordnance board. There was a private market to be exploited, but this could never compensate for the drop in demand. Under such circumstances the industry contracted: some producers reduced their capacity, others withdrew. Philippa Walton chose the former course. She ceased production at Balham and concentrated on the site at Waltham Abbey, purchasing it outright in 1718 for $1100, her own family acting as trustees. 
During the first decade of her management Philippa Walton was one of the few producers to obtain the scarcer ordnance contracts, and she entered into partnership with three other producers to build a gunpowder magazine at Barking in Essex and exploit the private markets. The business continued unchanged after her son became involved, and in the 1740s it was sufficiently robust to emerge as the second largest supplier to the Ordnance during the War of Austrian Succession. Other producers who had continued after 1714 were not so successful in maintaining their businesses intact. 
Philippa Walton was not the only widow to produce gunpowder in the early eighteenth century, but she was the most successful and the only one to continue so long. Nothing is known about the problems she faced as a woman in business but it can be noted that the 'Commons Journals' entered her name as Philip not Philippa in 1718 ('Commons Journals', 19, 1718, 85). She died on 7 December 1749, probably at Ongar in Essex, and was buried in the churchyard at Mickleham, Surrey, where her son Philip was vicar. Her memorial at Mickleham records that she died 'in calm and Christian serenity' after having improved her property and formed the minds of her children by her instruction and example. In her will she emphasized that her six sons had already received sufficient assistance to satisfy any claim on their father's estate, and so left her share of the partnership to her three surviving daughters, all of whom remained spinsters. Soon afterwards her son John purchased this share. 
Philippa Walton's eldest son, William, was to be one of only two sons not involved in the family business, and he was the only child to have children. After John's death in 1757, the business passed to a succession of three of Philippa's other male children until 1782, when Philippa's grandchild, John Walton, inherited. It was he who sold the Waltham Abbey site to the Ordnance board in 1789, after which it remained in government hands as an important explosives production site until the Second World War. 


@@@@@


doc= 48266


Turner, Thomas (1729-1793), diarist and shopkeeper, was born on 9 June 1729 at Groombridge in the parish of Speldhurst, Kent, the eldest of the four children of John Turner (1689-1752), a shopkeeper, and his second wife, Elizabeth Ovenden (1697-1759), of Rotherfield, Sussex. In 1735 the family moved to Framfield, Sussex, where John Turner took a shop and from where Thomas's two brothers, Moses and Richard, were apprenticed to their father's trade. Nothing is known of Thomas's schooling and apprenticeship, but by the time that he was twenty-one (in 1750) he had leased a shop in East Hoathly, Sussex, and had acquired the ability to reckon and cast accounts and to write a bold, clear hand. 
On 15 October 1753 Turner married Margaret (Peggy) Slater (1733-1761) in Lewes. She was the daughter of a Hartfield farming couple, Samuel and Ann Slater. The marriage was not always happy; Margaret's health was not good, she was frequently not as helpful in the shop as Turner would have liked, and her mother proved a thorn in Turner's side. Their only child, Peter, who was born on 19 August 1754, lived for less than five months, and Margaret herself died, after a long illness, on 23 June 1761. 
Early in his married life Turner began keeping a diary, the first surviving entry in which is dated 21 February 1754. The diary chronicles in detail the next eleven years not only of the life of a busy, worried, and frequently unhappy supplier of virtually every retail commodity to a rural community, but also of the life of the community itself. East Hoathly, on the edge of the Sussex Weald, was an agricultural village with a population of some 350 people. Turner recorded its activities at a time when the Seven Years' War brought constant rumours of a threat to invade from across the channel, and when, within the parish's western boundary, stood Halland House (since demolished), the Sussex mansion of the duke of Newcastle, first lord of the Treasury for almost eight of the diary years. 
Within this community Turner played an essential role. His shop was a centre for the gathering and dissemination of information, he was the local expert in money matters, he was the village undertaker, he wrote wills, kept accounts, collected taxes, served in one parish office after another, aided successive excisemen, surveyed fields, conducted auctions, and at one stage kept the village school. All these activities he chronicled in detail, embellishing his narrative with vivid thumbnail word sketches of his contemporaries, whether friends or enemies. In addition the diary gives details of his extensive reading and of his activities as drinking companion, party-goer, and cricketer. 
The diary has never been published in full and until 1984 the only publicly available extracts were those first given in the article in the 'Sussex Archaeological Collections' for 1859 by R. W. Blencowe and M. A. Lower, whose purpose was to contrast fashionable mid-nineteenth-century Sussex with the 'secluded and uncivilized' county of one hundred years before. These extracts, re-edited by F. M. Turner in 1925 and again by G. H. Jennings in 1979, did Turner no service, and it was as something of a figure of fun that he was noted by subsequent writers on diarists from Charles Dickens ('All the Year Round', 13 April 1861) onwards. Vaisey's edition of 1984 reproduces about one third of the whole and shows Turner to have been an important observer of eighteenth-century life. 
The surviving 111 volumes of the diary end with an entry written on 31 July 1765 recording Turner's marriage on 19 June to Mary (Molly) Hicks (1735-1807), daughter of Thomas and Mary Hicks of Chiddingly, Sussex. Turner lived on in East Hoathly for twenty-eight years after he stopped writing his diary, and during those years he prospered. He acquired land, and bought both his shop and the principal public house in the village. Seven children (two of whom died in infancy) were born of his second marriage, and at least two of his sons carried on the trade. He died on 6 February 1793 at East Hoathly and was buried in the churchyard there on 11 February. A table-tomb marks his grave. His house in the village bears a plaque recording his residence. His widow survived him by fourteen years and was buried at East Hoathly on 1 December 1807. 


@@@@@


doc= 48268


Charles Baldwin (1774-1869), who was bound to his father as an apprentice compositor on 7 July 1789. 'So quickly did he attain the knowledge of the business that at 18 Mr Baldwin senior confided in him the entire superintendence of the working part of his establishment' (Griffiths, 'Encyclopedia', 87). In 1801, at the age of twenty-seven, Charles saw his efforts rewarded when his father changed the firm's name to Henry Baldwin & Son and later relinquished his two shares. He married Elizabeth Ann Laurents of Jersey. They had fifteen children, one of whom, Edward ['see below'], later took over the business. By 1808, through gift, exchange, and purchase, Charles Baldwin owned seven of the eight shares in the company and with the death of Christopher Moody, the other shareholder, seven years later he became sole owner. 
In 1809 Charles Baldwin bought the rival 'London Evening-Post', and then in 1819 purchased the 'London Chronicle' for $300 from its owner, Colonel Robert Torrens, and absorbed it into the 'St James's Chronicle'. That same year, Baldwin and his new editor, Dr Stanley Lees Giffard, were loud in their condemnation of the crowds at the Peterloo massacre on 16 August: 'What has long been desired by every friend of order has at length taken place. The strong arm of the law has been put forth to put, we trust, a final stop to the assemblage of the ignorant and the seditious. (Griffiths, 'Encyclopedia', 86)' With the appointment of George Canning as prime minister in April 1827, the old tories sought to start a newspaper in opposition and approached Baldwin. After long discussions he agreed, and on 21 May 1827 'The Standard' was launched, carrying Baldwin's declaration: 'I was not willing to risk the continuance of my old and valued journal [the 'St James's Chronicle']; I preferred the heavier risk of establishing at my own expense and hazard, a Daily Evening Paper to be conducted on the same principles and by the same editor [Giffard]. I also engaged the assistance of Dr Maginn and other celebrated writers.' For Baldwin and his editor, there were to be three unshakeable principles: total opposition to Catholic emancipation, to parliamentary reform, and to repeal of the corn laws -- and for the next twenty years they were to fight hard in the struggle to defend these. Initially, the sales of the paper were barely 700, but within five years the circulation had risen to more than 1500; and with his other papers Baldwin was 'said to be worth upwards of $100,000'. Profits on 'The Standard' alone were estimated to be between $7000 and $8000 per year; and, apart from 'The Standard' and the 'St James's Chronicle', he was also owner of the 'London Packet', which came out twice weekly, and the 'London Journal', a weekly -- 'all got up with scarcely any expense out of 'The Standard'' (Griffiths, 'Encyclopedia', 86). It was believed that his total income from newspapers was more than $15,000 a year. 
In 1844, having reached the age of seventy, Charles Baldwin decided to retire. He continued, however, to attend the Stationers' Hall, having twice been master of the company, in 1842 and 1843, and the Literary Society, of which he was a founder member in 1799. He unsuccessfully contested the constituency of Lambeth in 1837 and 1841. He died aged ninety-five at his daughter's house, 27 Sussex Gardens, Hyde Park, London, on 18 February 1869, and to the very end it was said that 'his genial disposition, amiable manners and lively conversation endeared him to a large circle of younger friends' (Griffiths, 'Encyclopedia', 86). However, his passing was totally ignored by 'The Standard'. 
Since Baldwin's retirement in 1844, the papers had been run by his son 


@@@@@


doc= 48269


Bartholomew, (Harry) Guy (1884-1962), journalist and newspaper company chairman, was born on 17 October 1884 at 191 Belsize Road, Hampstead, London, the elder of two sons of Henry Bartholomew, a warehouseman, and his wife, Kate Shackall, who taught singing. Bart, as he later became known, was deliberately misleading about his origins and upbringing. Partly out of mischief and partly because he thought that it was commercially advantageous, he sometimes pretended to be Jewish. He never publicly dismissed the implausible suggestion that he was the illegitimate son of his first employer, the press baron Lord Northcliffe, whose features and mannerisms he shared. His education was 'elementary and perfunctory' (Edelman, 38). After leaving school at the age of fourteen, Bartholomew served his apprenticeship as an engraver on Alfred Harmsworth's 'Illustrated Mail'. His technical expertise and fresh thinking were soon evident, and at nineteen he was asked to join the fledgeling 'Daily Mirror', two months after it was founded, starting at 30's'. a week. Bart's talents were swiftly confirmed and he became assistant to Hannen Swaffer, himself a pioneering art editor. When eventually he succeeded Swaffer, Bartholomew continued to work in the field, as when he engraved blocks on a cross-channel ferry in order to publish the first pictures of a royal visit to Paris. On 20 December 1906 Bartholomew married a widow from Scotland, Bertha Broome ('b'. 1876/7), daughter of John Shaxton. They had a son, Peter. Bartholomew's wife was seven years older than him. 
Aged only twenty-eight, Bartholomew was appointed a director of the newspaper in 1913, by which time he had already played a key role in creating the 'Daily Mirror' as a mass circulation title, well equipped to report the First World War in unusually graphic and striking fashion. A courageous battlefield photographer, an accomplished artist and cartoonist, and above all, a brilliant picture editor, Bartholomew had technical ability that extended to a key role in developing the Bartlane process of telephoto transmission. 
Bart was as interested in content as layout, having a clear notion of how the 'Daily Mirror' could emulate New York's sensationalist tabloid dailies without necessarily sacrificing its integrity and sense of purpose. Nevertheless, throughout the twenty years that Lord Rothermere owned the paper Bartholomew was rarely consulted upon anything other than pictorial content. Only when falling sales saw the 'Daily Mirror' and the 'Sunday Pictorial' sold off as linked companies in late 1933 did Bartholomew seize his opportunity. He was appointed editorial director, and a decade later became chairman of both companies (albeit ceding executive control of the 'Pictorial' to Cecil Harmsworth King, nephew of the first Viscount Rothermere). 
In 1934, on the basis of advice from the advertising agency J. Walter Thompson, both King and Bartholomew agreed on a change in the ailing 'Daily Mirror''s market strategy. They aimed to attract fresh advertising revenue by targeting young working-class readers with disposable income, and set about transforming it into an American-style tabloid, staffed by a highly professional team of young editors, designers, and reporters (one of whom was Hugh Cudlipp). Market research was crucial to ensuring that the 'Daily Mirror' pitched its sensationalist reporting and striking layout at just the right level. The paper consciously avoided going too far down-market. Similarly, any editorial move leftwards was very gradual, and it took the Second World War to ensure that, in A. J. P. Taylor's words, 'The English people at last found their voice.' (Edelman, 142). Wartime radicalism, with the 'Daily Mirror' claiming to speak for ordinary servicemen and women, culminated in the advice 'Vote for them' (meaning Labour) in 1945. The general election in that year confirmed the paper's support for Labour, yet Bartholomew distanced himself from the Labour Party leadership, with the notable exception of Herbert Morrison. Ironically, it was Morrison who in March 1942 threatened to suppress the paper over a cartoon by the 'Mirror''s Philip Zec. This showed 'a torpedoed sailor with an oil-smeared face lying on a raft in a sinister, empty sea' (Edelman, 111). A caption read: 'The price of petrol has been increased by one penny -- official'; and this was meant to emphasize that 'casualties as well as prices were rising' (ibid.). However, it created a furore: questions were asked in the House of Commons, and Morrison warned Bartholomew that the 'Daily Mirror' must in future refrain from publishing material which might depress public morale. The incident increased Churchill's loathing of the newspaper; and further injury was given to the Conservatives on the eve of the 1951 general election. On 23 October the paper carried eight letters under the heading 'Whose finger on the trigger?', implying that 'the country would be safer with Labour's finger on the atomic trigger' (ibid., 178). 
Bartholomew's poor relations with both front benches may explain why there was no official recognition of his major contribution to the British newspaper industry. He was, however, appointed OBE in 1946 for producing 'Good Morning', a secret wartime newspaper for submarine crews modelled on the 'Daily Mirror', and with a now familiar mixture of striking headlines, racy stories, practical advice, punchy sports features, revealing and unusual photo-spreads, and addictive cartoon strips. The same formula had enabled King to relaunch the 'Mirror''s sister paper, the 'Sunday Pictorial', in 1937, with similar success. 
Bartholomew was a very recognizable figure in Fleet Street in the later 1930s and 1940s: he was short and stocky with seemingly boundless energy, and possessed a great shock of white hair. Although he often seemed rather brusque and ill-mannered, he nevertheless retained the loyalty of his staff, who recognized that he had both the technical expertise, and also the drive necessary to persuade readers in large quantities to buy the 'Daily Mirror'. 
Although chairman of the 'Sunday Pictorial', Bartholomew saw it as an in-house rival; and his antipathy towards King, Cudlipp, and their team became increasingly irrational. Bartholomew's riposte to King's success was to purchase a rather grubby weekly, 'Reveille', and broaden its appeal. Wartime sales of about 100,000, mostly to servicemen, had leapt to 3 million by the end of 1951. However, the Mirror Group had invested heavily after 1945 in west Africa, Canada, and in particular Australia. Not all these initiatives succeeded, and each new enterprise required an enormous amount of time and effort to set up. Moreover, whenever Bartholomew travelled abroad on business he behaved in an increasingly eccentric fashion, while his performance back home was severely affected by heavy drinking: he had always adjourned every evening to Fleet Street's most famous wine bar, El Vino. In December 1951 King and Cudlipp orchestrated a board-room coup, with Bartholomew being replaced as chairman of the Mirror Group by Cecil King. The latter appointed Cudlipp as editorial director. 
In 1952 King and Cudlipp nevertheless paid warm tribute to Bartholomew at the Mirror Group's annual general meeting, regaling shareholders with countless stories, some apocryphal and some true, of his relentless determination to score a scoop. Both men collected many of these anecdotes in their respective memoirs. Yet Bartholomew spent his last years in much reduced circumstances: he held no shares in the company he had built up, and had never made proper pension provision. He lived on a modest income established by Philip Zec once it became obvious that the outgoing chairman faced near penury. He retired to his Surrey home, Crawley Hill House, Crawley Hill, Camberley, where he died on 4 May 1962. His son, Peter, a wartime commando and later a regional television executive, survived him. Hugh Cudlipp described Bartholomew as the 'godfather of the British tabloids', and he was undoubtedly one of the most important figures in the history of popular journalism in Britain. 


@@@@@


doc= 48270


Beer, Rachel (1858-1927), newspaper proprietor and editor, was born in Bombay, India, the middle child and only daughter of Sassoon David Sassoon (1832-1867), a Jewish merchant, and his wife, Farha, 'nee' Reuben ('b'. 1828). Rachel's father arrived in England towards the end of 1858 to manage the London branch of the family business, followed a few months later by his wife and their two children. They chose Ashley Park estate in Surrey to be their family home. 
The merchant dynasty of the Sassoons originated in Iraq. The family was often described as 'the Rothschilds of the East' (Jackson, 1); their wealth was derived from trading in cotton, opium, and other goods in China and the Far East. Rachel's mother became absorbed in 'romantic pretensions to culture and gentility' after her husband's death (ibid., 73). A determined matriarch, she had a temper and wit to match, though she was not unknown for her generous, somewhat indulgent gestures. Farha ostracized her younger son Alfred for marrying a non-Jew, the first member of the family to do so. His name was never again mentioned in her presence. 
Rachel Sassoon was small in build, with 'an ivory skin envied by her sallower kinswomen' (Jackson, 74). Gentle and compassionate, she had no time for the hearty young men who sought her company at social gatherings. Instead, she took up unpaid hospital nursing. Despite her mother's threats she continued to visit Alfred and his wife, Theresa Thornycroft, and their growing family. Their younger son, and Rachel's favourite nephew, was the future poet Siegfried Sassoon (1886-1967). 
Approaching thirty, with perhaps a fear of spinsterhood, in 1887 Rachel announced her engagement to the gentile Frederick Arthur Beer (died 1903). Frederick was 'small and dapper', with a gentle smile and 'a brownish beard curling silkily over his cravat' (Jackson, 79). He was the son of Julius Beer who, like the Rothschilds, had come from Frankfurt. Through dealings on the stock exchange in London, Julius had become very wealthy: his son inherited an income of $20,000 a year, as well as ownership of 'The Observer' (which his father had acquired as an outlet for his views on international relations, rather than as a profitable business). The couple married on 4 August 1887 at Chelsea parish church. W. E. Gladstone and his wife were present, and signed the marriage register as witnesses. The Beers settled at 7 Chesterfield Gardens, Mayfair, a house with a fine Adam staircase. Unfortunately, it soon became clear that Frederick Beer was ill: he suffered from 'strange 'headaches' which suddenly made this mild man... irritable or, at times, feverishly gay' (Jackson, 80). Although not then diagnosed, his illness was probably caused by syphilis, his symptoms being those common to the early stages of general paralysis of the insane. Despite Frederick's illness, the splendours of visits to Chesterfield Gardens were much enjoyed by Rachel's nephews, and memorably described by Siegfried Sassoon in 'The Old Century and Seven More Years' (1938). 
Despite her husband's illness, Rachel Beer began to write articles for 'The Observer' and eventually took over as editor. In October 1893 she ambitiously purchased the 'Sunday Times', then an eight-page penny newspaper, for $11,000 and also edited this. Though not considered a brilliant editor, Rachel Beer came to be known in Fleet Street for her 'occasional flair and business-like decisions' (Jackson, 95). She insisted on the need for an objective political approach by the 'Sunday Times' and orchestrated one of the major journalistic scoops of 1898: Major Esterhazy's confession of forgery against Dreyfus. A known Jewish newspaper owner, Rachel Beer bravely endured vilification for her pro-Dreyfus stance. 
Frederick Beer's mental and physical state was still bad, if not deteriorating: he insisted, for example, on having the Beer family crest clipped out on his black poodle's back. Rachel herself was writing book reviews, occasional features, and leaders. The latter she would write in an indecipherable hand and have delivered at the eleventh hour by a footman, to the annoyance of her sub-editors. 
Frederick Beer's death in 1903 left Rachel distraught for months, and eventually led to her own breakdown. Strange leading articles began to appear in 'The Observer' and the 'Sunday Times' on subjects such as the advantages of cannibalism, and her ability to cope apparently collapsed halfway through an editorial for 'The Observer' with a 'continued in the next' (Jackson, 115). In 1904 Rachel Beer was certified and committed to the care of the commissioners of lunacy. Both newspapers were sold by her trustees in the course of 1904. 
Although Rachel Beer gradually recovered her mental health, she continued to need nursing care until the end of her days. She was allowed to buy Chancellor House, an imposing residence in Tunbridge Wells, and lived there with a butler and servants, in addition to her nurses. Although often too ill to receive visitors, she allowed local charities to make use of the house and grounds when needed. She acquired a fine organ and occasionally gave performances for a few friends in her drawing-room. 
Rachel Beer died at Chancellor House, Tunbridge Wells, on 29 April 1927. Her favourite nephew, Siegfried Sassoon, received a legacy of $30,000 from her estate, and in his library at Heytesbury House in Wiltshire later kept a splendid oil painting of her over the fireplace. 


@@@@@


doc= 48272


Carr, Sir (William) Emsley (1867-1941), newspaper proprietor and philanthropist, was born on 1 May 1867 at 9 Hunslet Road, Hunslet, Leeds, Yorkshire, the eldest son of Thomas Hay Carr (1842-1927), a cloth manufacturer, and his wife, Sarah Jane Emsley (died 1905). Educated in his native city, he became a journalist when summoned to Cardiff by his uncle, (Henry) Lascelles Carr (1841-1902), co-founder and first editor-in-chief of the 'Western Mail'. In 1891 a syndicate headed by Lascelles Carr purchased the 'News of the World', an ailing Sunday scandal sheet founded nearly half a century earlier. The new proprietor dispatched his nephew to London as editor. However, Carr's arrival in Fleet Street did not terminate his close connection with the 'Western Mail' and its associate newspapers: he remained their chief political correspondent until well into the 1930s. Business and family links were consolidated when he married Lascelles's daughter, Jenny Lascelles Carr (1879-1942), on 19 June 1895. Not long after this he became deputy chairman of the parent company, Western Mail and Echo Ltd. 
The 'Western Mail''s legal representative in London, George Riddell, became a major shareholder in the 'News of the World', working zealously to boost sales of the new enterprise. Riddell and Carr formed an effective partnership, yet were curiously reticent in acknowledging the scale of their enterprise. Although weekly sales were well over 1 million by the early 1900s, and quadrupled over the next four decades, the 'News of the World' never publicly acknowledged the full extent of its commercial success. Before the First World War Sabbath-day publication was regularly denounced in the pulpit. Even after all but the most fervent evangelist had acknowledged a seven-day hunger for news, the best-selling Sunday newspapers were still frowned upon within polite circles. Unlike Riddell, whose death in 1934 enabled the Carr family to consolidate their control of the publishing company, the editor and eventual chairman and managing director was always sensitive to middle-class opinion. Knighted in 1918 as reward for his wartime charity work supporting Welsh troops, particularly those captured by the enemy, Carr was a pillar of respectability, successfully distancing himself from even the sauciest front page story. In 1938 he was appointed high sheriff of Glamorgan. When in May 1941 he celebrated fifty years as an editor, Carr found himself enthusiastically toasted by the prime minister and warmly congratulated by the king. 
One of the first provincial correspondents at Westminster to gain admittance to the lobby, Carr was a respected pioneer of modern parliamentary reporting, and in 1930-31 he became chairman of the press gallery. He also helped to found the Institute of Journalists, eventually becoming a fellow and in 1932-3 serving as president. Carr took special responsibility within the institute for ensuring that all journalists were adequately provided for in their retirement, and he undertook a similar role in chairing both the Newspaper Press Fund and the Printers Pension Corporation. He was a delegate at the Imperial Press Conference in Canada in 1925, and again five years later in Australia. As a leading figure in the Empire Press Union, Carr also travelled widely across the Indian subcontinent. An inveterate traveller as well as a reporter, the editor vacated his chair to report on the stalemate in France, the surrender of the German fleet at Scapa Flow in 1919, and the subsequent peace conference in Paris. 
As chairman of the Alfred Robbins Lodge, Carr raised large sums of money for the Royal Masonic Hospital Fund, fulfilling a similar role for the Royal Free Hospital, in acknowledgement of which he was made a life governor. His sponsorship of annual athletics events is a lasting reminder that he loved sport almost as much as he loved newspapers. His involvement in athletics, and in particular middle-distance running, extended to the organization of the British games, and the selection and preparation of national teams to compete in both the empire games and the Olympic games. 
From track to links was but a short stride: witness Carr's vice-presidency of the Professional Golfers' Association, one of several honorary posts awarded for his service to the sport. A member of St Andrew's Royal and Ancient, and chairman of Lloyd George's favourite club, Walton Heath, Carr used golf to bring politicians and the press together in convivial surroundings: he promoted the parliamentary golf tournament, and was president of the Newspapers and Advertisers Golfers Society. A scratch player, Carr was as successful on the greens as off them: his happiest tournament win was probably the press gallery's Arnott cup. 
Carr lived only a short distance from the Walton Heath golf course, and he died at his Surrey country residence, Wonford, Walton on the Hill, on 31 July 1941. He was interred at St Peter's, Walton on the Hill, following a funeral at St Dunstan-in-the-West, Fleet Street, London, on 5 August 1941. His wife, Jenny, survived him. Their family comprised two daughters and six sons, of whom the eldest had died in action during the First World War. Their twin fourth and fifth sons, Walter Copley Carr (1908-1944) and Henry Lascelles Carr (1908-1943), followed a similar career path to their father, but service in the RAF prevented an early return to the 'News of the World'. Their deaths left the sixth son, Sir William Emsley Carr (1912-1977), as the family's senior representative on the board of an unusually lucrative newspaper enterprise: his father's sensationalist Sunday broadsheet was to emerge from the Second World War with liquid assets of over $2 million, an unprecedented rate of profitability, and weekly sales of approximately 7.5 million. A man of many talents, Sir Emsley Carr had in the course of half a century quietly created the biggest-selling newspaper in the western world. 


@@@@@


doc= 48273


Carter, Ernestine Marie (1906-1983), museum curator and writer on fashion, was born on 10 October 1906 in Savannah, Georgia, USA, the daughter of Siegfried Fantl. Carter was brought up in Savannah. She graduated from Wellesley College, Massachusetts, in 1927, where, remarkably for the time, she studied modern and contemporary art and design under the tutelage of Alfred Barr. She worked as a curatorial assistant at New York's newly formed Museum of Modern Art and from 1933 to 1937 she was its curator of architecture and industrial art. In 1936 she married the British antiquarian book dealer and bibliographer, John Waynflete Carter (1905-1975), and later took up permanent residence in London. 
During the Second World War she worked on exhibitions for the Ministry of Information, and edited a propaganda book of photographs, some specially commissioned from Lee Miller, 'Grim Glory: Pictures of Britain under Fire' (1941). It was popular enough to go into five printings. Later in the war she worked for the American office of war information in London, 'explaining America to England' (Carter, 62). She worked on the fashion component of the important design exhibition 'Britain can make it', organized by the Council for Industrial Design and held at the Victoria and Albert Museum in London in 1946. From 1946 to 1949 she was fashion editor for 'Harper's Bazaar'. Her first trip to Paris for the magazine was to report on Christian Dior's exhilarating first 'haute couture' fashion show in 1947. Carter's newspaper writing began with a cookery column for 'The Observer' from 1952 to 1954, during which time her lively cookbook 'Flash in the Pan' (1953) was published. In 1955 she began editing the woman's page of the 'Sunday Times', becoming associate editor of the paper in 1968. She was appointed OBE in 1964. She retired in 1972 and wrote discerning, well-illustrated books on fashion history: '20th Century Fashion: a Scrapbook' (1975), 'The Changing World of Fashion' (1977), and 'Magic Names of Fashion' (1980). Her vivid autobiography, 'With Tongue in Chic' (1974), includes much of interest to fashion history. Ernestine Carter died at her home, 113 Dovehouse Street, Chelsea, London, on 1 August 1983. 
Carter wrote lucidly about fashion in its widest sense. 'To me fashion is essentially people... I wrote about them all' (Carter, 179). She communicated the excitement and importance of fashion as it developed through the 1940s and 1950s. Looking back on the late 1940s as 'halcyon years' for couture, she judged the 'unforgettable' and 'voluptuous' new look to be unsurpassed as the most universally becoming and enduring fashion ever devised (ibid., 75-8). It is hard to imagine a more auspicious moment for her to start her career in fashion journalism. She took fashion seriously, a rare approach in post-war Britain, and was irritated by intellectually snobbish dismissal of fashion as frivolous, declaring it was 'surely no more frivolous than architecture, to which it is closely related' (ibid., 181). She interpreted developments in Paris fashion to her British readers, then later played a crucial role in nurturing British designer talent. Carter used her opportunities on the 'Sunday Times' to help modernize a then Conservative newspaper and forcefully to encourage the emergence of London as a major fashion centre in the 1960s. Her insight was to recognize that this new order was symptomatic of major social shifts. Her education and curatorial experience gave her a trained eye; this combined with pithy, intelligent prose, great energy, and uncompromising standards. On the 'Sunday Times' she became an authoritative figure in the fashion world. 
The Museum of Costume at Bath benefits from her foresight, which led to the donation of 2000 fashion photographs from her newspaper, dating from 1958 to 1972, known as the 'Sunday Times' fashion archive. Not surprisingly, Carter enjoyed fine clothes herself. Some are in the museum. Her personal style was distinctively neat and tailored, avoiding extremes of fashion. 


@@@@@


doc= 48275


Gunn, Herbert Smith (1903-1962), newspaper editor, was born on 3 April 1903 at 225 Old Road, West Gravesend, Kent, the younger son of Herbert Gunn, merchant seaman and marine engineer, and his wife, Alice Eliza Smith. Nothing is known about his education. In 1920 Bert Gunn began his training as a reporter on the 'Kent Messenger' but, only twenty-one years old, he headed for the Far East, getting a job as a sub-editor on the 'Straits Times' in Singapore. A year later he returned to England to join the 'Manchester Evening News'. He followed this with sub-editing stints on the London 'Evening News' (1929) and the London 'Evening Standard' (1931). On 12 September 1925 he married Annie Charlotte, known as Ann (1903-1944), daughter of Alexander Thomson, a farmer. The couple had two sons, Thomson William (Thom) Gunn (1929-2004), poet, and Alexander (Ander) Gunn ('b'. 1931), photographer. 
Gunn's abilities soon attracted the attention of Arthur Christiansen, editor of the 'Daily Express', and as a result in 1936 he became its first northern editor in Manchester. He later transferred to London as assistant editor and then between 1943 and 1944 was managing editor of the 'Daily Express'. It was there that he created the headline referring to Hitler as 'It's that man again', which afterwards became the title for Tommy Handley's long-running radio show 'ITMA'. His first marriage having ended in divorce, on 29 January 1944 Gunn married Margaret Olive Melville Edwards ('b'. 1912/13), who was a reporter on the 'Daily Mail'. She was the daughter of James Alexander Melville Brown, a company director, and the divorced wife of Philip Osbert Clifford Edwards. The couple had two sons. 
In 1944 Lord Beaverbrook appointed Gunn editor of the 'Evening Standard' in succession to Michael Foot, but it eventually became apparent there was a fundamental clash between them on editorial strategy. Gunn wanted to edit a popular paper, Beaverbrook wanted it to appeal mainly to the City and West End audiences. Their differences came to a head when, in 1950, with the Labour government returned for a second term, Beaverbrook suggested a malicious diary paragraph about John Strachey, secretary of state for war, indicating that his communist past made his loyalty questionable. Unfortunately Gunn promoted this to a front-page splash which emphasized the scurrility of the piece and led to a further clash with Beaverbook. 
Gunn was also in trouble when a Labour MP said in an article in the trade press that newspapers were paying MPs for information about private meetings of the Labour Party. The committee of privileges investigated the matter and under pressure from the attorney-general Bert Gunn revealed that the MP who wrote the article, Garry Allighan, was himself the source of stories paid for by the 'Evening Standard'. This led to Allighan's enforced resignation from the house. 
In 1952, no longer wishing to continue battling with Beaverbrook, Gunn resigned from the 'Evening Standard' and was quickly recruited by the second Lord Rothermere to join Associated Newspapers. A year later Rothermere appointed him editor of the ailing 'Daily Sketch', and within six years Bert Gunn had doubled its circulation. One of his most significant appointments then was that of David English as features editor. Vere Harmsworth was the managing director of the 'Daily Sketch' at the time, and thus Bert Gunn was instrumental in launching the highly successful friendship and collaboration of David English and Vere Harmsworth who, between them, were eventually to transform the fortunes of Associated Newspapers. 
In December 1959 Bert Gunn was appointed editor of the 'Sunday Dispatch' but when, for commercial reasons, it was merged with the 'Sunday Express' in 1961 he was very upset. By this time his health was failing, and the merger triggered his early resignation from the Associated Newspaper Group in 1962. 
Herbert Gunn was a superb newspaper craftsman whose technical abilities were not always matched by editorial judgement. A newspaperman through and through, held in high regard by his colleagues, he was brilliant at turning a news story into an eye-catching page layout. Though professionally tough, personally Gunn was the kindest of men, giving particular encouragement to the younger members of his staff. Tall, silver-haired, with a prematurely lined face and immaculate clothes, he was more like a visiting diplomat than a newspaperman. He smoked too much, drank too much, slept very little, yet had amazing energy. 
As a one-time president of the Institute of Journalists, Gunn went on record as a staunch upholder of the freedom of the press. He none the less had an uneasy relationship with the Press Council, which criticized him over a number of breaches of good taste and good manners. For example, he ignored a request from Princess Marina to regard the party for the coming of age of her son as a private occasion. As a result, after censure from the Press Council, he had to apologize to both the queen and Princess Marina. However, in every case where he was criticized he published the Press Council findings in a prominent position in the 'Daily Sketch'. 
During his retirement Gunn helped his wife launch a women's magazine, but this folded after very few issues. Theirs was a particularly happy marriage which lasted until his death from cancer on 2 March 1962 at his London home, the Coach House, 32 Somerset Road, Wimbledon. One of the sons from his first marriage was Thom Gunn (1929-2004), the poet. 


@@@@@


doc= 48276


Harris, Benjamin (c.1647-1720), publisher and bookseller, was born in London, the son of William Harris, citizen and barber-surgeon. Apprenticed to a bookseller on 6 April 1663, he gained his freedom from the Stationers' Company on 1 August 1670. His first known publication (with Robert Clavell), in 1673, was of the work of Particular Baptist divine Benjamin Keach, whose religious beliefs he shared. Harris continued to publish Keach's writings together with a medley of religious controversy and potboilers, including an astrological guide by William Lilly and Hannah Wolley's 'The Accomplished Ladies Delight' (1675), a successful cookery book. 
1679 marks the turning point in Harris's career. He was part of a publishing syndicate for the 'Narrative and Impartial Discovery of the Horrid Popish Plot' by William Bedloe, a tract which marks his entry into the religious and political turmoil of the years 1679-81. During that time he published at least a dozen pamphlet titles, including works by John Bunyan as well as ballads, a pack of playing cards depicting the Popish Plot, and anti-popish prints. In July 1679, with characteristic ingenuity and appreciation of the market, Harris was the first to exploit the new press freedom by starting a bi-weekly newspaper, the 'Domestick Intelligence', which he may also have written in collaboration with Nathaniel Crouch and Robert Claypole; his protest in 1681 that 'he was never the author of anything he ever published' can be interpreted as a denial of single authorship made at a time when he was struggling to avoid prison. Although 'published to prevent false reports', the 'Domestick Intelligence' was packed with anti-Catholic venom written in lively prose. Its success brought rivals, most notably Nathaniel Thompson's paper of the same name which began in August and deliberately sought to scoop Harris's readers. 
Harris soon found himself in trouble for publishing a tract, 'The Appeal from the Country to the City', probably written by Charles Blount, which was circulating in London in October 1679. It was remarkable on two counts. First, it contained a vivid depiction of the rape and pillage associated with an imagined Catholic massacre of protestants. As if the prose was not graphic enough, two years later Harris issued 'A Scheme of Popish Cruelties', which included copperplate images closely linked to the 'Appeal's' imagery. Second, the 'Appeal' was unique in its open support for the succession of Charles II's illegitimate son, James Scot, duke of Monmouth, on the grounds that 'he who has the worst title makes the best king' ('Appeal', 25). Throughout the autumn of 1679 Harris reported on Monmouth's exile and in 1681 he was to dedicate a work to Monmouth's son. Harris claimed he had merely republished 'to get money' a tract that had already been running 'up and down the town' ('State trials', 928); but it was he who 'bore all' (Luttrell, 1.36) when the government singled him out for prosecution. The publisher of the original copy has been a matter of dispute. Harris's enemy Nathaniel Thompson is one candidate, especially since his wife was arrested for dispersing the tract; Roger L'Estrange, the former licenser of the press, thought Langley Curtis was responsible; but it may ironically have been Harris himself who introduced the first copies, since customs officials had discovered a box of 'treasonable papers' sent direct to Harris from Flanders. In any case, Harris was brought to trial on 5 February 1680. The prosecuting counsel, James Jeffreys, and the presiding judge, Lord Chief Justice Scroggs, refused to allow Harris to speak in his own defence and made it clear that Harris was regarded by the government as 'factious'. The jury originally returned a verdict that he was guilty only of selling the book, prompting 'a very great and clamorous shout' in what was evidently a packed courtroom, but Scroggs condemned Harris to imprisonment, a promise of good behaviour for three years, and a $500 fine ('State trials', 929, 931). When, a week later, Harris stood in the pillory his friends and wife 'hollowed and whooped and would suffer nothing to be thrown at him' (Luttrell, 1.34); but although he had boasted that 'he had above a thousand persons who would stand by him in whatsoever he did' ('State trials', 926-7) he was unable to pay the fine and languished in prison. His newspaper carried on without him but ceased publication on 16 April, having shortly beforehand published an erroneous report that Lord Chief Justice North had said that the laws against absentees from church should only be enforced against the papists. Crouch tried to continue the paper with a slightly different title, prompting the imprisoned Harris to disclaim in print any responsibility for the new venture. 
Harris petitioned the House of Commons on 19 November 1680 and the Lords on the 24th. Both houses considered his case, the peers debating whether the excessive fine contravened 'Magna Carta', and the Commons resolving on 22 December that king's bench had acted arbitrarily and illegally. Harris was set free (on dubious authority) and immediately published 'The Triumph of Justice over Unjust Judges', a vituperative attack on Scroggs. On 28 December he was again first in the field -- after a proclamation in May had silenced the periodical press -- in resuming his newspaper, with the express hope that 'it may not give offence to any, not in the least intending to meddle with any thing, that may be any ways prejudicial to State-Affairs or any private Persons, but to proceed with all Modesty and Moderation imaginable'. But in January 1681 he changed its title to the 'Protestant (Domestick) Intelligence', largely to distinguish it from the Catholic Nathaniel Thompson's paper, and started another, short-lived, paper, the 'Weekly Discoverer Strip'd Naked', on 16 February 1681. Harris had now become a public butt of satire. A Catholic tract abusing the duke of Monmouth and the earl of Shaftesbury was published with Harris's imprint on it, forcing him to run to the lord mayor to disown the piece. Equally humiliating was the ridicule heaped on him, in a ballad called 'The Protestant Cuckold', for the alleged adultery of his wife, Ruth, with whom he had three children by 1681 but about whom no further details are known. Once parliament had been dissolved, privy council launched an inquiry into why Harris had been released and ordered him back into custody on 11 February 1681. His friendship with the republican Slingsby Bethel can hardly have endeared him to the government, which was also amassing evidence that Harris was one of Shaftesbury's printers. Harris's paper had also become more daring: it was accused in March 1681 of having invented one of the so-called 'instructions' to MPs which Shaftesbury was supposed to have promoted at the general election. The paper ceased publication on 15 April 1681. 
In June 1681, presumably as proof of good behaviour, the imprisoned Harris sent the secretary of state papers 'of a pernicious consequence' ('CSP dom.', '1680-81', 335) which had been sent to him for publication. In September he petitioned the king, protesting that he was 'heartily sorry' for his 'folly', confessing that he could not pay the fine, and that when free he would give the king an account of the 'Appeal' (Muddiman, 'N&Q', 149). Yet it was not until November or December 1682 that he finally recovered his liberty. In March 1683 he registered his 'Domestick Intelligence', to be 'published gratis every Thursday for the promoting of Trade', but no copies appear to have been issued. He was nevertheless back in trouble in August 1683 when he attempted to sell seditious libels at Bristol fair. A warrant was issued for his arrest and although he escaped he was forced to lie low in disguise. He continued to promote the nonconformist cause in print but was increasingly cautious, publishing less critical pieces such as 'Regall Power Asserted agt. Papall and Popular Userpation' and, in May 1684, 'The Pious Politician', a collection of the maxims of 'that incomparable prince' Charles I. Yet, perhaps because of his earlier support for Monmouth, Harris was a figure of suspicion in 1685 when James II came to the throne, and his house was searched. Among the materials seized in November were 'seventy reams of a seditious book entitled 'English Liberties'' ('CSP dom.', '1685', 382), a radical statement of the rights of a freeborn subject written by Henry Care. Although Harris had not published the pamphlets, despite having bought the title in June 1683, and even proved to the Stationers' Company that he was already 'selling them for waste paper' (Myers, 209), the raid was enough to frighten him. He later claimed that his assertion of the laws and liberties of England had won him so many inveterate enemies that 'to save my life and family from ruin, I was compell'd to be an exile from my native country, for above eight years' ('Intelligence, Domestick and Foreign', 1, 14 May 1695). 
Harris went to Boston, Massachusetts, in 1686 where he resumed publishing in 1687 and, continuing a trade he appears to have entered during the succession crisis, set up the London Coffee House. He was accompanied by one of his children, Vavasour. His newspaper experience and his eye for the main chance led him to publish, on 25 September 1690, the first (and last) unlicensed issue of 'Publick Occurrences', which has been hailed as the first American newspaper. Its novelty lay partly in its intended periodical nature -- it was to be 'furnished once a moneth (or if any Glut of Occurrences happen, oftener)'. But in style and content it was also revelatory. The paper promised to cover 'memorable occurents of divine providence', domestic and foreign public affairs so 'that people every where may better understand' them and 'assist their Businesses and Negotiations', and finally to do something 'towards the Curing, or at least Charming of that Spirit of Lying, which prevails amongst us, wherefore nothing shall be entered, but what we have reason to believe is true'. To achieve the latter aim the paper claimed it would 'expose the name' of anyone who maliciously raised a false report. The statement of high ideals was followed by some characteristically lively reports of disasters, a suicide, and fires, but also a racy report that Louis XIV slept with his daughter-in-law and another provocative item about the failure of 'miserable' Indian allies to deliver their promises. The governor and council of Massachusetts believed the paper contained 'reflections of a very high nature; as also sundry doubtful and uncertain reports' and suppressed it and any other unlicensed print. The influential puritan Cotton Mather was suspected as its author, particularly since Harris's partner and printer Richard Pierce was related by marriage to him, but in a private letter Mather disowned any large hand in it, suggesting that 'the Publisher had not one Line of it; only as accidentally meeting him on the high-way, on his Request, I show'd him how to contract & express the Report of the Expedition at Casco & the East'. Indeed Mather claimed the publisher 'pick't up here & there what hee inserted' and that Harris had his information from 'three or four... Ingenious men'. Even so, Mather's support for the publication, which he regarded as 'a very Noble, useful and Laudable Design', was clear and he may have been right that the suppression had been aimed at him as much as at Harris (Paltsis, 85-8). 
Harris's other claim to fame in America was his publication, again in 1690, of the often reprinted 'New England Primer'. While in England, Harris had fused his protestant zeal, propagandizing genius, and an interest in the education of the young with the publication in 1679 of 'The Protestant Tutor'. This has suggested to some that Harris was the author of the Boston publication. As with some of his other works the extent to which Harris was copying rather than innovating is not always clear. Even before Harris had arrived, a 'New England Primer' had been published by John Griffin; but in 1685 Griffin had himself published a 'Protestant Tutor' which lifted its catechism against popery and one other item from Harris's work of that name. 
Harris prospered in Boston and in 1691 he set up a profitable partnership with John Allen, another refugee from London who had previously printed several of Increase Mather's works. In December 1692 the partners won the right to publish the Massachusetts 'Acts and Laws' as printers to the governor, though they lost this the following year. 
Harris is thought to have visited England in January 1688 and again in November 1688, but he did not finally return to London until late in 1694 or early in 1695, perhaps tempted back by the final lapse of the 'Licensing Act'. Although he resumed publishing tracts, including works by Keach, he once more ventured into newspapers. On 14 May 1695 he published the 'Intelligence, Domestick and Foreign', 'to please and divert my older Protestant friends', changing its title in June to the 'Pacquet-Boat from Holland'. But he was arrested the following month 'for printing false news' (Luttrell, 3.497), probably because of a misleading account of the war against France. He had more success in June 1699 when he began the 'London Slip of News' which, after changing its title on the second issue to the 'London Post', continued in a whig vein until 1705. Before its closure Harris used the paper to attack his erstwhile friend John Dunton, who in happier days had described him as 'the most Ingenious and Innocent Companion that I had ever met with' ('Life and Errors', 216-17). Dunton in turn now condemned Harris as a liar: 'his employment, or rather livelihood, is to blast other men's credit and to steal their copies. He is a mere F -- y for slander, falsehood, tricking' (ibid., 466). After another unseemly tangle with the astrologer (and former fellow supporter of Monmouth) John Partridge, whose almanac he pirated, Harris was forced to close his 'thievish paper... for want of receivers' (ibid., 474). The quarrel with Partridge nevertheless rumbled on, for as late as 1713 Partridge observed that 'two or three poor printers and a bookbinder, with honest Ben' would counterfeit his work (Muddiman, 'King's Journalist', 255). As this suggests, Harris's fortunes were, and had been since the 1690s, in decline. Indeed, he spent his last years as a quack seller of Angelical Pills and other patent medicines. 
Aside from the two sons, Vavasour and Benjamin, who were apprenticed to their father, it is possible that the publisher John Harris who began entering titles in 1685, and Sarah Harris who issued Benjamin's titles in 1688-90, were also relatives. Harris died intestate, probably shortly before July 1720 when an administration order was granted to Anne, his second wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 48277


Bartlett, Abraham Dee (1812-1897), taxidermist and zoo superintendent, was born in London on 27 October 1812, second son of John Bartlett, hairdresser and brush maker, and Jane Dunster. As a boy he was allowed to play in the beast room of the Royal Menagerie, Exeter 'Change, London, run by Edward Cross, his father's friend. His fondness for living animals led to an interest in taxidermy that was encouraged by Cross. At fourteen he was apprenticed to his father at his premises at 83 Drury Lane, London. He detested the hairdressing trade, and about 1834 became a taxidermist, trading at Little Russell Street, Covent Garden. He married Lydia Norvall, with whom he had four daughters, Clara ('b'. 1840), Emma ('b'. 'c'.1844), Julia ('b'. 'c'.1848), and Ellen ('b'. 'c'.1851), and two sons, Edward (1844-1908) and Clarence ('c'.1848-1903). His business proved successful, which permitted a move to a larger house in Camden Town (he owned three residences at his death). 
Bartlett worked for leading naturalists, the British Museum, the Zoological Society of London (through the patronage of its secretary, David Mitchell), and the royal family; Queen Victoria gave him a gold watch for caring for her pet birds. His taxidermy display, including a reconstruction of the dodo, at the Great Exhibition of 1851 earned him a gold medal and an appointment as naturalist to the new Crystal Palace Company in 1852. He acted as London agent for the Calcutta-based curator Edward Blyth, and occasionally handled the latter's dealings in live animals with British purchasers. His association with the Zoological Society and familiarity with wild animals led to his being offered the superintendency of the zoological gardens in Regent's Park, London, in 1859, upon the death of John Thompson. He took up residence at the zoo and remained in post there until his death. 
To the public, Bartlett 'was' the zoo, a familiar figure in his long coat and top hat. Among notable zoo events with which he was associated was the controversial sale of the famous elephant Jumbo to P. T. Barnum. As a child he had seen an elephant run amok at the Exeter 'Change menagerie, and knew Jumbo had become too dangerous to remain in the zoo. He became an authority on the captive care of wild animals, and published nearly sixty papers and notes on the subject in the 'Proceedings of the Zoological Society' and other journals. Among many honours he was awarded a silver medal by the Zoological Society in 1872, and made an associate of the Linnean Society in 1879. 
Bartlett died at the zoological gardens on 7 May 1897, after a lingering illness. He was buried at St James's cemetery, Highgate, Middlesex, on 13 May. His younger son, Clarence, succeeded him in the post of superintendent of the zoo (having previously been assistant superintendent for twenty-four years), remaining there until a month before his death in 1903. Bartlett's elder son, Edward, a taxidermist, travelled as an animal collector to Peru. He became curator of the Maidstone Museum and later of Raja Brooke's museum, Kuching (Sarawak, Malaysia), and returned to England shortly before his father's death. 


@@@@@


doc= 48278


Dyer, Elinor Mary Brent- (1894-1969), children's writer, was born on 6 April 1894 at 52 Winchester Street, South Shields, co. Durham, the name on her birth certificate being Gladys Eleanor May Dyer. The elder of the two children of Charles Morris Brent Dyer (1856-1911), a surveyor at Lloyds, and his second wife, Eleanor Watson, 'nee' Rutherford (1869-1957), she was throughout her life secretive about her background, which was strikingly different from the backgrounds of her fictional heroines. Her childhood home was without garden or inside sanitation, and her parents had separated when she was three -- a fact that her mother strove to conceal, representing herself as a widow. She was educated privately at a small local school (1900-12), later attending the City of Leeds Teacher Training College (1915-17). She then worked in a variety of state and private schools; taught, at different times, English, history, Latin, and class-singing, coached hockey and folk-dancing, and ran a Girl Guide company. She also spent a brief period (late 1920s) studying music with Edgar Bainton at the Newcastle Conservatoire. Finally, after five years as a family governess, she founded and ran her own school, the Margaret Roper School (1938-48) in Hereford, where she had settled in 1933. 
Despite the many demands on her time, Brent-Dyer published a total of 101 books. Her first, 'Gerry Goes to School', was published in 1922, and her output during the ensuing forty-eight years included, in addition to school stories, family, historical, Girl Guide, adventure, and animal stories, a cookery book, and four educational readers. She also wrote plays (several were performed at local theatres), short stories, numerous unpublished poems, and a romantic novel, 'Jean of Storms'. (This story, originally serialized during 1930 in the 'Shields Gazette' and rediscovered by chance sixty-five years later, was published in book form in 1996.) 
Unquestionably, though, it is Brent-Dyer's 'Chalet School' series of fifty-nine books, with numerous related titles, which has kept her name alive. Not only have the stories been continuously in print since the first book, 'The School at the Chalet', appeared in 1925, but in the late 1990s nearly 100,000 'Chalet School' paperbacks were still being sold each year. The 1990s also saw the 'Chalet School' feature in broadcasts and university theses, and the growth of fan clubs numbering over 1000 members in fifteen different countries. The continuing popularity of these books about the fictional Chalet School, with its trilingual, international, and interdenominational traditions, may owe something to the attractively described settings (Austria, Guernsey, Herefordshire, Wales, Switzerland), but is due mainly to the author's having created, early in the series, a cast of recognizable characters, who reappear in book after book and gradually achieve a kind of reality for the reader, foremost among them being Joey Bettany/Maynard of the unruly black hair. Joey, when portrayed as an impulsive schoolgirl, frequently in trouble and with plenty of faults to balance her many talents, is convincingly drawn; and, although she later becomes far less credible, the comments expressed over the years in fan mail suggest that interest in Joey has undoubtedly helped the 'Chalet School' to outlive other school stories. 
As was common in the genre, the books frequently emphasized religious values, but they are unusual in portraying Roman Catholic girls associating on equal terms with protestants. Brent-Dyer was herself brought up a practising Anglican but converted to Roman Catholicism in 1930, and her stories demonstrate a remarkably ecumenical attitude for the period. 
A large, untidy, and heavy-featured woman, described by a former pupil as 'a very eccentric and different sort of person', Brent-Dyer appears to have aroused widely varying reactions in different people. One found her 'occasionally tiresome and exhausting'. Another, 'a deeply kind and generous woman -- surprisingly understanding'. All seem agreed that her 'imagination and vitality were amazing'. 
Brent-Dyer's final years were spent at 56 Woodlands Road, Redhill, Surrey, where she moved in 1964 to share a house with friends, Phyllis and Sydney Matthewman. Here she died peacefully in her sleep on 20 September 1969. Her grave in Redstone Hill cemetery was marked with a headstone specially commissioned by 'Chalet School' fans during the 1994 celebrations of her centenary, which also saw commemorative plaques erected in South Shields, Hereford, and the Tyrolean village of Pertisau am Achensee, where Brent-Dyer had spent the holiday that inspired her 'Chalet School' series. 


@@@@@


doc= 48279


Antoninus Pius (AD 86-161), Roman emperor, was born Titus Aurelius Fulvus Boionius Arrius Antoninus at Lanuvium, near Rome, on 19 September AD 86, the only known child of Titus Aurelius Fulvus and Arria Fadilla. He was educated at home and about 110 married Annia Galeria Faustina (died 140), daughter of Marcus Annius Verus and Rupilia Faustina. There were two sons of the marriage, who both died young, and two daughters; the younger married the emperor Marcus Aurelius. After his wife's death he took one of her freedwomen, Galeria Lysistrate, as a concubine. Antoninus was brought up at Lorium, near Rome. He served as quaestor, praetor, consul (120), and proconsul of Asia (probably in 134-5); he was also one of the four consulars appointed by Hadrian to administer justice in Italy. 
Antoninus was chosen by Hadrian as his successor on 24 January 138, following the death of Ceionius Commodus, the first choice. He was adopted by Hadrian on 25 February, becoming (Imperator) Titus Aelius Aurelius (Caesar) Antoninus, and in turn he adopted Marcus Aurelius and Lucius Commodus, son of Ceionius. Antoninus succeeded on 10 July 138, becoming (Imperator Caesar) Titus Aelius Hadrianus Antoninus (Augustus) Pius. 
Antoninus was an amiable and wealthy man, and probably distantly related to Hadrian by marriage. Most significantly he was the uncle-in-law of Marcus Aurelius (died 180), generally believed to be Hadrian's choice for the succession but, as yet, too young. Antoninus was probably chosen by Hadrian from among the possible candidates partly because he was a man of peace, having no military experience, and was therefore likely to follow Hadrian's policy of consolidating rather than expanding the frontiers of the empire. 
In fact, Antoninus almost immediately reversed Hadrian's policy, ordering an advance in Britain which led to the abandonment of Hadrian's Wall, the reoccupation of southern Scotland, and the construction of a new wall, known as the Antonine Wall. This is recorded by his biographer: 'he conquered the Britons through the governor Lollius Urbicus and after driving back the barbarians built a new wall of turf' (Magie, v.4). A passage in Pausanias may hint at the pretext for the invasion: 'Antoninus never willingly made war, but... he deprived the Brigantes in Britain of most of their territory because they too had taken up arms and invaded the Genunian district, the people of which are subject to Rome' (Pausanias, 8.43.3-4). 
An inscription from Corbridge, Northumberland (Collingwood and Wright, RIB 1147), records building there in 139, suggesting that the decision to move north came within months of Antoninus's accession. At the successful conclusion of the campaign Antoninus took the title (in its strictly military sense) of 'imperator', the only time he was to take it during his reign in spite of advancing the frontier in Germany, fighting a serious war in Africa, and dealing with a disturbance in Dacia. This suggests that the advance in Britain had a special significance for the emperor. Fronto records that 'although he committed the conduct of the campaign to others while remaining in the palace in Rome, yet like the helmsman at the tiller of a warship, the glory of the whole navigation and voyage belongs to him' ('Panegyric to Constantius', 14, 1). 
Not all had welcomed Antoninus's accession and others felt that they had a better claim to the succession. The reoccupation of southern Scotland may have been undertaken in order to provide Antoninus with a military triumph to secure his position on the throne. The Antonine Wall, 40 Roman miles long, was constructed across central Scotland, utilizing the Forth-Clyde isthmus. It consisted of a rampart of turf or clay, some 10-13 feet high, placed on a stone base about 14 feet wide and probably topped by a timber breastwork. In front lay a wide and deep ditch. The material from the ditch was tipped out onto the north side to form an outer mound. The original plan appears to have been for six forts 6-8 miles apart, connected by a road, with fortlets at mile intervals in between. This was modified during building work and at least ten more forts were added. 
A lost inscription from Hadrian's Wall dating to 158 (Collingwood and Wright, RIB 1389) suggests a return to that frontier, and this may be supported by a break in occupation of the Antonine Wall and rebuilding at other forts (Collingwood and Wright, RIB 2110, 283). This episode is not clearly understood but appears to be short-lived for the Antonine Wall continued in occupation until after the death of Antoninus. 
Antoninus reversed his predecessor's poor relations with the senate. His government was characterized by the long tenures of its members, a prudent fiscal policy, and improvements in the law. The forward movement in Britain in the early years of his reign was followed by the advance of the frontier in Germany some time during the second half of the reign. Raiding in north Africa grew into general revolt in the late 140s, and was succeeded by further revolts in Upper Egypt and Dacia (on the lower Danube), and disturbances among the tribes on the eastern frontier, while relations with Parthia deteriorated towards the end of the reign. Antoninus dealt energetically with all these problems, but left a difficult legacy to his successors on the eastern frontier. 
Antoninus Pius was the longest-reigning emperor since Augustus. He died on 7 March 161 at Lorium. He was presumably cremated on the Campus Martius in Rome, where a column was subsequently erected to his memory by his two successors. His ashes were buried in the Mausoleum of Hadrian in Rome (now Castel Sant'Angelo). He was succeeded by his adopted sons Marcus Aurelius and Lucius Commodus (renamed Lucius Verus), as joint and equal emperors. 


@@@@@


doc= 48280


Bacheler, Daniel (bap. 1572, d. 1619), lutenist and composer, was baptized on 16 March 1572 at Aston Clinton, Buckinghamshire, the fifth of the ten children of Richard Bacheler (1545-1583) and his wife, Elizabeth Cardell. On 13 November 1579 he was apprenticed to his mother's brother Thomas Cardell, a lutenist and dancing-master to Queen Elizabeth, with whom he went to live in King's Street in the parish of St Margaret's, Westminster. In June 1586 his apprenticeship was signed over to Sir Francis Walsingham, principal secretary of state. 
For the Walsingham family Bacheler composed several pieces for the broken consort, the ultra-modern music for mixed instruments of which he was one of the originators. Eight of these have survived, one dated as early as 1588, when he would have been only sixteen; three of the Walsingham consort books, thought to be in his hand, are in Hull University Library. In Thomas Lant's illustration of the funeral procession of Walsingham's son-in-law Sir Philip Sidney, Bacheler is depicted sitting on Sidney's war-horse. After Walsingham's death in 1590 he joined the household of Robert Devereux, second earl of Essex, on his marriage to the widowed Frances Sidney. There he was paid $7 10's'. a quarter and set to music Essex's poem 'To Plead my Faith'. This is his only surviving song. In August 1599 Bacheler was entrusted with letters from Queen Elizabeth to the earl, who was then fighting in Ireland. 
When Lady Essex, by this time married to her third husband, the earl of Clanricarde, was invited to the court of Anne of Denmark, consort of James I, Bacheler accompanied her. Coming to the notice of the queen, in 1603 he was appointed the highest paid groom of her privy chamber, receiving $160 a year. Further rewards followed in return for such services as overseeing the maintenance of musical instruments at court and acting as a secretary, as when in 1606 he wrote on his mistress's behalf to the earl of Salisbury, thanking him for the present of a cup. In May 1604 Queen Anne granted to him and William Gomeldon 'a chest of arrows cast up as a wreck' in her manor of Portland ('CSP dom.', 107); later he received the manor of Walton-cum-Trimley in Suffolk. In February 1607 he was granted a coat of arms bearing three dragons' heads, the dragon being the symbol of Denmark. 
In his years at court Bacheler composed at least fifty pieces for the lute, the best known being 'Mounsiers Almaine'. While his earlier lute music exhibits a traditional style, with a complex contrapuntal structure and much use of imitation, later pieces found in Lord Herbert of Cherbury's lute book (Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge) reveal that he developed a simpler, chordal style. Throughout, the complexity and sheer technical difficulty of his music point to a superlative lutenist and a composer of enormous talent, second only to the great John Dowland, whose son Robert described Bacheler as 'right perfect'. 
No record of a marriage has been found, but Cecily Bacheler of Twickenham, conveniently near Hampton Court, who died in 1610, was probably Bacheler's wife. In 1617 he witnessed the will of his uncle Thomas Cardell, who left him his chain of gold, but Bacheler died first, possibly of smallpox, which rampaged through the court in the winter of 1618-19. He was buried on 29 January 1619 in St Margaret's churchyard, Lee, Kent. He died intestate and without widow or children, and his brothers William and John disputed with his nephew Samuel over his considerable property. 


@@@@@


doc= 48281


Claudius (10 BC-AD 54), Roman emperor, was born at Lugdunum (Lyons) on 1 August 10 BC. His father was Nero Claudius Drusus, brother of the emperor Tiberius, and at the time governor of Gaul; his mother was Antonia, the daughter of Marcus Antonius and Octavia, the sister of the emperor Augustus. Despite this impeccable pedigree, Claudius did not advance to the offices that would have been normal for a person destined by birth for an important public career. According to Tacitus (AD 56-113) this was because he was largely blocked from such distinctions by Tiberius, who was emperor from AD 14 to AD 37, due to his 'weak-mindedness' (Tacitus, 6.46). In fact, encouraged by the great Roman historian Livy ('c'.64 BC-AD 12), he became a very considerable scholar, writing works on the Etruscans and the Carthaginians, on Augustus's principate, and an autobiography; none survives, but their accomplishment points to an active and focused mind, and one well versed in Greek, the language in which he wrote. His reputation as a scholar proved sufficiently durable for Robert Graves to publish his purported autobiography, 'I, Claudius' and 'Claudius the God', in 1934. Claudius did suffer, however, from severe physical disabilities, one likely reason for his being debarred from significant early office. Although well built, he dragged his right leg, spoke in a stammering voice that was barely comprehensible, being 'raucous and throaty', and when angry 'would foam at the mouth and trickle at the nose'. His laughter was 'unseemly', and his head and hands shook, all features which modern scholarship tends to interpret as signs of the condition of cerebral palsy. However, Suetonius ('c'.AD 69-140) does note that, while he was emperor, his health was excellent except for attacks of stomach pains that may have been heartburn; indeed, he had a particular interest in medicine, and took a favourite doctor from Cos, Gaius Stertinius Xenophon, on his journey to Britain in AD 43 (Suetonius, 31). 
With the succession of his nephew Gaius (Caligula) in AD 37, Claudius's hopes of political advancement took a brief upturn. He held the consulship, as Gaius's colleague, from 1 July to 31 August 37, giving him his first taste of power. He several times presided at public shows in lieu of Gaius, bringing him acknowledgement from the people, who cried 'success to the emperor's uncle'. Even so, he was continually insulted, not least because he was straitened financially, having only a comparatively modest inheritance. When he was obliged to become part of the priesthood of Gaius in AD 40, involving the payment of a huge sum of money, he had to borrow from the public treasury; when he could not meet his debts, his property was put up for sale to make up the deficiency. Humiliation and contempt were in fact constant companions in Claudius's life under Gaius, not least at the instigation of the emperor himself. Indeed, Gaius became ever more loathed among the political classes, whether for his autocratic manner, his swingeing taxes, or his lack of military achievement. His near-inevitable assassination came on 24 January AD 41, by officers of the praetorian guard. It took place as he passed along a passage out of the theatre on the Palatine on his way to the palace. According to the sources, Claudius, the 49-year old scholar, apparently fearful of his own life, hid in the palace on a balcony behind some curtains; a soldier, seeing his protruding feet, hauled him out and, in Suetonius's words, 'when Claudius fell at his feet in terror, he hailed him as emperor'. Claudius was then taken to the fort of the praetorian guard and, while the senate argued about whether to restore the republic, stayed there overnight and managed to secure, partly through bribery, the support of the guard. Although the senate initially declared Claudius a 'public enemy', a month later he could enter the building, albeit with bodyguards, and be confirmed as emperor. 
Although Suetonius describes Claudius's elevation as 'a freak of fortune', modern historical evaluation of the evidence suggests a highly discreet behind-the-scenes involvement with Gaius's assassination, and a prior striking of deals with those who thought that they had something to lose by the restoration of the republic. Likewise, given the nature of his accession and the lack of any sort of military achievement, he would have been well aware of the need for some sort of triumph. It was a point brought home by a brief and unsuccessful revolt against him in Dalmatia the following year. Territorial acquisition must have seemed the obvious course. Here he was able to claim much of the credit for the creation of two new provinces in north Africa, Mauretania Caesariensis and Mauretania Tingitana. Although properly the result of Gaius's order to assassinate the Moorish ruler, Ptolemy, in AD 40, it was mainly Claudius's generals who suppressed the ensuing uprisings, and brought about order. Both he and the commander, Marcus Crassus Frugi, received triumphal insignia from the senate. 
It was Claudius's conquest of Britain that was, however, to be his greatest achievement. It was an obvious target. Not only would he be following in the footsteps of the deified Julius Caesar -- and would hope to surpass him by creating a permanently held province -- but Britain was known to export grain, cattle, gold, silver, iron, hides, slaves, and hunting dogs. This would help to refill a treasury depleted by Gaius's extravagant spending, but would also provide booty for his soldiers. Moreover, occupation of Britain would allow a further geographical separation of the legions; there was by now a concentration of eight along the Rhine-Danube frontier, and the revolt of AD 41 was a reminder of the dangers posed by disaffected commanders. The decision to launch the conquest, already contemplated by Gaius, cannot have been difficult. 
Britain at that time was ruled by a series of tribal leaders. The more advanced issued coins, mostly bearing their name, but lived in settlements of no architectural pretension, although they were often provided with quite elaborate defences of earthen banks and ditches. Until his death about AD 40, the leading figure was Cunobelinus (Shakespeare's Cymbeline), ruler of the Catuvellauni of what is now Hertfordshire. During his long reign of some forty years, he instigated a considerable expansion of Catuvellaunian power into adjoining regions. His original base may have been at Verulamium (St Albans), but he later set up a new capital at Camulodunum (Colchester), already a royal seat of the Trinovantes. Pro-Roman in stance, Cunobelinus posed no threat to the adjacent province of Gaul; however, when his two sons, Caratacus and Togodumnus, succeeded him, matters altered, for they were both warlike and fiercely opposed to Rome. The territory of the Atrebates (modern Hampshire) was probably overrun by one or the other of them, and the ruler, Verica, expelled. He fled to Rome, and appealed to Claudius for intervention. It provided a perfect justification for the conquest. 
Preparations for the invasion were thorough. Not the least was the organization of the commissariat by the procurator of northern Gaul, Graecinius Laco, who was subsequently awarded the privilege of having a statue of himself erected in Rome for his work. The Britons had the reputation of being doughty fighters, and the channel, known as the Ocean, was so fearsome a barrier that initially the troops refused to embark. Eventually, however, probably in May or June AD 43, some 40,000 soldiers set sail from Gesoriacum (Boulogne). In command was Aulus Plautius, a distinguished man who came from the Balkan province of Pannonia, where he had been governor. He brought with him the ninth legion (IX Hispana) while three other legions, the II Augusta, XIV Gemina, and XX Valeria, were summoned from the Rhine; auxiliary troops were also drafted in. It was a formidable force, a comment both on the perceived strength of the opposition and on Claudius's manifest intention to succeed. 
Plautius had divided his invasion fleet into three. Where they landed is not known for certain, but Rutupiae (Richborough, in east Kent) is a strong probability on archaeological grounds, while another detachment may have headed for Noviomagus (Chichester) in a part of Verica's former kingdom. Initial skirmishes were followed by a great battle, which took place over two days (an unusual feature in antiquity), very likely at the River Medway. The fighting then moved on to the Thames, where the Britons were eventually ousted and Togodumnus was killed. The Romans now halted their advance, and sent for Claudius, as he had instructed. When word reached Rome, Claudius immediately began the arduous journey by sea to Massalia (Marseilles) and overland to Gesoriacum. With him were a considerable number of senior senators, doubtless brought to stop them from plotting in Rome, and also some elephants, which were commonly used in the Hellenistic world to frighten the enemy. The ancient sources disagree on Claudius's military achievements in Britain; but they were very likely real, and the Roman name for Chelmsford, Caesaromagus, may reflect his presence at a significant battle. Before long, he and the army had reached Camulodunum and captured it. When later the storming and sacking of a town, and the surrender of the British kings, was re-enacted in the Campus Martius in Rome, it was almost certainly the taking of Camulodunum that was being portrayed. 
Claudius is said to have stayed only sixteen days in Britain, and by early in AD 44, after some six months away, he was back in Rome. There he received a triumph (the first for a 'princeps' or emperor since 29 BC), and the building of two celebratory arches was voted by the senate: one in Rome and the other in Gaul, where he had embarked. The triumphal arch in Rome was dedicated in AD 51, and the surviving part of the inscription records that it was put up 'by the Roman Senate and People because he [Claudius] had received the surrender of eleven British Kings, defeated without loss, and for the first time had brought barbarian peoples from beyond the Ocean under Roman rule' ('Inscriptiones', 6, no. 920). A coin was struck, showing an equestrian statue of Claudius on top of an arch, inscribed DEBRITANN[IS], thus disseminating the news of the conquest throughout the empire; and a triumphal arch was erected by the citizens of Cyzicus and a relief, with Claudius subduing Britannia, at Aphrodisias. Both were places in far-off Asia Minor: it was a famous victory. 
Meanwhile, the Roman army pressed on in Britain. By AD 47, when Aulus Plautius returned to Rome to the great honour of an ovation, all of the territory as far as the road known as the Fosse Way (from Exeter to Lincoln) had been taken. Under the new governor, Ostorius Scapula, significant advances were made into eastern Wales and Cheshire. The Mendip lead and silver mines were in production by AD 49, and a network of forts and roads established; while Camulodunum, initially a legionary fortress, was in the same year converted into a 'colonia' for retired legionaries. In AD 51, Caratacus himself was finally captured and taken to Rome. The new province was thus firmly established, and Claudius's own position as emperor was likewise now secure. 
Claudius never again left Italy, despite the annexation of other territory in the Balkans (the province of Noricum) and Lycia, in south-west Asia Minor. He was responsible for great public works, like the harbour at Ostia and aqueducts serving Rome; and he also had an active private life. He was married four times: to Plautia Urgulanilla (AD 'c'.10); to Aelia Paetina (in AD 28 or before); to Valeria Messal(l)ina (AD 'c'.38); and finally to Julia Agrippina (AD 49), who survived him. He died in Rome on 13 October AD 54, it is said by poison, to be succeeded by Nero. He may have been buried in the Mausoleum of Augustus, in the Campus Martius in Rome, but this is unproven. 
Claudius's intervention in British affairs was, literally, to change the face of the country. Although he was not responsible for the conquest of the whole province, which took decades, many of today's lowland towns and cities (not least London) originated during his principate, just as the essentials of the road network are owed to Roman engineers. Claudius, who gained so much from the conquest, would surely have taken a personal interest in these matters; it was an epoch which properly marks the beginning of British history. 


@@@@@


doc= 48282


Cogidubnus (fl. c.AD 47-70), king in Britain, is mentioned only once in Roman literature, in the 'Agricola' of Tacitus, when he is reported to have been assigned certain tribes and to have remained loyal to Rome down to the memory of the historian. The date at which the king was given these responsibilities in the newly emergent province of Britain is not closely defined, but it probably fell within the governorship of Ostorius Scapula (AD 47-52). The location of Cogidubnus's kingdom is also uncertain, but a vital clue was provided by an inscription found at Chichester (Noviomagus) in 1723. This is a dedication for a temple to the gods Neptune and Minerva, set up on the authority of Cogidubnus. Noviomagus was thus a major centre in his realm, though not necessarily the only one. The area to the north was occupied by the tribe of the Atrebates, the heart of the kingdom of Verica who fled to the Roman empire early in the reign of Claudius ('c'.AD 41-2). It is a plausible suggestion that Verica's kingdom was handed over to the pro-Roman Cogidubnus after the Roman conquest, along with the territories of other neighbouring peoples. The (translated) title of Cogidubnus on the Chichester inscription accords well with his honoured status: 'great king in Britain'. The text also indicates that the king had been invested with full Roman citizenship by Claudius and had taken the emperor's praenomen and nomen, Tiberius Claudius. The precise legal position of Cogidubnus has been much discussed. The only evidence is contained in the wording of the Chichester stone, the text of which is incomplete. The king's status was earlier interpreted as 'rex et legatus Augusti in' 'Britannia' ('king and imperial legate in Britain'). Such a combination of roles is without parallel and long seemed anomalous. A revised reading of the text gives the title 'rex magnus in' 'Britannia' ('great king in Britain') and this is to be preferred. 
The origins of Cogidubnus are unknown. His name is not certainly established: the first two letters of his cognomen on the Chichester inscription are lost, and Togidubnus appears to have as strong a claim as any other. Tacitus called him Cogidumnus. He may have been a prince of the Atrebatic house who fled to the Roman world before the invasion of AD 43 and been subsequently given enhanced powers in the early years of occupation. Equally, he may never have left the island, but provided useful services to the occupying power, including bases for westward campaigns. The length of his reign is also undefined. Tacitus's comment that he continued his loyalty to Rome 'down to our memory' should mean that he remained in power until the 70s, Tacitus having been born 'c'.AD 56. This would allow Cogidubnus a reign of twenty to twenty-five years. But this raises a problem. The employment of allied native rulers was favoured by Claudius but phased out by his successor Nero. The survival of a British king from the reign of Claudius to that of Vespasian would be an extreme exception, though not wholly beyond possibility. 
The archaeological setting of the realm of Cogidubnus provides some evidence for the influence of the king on the early Romanization of southern Britain. Aside from the temple of Neptune and Minerva mentioned on the Chichester stone, Chichester has produced the base of a statue to Nero, an unusually early monument for the British province. The town of Calleva (Silchester) among the Atrebates also reveals early urban development along Roman lines, with an early forum and amphitheatre. Most impressive of all is the luxurious residence erected at Fishbourne, about a mile west of Chichester. The first phase of this palatial dwelling dates to the reign of Nero, 'c'.AD 55-60. The building was never completed and its demolished remains were later covered by an immense palace arranged around a series of courtyards and light-wells, the whole complex covering some 6 acres. This went up about AD 75. Although the Neronian residence could have been planned for Cogidubnus, the later palace seems rather too late for him. It might have been built for his unknown successor, grown rich on the revenues and tolls amassed by the native kingdom. 
Native rulers contributed much to the growth and stability of the Roman provinces. Relatively few such kings are attested in the western provinces. Although little is known about him for certain, Cogidubnus was one of the more successful and effective kings in Roman service. The rapid Roman conquest and occupation of southern Britain owed a great deal to his steadfast loyalty. 


@@@@@


doc= 48284


Constantius I (250?-306), Roman emperor, was born in the Balkan province of Illyricum on 31 March, probably in 250. It is alleged that he was related to the emperor Claudius Gothicus (Claudius II) ('r'. 268-70), though this may be a later invention to enhance the imperial family's antecedents. His parentage is unknown but the subsequent use of names in the family suggest that his father may have been a Flavius Delmatius and his mother possibly Julia Constantia. His nickname Chlorus ('the Pale') is not recorded before the sixth century but is likely to be a contemporary reference to his personal appearance. He embarked on a military career the nature of which suggests that he had powerful patronage, serving successively as a 'protector' (that is, a member of the immediate military entourage of the emperor, probably Aurelian), unit commander, and a governor of the Adriatic province of Dalmatia, probably in 284 or 285. Less reliable sources suggest that he served as a general under the emperor Probus ('r'. 276-82). His military ability drew him to the attention of the joint emperors Diocletian and Maximian and he served as praetorian prefect to Maximian from 288 to 293, presumably campaigning in northern Gaul where a peasants' revolt had erupted. 
In 293 new constitutional arrangements were implemented by which the emperors made preparation for their planned eventual retirement by creating two designated successors; Constantius was promoted to imperial rank as Caesar and heir apparent to the western ruler, Maximian. His immediate task was to recover parts of Gaul and Britain which had been wrested from imperial control by the usurper Carausius ('r'. 'c'.286-293). An attempt to recover Britain by Maximian had failed and, as a consequence, hostile forces were well established on the continental mainland. Gesoriacum (Boulogne), the principal stronghold of Carausius in Gaul, was besieged. Denied relief by a fleet from Britain by a mole which blocked access to the River Liane, the city fell. Carausius was assassinated by Allectus, his principal minister, who succeeded him and maintained hostilities. Following further campaigning, Gaul was cleared of hostile garrisons. In 296 an invasion force comprising two separate armies descended on southern Britain. One army, led by the praetorian prefect Asclepiodotus, landed in the area of modern Hampshire and defeated the army led by Allectus in person. The usurper fell in the conflict. The other force, led by Constantius, failed to make a landfall owing to adverse weather conditions, being delayed by contrary winds and fog and only arriving, via the Thames, in time to prevent the looting of London by fleeing remnants of the usurper's forces. None the less, a triumphant entry into London, the provincial capital, is recorded both by contemporary historians and by commemorative medals struck for issue to participants in the campaign. A copy now in the British Museum of a medal found at Arras in northern France bears depictions of Constantius and of his rescue of London. After the recovery of the island, widespread administrative changes were introduced which were probably overseen by the Caesar. Later events suggest that, possibly after an initially poor reception, Constantius's conduct immediately after the suppression of the revolt gave him a degree of popular support from the people of Britain which was reflected in the reign of Constantine. 
Marriage, or a less formal liaison, with Flavia Julia Helena produced one son, later to be the emperor Constantine I (the Great). On elevation to imperial rank, Constantius divorced Helena and entered a dynastic marriage with Theodora, the stepdaughter of the emperor Maximian, with whom he had six children. Helena, later converted to Christianity by her son, embarked on a life of pilgrimage and church building; she was later canonized. Enmity between the two branches of Constantius's family culminated in the massacre of Theodora's kin following the death of Constantine the Great in 337. 
After the campaign in Britain, Constantius was occupied for four years in warfare on the Rhine frontier. In the persecution of Christianity which was inaugurated by Diocletian and Maximian in 303, Constantius is credited with not having implemented the full rigour of the law in territory under his control. The story may owe more to the subsequent career of Constantine than to a coherent administrative decision by Constantius prompted by religious sympathy. 
In May 305 the emperors Diocletian and Maximian retired from office, handing the succession to Constantius in the west and Galerius in the east. Shortly after his accession events in Britain needed imperial intervention. A campaign in northern Britain was called for against the Picts, a generic name for the tribes of the highlands of Scotland. According to contemporary sources, possibly echoing accounts of campaigns in the region conducted in the first century AD by the governor Gnaeus Julius Agricola and by the emperor Septimius Severus in the first decade of the third century, Constantius is credited with having penetrated to the extreme north of Scotland. Victory was achieved in 305 since in that year Constantius took the additional names Britannicus Maximus for the second time, the first having been after the defeat of Allectus. 
Constantius died at Eburacum (York) on 25 July 306, sufficiently long after the assumption of Britannicus Maximus to suggest that his last illness was prolonged and prevented him from returning to London, much less to the imperial capital at Trier. Constitutional arrangements, made at the resignation of Diocletian and Maximian, designated Severus II as successor to Constantius, but the presence of Constantine with his father in Britain ensured, probably with paternal connivance, that Constantine should be proclaimed emperor on the death of his father. Based on the power of the army of Britain, Constantine forced his constitutional recognition on the legitimate emperors, eventually achieving sole imperial power in 324. 


@@@@@


doc= 48285


Constantine I (272/3-337), Roman emperor, was born at Naissus (modern Nis in Serbia) on 22 February 272 or 273. The year of his birth remains uncertain for lack of epigraphic evidence and calculations of the date are based on passing references in contemporary, or near contemporary, writers. These vary widely, suggesting that his age at death in 337 was between sixty and sixty-five years. A study of his career points to the latter age as best fitting the known facts about his various military appointments before his elevation to the throne. It has been noted that Constantine obscured his real age in order to dissociate himself, retrospectively, from the persecution of the Christian church which took place under his patrons the emperors Diocletian and Galerius, persecutions which his position might have required him to endorse or act upon. His claim to have been 'a mere child' in 303 when the great persecution began seems to be a disingenuous attempt to distance himself from these events. 
Constantine's father, Flavius Valerius Constantius, was the future emperor Constantius I (250?-306). Before elevation to imperial status Constantius served as an officer in the army of Aurelian in the east, probably in 271 or 272; by 284-5 he was governor of the Adriatic province of Dalmatia, and probably praetorian prefect of Maximian, the western emperor, in 288-93. In 293 he was raised to the rank of Caesar and became emperor (Augustus) on the retirement of Diocletian and Maximian in 305. Constantine's mother, Flavia Julia Helena (c.248-328/9), was of low social status, possibly the daughter of the manager of an imperial posting station. Drepanum, her birthplace in Bithynia (a province on the Black Sea coast of present-day Turkey), was renamed by her son Helenopolis. Later stories connecting her birth with Camulodunum (Colchester) in Britain can be discounted. Helena's relationship with Constantius is uncertain; opinion veers towards identifying her as his mistress, rather than legal wife. In any event her presence at Naissus in the province of Moesia Superior indicates that she accompanied Constantius on his military postings. The relationship ended when Constantius made a dynastic marriage with Theodora, the daughter of the emperor Maximian, at a date possibly before 289 or as late as 293. His father's second marriage provided Constantine with a family of three half-brothers and three half-sisters. 
Few details of Constantine's career before he became emperor have survived, indeed they may have been deliberately suppressed. Allusive statements by contemporaries suggest that after his father's promotion to Caesar, Constantine served in various military capacities in the east, perhaps also standing as hostage for his father's good behaviour in the west. While attached to the staff of the Caesar Galerius, Constantine served in Syria, Mesopotamia, and on the Danubian frontier between 'c'.293 and 299. The following years, 301-5, were spent in the entourage of Diocletian, both at the court in Nicomedia and on imperial tours to Egypt and Rome. 
Events following the abdication of Diocletian and Maximian in 305 saw Constantius as emperor in the west and Galerius in the east. Whereas a nephew of Galerius, Maximinus Daia, was elevated to be Caesar in the east, Constantine was passed over in favour of Severus II, a Pannonian army officer. Probably anxious for Constantine's future safety, Constantius persuaded Galerius to allow his son to join him. Fearing retraction of this concession, Constantine hastened west by forced marches. It is claimed in pro-Constantinian sources that, crossing the territory of Severus, he disabled the horses of the imperial posting stations on his route to prevent pursuit by the forces of the hostile western Caesar. The story may be an invention designed to denigrate Severus, whose territory Constantine later occupied. 
Constantine arrived at Gesoriacum (Boulogne) in the summer of 305 and joined his father who was preparing an expedition against the Picts. This tribe may have been menacing the northern frontier of Britain; on the other hand the campaign may have been designed to reinforce the start of the new reign with an easy victory in an unimportant province. Constantine's part in the actual campaign is not recorded; his earlier military career suggests that participation would have been very active, especially in the light of his father's declining health. Constantius died on 25 July 306 at Eburacum (York) and Constantine was immediately proclaimed emperor by the army. The only detailed account of this event is given by Eutropius (died 340), whose laconic comment is that 'all those about pressed him, especially Crocus, the king of the Alemanni, an ally of Constantius and a member of his entourage' (Eutropius, chap. 41, in 'Liber de caesaribus', ed. Bird). Nothing further is known about Crocus; a number of suggestions have been advanced as to his status. Possibly he was serving in the British expeditionary force as commander of an auxiliary force made up of his German followers; if so this body may have been decisive in securing the election. On the other hand Crocus may have been accompanying Constantius in a personal capacity, even as a hostage. That being so, he may have been in a position to guarantee Germanic assistance on the continent should Constantine be persuaded to cross the channel to occupy his father's territories. 
Constantine's elevation was unconstitutional and Galerius, as senior emperor, recognized Severus, the western Caesar, as his new imperial colleague in the west. None the less, though technically a usurper, Constantine effectively controlled the army of Britain, as well as his father's expeditionary force, and extended his 'de facto' rule over Constantius' territories of Gallia, Hispania, and Germania, where he set up his administrative capital at Trier. His position was reluctantly recognized by Galerius, who made him Caesar of the west. Encouraged by these events, Maxentius, the son of the emperor Maximian who came out of retirement, seized power in Italy. Severus surrendered to Maximian in 307 and committed suicide. In the same year Constantine allied himself with Maximian by marriage with his daughter Flavia Maxima Fausta, at the same time repudiating his mistress Minervina, the mother of his oldest son, Crispus. Fausta bore him three sons and two daughters before her execution in 326, shortly after Constantine had ordered the death of Crispus. The discovery of a relationship between the son and stepmother is usually advanced as an explanation of these events. 
A constitutional conference at Carnuntum, on the Danube east of Vienna, in 308 failed to meet the expectations of the individuals contending for power and recognition. Maximian again retired, a new emperor, Licinius, was appointed, and Maxentius condemned as a usurper. In 310 Constantine assumed the imperial title himself as did his fellow junior ruler, Maximinus Daia. There were now four emperors, and a usurper ruling in Italy. Maximian again attempted to emerge from retirement; but, defeated by Constantine at Massalia (Marseilles), the colleague of Diocletian either committed suicide or was executed by his son-in-law. 
Between his accession and 312, Constantine dealt with a number of internal and external crises. In particular he campaigned on, and fortified, the Rhine frontier as a preliminary to advancing further south and east into the domains of his imperial rivals. These preparations bore fruit when in 312 he attacked Italy, routing Maxentius at the battle of the Milvian Bridge on the northern outskirts of Rome. The defeat of Maxentius (312) and the elimination of Maximian (310), Maximinus Daia (313), Severus II (307), and, by natural causes, Galerius (311), left Constantine master of the west. A series of conflicts with Licinius, his eastern colleague, left him sole ruler in 324. 
Numismatic evidence points to three occasions when Constantine returned to Britain. In each case coins were issued by the London mint which played a part in the ritual associated with a formal imperial 'adventus', or state visit. The symbolism of the three coin issues associated with these visits originates in the third century and shows the emperor riding to the left, his hand raised in salutation; a captive may be crouched below the raised hoof of the horse. The iconography of the emperor's portrait also points to the coins being a special issue, since, in contrast to the normal portrait where the emperor faces to the right, the ruler's bust faces to the left and is often shown with elaborate body armour, shield, spear, and helmet or some combination of these elements. 
The first issue of the London mint probably occurred in the summer of 307. Constantine is correctly styled Caesar, though the reverse proclaims ADVENTVS AVGG (that is, 'Augustorum'), thus proclaiming that the Caesar's visit partakes of the actions of all of the rulers. The date of the issue is circumscribed by the fact that Constantine did not adopt the style AVGVSTVS on his coinage until either late July or December 307. Nothing is known about this visit; possibly a connection should be sought in the celebration of marriage to Fausta in the spring of 307 or to the defeat of German tribesmen, settled by Constantius on the west bank of the Rhine, who had pillaged parts of Gallia and Germania. Constantine's biographer Eusebius noted that when established in power the emperor visited the provinces formerly ruled by his father: a tour of Britain might have been part of this programme. 
The second issue of Adventus coins, which to judge by surviving specimens was very large, dates to a period shortly before the invasion of Italy in 312. Zosimus records that troops from Britain made up part of the Constantinian army and Eusebius records what may be a second visit. The examination of coin deposits in forts in Britain suggests that the garrisons of the outpost forts of Hadrian's Wall, and a number of other forts in northern Britain, were withdrawn as contributions to Constantine's new mobile force. These troops from Britain probably served in all of the campaigns down to the overthrow of Licinius, Constantine's last rival for undivided imperial power, in 324. A third Adventus series dates to 314. Constantine was in residence in Trier between August 313 and March 314. By the autumn he was in the Balkans campaigning against Licinius. A visit to Britain in the spring or summer of 314 is entirely feasible. Either at this time, or during previous visits, changes in the administration of Britain may have been initiated. That this was the occasion of warfare cannot be ruled out, since Constantine bore the title 'Britannicus Maximus' from 314. 
Constantine's victory in Italy is intimately associated with his conversion to Christianity. Two versions of events by contemporaries are extant. The earliest, recounted by Lactantius, tutor to Crispus, says that Constantine had a dream on the eve of the battle of the Milvian Bridge in which he was commanded to put the chi-rho monogram of Christ on the shields of his soldiers. A version given by the emperor to Eusebius a quarter of a century later claims that on his march to Rome he and the army saw, in broad daylight, a cross of light in the sky and the words 'hoc signo victor eris' ('by this sign you will conquer'). Constantine had already shown a predilection towards Christianity in that he had restored property to victims of the persecutions and was accompanied on his Italian campaign by Hosius, a Spanish bishop. On the other hand his adherence to traditional paganism, even while ostensibly Christian, should not be overlooked. While doubt has been cast on the story that Constantine experienced a vision of Apollo promising victory in 310, shortly before the overthrow of Maximian, support for this episode may be found in the fact that Constantine's principal coinage bore a figure of Sol and the legend 'Soli invicto comiti' ('the unconquered sun my companion') for a number of years after his experience of miraculous Christianity. Further, Constantine continued to hold the office of 'pontifex maximus', the chief priest of the state cult of Jupiter, Juno, and Minerva. 
That the emperor's conversion was sincere, if not precipitous, is attested by the benefactions bestowed on the clergy, the construction of churches in Italy and Palestine, and the foundation in 326 of Constantinopolis (Istanbul) as an alternative Christian capital, far removed from the traditional paganism of Rome itself. Constantine's religious policy did not force conversion on the pagan majority, although he sequestrated the accumulated treasures of pagan temples (perhaps more to augment his financial resources than to make a religious gesture) and instituted antisemitic legislation. Sacrifice was prohibited, as was divination. There is little doubt that the emperor's change of religion acted as a stimulus to conversion among members of the administrative classes and the higher ranks of the army. The adoption by the church of the administrative structure of the empire for its own regional organization ensured that governments and ecclesiastical institutions were soon inextricably intertwined and the attempt by the emperor Julian ('r'. 360-63) to undo the results of Constantine's conversion met with little success. 
Active in theological matters, Constantine convened a number of councils of the church and participated very directly in the proceedings of the Council of Nicaea (May 325) which laid down the basis of modern orthodox Christianity in the Nicene creed. As was normal for many converts at the period, Constantine delayed baptism until on his deathbed at Nicomedia on 22 May 337. His burial place in the newly erected church of the Holy Apostles in Constantinopolis signified his status as the thirteenth apostle, though in normal Roman style he was deified by his Christian sons and successors. 
That Constantine had to contend with co-rulers and rivals for more than half of his reign profoundly affected his administration. Heir to the least prosperous part of the empire, he adapted his financial and military policies to accommodate the situation. Reform of the gold coinage 'c'.310, by the issue of lightweight coins, led, inadvertently, to a stabilization of the currency since military success enforced circulation over an ever widening sphere of authority and the recovery of the more valuable currency of defeated rivals. The absolute necessity of protecting the frontiers of the provinces which constituted his power base in the west while he was warring against rivals in the east led to profound changes in the structure of the army. Faced with the prospect of warfare on more than one front, Constantine built upon the experience of Gallienus ('r'. 253-68) and split his forces into sedentary frontier garrisons and an elite mobile force. This division into 'comitatenses' (mobile forces) and 'limitanei' (frontier forces) characterized Roman military strategy throughout the fourth to sixth centuries. With these tactical changes came changes in pay scales between the troops, the frontier forces suffering thereby. Elite forces flourished at the expense of the frontiers, which had to be massively reinforced in the reign of Valentinian I ('r'. 364-75). As a tactical innovation the mobile army served Constantine well but put into the hands of subsequent usurpers a ready-made weapon with which to weaken fundamentally the fabric of the empire. The reign also saw an increased use of officers of German origin in both the middle and higher ranks of the army, at the same time as German troops were incorporated into tactical formations. 
While he is often characterized as a revolutionary, closer study of Constantine's reign suggests a marked degree of conservatism. Even the conversion to Christianity may be seen in a political light were it to be preparatory to the eventual conquest of the east, with its possibly majority Christian population. Constantine adhered to the reforms of Diocletian ('r'. 284-305), implementing the changes which led to the creation of a large, professional civil service and an efficient tax recovery system. He enhanced a system of military and civil ranks and honours which bypassed the influence of the pagan senatorial class, but caused distress in the cities of the empire by sequestrating their funds. 
After operating within the tetrarchic system for most of his reign, the emperor sought to re-establish its principles in his plans for the succession. His intention to divide the provinces between his relatives was thwarted after his death by the enmity between the families of Helena and Theodora, his father's two wives. An interregnum, lasting from May to September 337, saw the triumph of Constantine's sons and the elimination of his half-brothers and nephews, with the exception of the still infant Gallus (Caesar, 351-4) and Julian (Augustus, 360-63). The empire was then divided between Constantine II ('r'. 337-40), who took the north-western provinces, Constans ('r'. 337-50), who took Italy, Africa, and the Balkans, and Constantius II ('r'. 337-61), whose portion was the east. 
Constantine's historic eminence was guaranteed by the Christian church, whose early historians constructed the image of an ideal ruler -- as he came to be known, Constantine the Great. Few hostile contemporary accounts survived the winnowing of a millennium and a half of Christian historiography but such as do suggest that piety, superstition, ruthlessness, and opportunism combined in a personality of huge energy and unquenchable self-confidence. 


@@@@@


doc= 48286


Constantine III (d. 411), Roman emperor proclaimed in Britain, competed during his short reign (407-11) with the legitimate emperor Honorius to be the western Roman emperor. The pressure he exerted on Honorius's government increased its difficulty in controlling Alaric and the Goths, and thus contributed to the sack of Rome in 410. By withdrawing troops from Britain in 407, he also indirectly brought Roman rule in the province to an end, since his officials were unable to maintain their authority. The sequence of events is complex, however, and surviving narratives are incomplete and inconsistent, although they can be reconciled and supplemented by conjecture. The principal narratives are by two early-Byzantine historians, Sozomen 'c'.443 and Zosimus 'c'.500, both of whom used an excellent contemporary account, now lost, written by the Egyptian Greek Olympiodorus. 
On 31 December 406, a host of Vandals, Alans, and Sueves crossed the Rhine and poured into Gaul. In Britain the Roman garrison proclaimed Gratianus, a British civilian, as emperor; four months later it deposed him in favour of Constantine, who is said by the contemporary historian Orosius to have been only a common soldier with nothing but his name to recommend him. As a usurper he is conventionally said to have been 'gluttonous' (Gregory of Tours, ii.9) and 'unreliable' ('Sidonius', 5.9.1), but he was more energetic and decisive than the legitimate emperor Honorius. Nothing is known of his previous career or connections, except the names of his sons Constans and Julianus, both of them named, like their father, after fourth-century emperors who had been active in Gaul and Britain. It is not stated that these names were assumed only in 407. At his father's accession, Constans was actually a monk; Constantine himself was a Christian. It is quite possible that he was a Briton like Gratianus and his own general Gerontius, but there is no explicit testimony. Nor are the Roman garrison's motives clear. It contained nine mobile units, according to the 'Notitia dignitatum' (a contemporary list of civil and military appointments throughout the empire), and these nine units may have been largely recruited from Germans and other outsiders; but there were also many frontier units (the 'Notitia' names forty-six) of varying but inferior quality which were recruited locally. According to Zosimus, the British army feared an attack by the invaders of Gaul, but Constantine's strategy was not to defend Britain alone: in summer 407 he took an army to Gaul, with which he defeated the invaders inconclusively before reinstating the Rhine frontier. However, this initiative was also a threat to the central government, and Constantine's joint commanders-in-chief were defeated and killed by the Goth Sarus, an officer dispatched by Stilicho, the general who dominated Honorius's court in north Italy; but their successors Gerontius and Edobichus (a Frank) forced Sarus to retreat across the Alps. By May 408, even though the invaders were still at large, Constantine ruled Gaul and Britain from his capital at Arelate (Arles). 
Stilicho now concentrated an army at Ticinum (Pavia) to recover Gaul with the help of the Gothic king Alaric, but it mutinied and lynched many of his allies in the government; then Stilicho himself was arrested by his rivals and executed on 22 August 408 for appeasing the Goths. Constantine meanwhile had appointed Constans as his deputy (Caesar) and sent him with Gerontius and an army to Spain, where they soon crushed the local resistance led by kinsmen of Honorius. The new regime in Italy, distracted by the problem of controlling Alaric, proved more amenable than Stilicho's. It received an embassy from Constantine, who (like Magnus Maximus) excused his usurpation by saying that it had been forced upon him by the soldiers, and Honorius gave him a purple robe in recognition. In January 409 they shared the consulship, at least in the reckoning of the provinces controlled by Constantine. This was the high tide of his fortunes. 
In Spain, Constans replaced the native garrisons of the Pyrenees with German units of his own, the 'Honoriaci', whose title indicates that they had been raised before the usurpation but it is not known whether it was for service in Britain or in Gaul. Leaving his new wife at Caesaraugusta (Saragossa), Constans returned to Arelate on a visit to his father. Gerontius seized the opportunity to rebel and proclaim an emperor of his own, Maximus, for reasons which are not clear. His rebellion should probably be connected with the disaster of October 409, when the Vandals, Alans, and Sueves forced their way into Spain through the Pyrenees, the new garrisons proving ineffective. According to Orosius, a Spaniard, they actually joined the invaders. Gerontius may have feared supersession when Constans returned with a general called Justus, or he may have simply usurped authority in a crisis, like Constantine himself in Britain. Constantine now sent reinforcements to Spain and promoted Constans to full emperor (Augustus) to command them, but the soldiers went over to Gerontius, and Constans was forced to take refuge in Vienna (Vienne on the River Rhone). Constantine meanwhile had tried to secure his eastern front by invading Italy; ostensibly he was aiding Honorius against Alaric, and he was probably responding to an invitation from Honorius's general Allobichus, but when Allobichus fell from power and was executed, Constantine was forced to retreat to Arelate. 
By 411, therefore, Constantine's position was desperate. Gerontius had invaded Gaul and, after killing Constans at Vienne, was besieging Arelate in the east; Honorius's new and efficient commander-in-chief, the future emperor Constantius III, had crossed the Alps with an army. Constantine's only hope was his other general Edobichus, whom he had sent across the Rhine to collect German allies. First Gerontius was forced to retreat when most of his army deserted him for Constantius, then Constantius besieged Arelate himself. Edobichus attempted to rescue Constantine, but his army fell into an ambush; and when Constantine heard that he was dead, he tried to forestall his own death by abdicating and having himself consecrated as a Christian priest. Arelate now surrendered to Constantius, who sent Constantine and his younger son Iulianus back to Italy under a promise of safe conduct, but the party was intercepted by order of Honorius; the two prisoners were executed 30 miles from Ravenna; Constantine's head was stuck onto a pole and arrived (at Ravenna presumably) on 18 September 411. 
Constantine was the last Roman emperor to rule Britain. Gerontius had incited 'the barbarians in Gaul' against him when he rebelled, probably in autumn 409, and the resulting loss of Spain and most of his army made Constantine unable to resist 'the barbarians from across the Rhine'. Both terms are used by Zosimus, and it is not clear whether he means the same tribes by both; nor is it clear whether they were the Vandals, Alans, and Sueves 'before' they crossed the Pyrenees, or such of them as did not invade Spain, or other tribes which invaded Gaul in their wake (notably the Franks, Alamanni, and Burgundians), or even Saxons who invaded Britain. Zosimus adds that these attacks now: 'forced the inhabitants of Britain and some of the tribes in Gaul to secede from Roman rule and to be independent, obeying Roman laws no longer. And so the Britons took up arms, and risked their lives to free their own cities from the barbarians who were attacking them; and the whole of Armorica [Brittany] and other Gallic provinces copied the Britons by freeing themselves in this way, expelling the Roman officials and establishing whatever government they wished. (Zosimus, vi.5.2)' What this all meant has been much debated by modern scholars, but since Constantine's is the last Roman imperial coinage to reach Britain, it follows that the inhabitants of Roman Britain, by shaking off the usurper for themselves, did not pass once more under the control of the central government. This in any case had more pressing problems of its own in Gaul and Italy, as Honorius admitted 'c'.410 by his famous advice to the cities of Britain that they defend themselves. 


@@@@@


doc= 48288


Clodius Albinus, Decimus (d. 197), Roman governor of Britain, was reportedly born into a noble family at Hadrumetum in the province of Africa Proconsularis (modern Tunisia). Albinus held a major military command in Dacia, on the lower Danube, early in the 180s, and possibly served as governor of Lower Germany before being appointed governor of Britain in 191 or early in 192. He thus held one of the major military commands in the Roman empire at a time of serious political crisis following the assassination of the emperor Commodus, the last, and unworthiest, representative of the Antonine dynasty. Commodus was struck down on the last day of 192. The strict and senior general, Publius Helvius Pertinax, was hailed as emperor, but only three months later was removed and replaced by Didius Julianus, a wealthy senator. His election was not generally popular and three months later he was killed in his deserted palace. The most powerful provincial governors had been notably unimpressed by the choice of Didius Julianus. The initiative was seized by Lucius Septimius Severus, the governor of Pannonia Superior on the upper Danube. He, Clodius Albinus in Britain, and Pescennius Niger, governor of Syria, held three of the greatest military commands; the civil wars which followed were fought out by these three and their armies. 
Septimius Severus was the swiftest to act. Twelve days after the removal of Pertinax he had been hailed as emperor by his troops. In the search for potential allies he was bound to look to the forces under the command of Clodius Albinus in Britain. Albinus was offered the rank of Caesar, a position promptly accepted as an earnest of what it might lead to. Having thus neutralized, for the present, the threat on his western flank, Severus could turn his attention to his eastern rival, Pescennius Niger, eliminating him in 195. Albinus was now isolated but still retained possession of a formidable army. Severus gave clear notice of his intentions by renaming his eldest son Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, a reference to the dynasty which had died with Commodus. Clodius Albinus Caesar was a redundant figure in the emerging Severan order and was declared an enemy of the state. 
Nothing is known of Albinus's activities between the early months of 193 and the winter of 195, when the final breach with Severus was effected. In 196 he crossed to Gaul, taking with him a substantial part of the army of Britain, no doubt hoping to gather additional military forces there. He was proclaimed emperor, issued his own coins, and won some successes in the field, defeating in the course of these actions one of Severus's generals, Virius Lupus. He took possession of Lugdunum (Lyons) in this campaign and prepared to face the army of Severus close to that city early in 197. The issue was contested on 19 February of that year in a hard-fought battle, in which Albinus's forces acquitted themselves well. But the army of Severus proved too strong and broke their opponents' line. When defeat was certain, Albinus took his own life. The battle was destructive of life to both sides and may have been followed by confiscation of property of those who had supported Albinus. 
Very little is known of Albinus's personal life and circumstances aside from his origins in the urban elite of Africa. He was married, but nothing is recorded of relatives or descendants. 


@@@@@


doc= 48289


Hadrian (AD 76-138), Roman emperor, was born on 24 January AD 76 into a senatorial family which had its roots at Italica on the lower Guadalquivir near Seville in southern Spain. His father was Publius Aelius Hadrianus Afer, a leading member of the city who had reached the rank of praetor in the senate; he died when Hadrian was ten years old. His mother's name was Domitia Paulina, and his own name until he became emperor was Publius Aelius Hadrianus. 
It is not certain that the future emperor was born at Italica. One tradition speaks of Rome as his birthplace. One of the original settlers at Italica in the third century BC was an ancestor of Hadrian, from Hadria on the east coast of Italy. The emperor-to-be was thus a provincial who possessed an ancient link with Italy, and his interests and policies as emperor owed much to these features in his ancestry. Italica was also the home of Marcus Ulpius Traianus (Trajan), Hadrian's second cousin and predecessor as emperor. Early in his life Hadrian acquired as his guardians Trajan and another prominent citizen of Italica, Acilius Attianus. Much of his youth was passed in Rome where he first developed his deep admiration for Greek culture, another leitmotif of his reign. As a member of a senatorial family, he embarked on the customary career towards the senate, holding posts as a military tribune on the Danube and Upper Rhine between AD 95 and 97, tribune of the people in 105, and the praetorship in 108. But he also enjoyed less usual distinctions. He served on Trajan's staff in Dacia and in the east. When Trajan was adopted by the emperor Nerva as his son and successor, it was Hadrian who carried the congratulations of the Danube legions to him. Hadrian held the command of a legion, exceptionally, before his praetorship and he governed the Danubian frontier province of Pannonia before his election as consul (in 108), again unusually. Eventually, in 117, he was allotted one of the most senior of all provincial commands, the governorship of Syria. These exceptional features in Hadrian's 'cursus honorum' naturally spring from the fact that he was Trajan's closest male relative and had married, in AD 100, the emperor's closest female relation, Vibia Sabina. Trajan's adoption of Hadrian on his deathbed in 117 was not therefore wholly unexpected. But gossip in Rome, stemming from suspicious circumstances surrounding the event, hinted at darker purposes, and specifically at the involvement of Trajan's wife, Plotina, on Hadrian's side. The truth did not emerge but it is possible that the adoption was engineered from within palace circles rather than issuing directly from Trajan's own wishes. 
On his accession, Hadrian was careful to pay respect to senatorial opinion. His immediate position was secure: he had been acclaimed by the army. But in the early months of the reign a conspiracy involving ex-consuls and other adherents of Trajan was detected and quashed by the execution of four of the alleged ringleaders. Thereafter, Hadrian was not quite able to shake off a reputation for cruelty and his relations with the senate remained uneasy. 
Hadrian's views on the extent of the empire and its external relations were made manifest at an early date. Disturbances in Mauretania Tingitana (Morocco) and Britain were promptly suppressed and mounted nomads were prevented from attacking the Danube provinces. But forward movement from existing frontiers was not to be countenanced. It was even reported that he considered abandoning the trans-Danubian province of Dacia, only recently added to the empire by Trajan. External wars were avoided throughout the reign. The concomitant of this strategic policy was the planning of strong frontiers, clearly demarcated and well garrisoned. The classic instance is the great barrier of stone and turf which was constructed across northern Britain from about 122: Hadrian's Wall. Another decisive step was taken in Upper Germany, where a series of frontier works had been under development from about AD 90 onward. Under Hadrian a more coherent frontier was brought into being, consisting of a timber palisade set in front of pre-existing watch-towers and a communication track. In north Africa, too, measures were taken to guard the main routes through the desert fringes, without disrupting the economics of native life. 
Hadrian's frontier solution in Britain took the form of the most elaborate frontier work of any date in the empire. In the original plan this was to be a stone wall running from Segedunum (Wallsend) on the Tyne to the River Irthing and a rampart of turf and clay from the Irthing to the Solway Firth. At every Roman mile there was to be a fortlet (milecastle) and between each pair of fortlets two evenly spaced towers (turrets). Garrison forts were to lie to the rear, supplying auxiliary units to patrol the frontier and operate beyond it as necessary. Immediately in front of the wall lay a great ditch, while to the rear another ditch and accompanying mounds (the vallum) were designed to close off the frontier to unauthorized personnel. Lateral communication was to be supplied by a road running behind the wall (the military way). The terrain traversed by Hadrian's Wall is diverse. On the eastern and western flanks the ground is low lying. In the centre the volcanic outcrop of the Whin Sill offers a magnificent northward-facing scarp, along the top of which the wall was to run. The exposed western flank on the Cumberland coast was seen as vulnerable and was covered by a series of fortlets and towers, echoing those on the wall itself. 
The building of this immense work was begun in the governorship of Hadrian's ally, Aulus Platorius Nepos (122-5), and may well be a direct result of Hadrian's visit to Britain in 122. The coherent structure of the frontier in its first form bears all the hallmarks of a single organizing mind and it is most likely that that mind was Hadrian's own. Its purpose was not in the first instance tactical. A wall 80 miles long is not the most obvious or effective means of defence, particularly for an army trained and habituated to open warfare. Hadrian's Wall defined the limits of the Roman empire in Britain, but it did more. In the words of Hadrian's fourth-century biographer, it separated Romans from barbarians, one of the few recorded statements on the role of Roman frontiers and one which may be traced back to Hadrian's own thought. 
The original conception of this frontier, whether or not it sprang fully formed from the emperor's mind, did not come to fruition. Modification was quickly found necessary. In particular, the garrison bases lay too far to the rear and by 125 or 126 forts were being established on the line of the wall itself. The width of the wall was reduced as building proceeded westward, presumably to diminish the scale of the task. The western flank was further protected by a number of outposts north of the wall, perhaps revealing the region from which raiding was expected. These were major changes, and there were to be others, but the wall remained largely Hadrian's in concept and execution. Although raided for its stone in subsequent centuries, considerable sections of the wall remain, and Hadrian's Wall is Britain's most substantial and best-known Roman structure. 
The visit of Hadrian to Britain in 122 was followed by a renewed stimulus to urban development as an essential feature of the Romanization of the province. Several cities either built or rebuilt public buildings in Hadrian's reign, including several which lay close to the zone of military control. The splendid inscription set up in 129 by the 'civitas' (citizen body) of the Cornovii in dedication of the new forum at their centre of Viroconium (Wroxeter) occurs in precisely the kind of setting that would have caught Hadrian's attention. 
The emperor's care for the provinces went far beyond the defence of their frontiers. When his position was wholly secure, in 120-21, he embarked on several years of travel, inspecting provinces and their armies. Of the sixteen years from 117 to 133, more than twelve were devoted to journeys across the empire. Hadrian left his mark where he travelled. In Gaul he ordered and consecrated a temple to Plotina at Nemausus (Nimes). In Spain he brought together provincial representatives to examine a scheme for troop levies. In Mauretania he directed a military operation of some kind. But most of his travelling was done in the Greek provinces of the east. Here there were no military preoccupations and few of a pressing administrative kind. Hadrian's deep admiration for Greek culture was to find full expression during his long sojourn in Greece and Asia Minor. The city populations there responded to his progress with immense enthusiasm. In a second series of journeys he visited north Africa, inspecting the army and its works. His detailed interest in military training and effectiveness is attested by a remarkable inscription found at Lambaesis, which provides extracts from addresses given to the troops, praising and encouraging them and their commanders. In 129 Hadrian passed through the Levant and visited Jerusalem, ordering that city to be rebuilt as Aelia Capitolina, thereby unwittingly laying the foundations for the great Jewish revolt of 132. Later in the year the emperor's entourage moved into Egypt, where Hadrian's beloved boy Antinous drowned in the Nile. The emperor's reaction was one of uncontrollable grief. Statues of the youth were carved in their thousands and near the scene of the fatality the city of Antinopolis was founded. The cult of the deified Antinous now inaugurated was honoured not only in Egypt but across the empire. 
Most of the rest of the reign was spent amid peaceful pleasures in Rome. As well as literature, art, and philosophy, Hadrian was devoted to architecture and spent both time and money on buildings in Rome and Athens. In Rome, the temple of Venus and Roma was completed in his last years. The Pantheon, one of the greatest surviving works of Roman architecture, had been built early in the reign, replacing a building of Marcus Agrippa. But the most characteristic creation of this complex man was the vast private villa which he laid out at Tibur (Tivoli), close to Rome. This was an architectural ensemble which reproduced many of the buildings and places seen and admired by Hadrian on his journeys, among them the Canopus and Serapeum in Egypt, and the Academy, the Stoa Poikile, Lyceum, and Prytaneium in Athens. In Rome itself, on the Tiber bank below the Janiculum Hill, he built his own great mausoleum in the form of a brick drum; it survives as the Castel Sant' Angelo. There his remains were duly laid, after two years of increasing infirmity ended at Baiae (modern Baia, west of Naples) on 10 July 138. It is reported that he died with a valedictory verse to his own soul on his lips. 


@@@@@


doc= 48290


Julius Agricola, Gnaeus (AD 40-93), Roman governor of Britain, was born of provincial stock on 13 June AD 40 at Forum Julii (Frejus) in the Roman province of Gallia Narbonensis (Provence). His native city had been founded as a settlement of Roman citizens by Julius Caesar and refounded as a 'colonia' by Augustus, with the title Colonia Octavanorum Pacata, to accommodate veterans of the eighth legion. Agricola's family name, Julius, probably indicates that Roman citizenship had been acquired through a forebear who had either served as an officer of Julius Caesar or Augustus, or achieved prominence as a rich and influential native inhabitant of Forum Julii. Agricola thus belonged to that sector of western provincial society which played an increasingly important role in urban administration and the manning of the ranks of army officers. This was a social milieu of relative affluence and was not devoid of cultural pursuits. Agricola's father, Lucius Julius Graecinus, achieved senatorial rank under Tiberius and was appointed praetor at the end of that reign. He had a taste for practical literature, writing on viticulture with learning and humour. His agricultural interests are probably reflected in the cognomen he gave to his son. Seneca had a high opinion of Graecinus as a man of principle, telling how he would not take favours from political figures of dubious reputation. High-mindedness was not a safe virtue in the reign of Gaius (Caligula). Having refused that unstable emperor's request to prosecute Marcus Silanus, Graecinus was put to death shortly after Agricola's birth, in circumstances which remain obscure. His tomb monument was apparently set up on the Esquiline Hill in Rome. 
Agricola's mother, Julia Procilla, bore a name which is suggestive of Gaulish descent, probably from landed stock derived from the tribal nobility. When Agricola reached the appropriate age for schooling his mother dispatched him to Massalia (Marseilles), the ancient Graeco-Roman city where cultural pursuits created a favourable climate for the education of the young provincial elite in rhetoric and philosophy, the usual training for upper-class youth. As a senator's son, Agricola could aspire, if he wished, to imperial service. The first stage of that career, duty as a tribune of a legion, Agricola passed in Britain when he was eighteen to twenty years of age, under the governor Suetonius Paullinus. During the terrifying upheaval of the Boudiccan revolt in AD 60 to 61, he served on the governor's own staff, where he must have learnt much about provincial administration and what could result from its abuse, as well as the conduct of military affairs in a far from quiescent part of the empire. The sequence of offices which followed in Rome was conventional enough: quaestor in AD 64, tribune in 66, praetor in 68. But unusual duties fell to him during the civil wars of AD 68 to 70: under Galba the recovery of treasures stolen from temples, and under Vespasian the raising of legionary conscripts in Italy. That Agricola was viewed as a wholly reliable adherent of the Flavian cause of Vespasian is clear from his appointment in AD 70 as legate of the twentieth legion in Britain under the governor Petillius Cerialis. This regiment had recently been in turmoil, its commander being instrumental in driving out the previous governor of the province. Under Agricola's command the twentieth presumably took part in the major extension of Roman control in northern Britain which involved the conquest of the Brigantes of the Pennines and the Vale of York. Agricola's subsequent elevation to the ranks of the patricians and his appointment as governor of Aquitania, probably in AD 75, reveals that his command of the legion had been effectively discharged and he was seen as an imperial servant who, still in his mid-thirties, could go much higher. Election as suffect consul for a few months in AD 77 carried him into the pool of candidates from whom the holders of the highest military commands were drawn. Nevertheless, his appointment as governor of Britain, either late in AD 77 or in 78, represented something of a leap, for he had governed no province which contained a legionary army and the military task which Britain presented was still great. No doubt Agricola's excellent knowledge of Britain, as well as his all-round competence, earned him this senior command. It is difficult to identify anyone who was better qualified. 
Agricola had married Domitia Decidiana in AD 62 and in 77 their daughter was married to 
As a source for Roman Britain, especially in the Flavian period, the 'Agricola' stands alone. No other text provides a consecutive narrative from the invasion of Britain in AD 43 to the high-water mark of conquest in the north. But the very nature of the work and the purposes of the writer impose their own conditions on the use that can be made of it. The literary models for this form of biography are ultimately Greek, but a distinctively Roman tradition had evolved by Tacitus's day in which the qualities and character of the subject were given priority over historical context. While the 'Agricola' is much more than a laudation of a distinguished life not wholly fulfilled, it is something less than a biography. Herein lies a central problem of interpretation. Much of the treatment is historical, especially in relation to early Roman Britain. In style as well as in content the work is reminiscent of the narratives of Sallust and Livy of the previous century. Nevertheless, Agricola and his achievements are the dominant theme; he is rarely absent for more than a sentence or two. Interwoven into the fabric of the text there are also themes and references relating to the final years of the first century. It is matter for debate as to how much should be read into these, how 'political' were Tacitus's motives in writing as he did. Was the 'Agricola' to some extent an apologia and a justification for the provincial elite who had served Rome, rather than the regime of Domitian, in the previous two decades? Certainly there is a clear and deliberate contrast between the dedicated servant of the state and the paranoid despot whom he served. But there is more individuality in the delineation of Agricola than this. Tacitus had portrayed a man in his time, not with warts and all, but equally certainly not a stereotype of the good governor and soldier. 
Given the primacy of the text, the debate on the reliability of the 'Agricola' for its subject's governorship and for the wider history of Roman Britain in its first half-century will continue. Modern attitudes have ranged from acceptance tempered by caution to scepticism tempered by a measure of approval. On Agricola's work and achievements in Britain the account contains no obvious exaggeration or invention, even though the figure of Agricola naturally enjoys an enhanced status. There is general archaeological endorsement of the veracity of Tacitus in his account of the conquest of northern Britain, though it must be admitted that the geographical setting is very weakly presented. There is support, too, for the Flavian programme of urban and social development in Britain to which Agricola is said to have contributed and which is evident at London, St Albans, Cirencester, Silchester, Winchester, and elsewhere. There is no obvious discord between the archaeological record and the text of the 'Agricola' as it relates to Agricola's own administration. The account of Britain before the Flavian period is more suspect. There is foreshortening in the chronology here and the work of governors in Nero's reign is not given its due. Some achievements and developments are omitted altogether. From the early Flavian period onward, however, when Tacitus himself began to hold offices of state, the work can be used with much greater confidence and not merely 'faute de mieux'. 
Agricola's arrival in Britain followed upon, and was evidently intended to continue, forward movement in the west and north, prosecuted by his predecessors Petillius Cerialis and Julius Frontinus. Agricola's first task was to complete the subjugation of the Welsh tribes. He was swiftly into action soon after his arrival in the province. The Ordovices of north Wales had all but annihilated a Roman cavalry regiment shortly before. The new governor struck deep into their territory, destroyed their military strength, and seized the rich island of Mona (Anglesey). This bold stroke was followed by the routine garrisoning of north Wales, thus completing the work begun by Julius Frontinus between AD 74 and 77. No further resistance by the tribes of Wales is recorded. The northern regions of Britain posed greater problems, of logistics as well as of conquest, and the campaigns conducted there by Agricola from AD 78 to 84 were arduous and demanding. They were also highly successful and must be ranked among the finest feats of the Roman army in the western provinces at any date. While it is self-evidently true that Agricola's reputation has been enhanced by Tacitus's account of his career, there is no serious doubt that his military operations in Britain were highly successful. In six years of campaigning, the tribes of northern Britain, from the Pennines to the southern fringe of the Scottish highlands, were subdued and their territory firmly held by strategic roads and garrisons. The culmination of this forward movement came in a pitched battle against the Caledonians at 'Mons Graupius' in AD 84, a site which cannot be identified with certainty, but which must have lain in the coastal plain of north-east Scotland, probably in what is now Aberdeenshire or Banffshire. Agricola's battle position was far from favourable, the Caledonian host having the advantage of higher ground. By allowing the Roman centre to engage the enemy on the slopes, however, he tempted the northerners to descend to lower ground where four regiments of cavalry held in reserve were able to rout and disperse them. Roman legionary forces were not called upon to join in the battle. Auxiliary troops alone carried the day. Against Roman losses of only 360, the Caledonians were said to have lost 10,000 men. After brief forays further north and a voyage to the Orkneys to receive the surrender of those islands, Agricola withdrew to winter quarters. 
The Roman conquest of northern Britain had reached its highest point and so had Agricola's career. Shortly after the victory at 'Mons Graupius', he was recalled by Domitian and awarded the ornaments of a triumph -- the highest military honour he could have expected. He had been governor of Britain for seven years, an unusually long term for any province, especially one which contained so large a legionary army. His northern conquests were not to last for long. Pressures on other frontiers in mainland Europe, notably on the Danube, enforced a withdrawal of forces from Scotland. At the nodal point of his general disposition of forces in Scotland, Agricola had planned and begun the construction of a new legionary base at Inchtuthil on the Tay, possibly for his old legion, the twentieth. This base was largely complete when, in AD 86 or at the latest in 87, the decision was taken to abandon most of the territory north of the Cheviot hills. The legionary base was given up and carefully dismantled, along with the auxiliary forts between the 'highland line' and the Tweed basin. It is entirely credible, as Tacitus reported, that Agricola felt bitter about the turn of events. But no blame can be attached to him or to the emperor and his advisers for an enforced withdrawal from the northernmost conquests. The demands of frontiers under threat elsewhere could only be met by drafting in troops from secure provinces. That Britain could be so regarded was itself a measure of Agricola's achievement. 
Probably a much greater disappointment was Agricola's failure to receive one of the commands which crowned the senatorial career: Syria, Africa, or Asia. Domitian, or a confidant, made it plain that he should not put his name forward for the proconsulship of Africa or Asia. This is not wholly incomprehensible. Most of Agricola's years of service had been spent in the specialized conditions of Britain, far removed from the civilities of old proconsular provinces. He may also have lacked powerful connections at court and there may be some truth in Tacitus's assertion that Domitian harboured jealous sentiments about Agricola's achievements. The emperor may well have felt that he had received honours enough in the ornaments of a triumph, a public statue, and a long, honorific citation. 
Virtually nothing is known of Agricola's last years. He died nine years after his recall from Britain, on 23 August AD 93 after an illness. Tacitus reports a rumour that he was poisoned and hints, no more, at Domitian's involvement. In the fervid atmosphere of Domitian's later reign such rumours were frequent and there is no good reason for believing that this one held substance. Domitian (named as coheir in Agricola's will) had nothing to gain by removing from the scene a long-retired provincial governor. 
Agricola the effective and successful general is a figure whose fame is secure. Agricola's merits and achievements as a provincial administrator are less easily assessed, as the account of Tacitus is almost all there is. His all-round competence is entirely credible. Whether or not he was possessed of greater talents is more difficult to ascertain. His origins in a western 'colonia' may have made him more sensitive to provincial feeling than many of his Italian peers in the imperial service. His checking of abuses in the supply of grain to Roman forces may thus have been motivated by a sense of fairness, but it also made good administrative sense not to push newly subjected provincials too far. Similarly, his encouragement of Roman culture and education among the rising generation of British leaders may have been motivated as much by pragmatism as by a desire to Romanize the province. This was the social group upon which the further development of Britain would depend. There is evidence to support the statement of Tacitus that Agricola gave active assistance to the development of cities, though in this too he was building on the work of earlier governors. The famous dedicatory inscription for the forum at Verulamium (St Albans), dating to either AD 79 or 81 and naming Agricola, is striking confirmation of his general care for urban development, but this text records the completion of work which must have begun years earlier. 
The personality of Agricola remains elusive; it could hardly be expected to emerge from Tacitus's encomium. The figure there depicted is somewhat bland and bloodless; an efficient subordinate rather than a born leader; a man of duty not vision. That judgement may seem harsh. To have served emperors as diverse as Nero, Vespasian, Titus, and Domitian, and to have passed through a civil war, were achievements which proved to be beyond many. Agricola's career may not have reached the topmost pinnacles of the imperial service, but he does worthily represent that large and significant body of provincials who served the Roman empire with competence and distinction. Few provincial governors are better known to us. None could better exemplify their all-round achievements. 


@@@@@


doc= 48291


Julius Classicianus, Gaius (fl. c.AD 60), procurator of Britain, was married to Julia Pacata, daughter of Julius Indus; he died in office at an unknown date and was buried in London by his widow. To judge from his names and from what may be inferred about his wife, Classicianus was a Gaul, probably from the province of Gallia Belgica. His father-in-law, Indus, was the Treveran noble (that is, from the Trier region) who remained loyal to Rome during the Gallic revolt of AD 21 and helped to suppress the rebel leader Julius Florus. Her cognomen suggests that Julia Pacata was born soon after this event. Classicianus himself may be assumed to have been in his forties at the time of his appointment to the post in Britain. Family recollections of the revolt of AD 21, provoked by heavy indebtedness among the Romanized elite in Gaul (similar problems are said to have contributed to the revolt of Boudicca) may conceivably have influenced Classicianus's conduct in Britain. But this is naturally speculative. Apart from his tombstone (Collingwood and Wright, RIB 12) -- two parts of which were found in 1852 and 1935, reused in a bastion of the Roman wall of London, north of Tower Hill, and now in the British Museum -- the only record of this man is supplied by a brief passage in Tacitus's 'Annals'. 
Classicianus was appointed procurator (chief financial officer) of Britain in AD 60 or 61 as the successor of Decianus Catus, who had fled the province in panic after Boudicca's rebels had sacked Camulodunum (Colchester). Catus himself had been partly responsible for the outbreak of the revolt by his harsh treatment of the queen; and the governor, Suetonius Paullinus, after his hard-fought victory, had moved against any of the British peoples whose loyalty was uncertain or who were still hostile 'with fire and steel'. The situation was aggravated by a food shortage, for no crops had been sown during the rebellion, and the Britons tried to divert to their own use supplies reserved for the Roman army. According to Tacitus, Classicianus caused 'the fierce natives to postpone making their peace by holding out hopes that Paullinus would soon be replaced by a milder governor' (Tacitus, 'Annals', xiv.38). Meanwhile he reported to Rome that there was no hope of an end to hostilities unless Paullinus was given a successor. He attributed Paullinus's setbacks to his own perverse character, his successes simply to luck. Nero reacted by dispatching a senior imperial freedman, Polyclitus, to inspect. Following Polyclitus's report, although Paullinus was retained in office for a short time, he was replaced early in AD 61 by Petronius Turpilianus (Tacitus, 'Annals', xiv.39), a nephew of the first governor of Britain, Aulus Plautius. The policy adopted both by Turpilianus and by the next governor, Trebellius Maximus (AD 63-9), was indeed one of clemency, combined with which the 'barbarians' were encouraged to 'acquiesce in the blandishments of vice' (Tacitus, 'Agricola', 16.2-4), presumably a sarcastic reference to baths, banquets, and other aspects of the Roman way of life; and active campaigning ceased for a decade. 
It may be that the procurator Classicianus, himself of Celtic origin and hence with some sympathy for the Britons, played an important role in reconciling them to Roman rule. He could well have stayed in office as procurator for several years; but it is quite unknown how long he lived. No descendants are known, but a Treveran named Alpinius Montanus, who served as an equestrian officer in the army of Vitellius, in AD 69, could have been a son of Classicianus. 


@@@@@


doc= 48292


Julius Frontinus, Sextus (d. 103/4), Roman governor of Britain, held that appointment from AD 73 or 74 to 77. His service in Britain is attested only by a single sentence in Tacitus's 'Agricola', and his date of birth, origin, and early career are unknown. But as the author of a work on land-surveying ('Libri duo argumenti gromatici', preserved only in excerpts), of the 'Stratagemata', and of the 'De aquis', as a patron and friend of the younger Pliny, and as a leading figure in the reigns of Nerva and Trajan, he was to become one of the most prominent persons of the age. Aelian, author of the 'Tactica', visited him to discuss military matters at Formiae, near Rome, and the poet Martial refers to his country retreat at Anxur (Tarracina); but there is no reason to suppose that Frontinus's original home was in Latium. Rather, his names and connections suggest strongly that he was of Gallic origin, probably from Nemausus (Nimes). His wife's name is unknown. A daughter married the leading general Sosius Senecio (consul for the second time in 107), a granddaughter was the wife of Pompeius Falco, governor of Britain at the beginning of Hadrian's reign. Frontinus also had links with the Calvisii, the family of Marcus Aurelius's grandmother. 
Frontinus first appears in the historical record as praetor in AD 70. In this capacity he had to convene the important meeting of the senate on 1 January, in the absence of the consuls, who were the new emperor Vespasian and his elder son Titus, both still in the east. It has been conjectured that Frontinus had recently been promoted to the senate, perhaps by the emperor Galba ('r'. AD 68-9), after service as an equestrian officer and procurator. Later in AD 70 he served in the campaign against the Batavians and other rebel tribes of northern Gaul and the Rhineland, probably as a legionary legate. He mentions in the 'Stratagemata' that he received the surrender of 70,000 rebel Lingones, whose chief town was Andematunnum (Langres). An altar dedicated at Vetera (Xanten) to Jupiter, Juno, and Minerva for Frontinus's welfare may belong to this time, if not to his later participation in a campaign in Germany ('Corpus inscriptionum Latinarum', 13, no. 8624). He presumably held the consulship (the necessary qualification for the governorship of Britain) at latest in AD 73, in which year he probably succeeded Petillius Cerialis in the province. 
To equal Cerialis was a difficult task, so Tacitus wrote, but Frontinus: 'took up and sustained the burden; he was a great man -- insofar as greatness was then permitted; and he subdued by arms the powerful and pugnacious people of the Silures, overcoming not only the courage of the enemy but the difficulties of the terrain. (Tacitus, 17)' Archaeological evidence suggests, if it cannot prove, that Frontinus founded the legionary fortresses at Isca (Caerleon), in Silurian territory, and Deva (Chester), and that he added substantially to the network of auxiliary forts in mid-Wales. Apart from dealing with the refractory inhabitants of south Wales, Frontinus clearly, as Tacitus indicates, carried on where Cerialis had left off, in northern Britain. He may also deserve credit for giving the Silures a new urban centre, at Venta Silurum (Caer-went), and for fostering urban development in southern Britain, for example at Verulamium (St Albans). In midsummer of AD 77 he was succeeded by Julius Agricola. His next known activity was in 83, when he accompanied the emperor Domitian on his campaign against the Chatti (of Hesse) in Upper Germany, either as governor of Lower Germany or as a member of the emperor's general staff ('comes Augusti'). Several important passages in the 'Stratagemata' recall aspects of this service, including a much discussed description of the driving of 'limites', the word later used to describe Roman frontier works, through the German forest. A few years later Frontinus became proconsul of Asia: a massive arch set up at Hierapolis (Pamukkale) during his term of office is dated to AD 86 (Eck, 77ff.). 
The Asian proconsulship generally marked the final stage in a senatorial career and Frontinus probably devoted himself mainly to writing in the following decade. But the assassination of Domitian in September AD 96 and the accession of Nerva led to his re-emergence, as a senior statesman. In AD 97 he was made 'curator aquarum', and undertook the overhaul of Rome's aqueducts with great conscientiousness, to judge from his manual on the subject. His praise of Rome's practical engineering, as the best testimony to the greatness of the empire, in contrast to the 'idle pyramids' and the 'useless' works of Greek architecture (Frontinus, 'De aquis', 16), has often been quoted. In the same year he was one of the first two men chosen to serve on a special economy commission and early in AD 98 held a second consulship. His colleague was Trajan, who had been adopted by Nerva as his heir in October AD 97 and succeeded him in January AD 98. Frontinus's son-in-law Senecio was consul in AD 99 and Frontinus himself held a third consulship, a very rare distinction, as colleague of Trajan, in 100. It may be inferred that Frontinus played an important part in securing the choice of Trajan as Nerva's heir. Frontinus died in 103 or 104, when Pliny recalled with satisfaction that he had been elected to the vacant place in the college of augurs which Frontinus's death had created. Frontinus had doubtless held this prestigious priesthood for many years, a further sign of his great distinction. 


@@@@@


doc= 48293


Lollius Urbicus, Quintus (b. after 100?, d. after 150), Roman governor of Britain, was born near Cirta in the province of Numidia (eastern Algeria), in north Africa, probably shortly after 100. He appears to have been the second of the three known sons of Marcus Lollius Senecio and Grania Honorata. His career can be calculated as starting soon after the accession of Hadrian in 118 and he served as: 'quattuorvir viarum curandarum' (one of the officials in charge of the streets of Rome); 'tribunus laticlavius' (senior tribune) in legion XXII Primigenia, stationed at Moguntiacum (Mainz) in Upper Germany; quaestor of the city of Rome; legate (adjutant) of the proconsul of Asia; tribune of the plebs and praetor, both as the emperor's candidate; legate (commanding officer) of the X Gemina at Vindobona (Vienna), in Upper Pannonia (Hungary); legate (staff officer) in the Jewish War of Hadrian (132-5), in which he was decorated; consul, probably in 135 or 136; 'fetialis' (a member of one of the colleges of priests in Rome); governor of Lower Germany; governor of Britain from 139 to 142 or 143; and prefect of Rome, probably from 146 to at least 150. 
Urbicus does not appear to have been the son of a senator; he was thus one of the new men who came into the aristocracy during the empire from the provinces. His early career is not distinguished, but it clearly acquired imperial support after his service as legate of the proconsul of Asia. Here he may have acquired a patron who helped further his career and this may have been Pompeius Falco, formerly governor of Britain. Urbicus held a staff post during the Jewish War of 132 to 135, serving under Sextus Julius Severus, also a former governor of Britain. At the end of the decade Urbicus was specially chosen by Antoninus Pius to reverse the frontier policy of his predecessor in Britain by conducting a new campaign to subdue the Britons north of Hadrian's Wall. It may be presumed that Urbicus had acquired some background knowledge of the province through his service with previous governors. 
The emperor Hadrian died in July 138. The biography of his successor, Antoninus Pius, states that 'he conquered the Britons through the governor Lollius Urbicus and after driving back the barbarians built a new wall of turf' (Magie, v.4). An inscription from Corbridge demonstrates that Urbicus was governor of Britain by 139. In 142, following the end of the campaign, Pius was acclaimed 'imperator' ('conqueror': the traditional acclamation by soldiers on the field of battle to their victorious commander was given under the empire to the emperor when his generals won victories in his name). 
The reasons for the reconquest of southern Scotland are not known. The phrase 'drive back the barbarians' seems to imply that forcible action was necessary and this receives some support from an aside by Pausanias in his 'Description of Greece': 'Antoninus deprived the Brigantes in Britain of most of their territory because they too had taken up arms and invaded the Genunian district, the people of which are subject to Rome' (Pausanias, viii.43, 4). The passage as it stands makes little sense; nevertheless it presumably relates to the northward advance in the early 140s. Hence modern scholars have suggested that the reason for the reconquest of southern Scotland was that the northern tribes were causing trouble. A more subtle explanation is that Hadrian's Wall was a tactical success but a strategic failure, in that it was too distant from the main enemy in the north, the Caledonians, and that it was therefore necessary to move the frontier northwards. More recently the necessity for the new emperor to gain a military triumph to secure his position on the throne has been emphasized, with Britain chosen as the location of this imperial triumph. Certainly the invasion of southern Scotland would have been the decision of the emperor, not of Urbicus, as the life of Antoninus Pius and a comment by Cornelius Fronto both imply. 
Urbicus was clearly responsible for the preparations for the reconquest of southern Scotland, as the inscription from Corbridge indicates, and the preparations continued into the following season, as demonstrated by a second inscription from Corbridge. He is also recorded on two building inscriptions at the Roman fort at Balmuildy, one of the first forts to be constructed on the Antonine Wall. His name, however, does not appear on other inscriptions on that wall, which suggests that he left Britain during the building of the frontier, leaving completion of the task to his unknown successor. He is also recorded on a building stone at High Rochester on Dere Street to the south of the Antonine Wall. Clearly, Urbicus left his governorship only when work on securing its success through construction of the frontier and its attendant forts was well advanced. The close density of the forts and fortlets in southern Scotland was presumably ordered by Urbicus and may reflect his determination to ensure the enduring success of his military action. Nevertheless, the occupation of the Antonine Wall does not appear to have outlasted Antoninus Pius by many years. Modern opinion considers that it was abandoned within a decade of his death in 161. 
Urbicus's career is further recorded on two inscriptions from Numidia. He left no known descendants and the author 'Lollius Urbicus' cited by the 'Scriptores historiae Augustae' is now known to have been bogus. 


@@@@@


doc= 48294


Martinus (d. 353/4), Roman administrator, was 'vicarius' of the Britains, the head of the Roman civil administration: the 'vicar' or deputy of the praetorian prefects supervised the governors of the four provinces into which Roman Britain was now divided. Nothing is known of his origins or connections (the name is a common one), nor of his previous career. Only the manner of his death is known, in an episode recorded by the late-Roman historian Ammianus Marcellinus. After the death (on 10 August 353) of the western usurper, Magnentius, the legitimate emperor, Constantius II, sent a special emissary to Britain called Paulus (nicknamed the Chain) to arrest some officers who had supported Magnentius. When Paulus exceeded his instructions by making many other arrests, Martinus protested to him and threatened to resign. Paulus then threatened to arrest him as well (it is not recorded whether Martinus had been appointed by Magnentius or by Constantius), and Martinus drew his sword; but his 'failing hand' prevented him from striking a mortal wound, so he killed himself instead. Paulus returned to the imperial court with many prisoners who were subsequently condemned (Ammianus Marcellinus, 14.5.7-8). Since Ammianus calls them 'ingenui' (gentry), it has been suggested that their fate is reflected in a decline of British towns and country houses (villas) after the mid-fourth century, but until this decline has been more closely dated and quantified, it would be unwise to attribute it to this single episode. None the less, the name of Martinus 'deserves to be remembered in Britain' (P. Salway, 'Roman Britain', 1981, 358). 


@@@@@


doc= 48295


Magnus Maximus (d. 388), Roman emperor in Britain and the western empire, was blackguarded after his death by Pacatus the panegyrist of his conqueror, the emperor Theodosius. The historical tradition is hostile to a failed usurper, as usual, but there are hints that he was respected in his time. St Martin's Gallic biographer says that he was 'a good man in other respects, but corrupted by the advice of bishops' (Sulpicius Severus, 'Dialogues', iii.11.2) and the Spanish writer Orosius comments that he was 'an energetic and honourable man worthy of being Emperor, if he had not broken his oath and become Emperor by usurpation' (Orosius, vii.34.9). 
Maximus was born in Spain, at a place unknown; as emperor he created a new province in the north-east, but since he also created one in Gaul, this may not be significant. He was a kinsman and dependant of Theodosius's father, the Roman general Flavius Theodosius, with whom he campaigned in Britain (367-8) and Mauretania (373-4); in Mauretania he arrested a corrupt Roman official and two disloyal Moorish chieftains. Since the elder Theodosius was executed at the end of 376, Pacatus's reference to Maximus being 'an exile and a fugitive' (Pacatus, 31.1) may mean that he shared his patron's fall; but as this 'exile' is contrasted with the younger Theodosius's army command (presumably in 378), it need only mean that he was posted to Britain. There he was commander of the Roman garrison during Gratian's reign ('r'. 375-83); it is not known whether he was formally the 'dux', or held the higher rank of 'comes', but the latter is more likely, since it regularly implied command of mobile units. 
Gratian made himself unpopular with his army by favouring certain barbarian recruits, and Maximus in Britain is also said to have resented not being more highly promoted. Pacatus guardedly remarks that he 'boasted of his kinship' with the emperor Theodosius and claimed his tacit support (Pacatus, 24.1 and 43.6). Indeed, since Theodosius's father had been executed in the names of Gratian and his infant brother, Valentinian II (although others gave the actual order), and since Theodosius not only recognized Maximus as co-emperor but after his execution protected Maximus's mother and daughter, this suspicion, even if untrue, was not unfounded. Maximus later claimed, like most usurpers, to have been forced into usurpation by the army; the soldiers may have thought he would be a worthier successor of Gratian's father, Valentinian I ('r'. 364-75), as indeed did Maximus himself, since he struck coins which imitated Valentinian's obverse portrait and reverse types and in his negotiations with Valentinian's younger son, Valentinian II, asserted a father's authority. 
After being proclaimed emperor in Britain in spring or early summer 383, Maximus invaded Gaul with an army. Gratian was still at Verona on 16 June 383, but later that summer confronted Maximus near Paris. However, when after skirmishes his soldiers began to desert him for Maximus, and even his commander-in-chief Merobaudes changed sides, Gratian fled with a small escort for Italy. Maximus sent his cavalry commander Andragathius in pursuit, by whom Gratian was captured and perfidiously killed at Lyons on 25 August 383. Maximus, who insisted that he had not ordered Gratian's death, was now 'de facto' ruler of Britain, Gaul, and Hispania, and resided at Valentinian I's old capital of Trier. The younger Valentinian (II), aged only twelve, nominally ruled Italy, the Balkan province of Illyricum, and Africa (roughly modern Tunisia) from Milan, and in their first negotiations Maximus insisted to his envoy Ambrose, the sainted bishop of Milan, that Valentinian should come to him 'like a son to his father' (Ambrose, letter 24.7). Ambrose eluded this demand, but after further negotiation the court at Milan grudgingly recognized Maximus's authority beyond the Alps. 
The surviving sources are not explicit about the relations between the three emperors, but it can be deduced that Theodosius, who was preoccupied in the east with Goths and Persians, was prepared to recognize Maximus in the west if he left Valentinian alone. There is certainly no evidence that he actually promoted Maximus's rebellion against Gratian. He and Maximus struck a few coins in each other's name, and in 386 Maximus's praetorian prefect Euodius shared the consulship with Theodosius's younger son Honorius; Maximus's portrait was now formally displayed in the eastern empire. In effect, therefore, he was accepted as a member of the imperial college; an inscription from Tripolitania, an African province subject to Valentinian II, honoured all four emperors: Valentinian, Theodosius, his elder son Arcadius, and Maximus (whose name was later deleted). This was only a working arrangement, not a warm collegiality, but it might last while each emperor was preoccupied by his own problems. Thus Maximus is said by Orosius to have been 'a formidable man, exacting tribute and military service from the most monstrous German tribes by the terror of his name alone' (Orosius, vii.35.4). Orosius is exaggerating Maximus's strength, to prove that it was only by God's will that he fell, but Maximus himself told Ambrose that there were thousands of barbarians in his service who received rations from him (Ambrose, letter 24.4). There is numismatic evidence that he revisited Britain, perhaps to cope with the invasion of Picts and Scots recorded by the Gallic chronicle of 452 (which, however, implies it was in 383). Gildas alleges that Maximus stripped Britain of its army, administrators, and manpower, but his account has no independent value although it accidentally contains this truth: the usurpation was an important step, though it cannot be quantified, in the reduction of the Roman garrison. Maximus, as the last Roman emperor of Britain according to Gildas, was therefore claimed as their first ancestor by medieval Welsh kings, but this is a ninth-century invention. Historical deductions are invalid, for example that Maximus delegated authority in northern Britain to native chieftains; so too should be regretfully dismissed as fiction the medieval Welsh story of 'Macsen Wledig' (King Maxentius), the emperor of Rome who married the princess of Caernarfon. 
Maximus like Gratian was an Orthodox (Nicaean) Christian, an embarrassment to some Catholic students of history, as is clear from a comment by Augustine in 'The City of God' (5.25); Maximus told Pope Siricius that he had come to the throne 'straight from the baptismal font', and regarded God as his patron and protector (letter 40 in the 'Collectio Avellana'). To Valentinian II, whose Arian mother, Justina, was vainly trying to extort a church for Arian worship from Ambrose at Milan, Maximus wrote a disingenuous warning in 386 that it was dangerous to persecute the Orthodox. He asserted his own Orthodoxy by his unrelenting treatment of his fellow-Spaniard, the heretic Priscillian. Certain Spanish bishops had become suspicious of Priscillian's ascetic practices and teaching, which they equated with Manichaeism and sorcery; Maximus ordered that the case be heard by a synod at Bordeaux, but when Priscillian appealed from it to the emperor, Maximus sent him for trial before the praetorian prefect Euodius at Trier. Priscillian was tortured and beheaded, the first heretic to be formally executed, even if it was for sorcery. This intervention by the secular power was resented by leading western bishops like Ambrose and Martin of Tours, and it was in response to such criticism that Maximus told Pope Siricius that by condemning 'Manichees' he was upholding the unity of the church. His downfall, however, was subsequently attributed by Ambrose to quite another action, his edict of 387 or 388 which censured Christians at Rome for burning down a Jewish synagogue; they exclaimed: 'the emperor has become a Jew' (Ambrose, letter 40.23). 
In 387 there were negotiations between Valentinian II and Maximus to improve their accord, in which Maximus deceived Valentinian's envoy and followed after him with an army. His motives for crossing the Alps are unclear: to make Valentinian his puppet, perhaps, or (like Constantine in 312) to strengthen himself against an inevitable civil war. Italy fell without a struggle in summer 387, but Valentinian and his mother escaped by ship to Salonika where they appealed to Theodosius for restoration. The Roman aristocracy acquiesced, however, judging by the decision of the orator Symmachus to deliver a panegyric of Maximus in January 388. Theodosius himself was slow to react. According to the pagan Eunapius's hostile account, he delayed until he was offered the prospect of marrying Valentinian's seductive sister, Galla, but it is more likely that he needed time to mobilize against the formidable western army. In the event, he moved decisively: in summer 388 his army advanced up the Sava valley, defeated Maximus's brother Marcellinus and his other generals at Siscia (Sisak) and Poetovio (Ptuj), and then trapped Maximus himself at Aquileia. Maximus surrendered, perhaps in hope of mercy, but Theodosius's generals immediately executed him, probably on 28 July 388. His son Victor, whom he had left in Gaul as titular emperor (Augustus), was arrested soon after and also executed. 


@@@@@


doc= 48296


Ostorius Scapula, Publius (d. AD 52), Roman governor of Britain, died in the province. His date of birth is unknown, but was probably about 1 BC at the earliest. His father, of the same names as himself, was a high-ranking Roman knight, who became prefect of Egypt in AD 10. His mother was perhaps called Sallustia Calvina. An uncle, Quintus Ostorius Scapula, was one of the first two prefects of the praetorian guard (2 BC). Scapula's son Marcus served in Britain under his father and became consul in AD 59. A grandson, also called Marcus, was proconsul of Asia in 114-15. The family had estates in northern Italy, perhaps near Novaria (Novara), but probably derived from central or eastern Italy. 
Scapula arrived in Britain to take up his command as the second Roman governor of Britain late in AD 47 and had to take rapid action against free Britons who had attacked the province (between the Trent and Severn). In order to secure his rear, Scapula now ordered the surrender of weapons by the peoples under Roman control. This provoked a revolt by the Iceni of what is now East Anglia, who enjoyed the status of a client kingdom; they were joined by neighbouring peoples. Scapula's son won the highest Roman distinction for valour during the ensuing campaign. In AD 49 Scapula campaigned in north Wales against the Deceangli, reaching the Irish Sea, but failing to bring the enemy to a pitched battle. He had to abandon the campaign in order to suppress an anti-Roman movement in the client state of the Brigantes, who occupied most of what is now northern England. During the following year, AD 50, he attempted to subdue the Silures of south Wales, who were now led by the surviving British leader from the time of the Roman invasion, Caratacus. Again, Scapula's success was limited, and Caratacus escaped north to the Ordovices of Snowdonia. During this period Scapula transferred one, or two, of his four legions from Camulodunum (Colchester) to the frontier region, one new base being Viroconium (Wroxeter). The vacated fortress at Camulodunum was now turned into a 'colonia' (a chartered new town for the settlement of retired veteran legionaries). 
During AD 51, in the course of a campaign against the Ordovices, Scapula finally brought Caratacus to battle, somewhere in north Wales, and achieved a decisive victory. Caratacus fled to the Brigantes, but the Brigantian ruler, Queen Cartimandua, remained loyal to Rome and handed Caratacus over. He was sent with his wife, daughter, and brothers to Rome, where Claudius displayed them in a victory ceremony. Scapula was rewarded by an honorary triumph. Despite this success, British resistance continued, with the Silures wiping out several legionary cohorts which were engaged in building forts. Scapula took immediate steps and proclaimed his intention to 'extinguish the name of the Silures' (Tacitus, 'Annals', xii.39). But in the same year, AD 52, he died at his post, 'wearied by the irksomeness of his task' (ibid.), as Tacitus put it, at the end of his lengthy account of Scapula's governorship (he had already given a brief summary in the 'Agricola'). Later in the 'Annals' Tacitus also describes the murder of Scapula's son Marcus at the hands of Nero's assassins in AD 66. 


@@@@@


doc= 48297


Petillius Cerialis, Quintus (fl. c.AD 60-c.74), Roman governor of Britain, was related by marriage to the emperor Vespasian, almost certainly as the husband of Vespasian's only daughter, Flavia Domitilla. The consul of AD 83, Quintus Petillius Rufus, is generally considered to be his son from a previous marriage; another possible son is a senator called Petillius Firmus, who came from Arretium (Arezzo) -- if the conjectured relationship is correct, this was Cerialis's home town. From the presumed marriage with Domitilla there was a daughter of the same names as her mother. Cerialis's presumed father, Petillius Rufus, was a senator in the reign of Tiberius, when 'he stooped to a shameful deed in the hope of becoming consul, but later met his just deserts' (Tacitus, 'Annals', iv.68 ff). This story in the 'Annals', combined with the tone of numerous references in the 'Histories' and the account in 'Annals' xiv. of Cerialis's conduct in AD 60, suggests that Tacitus heartily disliked Cerialis, the former chief of his own father-in-law, Agricola. In the fashion of the time, Cerialis himself had two extra names, which indicate kinship with a family of Caesii. One of his predecessors as legate of the ninth legion, Caesius Nasica, might well have been a kinsman. 
Cerialis's first known appointment was as legate of the ninth at the time of the great rebellion in AD 60 or 61. After the destruction of the Roman capital, Camulodunum (Colchester), by Queen Boudicca's forces, Cerialis, 'coming to help, was routed and his infantry was slaughtered; he himself with the cavalry escaped to his base [presumably Longthorpe near Peterborough], where he was protected by the fortifications', according to Tacitus, who further described his defeat as 'a disaster' ('clades') (Tacitus, 'Annals', xiv.32). The ninth legion had to be brought up to strength after the revolt by the dispatch of two thousand men from the Rhine army. In spite of this debacle, Cerialis had 'a not inglorious military reputation' (Tacitus, 'Histories', iii.59) nine years later (his activity in the intervening years is unknown), when he was chosen to command a special force of one thousand cavalry in the Flavian advance guard's assault on Rome in December of AD 69, the so-called 'year of the four emperors'. Further reasons for his selection, mentioned by Tacitus, were his kinship with Vespasian and his local knowledge, suggesting that he had property in Etruria or Umbria (which accords with the probable origin at Arretium). As it turned out, he bungled the task, being heavily defeated by the Vitellians in the outskirts of Rome and failing to prevent the burning of the Capitol, 'the most shameful deed in the history of Rome' (Tacitus, 'Histories', iii.72). Shortly afterwards, when a delegation from the senate arrived to negotiate, Cerialis was unable to prevent his men from mishandling the senators. 
No doubt because of his kinship with Vespasian, Cerialis was none the less within a few weeks given an important new mission. He was made consul (presumably 'in absentia') or perhaps simply given the rank of ex-consul, the necessary qualification for appointment as governor and commander-in-chief of the Lower German army, with the task of suppressing the dangerous revolt of the Batavians and other German or north Gallic peoples. His operations in the Rhineland are described in detail by Tacitus in his 'Histories'. A famous speech before an assembly of rebellious Gauls, put in the mouth of Cerialis, who begins with the immortal phrase 'neque ego umquam facundiam exercui' ('unaccustomed as I am to public speaking'; Tacitus, 'Histories', iv.73), has been called the finest justification of Roman imperialism ever written. There is of course no guarantee that it represents anything that Cerialis himself actually said. He is also given some credit for his tactful handling of the embarrassing attempt by Vespasian's younger son, Domitian, then only nineteen, to assume command of the campaign. But in general the impression conveyed is that Cerialis succeeded rather by good luck than by good generalship. On one occasion he narrowly escaped capture by the enemy, who seized the flagship of the Rhine flotilla during the night in the belief that the Roman commander was on board. However, Cerialis 'was sharing a bed on land with an Ubian woman, named Claudia Sacrata' (as Tacitus drily reports in 'Histories', v.22). The final outcome of the campaign is not recorded; the last surviving page of Tacitus's account has Cerialis negotiating on an island with the rebel leader Julius Civilis in the second half of AD 70. Cerialis's settlement evidently guaranteed the maintenance of certain privileges for the Batavians, whose fighting qualities continued to be highly prized by Rome, in return for them laying down their arms. 
Cerialis proceeded straight from the northern Rhineland to take over the governorship of Britain from Marcus Vettius Bolanus, who had been struggling to keep the peace with a diminished garrison. Cerialis brought extra troops and at once began a forward policy, aimed at subduing the Brigantes of the Pennines, who had overthrown their pro-Roman ruler, Cartimandua (Bolanus had had to rescue the queen), and were now openly hostile under her ex-husband, Venutius. The archaeological record shows that Cerialis established bases at Eburacum (York) for his old legion, the ninth, and a forward post at Luguvalium (Carlisle); he probably penetrated into southern Scotland as well. The other legions were now based at Lindum (Lincoln), at Viroconium (Wroxter) or Deva (Chester), and at Isca (Caerleon). Cerialis's governorship of Britain is only briefly described by Tacitus, in the 'Agricola', the sole source. He is said to have overrun, if not to have completely conquered, the Brigantes; and Gnaeus Julius Agricola, serving under Cerialis as legate of the twentieth legion, had the opportunity for gaining distinction, even if 'the glory had to be reserved for his chief' (Tacitus, 'Agricola', 17). Cerialis had probably been replaced by the summer of AD 73; he was at any rate back at Rome by the spring of 74, when he held a second consulship (the record of which is the sole evidence for his full names). Nothing is heard of him thereafter. That the consul of AD 83, Quintus Petillius Rufus, Cerialis's presumed son, was one of the first consular colleagues of the new emperor Domitian ('r'. AD 81-96), suggests that the family enjoyed that ruler's favour, at least initially. But Cerialis's presumed daughter, Domitilla, a niece of Domitian, was married to the emperor's cousin Titus Flavius Clemens, who was executed in AD 95; and Cerialis and his family seem to have disappeared from the scene by the early second century, for the poet Martial refers to the 'Petillian mansion' (Martial, 'Epigrams', xii.57, 19) at Rome as the residence of another senator at this time. 


@@@@@


doc= 48298


Plautius, Aulus (fl. AD 29-57), Roman governor of Britain, was the son of Aulus Plautius (consul in 1 BC) and Vitellia. His younger brother Quintus Plautius was consul in AD 36, and a sister, Plautia, was married to Publius Petronius (consul in AD 19). The family home was Trebula Suffenas, near Tibur (Tivoli). Plautius, in common with Quintus Veranius, governor of Britain in AD 57-8, and the emperor Aulus Vitellius, was one of the last Romans not to have a cognomen (third name). From the reign of Claudius onwards it became standard for all male Roman citizens to bear three names -- the Plautii, Veranii, and Vitellii were no doubt consciously old-fashioned in this respect, using the simple form with just praenomen (forename) and nomen (family name), as in the early centuries of Roman history. Plautius's chief claim to fame is that he commanded the invasion force which conquered much of southern Britain between AD 43 and 47 and, as the first governor ('legatus' 'Augusti' 'pro praetore'), established the Roman province of Britannia. Even though little is known of his previous experience, his selection for this major undertaking by the emperor Claudius, whose position was still very insecure, can readily be explained. His family had long been closely linked with the Claudii; and a cousin of Plautius, Urgulanilla, had been married to the emperor. The Plautii were also intermarried with two families, the Petronii and Vitellii, who were highly regarded by Claudius. Plautius was probably born 'c'.10 BC, at the earliest. All that is known of his career before his consulship in AD 29 is that he played some part in suppressing a slave uprising in Apulia in the early 20s. At the beginning of Claudius's reign (AD 41), Plautius was governing the important military province of Pannonia (Hungary). In this capacity he must have shown his loyalty when the governor of the neighbouring province, Dalmatia, attempted a 'coup d'etat' against Claudius in AD 42. 
The bulk of Plautius's invasion army was supplied by the Rhine garrison, which contributed three legions, while he brought one of his Pannonian legions, IX Hispana. After a delay in embarkation at Gesoriacum (Boulogne), caused by a mutiny, the expeditionary force landed without encountering opposition and advanced through what is now Kent. The first serious conflict took place at the crossing of the Medway; the British leader Togodumnus died from wounds received there shortly afterwards, leaving his brother Caratacus in sole command of British resistance. After crossing the Thames, Plautius invited the emperor to join him. In the interval before Claudius arrived, parts of south-west Britain were probably subdued by one of the legionary commanders, the future emperor Vespasian, legate of II Augusta, who is credited with capturing Vectis (Isle of Wight). Other peoples, including the Dobunni of the Cotswolds, had submitted voluntarily. Claudius spent sixteen days in Britain, entering Camulodunum (Colchester), Caratacus's capital, in triumph, and receiving the submission of eleven British rulers. These certainly included those of the Dobunni, the Iceni (East Anglia), and the Brigantes (Pennines), and the previously pro-Roman Britons of modern Hampshire and Sussex, whose ruler, Cogidubnus was later commemorated for his loyalty to Rome by Tacitus; an inscription at Chichester shows that he had been granted Roman citizenship (Collingwood and Wright, RIB 91). Plautius remained in Britain for a further four years. No details are recorded of his activity, but on his return to Rome in AD 47 he was granted an 'ovatio' (minor triumph), the last non-member of an imperial house to be so honoured. Archaeological evidence suggests that he had extended direct Roman control over southern Britain to a line approximately marked by the Roman road now known as the Fosse Way (between Exeter and Lincoln). Parts of this area were retained by native rulers as clients of Rome, a status also accepted by the Brigantes of the Pennines, the largest people in Britain. But resistance continued, led by Caratacus, who was still operating in Wales when Plautius was replaced by Ostorius Scapula. 
Plautius is mentioned twice more during his later years. In AD 48 his prestige was sufficient to protect his nephew Plautius Lateranus, one of Messalina's lovers, after the empress's downfall. Plautius's wife, Pomponia Graecina, was 'accused of practising a foreign religion' (Tacitus, 'Annals', xiii.32) in AD 57. Plautius, who claimed the traditional right to try her himself, found her innocent. Pomponia and Plautius himself have often been claimed as Christians on the strength of this story in Tacitus, but there is no direct evidence. At about this time a young man also called Aulus Plautius, who may have been his son, was put to death by Nero: he had been a lover of Nero's mother Agrippina and was suspected of plotting treason. A nephew of Plautius, Petronius Turpilianus, was appointed governor of Britain after the bloody suppression of Boudicca's revolt: he had probably inherited the ties of patronage that Plautius had built up with British notables. At any rate, Plautius may be assumed to have died before AD 65, for he is not mentioned by Tacitus in connection with the execution of his other nephew, Lateranus, in that year. His widow Pomponia survived until AD 83. No direct descendants are recorded; the Plautii are last heard of in the 130s, when Plautius Lamia Silvanus was son-in-law of the future emperor Antoninus Pius. 


@@@@@


doc= 48299


Platorius Nepos, Aulus (fl. 119-c.125), Roman governor of Britain, whose full name was Aulus Platorius Nepos Aponius Italicus Manilianus Gaius Licinius Pollio, was the governor of the Roman province of Britain between 122 and 'c'.125. He is chiefly known, in consequence, as the person in charge of construction work on Hadrian's Wall. Sources for his life and career are few, but he is mentioned in the 'Historia Augusta' (ed. Magie), which contains a brief biography of the emperor Hadrian, and his name is found on Roman inscriptions from Hadrian's Wall. His career in Roman public and military service is also detailed on a dedication set up in his honour in Aquileia (near Trieste), in northern Italy. He held the highest office at Rome -- the consulship -- before becoming governor of the province of Lower Germany in 119, the post he held before his governorship of Britain. 
Platorius Nepos was appointed to Britain in July 122, in succession to Quintus Pompeius Falco, and was entrusted by the emperor Hadrian with the task of overseeing construction of the military frontier installations now known as Hadrian's Wall. These consist of a stone wall, originally from Pons Aelii (now the centre of Newcastle) running westwards to the crossing of the River Irthing (some 45 miles), beyond which point the wall was built of stacked turf to its terminal point on the Solway Firth at Maia (Bo'ness). It was also extended eastwards in stone from Pons Aelii to Segedunum (Wallsend). The wall was accompanied by a ditch, and small defended gateways (known as milecastles) spaced more or less regularly at each Roman mile, together with pairs of further towers (known as turrets) evenly distributed between the milecastles. At a slightly later stage, Roman forts, providing garrison bases for troops stationed on the wall, were added to its line, and a flat-bottomed ditch flanked by a pair of mounds (now known as the vallum) was dug behind the wall for virtually the whole of its length. 
Platorius Nepos's oversight of this work is commemorated by a number of surviving inscriptions from milecastles both on the stone- and the turf-built portions of the wall, and from other inscriptions recording construction of the military forts added slightly later. It is not certain to what extent Platorius Nepos can be termed the architect of Hadrian's Wall, but he was clearly entrusted with the responsibility of translating the vision of this frontier (which may have been the emperor Hadrian's own) into reality on the ground. The term of Platorius Nepos's governorship in Britain came to an end, possibly abruptly, in 124 or 125, with the works still not completely finished, and with aspects of frontier design and its implementation still evolving. 
Platorius Nepos is said at one stage to have been considered by Hadrian as a possible successor to him as emperor, but latterly fell out of favour for reasons which cannot be determined, but which may relate to an inability to control the extravagant cost of construction of the Hadrianic frontier in the north of Britain. After holding the governorship of Britain, Platorius Nepos faded out of public life. At his death (date unknown) a statue was erected in his honour by the town council of Aquileia. This gives full details of his career in public life, and shows the junior posts he held, in military and civilian service, before attaining the consulship and subsequent posts as consular governor in Germany and Britain. The town councillors of Aquileia (the decurions) dedicated this inscription to a man they described as their 'patron'. 


@@@@@


doc= 48300


Septimius Severus, Lucius (145/6-211), Roman emperor, was the founder of the Severan dynasty and passed his last four years in Britain directing military operations against peoples beyond the northern frontier of the Roman province. A ruthless reformer and efficient administrator, his reign ranks only after those of Augustus and Hadrian in the evolution of the empire. Severus was born on 11 April 145 or 146 at Lepcis Magna in Tripolitania (Libya), a prosperous Phoenician city on the north coast of Africa; his mother was Fulvia Pia, but the name of his father is not recorded. The Septimii may have been of local Punic origin who chose to assume the Italian family name. At seventeen Severus spoke in public and then departed for Rome, retaining, it is recorded, an 'African accent' for the rest of his life (Magie, 19.9). 
Having entered the Roman senate in 169, Severus rose steadily through the succession of traditional magistracies at Rome and imperial appointments in the provinces. His first wife was Paccia Marciana; she died at some time before 185, when, during a tour of duty in Syria, he married his second wife, Julia Domna. She belonged to the priestly dynasty of Emesa in Syria and as empress became a powerful figure in her own right. Severus achieved the consulship 'c'.190 and was appointed governor of Upper Pannonia (Hungary and northern Croatia), a major command over three legions on the Danube frontier. The murder of Pertinax (28 March 193) triggered off a competition for power between three major provincial armies: that in Britain under Decimus Clodius Albinus, the Pannonian under Severus, and the Syrian under Gaius Pescennius Niger. It was Severus who made the first and, as it proved, decisive move: proclaimed emperor by his troops on 9 April, he was ruling in Rome by the end of May. To Albinus, Severus offered the novel title 'Caesar' with its implied promise of the succession and the consulship of the following year. In 196 Albinus, who was gaining popularity among the upper classes of the west, was declared a public enemy by the senate and replaced as Caesar by Caracalla ['see below'], Severus's elder son (he was raised to Augustus in 198). Severus's Danube legions defeated the weaker army of Albinus near Lugdunum (Lyons) on 19 February 197 amid scenes of horrific carnage. Harsh measures against adherents of Albinus resulted in confiscations of property and may even have caused a disruption of the commerce in wine and olive oil between Spain and Britain. 
Cassius Dio informs us of the state of affairs on the northern frontier of Britain ('Dio's Roman History', 75.5.4): the Caledonii, inhabitants of the Scottish highlands, had broken their pledge not to aid the Maeatae of central Scotland and, since Severus was busy with the Parthians, in order to ward off trouble, the new governor, Virius Lupus, could do no more than offer a large subsidy in exchange for a few prisoners. The same historian records a destructive invasion by peoples beyond the northern frontier around fifteen years before ('Dio's Roman History', 72.8.2-6); yet there is no conclusive evidence for a major attack from the north in 197. Repair and rebuilding of the northern forts continued. An allusion in Cassius Dio to victories won in Britain and the dedication of an altar at Benwell (Collingwood and Wright, RIB 1337) on Hadrian's Wall to celebrate imperial victories may indicate that no major catastrophe brought Severus to Britain in 208. Yet there is the testimony of Herodian that a message came from the governor in Britain that 'the barbarians there were in a state of rebellion and were causing great damage, looting and wrecking virtually everything' (Herodian, 3.14.1). Both Cassius Dio and Herodian in fact give greater prominence to Severus's concern that his sons and the army needed the harsh discipline of war ('Dio's Roman History', 76.11.1; Herodian, 3.14.2). 
The imperial expedition to Britain in 208 was undertaken with characteristic vigour. Although coins of that year bearing the legend PROF[ECTIO] AUG[USTORUM] depict Severus riding on horseback ('Coins of the Roman Empire', 568, 854) he was now suffering from a crippling disease (gout or arthritis) which caused him to be carried everywhere in a litter but 'in spirit he was tougher than any youth' (Herodian, 3.14.2). Accompanied by the empress, his sons, and senior military advisers (who included Papinian, prefect of the praetorian guard and the most distinguished jurist of the time), Severus crossed into the province with a large military force and a vast sum of money. The record of his British campaigns is deficient in many respects ('Dio's Roman History', 16.12.1-5; Herodian, 3.14.6-8). There are no topographical details but only the outline of a guerrilla war in which the enemy harassed an army 'cutting down forests, levelling hills, filling up swamps and bridging rivers' ('Dio's Roman History', 6.13.1). Operations continued during the following years, first against the Caledonii and subsequently against the Maeatae. By 210 Severus and both his sons had formally assumed the triumphal title Britannicus ('Coins', 25, 34, 47, 49). Severus persisted with the effort until, having almost reached the extremity of the island, the Britons were forced to a settlement and to cede a great part of their territory. The victory was not conclusive and Severus was preparing to lead another attack on the Caledonii when he died at Eboracum (York) on 4 February 211. 
The direction and scope of Severus's campaigns remain little known. A great deal of movement appears to have taken place by sea, for which a special combined command was created of the British, Rhine, and Danube fleets (coins of 209-11 bear images of Neptune and Oceanus). In Scotland only Cramond on the Forth and Carpow near Abernethy on the Tay can be linked with these campaigns: the former is a stone fort of normal auxiliary size (about 6 acres), the latter a purpose-built legionary base (about 24 acres). A rare coin of Caracalla showing a bridge of boats and the legend TRAIECTUS ('Coins', p. 353) may depict the Tay crossing at Carpow where remains of large temporary enclosures have been found on both banks. Severus died in his sixty-sixth year in the eighteenth year of his reign. For all his unconcealed dislike of the regime, Cassius Dio offers what seems an authentic portrait: 'Small in stature but powerful until he grew weak from his illness his mind was sharp and very active. He was eager for more education than he had actually received. He was a man of few words but many ideas. He was considerate to friends, unforgiving towards opponents, single-minded in achieving his aims but caring nothing for his reputation. He raised money from every source but without killing anyone in the process, while for his part he paid out what was due without hesitation. ('Dio's Roman History', 76.16.1-3)' 



@@@@@


doc= 48301


Suetonius Paullinus, Gaius (fl. c.AD 40-69), Roman governor of Britain, almost certainly derived from the town of Pisaurum (Pesaro), on the Adriatic coast of Italy. Nothing else is known about his family, except that a man of the same names as himself, consul in AD 66, may be assumed to be his son (the famous biographer of the Caesars, Gaius Suetonius Tranquillus, is not known to have been related to Paullinus). 
Paullinus first came to notice at the beginning of the 40s. He was one of the Roman generals, with the rank of ex-praetor, who pacified the Moorish rising provoked by the annexation of the north African kingdom of Mauretania. Paullinus was the first Roman commander ever to cross the summit of the Atlas Mountains. He may have owed his selection for this expedition to the prefect of the praetorian guard, Arrecinus Clemens, a native of Pisaurum. Paullinus must have held the consulship in the 40s, but nothing further is known of his career until his appointment to Britain in AD 58. This followed the unexpected death in the province of the governor Quintus Veranius, who had begun a forward policy after some years of quiescence under the intervening governor, Didius Gallus. In AD 58 and 59, taking up the challenge implied in the testament of Veranius, who had claimed that 'he could have conquered the rest of Britain if he had had another two years' (Tacitus, 'Annals', xiv.29), Paullinus subjugated and garrisoned much of Wales. There remained the island of Mona (Anglesey), the stronghold of the druids, whose influence over the Britons made it an inevitable target. Paullinus had the best part of two legions, the fourteenth and the twentieth, under his command; the other two, IX Hispana and II Augusta, were left guarding the north-east and south-west of the province respectively. No sooner had the island been occupied and the sacred groves cut down than Paullinus received news of Boudicca's uprising. 
A combination of factors had provoked the great rebellion. Prasutagus, client ruler of the Iceni of what is now East Anglia, had died shortly before and his kingdom was incorporated into the province. In the process the imperial procurator (chief financial administrator), the knight Decianus Catus, acted very harshly, and Prasutagus's widow, Boudicca, and her daughters were maltreated. The land-grabbing activities of the veteran colonists at Camulodunum (Colchester) had also caused deep resentment and the Temple of Claudius in the 'colonia' (chartered town for the settlement of veterans) was regarded, according to Tacitus, as 'a citadel of eternal domination' (Tacitus, 'Annals', xiv.31). Cassius Dio mentions that the wealthy Seneca, still a leading adviser of the emperor Nero, had suddenly called in loans made to the Britons, which would certainly have caused hardship among the British elite. Finally, the assault on the druid 'holy island' may well have stirred the religious feelings of the Britons. At all events, the rising won widespread support, with Boudicca as its figurehead. Camulodunum was stormed and largely destroyed. The procurator Catus, with only a few hundred soldiers at his disposal, was unable to defend the town and fled across the channel to Gaul, while the legate of the IX Hispana, Petillius Cerialis, who brought his troops south (presumably from the legionary base at Longthorpe, near Peterborough), was routed, with heavy casualties. Cerialis himself escaped with his cavalry. Paullinus had meanwhile marched rapidly south, but, although he reached London, he decided that it could not be defended and withdrew into the midlands. London and Verulamium (St Albans) were both destroyed, with heavy loss of life. It was later claimed by Cassius Dio that 'eighty thousand Romans' died at the hands of the rebels, and that some of the captives were sacrificed in bestial fashion 'in the grove of Andate' (Cassius Dio, 'Roman History', lxii. 1, 7). 
With the fourteenth legion, part of the twentieth, and some auxiliary regiments, Paullinus had about 10,000 men when he met the rebel army, probably in the midlands, close to the Roman road now called Watling Street, where he won a famous victory. 'A little less than eighty thousand Britons' were said by Tacitus to have fallen, as against only 400 on the Roman side (Tacitus, 'Annals', xiv.37). Boudicca took her own life, as did a senior Roman officer, Poenius Postumus, who had been too frightened to bring the II Augusta from its base in south-west Britain to help. The scale of the destruction caused by the rebels and the report by the procurator Catus of the sack of Camulodunum had evidently led Nero to contemplate abandoning Britain. It must have seemed like a repetition of the great disaster in Germany in AD 9, when the loss of three legions resulted in the withdrawal from Germany east of the Rhine. As it was, the ninth legion had lost 2000 men, who had to be replaced by troops from the Rhineland, and eight new auxiliary infantry cohorts and two cavalry regiments, a further 5000 men, were also sent to Britain. 
Paullinus followed his victory with repressive measures, which had the result of stoking up resistance. The new procurator, Julius Classicianus, protested to Rome that peace could not be achieved unless Paullinus was replaced. Nero sent a senior imperial freedman, Polyclitus, to inspect the situation. Paullinus was initially retained, but dismissed on a pretext not long afterwards, to be succeeded by one of the consuls of AD 61, Petronius Turpilianus, nephew of the first governor of Britain, Plautius. (Since Petronius was sent to Britain straight after his consulship, but in the year following the rebellion, it is clear that the rebellion and its suppression, although described by Tacitus under the year 61, must have occurred in 60.) However, Paullinus was by no means disgraced: a lead tessera from Rome with the emperor's name on one side and that of Paullinus, with victory symbols, on the reverse (Rostowzew, no. 230), suggests that Nero issued largess to celebrate the victory. Further, Paullinus's presumed son was consul a few years later, in AD 66. The two legions which had defeated Boudicca were honoured with new titles, the fourteenth becoming Martia Victrix and the twentieth Valeria Victrix. Camulodunum was rebuilt with the new title 'colonia Victricensis', suggesting that veterans of these two legions were settled there. The last record of Paullinus comes from the 'year of the four emperors', AD 69, when, by now 'the oldest of the ex-consuls' (Tacitus, 'Histories', ii.37), he held high command for Otho in his unsuccessful campaign against Vitellius in northern Italy. 


@@@@@


doc= 48302


Theodosius (d. 376), Roman general, conventionally known as Count Theodosius from an extraordinary military command that he held in Britain in 367-8, as 'comes' (general, or 'count'); he is also called Theodosius the elder to distinguish him from his second son, the emperor Theodosius ('r'. 379-95). Since the younger Theodosius was born 'c'.346 at Cauca (Coca) in Spain (where he owned land after his father's death) and since kinsmen are recorded in 408 as influential landowners in Spain, it is likely that Count Theodosius himself came from a Spanish propertied family. His wife's name was Thermantia. The family was evidently Christian but is unlikely to have been rich and well-connected before his time, since he (unusually for landed gentry in the late-Roman period) chose a military career and seems to have lacked higher education and the younger Theodosius, even according to a sympathetic source, was only 'moderately cultured' (Pichlmayr, 48.11-12). Nothing is known of Theodosius's early career (which was 'distinguished', according to the contemporary historian Ammianus Marcellinus), unless it is implied by a panegyrist's allusion to 'land victories in Batavia [modern Netherlands] and defeat of the Saxons by sea' (Pacatus, 5.2) which might belong to the emperor Valentinian I's recovery of the Rhine frontier in 366, but are more likely to relate to the ill-defined campaigns of 367-8. 
In June 367 Valentinian had received news of a concerted attack upon Britain by its neighbours, the so-called 'Barbarian conspiracy' of which Ammianus Marcellinus gives the only real account. Archaeological evidence in confirmation has often been sought, but continues to be elusive, while Ammianus Marcellinus's account is geographically vague and leaves questions unanswered; that he was writing in the reign of Theodosius's son probably forced him to panegyrize the father. The invaders were Picts from north of the Clyde-Forth isthmus, Scots from Ireland, and 'Attacotti' of unknown origin; meanwhile north-German Franks and Saxons were attacking 'the Gallic areas' (the channel coast of Gaul or possibly of Britain). The Roman coastal commander had been killed, and his colleague, the general ('dux') who commanded the land garrison of Britain, had been eliminated. The obscure 'areani' who collected military intelligence beyond the frontiers had changed sides, a 'province' had been overrun, and many soldiers had deserted their units. To retrieve these disasters, Theodosius was sent to Britain with the rank of 'comes' and a small army consisting of four infantry units from the strategic reserve. 
Theodosius landed at Rutupiae (Richborough, Kent) and advanced towards London, the capital, rounding up enemy raiding parties as he went. At London, his base for the winter of 367-8, he successfully offered an amnesty to Roman deserters and recruited a new head of the civil administration (the 'vicarius') and a new 'dux' of the British garrison. Ammianus Marcellinus gives no details of the fighting that restored Roman authority in 368: his principal episode is the arrest and execution of a criminal exiled to Britain who was now plotting to seize power. This episode remains mysterious, perhaps because Theodosius forbade further investigation, but also because the victim Valentinus was brother-in-law of the Maximinus who later became Valentinian's praetorian prefect and chief civil minister. Theodosius is also said to have 'restored cities and forts, and protected the frontiers with garrisons and outposts' (Ammianus Marcellinus, 28.3.3, 28.3.7), perhaps appropriate to a refurbishment of the fixed defences like that which was being directed by Valentinian on the Rhine and Danube frontiers; but possible pieces of evidence -- such as fort repairs and the drafting of new garrisons, the strengthening of town walls with towers, the deployment of 'signal towers' on the north Yorkshire coast -- have not been dated conclusively to 368. Theodosius is also said to have created a new province called Valentia; this certainly existed thereafter, but its location remains uncertain. The mysterious 'areani', who probably operated north of Hadrian's Wall, were disbanded. 
Theodosius's achievement was genuine -- his subsequent career proves that -- but it cannot be quantified. On his return to the imperial court he was promoted to joint commander-in-chief ('magister equitum') and operated successfully against the German Alamanni in the Black Forest in 370, and again in 372, when he commanded the cavalry advance guard in Valentinian's penetration of the Main valley. He may also have campaigned on the Danube. Then in 373 he achieved another independent command, this time in Mauretania (modern Algeria), where Roman rule was threatened by a major internal revolt. Its leader was a Moorish chieftain called Firmus who had killed his pro-Roman brother Sammac in a dispute over the succession to their father 'King' Nubel, thereby upsetting the equilibrium in Mauretania between the Romanized cities and farmers, protected by static garrisons and a small mobile reserve, and the necessary loyalty of the native tribal chieftains. Theodosius sailed from Arles with a small army, with which he arrested incompetent local officials and punished disloyal units with savage reprisals; then in a brilliant series of campaigns (373-4), which combined long marches and pitched battles against heavy numerical odds, and by judicious diplomacy and terrorism, he broke up Firmus's coalition of tribes and procured his betrayal. Firmus, who had once denounced Theodosius to his own (Theodosius's) men as a 'brutal executioner', killed himself rather than fall into his hands alive. 
Theodosius was now congratulated as the 'physician of Africa's recovery' by the orator Symmachus, who exclaimed that his fame would never yield to 'envy'. This qualification may have been added to the letter (Symmachus, x.1) when it was published, for Theodosius fell from power when his patron Valentinian suddenly died of a stroke, on 17 November 375, in distant Pannonia (modern Hungary). Theodosius, who was then still in Africa, was arrested and taken to Carthage where, after receiving baptism, he was beheaded in December 376. Contemporaries understandably tell us almost nothing about the execution for 'treason' of an emperor's father. Ammianus Marcellinus is entirely silent. However, it seems unlikely that Theodosius was actually planning a coup. The order for his execution must have come from the imperial court where his colleague Merobaudes, joint commander-in-chief ('magister peditum'), was taking other precautions against a possible usurpation. But even if the execution was a matter of business for Merobaudes, he gained personally by removing a rival. 
The younger Theodosius, who was then a 'dux' on the Danube frontier, retired to Spain; but after the death of Valentinian's younger brother, the eastern emperor Valens, in battle against the Goths on 9 August 378, Valentinian's son Gratian recalled Theodosius to take command. Soon afterwards, on 19 January 379, Theodosius was promoted to the vacant eastern throne, where he founded a dynasty which lasted another two generations in both the east (until 450) and the west (until 455). Count Theodosius, therefore, as the new dynasty's 'divine' ancestor, was duly honoured posthumously in panegyric and by the erection of public statues. 


@@@@@


doc= 48303


Vettius Bolanus, Marcus (d. c.AD 93), Roman governor of Britain, could well have been a descendant of a Marcus Bolanus for whom Cicero wrote a letter of recommendation as 'a good, brave, and in every respect distinguished man' (Cicero, 'Ad familiares', xiii.77). The rare name Bolanus is found, together with that of Vettius, on an inscription at Mediolanum (Milan), and other Bolani are recorded there and in this region of Italy, which was presumably the governor's home. The family also had estates in Etruria, north of Rome. Bolanus had two sons, one with the same names as himself, the other called Crispinus, born in the late AD 70s and 'c'.AD 80 respectively. Hence Bolanus evidently married late, as he himself was probably born between AD 20 and AD 30; he died 'c'.AD 93. 
Not much is known of his career before his governorship (AD 69-71), but Bolanus served as a legionary legate in Armenia in AD 62 in the campaign against the Parthians conducted by Gnaeus Domitius Corbulo. He then probably served as proconsul of Macedonia before holding the consulship in AD 66, or at least had strong links with that province, since a Macedonian who clearly owed his Roman citizenship to Bolanus, Marcus Vettius Philo, later left money in his will to celebrate Bolanus's birthday annually. In April AD 69 Bolanus was at Lugdunum (Lyons), where he had gone to greet the emperor Vitellius immediately after the latter's generals had defeated Otho in northern Italy. The governor of Britain, Trebellius Maximus, had just arrived, having been forced out of the province: the legionary legates, dissatisfied with Trebellius's sluggish and indecisive stance during the civil war, had stirred up the troops against the governor's 'greed and meanness' (Tacitus, 'Histories', i.60). Bolanus was selected to fill this difficult vacancy. 
After a decade of inaction in the military field, there was now trouble on the northern frontier of the province. The Brigantes of the Pennines were at odds with their pro-Roman ruler Cartimandua, who was 'hated for her cruelty and lust', according to Tacitus ('Histories', iii.45): she had divorced her anti-Roman husband Venutius and married his armour bearer. An added incentive to the anti-Roman party was provided by the fall of Nero and the ensuing civil war, not least because Vitellius had further diminished the province's garrison (already deprived of the crack fourteenth legion and eight cohorts of Batavians in AD 66) by withdrawing 8000 men from the other legions. Although Bolanus was allowed to take the fourteenth back to Britain, Vitellius soon demanded more troops. Bolanus temporized, because 'Britain was never peaceful enough' (ibid., ii.97); but substantial numbers of men from the British garrison were engaged in the civil war campaign in northern Italy in October AD 69. Besides this, the loyalties of his men were again divided, between Vitellius and Vespasian, with the second legion favouring the latter, its old commander from twenty-five years earlier. Thus Bolanus's room for manoeuvre was already limited when the crisis in the north broke out. He was able to rescue Cartimandua and fought several battles with mixed success, according to Tacitus's account in the 'Agricola', written in AD 98. But Venutius was left in control of the kingdom. Bolanus clearly had to refrain from further action until conditions were more favourable. At about this juncture, Julius Agricola took over command of the twentieth legion, replacing the turbulent Roscius Coelius, and fretted at his lack of opportunity for campaigning. Bolanus was replaced in AD 71, by Petillius Cerialis, who, with the garrison back to full strength, was able to launch an aggressive, forward policy in northern Britain. 
Shortly after his return from Britain, in AD 73, Bolanus was honoured by Vespasian by being made a patrician and a little later became proconsul of Asia. Both items indicate that the man who had been appointed by Vespasian's enemy Vitellius had performed to the new emperor's satisfaction. Perhaps he had refused active support to Vitellius at a critical moment in AD 69. Three years before Tacitus wrote about Bolanus for the first time in the 'Agricola', the poet Statius had composed 180 hexameters in honour of Crispinus, the sixteen-year-old son of Bolanus; the latter had died shortly before. Crispinus was on the verge of beginning his own career, as a military tribune, and Statius recalled, as an inspiration for the young man, the martial deeds of Bolanus, which included capturing 'the breastplate of a British king' (Statius, v.2, 148-9). This can hardly be other than Venutius. At all events, Bolanus's successes may have been greater than is conveyed by Tacitus in his hostile version. Statius's poem also reveals that after the death of Bolanus, his widow had tried to poison Crispinus, who was probably as a consequence adopted into another family (the Clodii) and may be identified as the consul of 113, Gaius Clodius Crispinus. The elder son, Marcus Vettius Bolanus junior, was consul in 111. 


@@@@@


doc= 48304


Caesar (100-44 BC), politician, author, and military commander, was born on 13 Quinctilis (July) 100 BC, probably at Rome, the son of Gaius Julius Caesar, a patrician of old but recently undistinguished family whose brother-in-law was Gaius Marius, and Aurelia, probably daughter of Lucius Aurelius Cotta (consul in 119 BC). He had two sisters, married to Quintus Pedius and to Marcus Atius Balbus of Aricia; the latter's grandson, adopted in Caesar's will, became the emperor Augustus. 
Nothing is known of Caesar's education. He was twelve when his uncle Marius was driven into exile by Sulla's march on Rome, and thirteen at the time of Marius's vengeful return with Lucius Cornelius Cinna. When he was fifteen, his father died; the following year Caesar broke off his engagement to a girl from a wealthy equestrian family to marry Cinna's daughter Cornelia (died 69 BC). In 82 BC Sulla returned victorious from the east; by now Marius and Cinna were both dead, and Caesar went into hiding. His relatives successfully pleaded for his life, but the dictator sourly commented 'There are many Mariuses in that boy' ('Life of Caesar'). Caesar left Rome to serve in Asia Minor, where he was decorated for bravery in the attack on Mytilene. He came back to Rome at the news of Sulla's death, and announced his arrival on the political scene with the prosecution (unsuccessful) of a senior senator for extortion. In 75 BC, sailing to Rhodes to study rhetoric, he was captured by pirates; on payment of the ransom, he raised a squadron to defeat them, and had them crucified. 
Caesar's first public office was the elective military tribunate (probably in 72 BC); in 69 he was quaestor, serving in Spain; in 65, curule aedile. It was a period of revived hope for 'popularis' politicians: the Sullan oligarchy had proved itself corrupt, and the people's tribunes had regained the powers of which Sulla had stripped them. Caesar advertised his allegiance by his funeral speech for his aunt Julia, widow of Marius, in 69 BC, and by restoring to public view, as aedile, the Marian trophies Sulla had pulled down. In 63 BC, though still a junior senator, and in competition with two distinguished ex-consuls, he got himself elected to the high office of 'pontifex maximus'. He was thirty-seven, already a formidable politician, and no friend of the conservative 'establishment' in the senate. 
After a stormy praetorship in 62 BC, Caesar's first military command came with his proconsulship of Further Spain, in campaigns against the Callaeci and Lusitani conducted with characteristic decisiveness and dash. He was granted the right to a triumph, which for most Romans was the height of ambition. Caesar chose to forgo it. He wanted the consulship, and by entering the city to declare his candidacy he had to abandon his military command. His ambitions were not those of ordinary Romans. After the consulship there would be a greater command, one like those the people had conferred on Gnaeus Pompeius (Pompey the Great), whose triumph over the pirates and Mithridates, an affair of unprecedented splendour, had taken place in 61 BC. 
'Caesar has the wind in his sails just now', wrote Cicero in June 60 BC (Cicero, 'ad Atticum', II.1.6). Certainly Caesar's enemies thought so, and did their best to prevent his election as consul, or to commit him in advance to a harmlessly administrative consular command (the forests and drove-roads of Italy). It was in vain: Caesar was elected consul for 59 BC, with the powerful backing of Pompey and Marcus Licinius Crassus, and, having swiftly neutralized his optimate colleague Marcus Calpurnius Bibulus, forced through a programme of land distribution in the teeth of furious conservative opposition. 
The people's consul was rewarded with an extraordinary command (like those for Pompey in 67 and 66 BC) passed by a tribune's law in May 59 BC: he was to have Cisalpine Gaul and Illyricum (that is, northern Italy and the eastern coast of the Adriatic) for five years; Pompey subsequently got the senate to add Gallia Narbonensis (Provence). So the great campaigns of conquest, to rival Pompey's in Asia, would be either eastward or north-westward (in modern terms, either on the middle Danube or in France and Belgium) according to opportunity. As it turned out, the migration of the Helvetii took Caesar west and north. He left Rome as proconsul on or about 19 March 58 BC. When he next entered it, just over nine years later, it would be as an invader in a civil war. 
As consul, Caesar's first act had been to make public the proceedings of the senate. As proconsul, he reported his campaigns to the Roman people in annual 'commentaries', which have been recognized ever since as masterpieces of military narrative. First (58 BC), the defeat of the Helvetii, and of Ariovistus's Germans; second (57), the defeat of the Nervii (a very close-run thing) and the conquest of the Belgic peoples; third (56), the conquest of Brittany and Aquitaine. In three years, Caesar had conquered to the ocean and the Rhine; now it was time to go beyond. 
Again, Caesar kept his options open. The fourth 'commentarius', for 55 BC, reports the bridging of the Rhine and the punitive raid into Germany, and after that the preliminary expedition to Britain in late summer. Either of those could be repeated on a larger scale the following year, for his allies Pompey and Crassus were now consuls, and the people duly voted him a five-year extension to his command. Britain was the more glamorous option, an adventure beyond Ocean itself, and public opinion in Rome was excited about the conquest of this people at the very ends of the earth ('ultimi Britanni', Catullus, 11.11f). 
The show of force in September 55 BC was very nearly a disaster. Caesar's main cavalry force was unable to make the crossing; he had the greatest difficulty in getting his two legions disembarked (near Deal in Kent), against fierce opposition; four days after the landing a violent storm and high tides seriously damaged his transports; and when one of the legions was ambushed, only the last-minute arrival of reinforcements prevented its total defeat. In the end Caesar was glad to be able to get back to Gaul in his patched-up transports before the equinox. 
For the main assault the following year Caesar ordered the building of large numbers of new transport ships, low in draught to be beached easily, and able to be worked by oars or sail. In the midsummer of 54 BC he set sail from Portus Itius (Boulogne) with five legions and 2000 cavalry, in an armada of 800 ships. Tides and currents made it an awkward crossing, and oars were needed to get the transports to the landing place, probably not far from the previous year's, though this time undefended. The British forces had withdrawn inland to higher ground; Caesar disembarked, left his ships at anchor, and marched inland the same night. His forces had crossed the Stour and captured a British defensive stronghold, probably Bigbury, when news came that a storm had driven the ships ashore, with great damage. Caesar had to return to the coast, organize repairs, send for replacements from Gaul, and bring the ships on shore behind a defensive fortification. In the meantime the Britons had put Cassivellaunus, the powerful king of the Catuvellauni, in command of their forces. 
Resuming his advance through Cantium (Kent), after hard fighting against well-organized British cavalry and charioteers, Caesar forced a crossing of the Thames (possibly at Brentford) and eventually found Cassivellaunus's fortress and stormed it. Meanwhile, an attack on the base camp and Caesar's ships was successfully beaten off. Cassivellaunus asked for terms; Caesar accepted his surrender, demanded hostages and an annual tribute, and took his army back to Gaul. 
On his return Caesar was told of the death of his only child, his beloved daughter, Julia, Pompey's wife, in childbirth in her early twenties. (Julia's mother, Caesar's first wife, Cornelia, had also died young; his second wife, Pompeia, was divorced in 62 BC, for not being 'above suspicion'; he then married Calpurnia, who outlived him -- it was she who had bad dreams on the night before the ides of March.) He also found dangerous unrest in Gaul, which was why he had come back so quickly. It soon blew up into full-scale rebellion in the Belgic lands, with one Roman winter camp wiped out and another, under Cicero's brother Quintus, only narrowly saved from the same fate. One and a half legions, about 7000 men, were lost in the disaster. 
It is not known where or when the fifth book of commentaries was written; Caesar was desperately occupied in the winter of 54-53 BC. But it contains, among other things, the first ever account of the geography and ethnography of Britain: 'The island is triangular in shape, with one side facing Gaul... The second side faces westward, towards Spain' (Caesar, v.12-14). As Caesar's contemporary Catullus confirms ('ultima occidentis insula', Catullus, 29.12), the Romans thought of Britain as in the far west, close to Spain. It was a fitting scene for a heroic epic, duly composed by Cicero from material supplied by his brother (Cicero, 'Ad Q. fratrem', II.14.2, 16.4, III.7.6). But now that adventure was over, as Quintus, after his narrow escape, knew better than most. 
Caesar spent the next four years reconquering his conquests. The great pan-Gallic rebellion of Vercingetorix in 52 BC came very close to destroying his whole achievement, and him with it. His enemies in Rome took heart: Crassus was dead, Pompey could be seduced to their side as the protector of the republic. They were determined to destroy Caesar, and he was determined not to be destroyed. In January 49 BC he threw the dice in the air and marched into Italy. 
With his battle-hardened army of veterans, Caesar fought his civil war against Pompey and the republicans all over the empire of Rome, and beyond: Spain in 49 BC, Thessaly in 48 (defeating Pompey at Pharsalus), Alexandria in 48-7 (where he probably wrote the three books of his 'De bello civili' commentaries), Asia Minor in 47 ('I came, I saw, I conquered'), and above all north Africa in 46, where Marcus Porcius Cato, symbol of the old republic, killed himself after Caesar's victory at Utica. In September 46 BC, by the then calendar, Caesar at last held the great triumph that would outshine Pompey's of fifteen years before. He was now dictator for a ten-year term, with a formidable programme of projects of which the most lasting was the Julian calendar, introduced on 1 January 45 BC. But warfare still preoccupied him: first against Pompey's sons in Spain, won only by a hair's breadth at the battle of Munda (March 45 BC), and then a planned campaign against the Parthians, to avenge Crassus. But by now his autocracy was openly regal, and deeply offensive to the senate. He was careless of his own security, trusting perhaps in the luck that had protected him for so long. The latest of his long line of mistresses was Cleopatra, queen of Egypt, now conspicuously living in Rome; in 44 BC he was made dictator for life; the month of his birth, Quinctilis, was renamed 'July'; a cult of Caesar, with his own priest ('flamen'), was instituted. It was too much. On 15 March he was murdered in the Curia Pompei in Rome by republican senators under the leadership of Cato's son-in-law Marcus Junius Brutus. 'The body lay where it fell, unworthily fouled with the blood of a man who had forced his way to the west as far as Britain and Ocean, and intended to force his way to the east against the empires of Parthia and India. (Nicolaus of Damascus, 95)' So Nicolaus of Damascus, writing about twenty years after the event, sums up the many-sided genius of Caesar in the way he would probably have wanted, as an imperial conqueror. 
In 42 BC Caesar was deified. The heir to his name and fortune was his great-nephew Gaius Octavius, whom he adopted in his will as Gaius Julius Caesar Octavianus and who dedicated the temple of Divus Julius on 18 Sextilis (later 'August') 29 BC, immediately after his own triumph over Cleopatra's Egypt. The young Caesar 'Octavian' became Caesar Augustus, and thereafter Caesar's name became synonymous with imperial autocracy throughout the history of Europe. 
Shakespeare's 'Julius Caesar' was first performed in 1599 and has always been one of his most frequently performed plays. Shakespeare's source was Plutarch's 'Lives' (written some 150 years after Caesar's death) in the translation by Sir Thomas North of 1579, or its reprint of 1595. Shakespeare's play deals with the final days and assassination of Caesar and shows no interest in his role as Britain's first invader. 


@@@@@


doc= 48305


Tacitus (b. AD 56/7, d. in or after 113), a young man then taking his first steps in official life. Since almost all that is known of Agricola is relayed by this writer, the position and outlook of the man are worth more than passing comment. Cornelius Tacitus was born of provincial stock in northern Italy or southern Gaul; the latter is more likely to have been his origin as his writing reveals a close knowledge of that province. He may thus have belonged to the same provincial circle as Agricola himself. His father was of equestrian rank (a step lower than the senatorial class), quite probably the procurator of Gallia Belgica. In the reign of Vespasian (AD 69-79) Tacitus embarked on the usual minor magistracies held by the young Roman bound for the senate. He served as quaestor in AD 81 or 82, either tribune of the people or aedile three years later, and praetor in 88. He should then have served as legate of a legion for about three years, but this phase in his career is not recorded. He next appears as consul in AD 97, when he was forty or forty-one. This succession of offices had been rapid for the son of an 'eques' and there is no evidence that his progress had been slowed by changes in the Flavian regime. The later stages of his official career are largely unknown, but he attained the proconsulship of Asia (a small portion of western Anatolia), the pinnacle of the senatorial 'cursus', in 112-13. His talents were not confined to the field of provincial administration. He was an outstanding orator and advocate; and by his early forties, if not before, he had begun his literary career. The 'Agricola' was fairly certainly his first published work, compiled in AD 97-8, immediately before the 'Germania' and immediately after his consulship. The circumstances of its writing -- the recent death of Domitian, the accession of Nerva, and the adoption of Trajan -- have left their mark on the tenor of the work. 


@@@@@


doc= 48306


Venutius (fl. AD 51-c.71), king in Britain, was a man of high rank, of the tribe of the Brigantes, which during the Roman period in Britain occupied almost the whole of the area from the Humber to the line of Hadrian's Wall, with the exception of what is now south-east Yorkshire and with the possible addition of territory in south-west Scotland. He was married to Cartimandua, queen of the Brigantes. The Roman historian Tacitus, in his account of this period, the 'Annals', singles out Venutius as the outstanding British general after the capture of Caratacus in AD 51 and a man who had long been loyal to Rome, and protected by her, as noted in an earlier passage. This earlier reference to Venutius is not extant, so it must have been in the lost part of Tacitus, for AD 43-7. It may be assumed that Cartimandua's alliance with Rome, supported by Venutius, dated from the invasion in AD 43 or not long after. Venutius then quarrelled with Cartimandua; his brother and relations were captured by her; and an invasion of Cartimandua's kingdom was launched as a response by a war band led by Venutius, presumably from the north, since Rome held the south. Roman forces were involved in supporting their ally, the queen, and were in the end successful in repelling the invasion. These events took place under the governor Didius Gallus, whose term of office was AD 52-7. 
Tacitus had already written the history of the years AD 69-96 in the 'Histories', and in that account the story of Venutius and Cartimandua and its end is told in highly compressed form. Here it was the glory of having handed over Caratacus to the Romans that led to Cartimandua increasing in wealth and extravagance. She rejected Venutius in favour of his armour bearer Vellocatus, whom she took as her new consort. Venutius summoned allies and the Brigantes themselves revolted. Cartimandua sought support from Rome; she was rescued; but the kingdom was left to Venutius, with war against the Brigantes inevitable when Rome's hands were freed from the civil war in AD 69 that had given Venutius his opportunity. The story as told in the 'Histories' seems at first to imply a much shorter time scale than the story in the 'Annals', but the beginning of the trouble is clearly stated to be not long after the capture of Caratacus and the final triumph of Venutius linked to the opportunity offered by Roman civil war in AD 69. It would appear, therefore, that Venutius nursed his grievances in exile from the early AD 50s to 69. 
Sir Mortimer Wheeler thought that he had located Venutius's stronghold in the great defended enclosure at Stanwick, in north Yorkshire. More recent work and thinking rejects this notion and that of a 'battle of Stanwick' and sees Stanwick as an 'oppidum', a proto-urban centre, receiving luxury items from the Roman world, and therefore much more probably to be linked to the pro-Roman queen Cartimandua. 
In Tacitus's terse description in the 'Agricola' of the conquest of the Brigantes by Petillius Cerialis, there is no reference to Venutius. There may be one other reference, by the poet Statius, eulogizing the achievements of an earlier governor of Britain, Vettius Bolanus (AD 69-71), for the benefit of Bolanus's son and referring to the trophies Bolanus dedicated in Britain, among them the breastplate which he took from a British king. As it was Bolanus who rescued Cartimandua, it may not be too fanciful to see here a reference to Venutius. If so, Venutius survived this encounter, perhaps to perish in fighting against Cerialis, governor from AD 71 to 73 or 74. 


@@@@@


doc= 48308


Hugh the Chanter (d. c.1140), historian, may have had family origins in Flanders or Picardy, a suggestion supported by the other name by which he was known, Sottovagina (Sottewain in the vernacular), evidently a nickname meaning 'foolish (or absurd) scabbard'. It was an unusual name, which Hugh shared with a number of individuals associated with York. Thomas Sottovagina and his brother Ernulf, for instance, both York canons, occurring from the 1120s to the 1150s, may have been Hugh's nephews or sons. Hugh's place and date of birth are, however, unknown. The text of his history of the church of York (which survives in one manuscript copy, in the early fourteenth-century 'Magnum registrum album' (MS L2/1) of York Minster Library) does not bear his name, but he is identified as its author by the Digby chronicle of the archbishops of York, written soon after 1140. The chronicler acknowledged his own debt to Hugh, whom he described as 'an admirable man, worthy of remembrance' and 'a man of venerable age and happy urbanity' (Raine, 2.355). 
Hugh's history, covering the period from 1070 to 1127, is an account of the primacy dispute between the churches of York and Canterbury, which centred on the demands by the southern archbishops that those of York make written profession of obedience. The way in which he refers to the cathedral chapter makes it clear that Hugh was a canon from the time of Archbishop Thomas (II; 1109-14), and he may have been collated 'c'.1108. Until 1114 some aspects of Hugh's account are confused and misleading, but from that date, and thus for the main body of the book, Hugh was writing as an eyewitness. He was probably with Archbishop Thurstan (1114-40) in 1119 and 1120, years for which he was able to give details of dates and places of events and meetings. His narrative therefore, although partisan, is generally well informed. At the very end of the work Hugh states its purpose, that posterity might forgive those who professed obedience to Canterbury, and imitate those who maintained York's independence, notably the book's central character, Thurstan. He suggests that the book might have been entitled 'The man set free' because it demonstrated how Thurstan brought the church of York back to its ancient freedom. The history shows Hugh to have been a skilful and lively writer. It is his only surviving historical work, but Richard of Hexham quotes two lines from an account by Hugh of the battle of the Standard, which took place near Northallerton on 22 August 1138, and Hugh was also the author of a set of versified moral precepts, dealing with themes such as tyranny and government, wealth and poverty. 
The date at which Hugh became archdeacon and precentor is not known. As canon of York he was a frequent witness to charters issued by the archbishop and others, and was attesting 'acta' as precentor by 1133; however he is not likely to have held that office before 'c'.1125. His occurrences as archdeacon are not easy to establish, since there was a slightly earlier archdeacon of York also named Hugh. It is therefore not certain which of these, for instance, accompanied Archbishop Thurstan to St Mary's Abbey, York, in October 1132 when a number of monks seceded to found Fountains Abbey. Hugh's archidiaconal title is either simply 'archdeacon' or 'archdeacon of the church of York', but it is probable that the archdeaconry which he held was that of Cleveland. As precentor and archdeacon Hugh issued a charter addressed to Prior Roger and the convent of Durham, which cannot be later than 1137. This survives in its original (Durham Cath. CL, Charter 2.4 Ebor.6), with Hugh's seal attached. Hugh was still alive in August 1138, at the time of the battle of the Standard, but had been succeeded as precentor by William d'Eu before January 1140. The 'Liber vitae' of Durham Cathedral priory records the commemoration of an archdeacon Hugh on 4 July. If this was the obit of Hugh the Chanter, then his death occurred on 4 July 1139. However, there exists a poem written by Hugh, monk of Pontefract, which contains strong verbal echoes of the history of Hugh the Chanter. It is therefore possible that Hugh the Chanter and Hugh the monk of Pontefract were one and the same, and that Hugh did not die in office, but retired to Pontefract with Archbishop Thurstan in 1140. 


@@@@@


doc= 48309


Worcester, John of (fl. 1095-1140), Benedictine monk and chronicler, was very probably responsible for the work formerly attributed to Florence of Worcester ['see below']. Orderic Vitalis (died 1143) saw the monk John at Worcester at work on a chronicle not later than 1124, and reports that Bishop Wulfstan (died 1095) had asked him to continue the world chronicle of Marianus Scotus (died 1082). Like Marianus's chronicle, John's is a world history extending from the beginning of humankind to 1140. He occasionally supplemented or corrected Marianus's account of world events, but the substantial English history (from 450 to 1140) that he grafted on to Marianus, and the respect that he showed for his sources, make his chronicle particularly valuable. The backbone of his annals was a translation of one or more versions of the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle', and John's differences from existing vernacular witnesses are therefore of significance. He had considerable recourse to Bede's 'Historia ecclesiastica' for events down to 731, and John's extensive copying of Asser's 'Vita AElfredi' makes his text, as one of three surviving partial medieval witnesses to that life, of crucial importance in its reconstruction. 
For much of the tenth and early eleventh centuries saints' lives -- those of Dunstan by B, Adelard, and Osbern, of Oswald by Byrhtferth, and of AElfheah by Osbern -- fill in some of the gaps in the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle'. And from the early eleventh century to the chronicle's conclusion in 1140 John's additional information is often of great interest, while after 1106 or so he departs increasingly from the one surviving version of the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle'; and in these years, and in the later years of Henry I and the first five years of Stephen, he becomes an important contemporary source. John complemented the consular tables and lists of popes, with which Marianus had introduced his chronicle, with genealogies of English kings, brief and valuable narratives of the English kingdoms, and episcopal lists. Although it contains only occasional details about its compiler, his chronicle shows that John stayed at Winchcombe for some time (annals 1130, 1134); that he relied on the oral testimony of Grimbald, Henry I's physician, Bishop Henry de Blois, and the abbot of St Valery-sur-Somme (annals 1130, 1134, 1137); that he witnessed the sack of Worcester in 1139; and that his accounts of the campaigns in the west in Stephen's reign seem based on personal knowledge. The interest in celestial phenomena, which is a notable feature of his work, seems confirmed by the appearance of his distinctive hand in the Worcester copy of the 'Tables of al-Khwarizmi' in Adelard of Bath's translation (Bodl. Oxf., MS Auct. F.1.9.). 
John's chronicle survives in five twelfth-century manuscript copies and in a single leaf from a sixth. The chief manuscript (Oxford, Corpus Christi College, MS 157) was a working copy which John himself extensively revised. He made marginal additions and rewrote some annals, he erased and rewrote the annals for 1128-31, and he continued the chronicle to its present imperfect end in 1140. The other four copies, which all depend directly or indirectly on the Corpus Christi manuscript, testify to two versions of the chronicle ending in 1131. The first version is represented by Dublin, Trinity College, MS 502, and LPL, MS 42, written at Coventry and Abingdon respectively, and the second by a Bury copy, Bodl. Oxf., MS Bodley 297. Cambridge, Corpus Christi College, MS 92, which was probably begun at Abingdon and completed at Peterborough, is hybrid. The evolution of the text shows how John, during its compilation, kept in touch with contemporary history writing at Durham, Canterbury, and Malmesbury. 
After he had revised and continued the Oxford Corpus Christi copy, John compiled and in part transcribed a self-styled 'chronicula' (Dublin, Trinity College, MS 503), which was made up of much material extracted from Corpus, MS 157, and of added information from other sources. This 'chronicula' was completed at Gloucester, where interpolations were added, and the history extended to 1141. The extant complete twelfth-century copies show that the full chronicle was copied at Bury, Abingdon, and Coventry, and that a copy was taken to Peterborough. It was very popular in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries and was taken over into many other chronicles and histories, in particular into those of Walter of Coventry and Roger of Howden. The earlier editions of the chronicle by Howard, Petrie, and Thorpe, did not take Oxford, Corpus Christi College, MS 157, as their basis, and the first edition to do so, that of Weaver, was confined to the annals from 1118 to 1140. A new edition is included in the 'Oxford Medieval Texts' series. 




@@@@@


doc= 48310


Fantosme, Jordan (fl. 1170-1180), historian, was the author of an important Anglo-Norman poem on the war of 1173-4 between Henry II and his rebellious eldest son, Henry the Young King (preserved in Durham Cathedral, MS C.N.27, fols. 139'r'-167'v'; Lincoln Cathedral, MS 104). He probably composed his chronicle, as this work has become known, in England in late 1174 or 1175, but the place and date of his birth and of his death are unknown, and all external biographical evidence is circumstantial. The significance of the epithet Fantosme, from the Latin 'fantasma' ('apparition', 'ghost'), is unclear. It may refer to his pale appearance or perhaps to an elusive character. 
Almost certainly intended for recitation at court, Fantosme's subtle and diplomatic poem celebrates the victory of Henry II, lauds the fidelity and bravery of his loyal barons, but equally urges reconciliation between father and son. While gently censuring the Young King for the folly of rebellion, Fantosme reminds Henry II of the grievances of his heir, who, although crowned, has been denied effective power or a realm of his own. Fantosme likewise has Henry II admit responsibility for Thomas Becket's death, but regards the miraculous correlation of Henry's penance at Canterbury and the capture of William the Lion, king of Scots, on 13 July 1174, as clear proof that St Thomas and the king have become reconciled. 
Fantosme's detailed knowledge of Anglo-Scottish political and military affairs, coupled with a measured sympathy for William the Lion's 'casus belli' and lavish praise for the king's younger brother, Earl David of Huntingdon, suggests intimate contact with the Scottish court, possibly at a diplomatic level. Fantosme seems to align himself strongly with an element of William's court headed by Ingelram, bishop of Glasgow, and Waltheof, earl of Dunbar, that urged peace with England in 1173, and is highly critical of influential but unnamed 'aliens' who incite William into a foolish and disastrous war. 
Internal evidence also indicates Fantosme's widespread connections, for example with the citizens of London, and particularly close links with the baronage of Yorkshire and Northumbria, focusing his attention on such northern lords as Robert de Vaux, Roger Fitzrichard, Odinel de Umfraville, the Stutevilles, and others. Fantosme claims to have been with the forces of Ranulf de Glanville when the English surprised and captured William the Lion as he breakfasted outside Alnwick Castle on 13 July 1174. Certainly, in its vivid and detailed portrayal of warfare and chivalry in the later twelfth century, his poem must rank second only to the 'Histoire de Guillaume le Marechal' (the Anglo-Norman verse biography of William (I) Marshal), and Ambroise's 'History of the Holy War', an eyewitness account of the third crusade. 
The rarity of the name Fantosme has led to general agreement that the poet is identical with the man who was a clerk of the bishop of Winchester and master of the schools, prominent in the household first of Henry de Blois (died 1171), then of his successor, Richard of Ilchester (died 1188), though the link remains unsubstantiated. The Jordanus Fantasma of Winchester was a man of some importance, who testified 'viva voce' for Henry de Blois in 1160, and whose house in Minster Street was regarded as a prominent landmark in contemporary charters. His claim to a teaching monopoly in the city's schools was recognized by Archbishop Theobald in a letter to Pope Adrian IV ('r'. 1154-9), preserved by John of Salisbury, concerning a dispute between Fantosme and another of the bishop of Winchester's clerks, Master John Joicel. 
Fantosme may have studied under the philosopher Gilbert de la Porree, when the latter was bishop of Poitiers (1142-54), as a twelfth-century St Amand manuscript of Gilbert's commentaries on Boethius contains a miniature showing the master with his most distinguished pupils at his feet, including Ivo of Chartres and one Jordanus Fantasma. No firm evidence links this scholar and Jordan the poet, but the influence of Provencal lyric on the poem, and its accordance with Porretanian views of free will, do not rule out this connection. An early thirteenth-century manuscript labels a Latin poem on the death and incarnation of Christ as the 'Poem of Jordan Fantasma' ('Rithmus Jordanis Fantasmatis'), though again the connection between Jordan the poet or Jordan the clerk remains circumstantial. 
From his involvement in a serious dispute in 1171, Fantosme appears as an unscrupulous litigant, manipulating papal appeals and playing off rivalries between secular and ecclesiastical courts to gain letters barring prosecution witnesses from appearing. In the last known stage of the case, the pope ordered Bishop Bartholomew of Exeter (died 1184) to suspend Fantosme and to deprive him if found guilty of active intimidation. 
If clerk and poet are one and the same, however, Jordan Fantosme was in a position influential enough by 1174 to attempt to reconcile Henry II and his son by means of a courtly praise poem, remarkable as much for the insight it affords into the world of Angevin politics as for its complex and innovative prosody. 


@@@@@


doc= 48311


Evesham, Dominic of (d. in or before 1150), Benedictine monk and hagiographer, was perhaps born of English parents, as some slight linguistic evidence suggests. He seems to have become a monk at the Benedictine abbey of Evesham during the abbacy of Walter (1078-1104), probably during its latter years -- he was not a monk in 1077, and knew only at second hand about some remarkable events at Evesham in Walter's earlier years. Dominic was an Evesham monk before Walter died, however, but was not highly placed in a list of the convent that was drawn up soon afterwards. In due course he became prior, and in that capacity represented his abbot in 1125 at the consecration of the abbot of Tewkesbury and witnessed his abbot's charters in 1130 and probably 1133. But by 1150 there was a different prior, and the inference is that Dominic was dead. Evesham Abbey observed his obit every year on 11 October. 
Although Evesham Abbey was not very notable for its writings in Abbot Walter's day, Walter himself was believed to be 'greatly learned in both liberal and grammatical literature' and he encouraged the monks to study; 'he made many books' ('Chronicon abbatiae de Evesham', 96-7). Dominic's chief literary interest was in miracle stories connected with the house. It was probably before 1100 that he rewrote Byrhtferth of Ramsey's life of Evesham's founder, St Ecgwine (died 717), which he rendered in a more conventional and polished style to agree with Anglo-Norman taste, and in or after 1104 he added his own collection of stories about Ecgwine's posthumous miracles, from the late tenth-century revival of Evesham to the abbacy of Walter. Together Dominic's life and miracles of St Ecgwine have been praised for their clarity and elegance. The life was published by M. Lapidge in 'Analecta Bollandiana', 96 (1978), 65-104. The miracles are in Hereford Cathedral Library, MS P.vii.6, and a thirteenth-century Evesham version of them, with no significant changes, was published in 'Chronicon abbatiae de Evesham' (pp. 36-67). Dominic also collected miracles of St Odulf (died 855), a Brabantine missionary whose relics were given to Evesham in the early eleventh century. The stories evidently dated from that time to the abbacy of Maurice (1104- 'c'.1121) and seem to have been appended to a life lightly adapted, perhaps by Dominic, from that usually ascribed to Cappidus of Stavoren. The life and Dominic's miracles of St Odulf, or versions of them, are probably those in Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. A.287, folios 116'v'-119'v', from which the miracles were published in 'Chronicon abbatiae de Evesham' (pp. 313-20). 
Dominic's most widely read collection, and one that became more influential than he could have foreseen, was of fourteen miracles of the Virgin Mary, Evesham's patron. He appears to have compiled it after 'c'.1121 -- one of the stories probably came from Abbot Robert, appointed about then -- and under the influence of a contemporary compilation of miracles of the Virgin now ascribed to Anselm, abbot of Bury (died 1148). William of Malmesbury's collection of miracles of the Virgin borrowed seven or eight stories from Dominic's, and all three English collections were amalgamated by the mid-twelfth century. In that form they laid the foundations of a new genre, devoted to the Virgin herself rather than to places or saints that she had honoured, which was to permeate the culture of western Europe. Dominic later made a collection of eleventh-century miracle stories associated with Evesham called 'Acta proborum virorum' ('Deeds of good men'), in which he listed his own earlier miracle collections. It was published in 'Chronicon abbatiae de Evesham' (pp. 320-25). There is no evidence to confirm the suggestion that Dominic revised (to 1078) and continued the Evesham 'Gesta abbatum' ('Deeds of the abbots'); those parts of the 'Gesta' (printed in 'Chronicon abbatiae de Evesham', 69-98) are unlike Dominic's known writings in genre and style. Nor has it been demonstrated that a lost life of St Wigstan (died 849), whose relics lay at Evesham, was Dominic's work, though a version of it was written at Evesham in the thirteenth century (published in 'Chronicon abbatiae de Evesham', 325-37). 


@@@@@


doc= 48312


Ste Maure, Benoit de (fl. c.1160-c.1180), historian and poet, may have been a monk at the Benedictine abbey of Marmoutier. Virtually nothing is known about his life, except that he is more likely to have come from the town of Ste Maure in the Touraine region than from Ste Maure in Champagne. Two long narrative poems in octosyllabic rhymed couplets have been identified as his: the first, the 'Roman de Troie' ('c'.1160), with certainty, and the second, the 'Chronique des ducs de Normandie' ('c'.1174-1180), with certainty by a majority of scholars, but with hesitation (or not at all) by others. The identification of the Beneeiz de Sainte More of the 'Roman de Troie' with the Beneeit of the 'Chronique' is based upon linguistic and stylistic evidence, and not on biographical information in the 'Chronique', or on extratextual evidence (of which there is almost none). Although he was a contemporary of Wace who also wrote a poem containing a myth of Trojan descent, the 'Roman de Brut' (1155), and a chronicle of the Norman dukes and Anglo-Norman kings, the 'Roman de Rou' ('c'.1160-1174), Benoit de Ste Maure was much less forthcoming about his personal circumstances than the Norman poet; in that respect he was more typical of the majority of contemporary authors about whose lives very little is known. 
Benoit de Ste Maure's practice of translation was also typical of contemporary practice: he considered the 30,316-line 'Roman de Troie' a translation, though it is a lengthy adaptation of two short Latin prose works, the 'De excidio Troiae historia' of Dares the Phrygian, and the 'Ephemeridos belli Troiani' of Dictys of Crete, pseudo-histories dating from the fourth to the sixth centuries AD. One of the 'romans d'antiquite' (French narratives based on classical authors), the 'Roman de Troie' traces the legendary history of Troy from the Argonauts to the death of Ulysses upon his return home from the siege. In the 'Roman de Troie' where Hector is the main hero rather than Achilles and the story of Troilus and Cressida (or as Benoit calls her, Briseida) is thought to appear for the first time, antiquity is depicted under the guise of twelfth-century feudalism, and the element of love intrigue is considerable. The 'Roman de Troie', often thought to have been dedicated to Eleanor of Aquitaine based on Benoit's reference to a 'riche dame de riche rei', was extremely popular, widely translated and imitated. According to the scholars who accept the single identity of the author of the 'Troie' and of the 'Chronique', it was probably the popularity of the 'Troie' that brought the poet to Henry Plantagenet's attention. 
Benoit de Ste Maure's chronicle of the Norman dukes, the 44,544-line 'Chronique des ducs de Normandie', was, however, less popular than the 'Roman de Troie'. According to Wace, Henry II commissioned 'Maistre Beneeit' to write a history of the Norman dukes, leading Wace to break off the 'Roman de Rou' before bringing the narrative up to the reign of Henry II. Although Benoit's chronicle of the Normans is more diffuse and less lucid than Wace's, and is considered by historians to be less reliable, possibly owing to the large amount of panegyric inserted for the benefit of the royal house, notable parallels exist between the 'Rou' and the 'Chronique' as regards circumstances of composition. Like Wace, Benoit de Ste Maure was at this point in his career writing for Henry's court. He also used the Norman histories of Dudo of St Quentin, William of Jumieges, and William of Poitiers as his primary sources; passages in the 'Chronique' suggest that Benoit may have had Wace's 'Rou' at hand as well. Again like Wace he did not complete his chronicle of the Norman dukes, ending with the death of Henry II's grandfather, Henry I, in 1135; towards the end of the work Benoit also expresses reservations about his patron's possible displeasure with the work, due perhaps to slow progress. Benoit de Ste Maure devoted less energy than Wace to the military aspects of the Normans' rise to power, and concentrated more on demonstrating the necessary interaction of chivalric with clerical values and interests. He is thereby thought to have made a significant contribution to the medieval theory of the three orders of social organization. 


@@@@@


doc= 48313


Eynsham, Adam of (b. c.1155, d. in or after 1233), abbot of Eynsham and hagiographer, came from a middle-class Oxford family, and became a monk and then in due course first prior, and then abbot, of the Benedictine monastery at Eynsham. His father, Edmund, was a doctor who owned properties in Oxford (probably in the Osney district), but went to the Holy Land and died there 'c'.1187. One of Adam's brothers, William of Oxford, is mentioned as the abbot's brother in Eynsham charters, and a younger brother, also called Edmund, had studied at Oxford and in 1196 experienced a vision of the next world. Adam wrote an account of this, 'The Vision of the Monk of Eynsham', which survives in several manuscripts and printed editions. 
Eynsham is a rare English example of an abbey founded by the local bishop (Lincoln), who had the right of patronage. This right deeply affected Adam three times in his life. Hugh (bishop of Lincoln, 1186-1200) successfully claimed it against the king in 1197, and Adam, prior or sub-prior during the vacancy caused by Abbot Godfrey's death in 1195, probably compiled the Eynsham cartulary for this lawsuit. In 1197 Robert, prior of Dover, became abbot and Hugh shrewdly chose Adam as his chaplain. From then until Hugh's death Adam was his companion and confidant, travelling with him in England, Anjou, and the Dauphine. This experience enabled Adam to write the life of Hugh, one of the fullest and most trustworthy saints' lives of the middle ages. This work is Adam's principal title to fame. It is mainly through his portrait, although both idealized and selective, that Hugh can be known in such great detail today. 
Adam completed this life after Hugh's death. Like many of the English clergy he went abroad during the interdict (1208-13) under King John. He was certainly in Paris for some of this time. Hugh of Wells, bishop of Lincoln (1209-35) returned to England in 1213 and exercised his right to preside over the election at Eynsham of a successor to Abbot Robert, who had died in 1208. Adam, whose research had earlier established the bishop of Lincoln's rights, was elected abbot and ruled for fifteen years. 
Eynsham was never a very large monastery, but it was important for the many visitors who stayed there on the way to the west and to Wales, and it was frequently chosen by kings as the place for episcopal elections, which were held there while the king stayed in the palace at Woodstock. Such events were inevitably expensive for the monastery. While Adam was abbot, the monks incurred another expense, that of providing 52's'., as well as a meal, for 200 poor (clerical) students each year. This had been imposed on the town of Oxford, in reparation for the townspeople's having killed some student clerics in a riot in 1209, by the papal legate Nicolo of Tusculum. The town, it seems, persuaded Eynsham to provide this annual sum in return for a cash or property payment. Although Eynsham owned considerable estates (including woodlands, which Adam had cut wastefully), the abbey had fallen into debt under Abbot Godfrey, and by 1227 it owed $152 15's'. to David the Jew of Lincoln. This they managed to repay on 29 June of that year, but in 1228 Adam, now an old man, was deposed by the bishop of Lincoln, Hugh of Wells (again exercising his powers over a 'bishop's monastery'), as a 'manifest dilapidator' of monastic property. This needs to be considered in the context of widespread monastic financial problems at this time, and of the claims of communities to exercise more control over spending, not to mention the interdict and royal exactions. On the other hand, it may be that Adam, although a good scholar in the monastic tradition, was a poor administrator. His abbatial seal survives. 
After his retirement he lived in the manor of Little Rollright and witnessed charters. In 1233 he was exempted from doing suit for the manor, and presumably died soon afterwards. From his writings, composed just when Oxford schools were developing into a university, Adam emerges as one well read in the 'Bible' and the fathers who was also a keen and articulate observer of events, people (including three Angevin kings), and even animals (such as the swan of St Hugh of Lincoln), and as one who tellingly depicted the weak and the strong aspects of twelfth-century church life. 


