@@@@@


doc= 48315


Powderham, John (d. 1318), impostor, was the son of an Exeter tanner who attained notoriety by treasonably claiming to be the rightful king of England in 1318. Records are meagre: on 20 July William Montagu, the king's steward, was ordered to take him (under the name of John Exeter) from Northampton gaol for trial. All further information comes from chronicle sources, which show a reasonable correspondence of detail. 
Powderham, who took his name from a hamlet about 51/2 miles south of Exeter, first made his claim in Oxford in June 1318. Variously described as 'literatus' or 'scriptor', perhaps attracted from Exeter to make his living as a scribe on the fringes of Oxford's university community, he went to the King's Hall there, which had recently been granted to the Carmelites, and ordered them to leave his house, claiming to be the true heir of Edward I. His claim was confused, being reported both as a claim to be Edward II's brother, and as a claim to be the real Edward II, changed in the cradle following injury through the negligence of his nurse. He was first imprisoned in the Bocardo in Oxford, then in Northampton. The king treated him with derision, but the queen and the magnates took him seriously in the tense political situation of 1317-18. A trial was held before Montagu; Powderham's parents were brought from Exeter and swore he was their son; he then allegedly confessed to association with the devil, who he said had persuaded him to make the claim; and he was executed by hanging about 24 July. Franciscan and Dominican writers used the episode as an excuse to preach on the vanity of dreams and on false prophets, but in general chroniclers were sceptical about witchcraft, and the canon of Bridlington considered him weak in the head. 
The Lanercost chronicler raised the question of whether Powderham was manipulated by others. His advent certainly came at a delicate political time. England hovered on the edge of civil war in 1317 and early 1318, with relations between Edward and Thomas of Lancaster at their lowest ebb. However, mediation intensified in June and July 1318, largely due to the need to face the Scots, who had retaken Berwick in April. By 23 June the first set of talks had failed, but on 11 and again on 18 July the archbishop of Canterbury expected success. It is exactly in these months that the impostor appeared. Agreement was finally reached on 29 July, just after his execution. If he was, as most chronicle reports seem to suggest, a foolish, half-educated man, who had convinced himself that the devil came to him in dreams, he might easily be manipulated, but if so, by whom? The king's favourites did not particularly want a peace settlement with Lancaster if it included a confirmation of the ordinances, but it is not easy to see how an attack on the king's position would help them, unless they hoped to attribute the attack to Lancaster. It is conceivable that Lancaster or some of his supporters might encourage an attack on the king if they thought it would weaken him, and bring reconciliation on Lancaster's terms. There is in fact no evidence that either side had any connection with Powderham, nor of what effect his appearance had on negotiations. The impostor was an embarrassment to Edward, but it is unlikely that anyone saw the deposition of Edward as a practical possibility at this time, and, whatever Edward's faults, it is highly doubtful that any manipulator would seriously think that a man whose background appears to have been an upbringing in an Exeter craft family, and who believed he was in contact with the devil, would be more suitable. Edward's initial reaction, to see him as a court jester, might well have been the right one in normal times. 


@@@@@


doc= 48316


Katherine (1372-1418), queen of Castile, consort of Enrique III, was the youngest of the three daughters of John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster (1340-1399), and his second wife, Constanza (1354-1394), daughter and heir of Pedro I of Castile, whose death at the hands of his half-brother Enrique of Trastamara (Enrique II) in 1369 gave John a claim to the Castilian throne in his wife's right. Probably born at Hertford, as an infant, in January 1375, Katherine had her own household at Melbourne, Derbyshire, but from mid-April 1380 until at least 1382 she lived with Joan Burghersh, Lady Mohun, a widowed kinswoman of her father. In 1381 she was recorded as Katerine d'Espaigne, suggesting that a role in Iberian affairs was foreseen for her, and in 1386 she and her sisters accompanied their parents on an expedition to Castile to press John's claims to its throne. He occupied Santiago with ease, but in 1387 withdrew to Portugal after an unsuccessful invasion of Leon, and subsequently accepted the proposal of King Juan, Enrique's son, that Katherine should marry his son, another Enrique, and that he and his wife should renounce their claims. A final treaty was ratified at Bayonne in Gascony on 8 July 1388. 
On 5 August 1388 Katherine declared that she entered freely into the marriage and accepted the treaty arrangements. These included a dower of the towns of Soria, Almazan, Atienza, Deza, and Molina, and licence to adhere in her private worship to the Urbanist papal obedience (in September 1390 she succumbed to pressure to accept the authority of the Avignon papacy, of which she became a staunch supporter). On 17 September 1388 she was married to the nine-year-old Enrique in Palencia Cathedral. Her husband succeeded to the throne in 1390, and began to rule in 1393. Katherine -- in Spanish Catalina -- was of minor political importance during Enrique's reign, except in bearing three children, Maria (1401), Catalina (1402), and the future Juan II (1405). Her remaining energies seem to have been devoted to religious patronage, especially of the Dominicans. All this changed when Enrique died in 1406. According to the terms of his will, his brother Fernando and his widow were to be joint regents during Juan's minority, but the custody of his son was to be entrusted to two nobles, Diego Lopez de Stuniga and Juan Fernandez de Velasco. Rather than hand over her son, in 1407 Catalina prepared to defend herself and her household in the Alcazar at Segovia, but Fernando eventually brokered a deal that enabled her to keep her son. Nevertheless, distrust between the regents was exacerbated by Fernando's plans to lead his brother's planned campaign against the kingdom of Granada, separating the two regents and consequently, under Enrique's will, necessitating a division of rule. The royal council awarded Catalina control of the northern kingdoms of Castile and Leon. Tensions between the regents persisted, not least over Catalina's favours to Velasco and Stuniga, and in 1409 Fernando insisted on their expulsion from her court. Thereafter she became co-operative in providing financial support for his costly Granadan campaigns. 
In consequence of her increasing involvement in wars in the south, Castile's alliance with France languished, and Catalina was able to cultivate better relations with Portugal (where her half-sister Philippa was queen) and with England, along lines her father would have approved. She was on good terms with Richard II, while her dealings with her half-brother Henry IV, infused with personal warmth, had beneficial effects. Although there was no peace treaty, the two rulers fostered Anglo-Castilian trade by granting numerous safe conducts, while Catalina, who herself bought costly fabrics in London, sponsored a series of unilateral truces between 1410 and 1416. Her international policies boosted the prosperity of Castilian communities, whereas her co-regent's were a drain on it. However, although as a result of Fernando's pursuit of the throne of Aragon, Seville, Cordoba, and Jaen were brought within her sphere of control, his attainment of his ambition in 1412, and his death in 1416, had the effect of reducing Catalina's authority, by depriving his rivals of incentives to support her. Government became increasingly conciliar, and Catalina -- who may have been partially incapacitated by a stroke -- relinquished the custody of her son. 
A vivid account of Catalina towards the end of her life was later recorded by Fernan Perez de Guzman. It suggests that she may have inherited physical characteristics from her father, and also that she was a sick woman: 'The queen was tall of body and very fat. She was pink and white in her complexion and fair. In her figure and her movements she seemed as much like a man as a woman. She was very virtuous and reserved in her person and in her reputation; generous and magnificent in her ways but very much devoted to favourites and greatly ruled by them -- a thing which, in general, is a vice common to royal personages. She was not very well ordered in her body and had a serious affliction of the palsy which did not leave her tongue properly loose or her bodily movements free. (Guzman, 19-20)' Whatever the effects of her favouritism -- she was twice obliged to banish ladies from her household -- they should not be allowed to obscure either the constructive effects of her initiatives in foreign policy, or the concern to protect the interests of Juan II which infused her domestic statecraft. Catalina died at Valladolid on 2 June 1418, and was buried with her husband in the capilla de los reyes nuevos in Toledo Cathedral. Her monumental effigy portrays her with a long face and highly arched forehead. 


@@@@@


doc= 48317


Maudeleyn, Richard (1371/2-1400), royal councillor, was born in London, the son of John Maudeleyn, serjeant-yeoman of the king's robes, and his wife, Alice, and the brother of Agnes, wife of Robert Sewall. Between 1386 and 1391 he was a royal scholar at King's Hall, Cambridge; when granted a dispensation to be ordained a priest in 1392, he was aged twenty. He enjoyed the favour of Richard II during the later years of the reign, receiving numerous benefices, including canonries at Lincoln in 1393, at St Stephen's Chapel, Westminster, in 1396, and at York in 1397. In April 1398 he became archdeacon of Lincoln. The king demonstrated great trust in his 'Master Richard': in October 1397 he brought the duke of Gloucester's corpse from Calais to London, and in 1398 was sent to Ireland to prepare the royal chambers in Dublin Castle for the king's arrival. Maudeleyn was also made an executor of the king's will. He accompanied Richard to Ireland in 1394, and again in 1399, returning with him to Wales upon news of Henry Bolingbroke's arrival. At Conwy, where the royal party was cornered by the earl of Northumberland, Walsingham states that the king offered to abdicate on condition that his life and the lives of eight of his counsellors, including Maudeleyn, were spared; the more reliable Creton says that Maudeleyn was one of five royal counsellors whom Bolingbroke intended to try for Gloucester's death. 
Together with the captive king Maudeleyn was taken to London, where in October 1399 Bolingbroke, now Henry IV, presented to the knights of parliament a 'certain scroll... containing magic arts' found in Maudeleyn's possession; summoned before convocation the next day to explain it, he confessed that it had been given to him by Richard II, but denied any knowledge of its meaning, and was released ('Johannis de Trokelowe', 301). With Richard II imprisoned in Pontefract Castle, Maudeleyn now joined a plot to kill Henry and restore Richard to the throne. He was said to resemble the deposed king greatly, and was employed to impersonate him during the early stages of the revolt, but things went badly wrong, and Maudeleyn's chief accomplices were killed at Cirencester or Oxford in early January 1400. Maudeleyn and William Ferriby, another royal clerk, were captured in Yorkshire -- apparently they were fleeing to Scotland -- and brought to London at the end of January. They were drawn, hanged, and beheaded; Maudeleyn allegedly thanked God that he died in the service of his 'sovereign lord, the noble King Richard' (Creton, 134-5). Two months later, when Richard II's corpse was brought to London for burial, Creton (who was not there, but believed that the former king was still alive) thought it must have been the body of 'Maudeleyn, his chaplain, whose face, size, height and build were so exactly similar to the king's that everyone firmly believed that it was good King Richard' (Creton, 221). Creton was almost certainly wrong. Later suggestions that Maudeleyn might have been an illegitimate child of Richard II are equally implausible, given his likely date of birth. 


@@@@@


doc= 48322


Sir Edward David Stern, baronet (1854-1933), who had become a partner probably in the 1870s, to lead the business as senior partner. The younger son of David Stern, Edward was born in Marylebone, London, on 18 July 1854, and was educated at King's College School, London (1866-9), and later studied at King's College, London (1874-5, 1878), graduating in general literature and science. In 1883 he married Constance (1858-1918), daughter of Sir George Jessel, master of the rolls. Constance died in 1918, and Edward Stern subsequently married Sir Adolph Tuck's daughter, Sybil Grace (1887-1979), in 1925. Neither marriage produced any children. 
The merchant bank over which Edward presided maintained its alliance with the firms of Jacob S. H. Stern of Frankfurt and A. J. Stern & Cie of Paris, although each was independent of the others. Its transactions in the bond market for sovereign clients continued, and included an 1889 conversion of Argentine bonds and an 1908 issue of Turkish government bonds. The house also cornered Bulgarian government finance in London, and other business included the London paying agency for German government bonds, shared with Deutsche Bank and Discontogessellschaft. 
The First World War must have severely damaged the firm's foundations. Links with Frankfurt and Paris were left in disarray, and its European client network and security distribution channels destroyed. At the same time English-based members of the family publicly distanced themselves from their German cousins. During the First World War, Lord Michelham provided hospitals in Paris for British officers and offered ten prizes of $1000 a piece for each Zeppelin shot down. 
In the 1920s Stern Brothers was a shadow of its former self. Although the firm had led Bulgarian government bond issues on equal terms with Schroders and the Ottoman Bank in 1909, in 1926, when the syndicate reformed, Sterns was scarcely up to the task. 'It was the first issue... Stern Brothers had made for many years', commented Schroders, 'and they were full of their own importance and very touchy on questions of prestige' (Roberts, 200). 
Outside Sterns, Edward's one prestigious appointment was, from 1901, a directorship of the London Joint Stock Bank Ltd, which later became the Midland Bank. He lived in splendour at 4 Carlton House Terrace, London, and at Fan Court, Chertsey, Surrey, where he gave generously to the local community. His particular interests were the Jews' Deaf and Dumb Home (he himself was deaf), the Jews' Orphan Asylum, and the Royal Albert Orphanage, of which he was treasurer. The West London Synagogue also benefited from his giving. Edward Stern was knighted in 1904 and made a baronet in 1922. 
A quietly spoken and reserved man, Sir Edward showed modest ability as a banker, presiding over Stern Brothers' graceful decline and appearing in old age as an improbable character. He was 'the last prominent City man to go daily to the office in a horse drawn carriage' ('The Times', 19 April 1933, 12c), while at home his progression on horseback from Fan Court to the nearby racecourse proved 'a triumphant progress.... People old and young stood at their gates waiting to see him pass.... Shouts of 'Good old Sir Edward' testified to his popularity' (ibid., 20 April 1933, 15b). He died on 17 April 1933 at 4 Carlton House Terrace, London, leaving most of his estate to London University. His pictures and other collections went to the National Gallery and the Victoria and Albert Museum. Sir Edward was buried at the Kingsbury Road Jewish cemetery, Dalston. 
Sir Albert Gerald Stern, the second son of James Julius and Lucy Stern, succeeded Sir Edward as senior partner of the firm in 1933. Educated at Eton College and Christ Church, Oxford, he converted to Christianity at an early age and became a partner in Stern Brothers in 1903. Although he negotiated a large loan to the sultan of Morocco, Albert Stern had no real flair as a merchant banker. His most prominent contribution, and for which he was awarded a knighthood, was as a pioneer of tank warfare in the First World War. Stern continued as a partner in Stern Brothers until 1964 when, as a virtual shell, the firm discontinued business. 
The original Stern brothers, David and Herman, achieved immense wealth and leadership within Britain's Jewish community in the second half of the nineteenth century by establishing one of London's most successful merchant banks. Their sons and grandsons, however, failed to show a similar distinction as merchant bankers, and were distracted from business by other interests. The firm had become little more than a name by the mid-twentieth century. A shrewd commentator noted in 1944 that 'As the Sterns' wealth increased their spirit of enterprise declined; in the new generation fewer and fewer transactions were promoted and today Stern Brothers is little more than an office for the payment of the coupons on the loans they have issued in the past. (Emden, 543)' 



@@@@@


doc= 48323


Stevenson, James Cochran (1825-1905), chemical manufacturer, was born on 9 October 1825 in Glasgow, the eldest of the numerous children of James Stevenson (1786-1866), a Glasgow cotton broker, and Jane Stewart, 'nee' Shannan, daughter of a Greenock merchant. John James Stevenson was a younger brother, while Louisa Stevenson and Flora Clift Stevenson were among his sisters. Stevenson was educated at Glasgow high school and the University of Glasgow. When he was eighteen, the whole family moved to South Shields, where his father became senior partner of the Jarrow Chemical Company, alkali manufacturers. It seems probable that there were business links between the elder Stevenson and the Tennant family, alkali manufacturers at St Rollox in Glasgow, who put up one sixth of the original $36,000 capital for the Jarrow Chemical Company and were involved in other combined ventures. The Tennants set up their own alkali works at Hebburn-on-Tyne in 1863. 
On the retirement of his father in 1854, Stevenson and one of his father's partners, John Williamson, took over management of the Jarrow Chemical Company. This was only one of dozens operating the Leblanc process to produce soda ash, acids, and bleach. Demand from the textile and paper industries was high and competition minimal; price agreements were the rule. Williamson and Stevenson managed the Jarrow company effectively. In 1855 they patented a revolving kiln to improve the efficiency of the production process. Within a few years it was the largest chemical company in England and, after the Tennant St Rollox works, the second largest in the United Kingdom. With Tennants, the Jarrow Chemical Company developed brine deposits on Teesside for salt and were involved with the Tharsis Sulphur and Copper Company, set up to mine pyrites in Spain to supply their need for sulphur. By the 1870s the Jarrow Chemical Company employed 1400 men and produced annual profits of around $90,000, of which Stevenson's share was over $20,000. As soon as the Solvay ammonia-soda process, licensed to Brunner and Mond in 1873, was developed as a practical alternative, the Leblanc producers came under heavy competitive pressure. In 1890 they merged their interests into the United Alkali Company to rationalize production. Stevenson, who had been very active in the merger negotiations, became a vice-chairman; almost all Leblanc plants, including his own, were closed down over the next few years. 
Apart from his work in the chemical industry, Stevenson played an active part in public life on Tyneside. As a young man he campaigned for a River Tyne Improvement Commission to offset the growing needs of North and South Shields and Gateshead against Newcastle's traditional dominance. Appointed a life member of the commission from its establishment in 1850, and chairman for twenty years from 1880, Stevenson pressed for improvements to navigation and the establishment of dock and customs facilities at the mouth of the Tyne, often against the opposition of Newcastle interests. 
Stevenson was closely involved with the civic life of South Shields; first elected to the council in 1862, he became successively alderman, mayor, and radical Liberal MP (1868-95) and the borough's first freeman. He was instrumental in persuading the council to undertake major sanitation and road-widening schemes financed by municipal borrowing rather than implementing such works piecemeal out of current rate revenue as had been the practice. He was the first chairman of the chamber of commerce, colonel of the 3rd Durham artillery volunteers (1860-87), and a JP. He was on the board of several local companies, notably Swan's Electric Light Company (of which he was the first chairman in 1881) and the Northern Press and Engineering Company, publishers of the 'Shields Daily Gazette', of which he became sole proprietor on his father's retirement. He was a member of the general council of the University of Glasgow and of the Institute of Chemistry. 
Stevenson was a modest and retiring man, somewhat humourless and deeply religious. He was a Sunday school teacher and office bearer in the Laygate Presbyterian Church. He married on 31 October 1855 Elisa Ramsay, third daughter of Revd James Anderson DD, Presbyterian minister of Morpeth (a prominent follower of Dr Chalmers in the Disruption of 1843); they had five sons and seven daughters, including the politician Hilda Runciman. Through his wife, Stevenson was linked to the Anderson shipowning family. 
Stevenson's strong sense of public duty and commitment to his local community contrasted with his business activities as a Leblanc manufacturer. The process was noxious, producing foul smells and large quantities of industrial waste, which polluted the environment. Conditions of employment were harsh, typically with alternating 56 hour weeks of day shifts and 112 hour weeks of night shifts, and damaging to the health of workers. The Jarrow Chemical Company was, however, the first on Tyneside to grant a Saturday half-holiday. 
On his retirement Stevenson moved to Eltham Court, Eltham, Kent, where he died on 11 January 1905. 'The Times' obituarist reported that the news was received on Tyneside 'with great regret' as he was 'highly esteemed'. 


@@@@@


doc= 48324


Stoker, Robert Burdon (1859-1919), shipowner, was born at Westoe, South Shields, on 23 May 1859, the son of Robert Stoker, a sailmaker's agent, and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Burdon. He was the descendant of a Dutch soldier who had arrived in England in 1688, in the service of Wiliam of Orange. Educated at Liverpool College, in 1878 he entered a shipping house in Liverpool and in 1882 joined Christopher Furness (1852-1912) in the firm of Furness Withy & Co. Ltd, which had been established in 1878 at West Hartlepool. He married Catherine Alice, daughter of Thomas Smith, a provision agent, in 1885: they had two sons and two daughters. 
Stoker's competence led Furness to appoint him managing director of a new company, Manchester Liners Ltd, registered on 3 May 1898. Its capital of $350,000 was raised with some difficulty, half having to take the form of 5 per cent preference shares. The new shipping line was formed by Furness and J. K. Bythell, chairman of the Manchester Ship Canal Company, as the inevitable corollary to the creation of the ship canal itself because established shipowners refused to entrust their ocean-going vessels to the hazards, delays, and costs of a 35 mile inland and locked navigation. Stoker began operations with chartered vessels, but ordered seven new 13 knot cargo liners, designed to suit the dimensions of the canal and equipped with telescopic topmasts which could be lowered when passing beneath the bridges spanning the waterway. The purchase of the new fleet was financed by the issue of 4.5 per cent debentures in London. The first custom-built vessel for Manchester Liners was named 'Manchester City': it arrived in Manchester docks on 16 January 1899, and carried the name of its home port across the Atlantic, as did all the later vessels of the line. 
The ship canal had been built to the same depth as the Suez Canal in order to link the Lancashire cotton industry to its export markets in Asia. Manchester Liners made no attempt to establish a service to Asian ports: operations began with a transatlantic service to the grain port of Montreal. That pioneer venture represented a remarkable gamble because the north Atlantic routes had become the most competitive in the whole world of shipping. It succeeded only because of the boom in shipping freights created by the South African War, the full support of the Manchester corporation, and the grant of a subsidy by the Canadian government after two directors of the canal company, Alderman J. W. Southern (1840-1909) and Sir Bosdin Leech (1836-1912), visited Ottawa, and two Canadian ministers inspected the ship canal. The Montreal service could be maintained only during the ice-free months of summer, and was supplemented by a winter service to St John's and Halifax. A secondary service was begun from 1899 to the cotton port of New Orleans, and was extended to call at Philadelphia in 1901. A great stimulus was given to the direct import to Manchester of grain, cattle, and cotton. The distributive functions of the new post were notably enhanced, and a provision trade association, independent of Liverpool, was formed in 1899. The import trade was established upon a firm basis, raising Manchester from the status of twelfth importing port in 1898 to that of fourth in 1903. Stoker proved to be less successful in the development of exports from Manchester. He did, however, enlarge the share of British shipping in Canada's foreign trade, and extended the main service downriver to Quebec in 1902. His most constructive achievement was to refute the criticisms voiced by outside shipowners by proving that the waterway could be safely navigated by large vessels, with a length of 470 feet and a gross tonnage of 4400. The Manchester-Montreal line remained the main service of Manchester Liners, as well as an essential element in the prosperity of the ship canal. Under Stoker's management the shipping line became the most profitable of the trio of enterprises associated with the new waterway, its dividends surpassing those of Trafford Park Estates Ltd and of the Manchester Ship Canal Company itself. 
Stoker earned a high local reputation in virtue of his energy, tact, and geniality. He became chairman of the Manchester Steamship Lines' Association for 1907-8 and chairman of the board of Manchester Liners itself in 1913 after the death of Lord Furness: he was chosen in preference to Stephen Furness in deference to the wish of the local directors to have a chairman resident in Manchester and acceptable to Manchester merchants. The First World War raised Stoker to the zenith of his career: it enabled the line to secure a quotation on the Manchester stock exchange in 1915, to pay record dividends of 25 per cent in 1916-18 (not surpassed until 1974), and to survive the loss of its Canadian subsidy in 1917. A director of the Manchester chamber of commerce since 1908, Stoker became its president as a result of the palace revolution of 1916 ('Chamber of commerce and free trade: thirty directors resign', 'Manchester Guardian', 24 Feb 1916). He became the first protectionist president of the chamber since 1845. He had gauged far more accurately than his fellow directors the intensity of the wartime anti-German swing in opinion against free trade. He served for three years (1916-19) as the chief executive of the Manchester trade, and presided over the passage in 1916 of a motion in favour of post-war imperial preference. His services were in increasing demand in the business world. His outside directorships rose from ten in 1915 to thirteen in 1919, and he became Unionist MP for Manchester in 1918. He died at his home, Heather Lea, Green Walk, Bowdon, Cheshire, on 4 September 1919. 
Frederick W. Lewis (1870-1944), deputy chairman of Furness Withy since 1914, succeeded Stoker as a chairman of Manchester Liners, and transferred the regular meetings of its board to London. The establishment of the line in 1898 had initially inspired extravagant hopes of the local development of 'a race of shipowners' (Manchester Ship Canal Company, annual report, 21 Feb 1901, 1). The shipping dynasty founded by Stoker in an inland city survived his death for two generations. His son Kenneth Stoker (1886-1979) and his grandson R. B. Stoker ('b'. 1914) became in turn managing director of Manchester Liners, which was finally merged in 1983 into Furness Withy Ltd. 


@@@@@


doc= 48328


Streat, Sir (Edward) Raymond (1897-1979), cotton trade administrator, was born on 7 February 1897 at 2 Brunswick Terrace, Prestwich, Lancashire, the fifth of the six children of Edward Streat (1856-1918), a commercial traveller, and his first wife, Helen (Nellie) Wallis (1859-1908). His father, who was born in Chaddleworth, near Newbury, Berkshire, and went to Manchester at an early age to find work, was a Wesleyan Methodist of sincere convictions, an ardent freemason, and an active member of the local Liberal Party; his mother was a cultured woman. Streat attended Manchester grammar school; although a good student, he left in 1913 to become an office boy. Several months later, not yet eighteen years old, he enlisted in the 10th Manchester regiment, against his father's wishes. He had been a 'delicate' child but he survived the First World War, having seen active service in France, where he was slightly wounded. Looking back, he commented that 'really it was the experiences as an infantry officer which broadened my social armoury' ('Lancashire and Whitehall', 1.xiii). 
After being demobilized as a captain in early 1919, Streat became secretary to the director of a Manchester insurance firm. Six months later, out of 600 applicants, he was made assistant secretary to the Manchester chamber of commerce; following the death of the secretary, the board of directors, in January 1920, by a margin of one vote, appointed Streat secretary. It was a bold appointment: he was only twenty-two years old, and he became the highest-ranking permanent paid official of the richest, the largest, and probably the most influential chamber of commerce in the country. Without any member of his family having any connection with the cotton industry, he found himself secretary of an organization dominated by merchants in the cotton trade. He remained at the chamber for twenty years until in 1940 he was appointed chairman of the Cotton Board, a position he held until 1957. He married on 16 March 1921 Doris Davies (1896-1976), a friend from his school days, the daughter of Amos Davies, a manufacturer; they had three sons -- Basil, Tony (who died from wounds during the Second World War), and Christopher -- and established their home at Wilmslow, Cheshire. 
For thirty-eight years Streat was at the centre of the cotton industry's attempts to cope with the drastic decline of its trade. No one else played such a leading part in Lancashire's struggle to find a workable solution over so long a period. Neither a businessman nor a civil servant, Streat belonged to a relatively new occupational group, the professional secretary. His duty as secretary of the Manchester chamber of commerce was to record the proceedings of meetings, but, with his energy, vision, charm, and tact, he exercised initiative in administration and played an active role in the formation of the chamber's policy and in negotiations. He built up the staff from half a dozen in 1920 to fifty in 1939; he trained assistant secretaries who went on to become secretaries of other chambers of commerce; he wrote the annual report and the presidents' speeches; he edited the chamber's magazine, the 'Monthly Record'; he contributed articles to newspapers; and he served as a link between the chamber and other Lancashire organizations. He was also a link between the chamber and the international chamber of commerce, and served as a member of its delegation to the World Economic Conference held at Geneva in 1927 under the auspices of the League of Nations. He built up personal contacts with civil servants, MPs, and key figures, gaining a reputation for providing an authoritative briefing paper quickly, and he came to play an intermediary role, taking proposals and counter-proposals from one group to another, and earned an accolade as 'a tennis ball with a decided spin of its own' ('Lancashire and Whitehall', 1.531). He contributed innovative ideas such as that for the Lancashire Industrial Development Council, which, from its inaugural meeting in 1931, worked to bring new industries into Lancashire. 
During the inter-war years the troubles of the cotton trade overshadowed the chamber's other activities. Because many of the industry's difficulties revolved around the loss of export markets and questions of tariffs, quotas, and trade agreements, the chamber became the principal voice of the cotton trade, wielding considerable influence. India presented the most complex problems. In the early 1930s Streat was among those who believed it was useless for Lancashire to seek safeguards in the 'Government of India Bill'. In 1933 he was a member of the British textile mission to India led by Sir William Clare Lees, and he formulated the compromise which led to an agreement. He was a central witness in the Privileges Affair of 1934. In 1935 he was a member of the delegation which presented Lancashire's case before the Indian tariff board and obtained a reduction of duties on most British cotton goods. He was also part of the delegation representing Lancashire's interest in negotiations in India that eventually resulted in the Anglo-Indian trade agreement of 1939. By the 1930s, however, Japanese competition was taking more of Lancashire's trade than was being blocked by Indian tariffs. Streat played a central role in long negotiations which in 1934 led the British government to impose a system of quotas, restricting imports of Japanese goods throughout colonial markets, and doing more than anything else to slow down the contraction of Lancashire's export trade. In addition he was particularly active in urging the reluctant Board of Trade to use the protective tariff brought in by the 'Import Duties Act', 1932, as a bargaining counter in renegotiating trade agreements to Lancashire's advantage as the world moved from multilateral to bilateral trade relations. 
The reduced demand for exports after 1920 left Lancashire with the problem of how, in a horizontally divided industry, to adjust industrial capacity and reduce equipment and labour to match the new conditions. In 1925 the sectional organizations joined to form the Joint Committee of Cotton Trade Organizations, which included representative employers, merchants, and trade unionists; Streat served as its honorary secretary. 
Streat's appointment as chairman of the Cotton Board in June 1940 evolved out of his broad experience with the problems of the export trade in cotton goods and his work at the Export Council, which he served as secretary on loan from the chamber from February 1940. The Cotton Board was not a government department but a statutory body, financed by a levy on the industry. Based in Manchester, it consisted of eleven members drawn from employers and trade unionists in the different sections of the industry, appointed by the president of the Board of Trade with an independent chairman. As chairman, and with his authority strengthened by a knighthood in 1942, Streat pushed ahead plans to promote exports until the advent of lend-lease subordinated exports to the needs of the war economy. The board rationed the remaining export trade, organized the concentration of the finishing section, planned and operated a scheme for the care and maintenance of the closed mills and their reopening at the end of the war, and established the 'utility scheme' supplying standard cotton cloths to meet civilian needs. Also, implementing an idea of Streat's, it set up the Colour, Design and Style Centre, which worked to bring manufacturers and designers together to raise the standard of design. 
From 1942 Streat was particularly active in discussions of post-war plans for industry, and he attended the Nuffield College weekend conferences on post-war reconstruction. A Wesleyan turned Anglican, he was among the Manchester business and university leaders who publicly supported the archbishop of Canterbury's 'religion and life campaign', which affirmed Christian principles as the basis for economic and political action after the war. Furthermore in 1943 he wrote the 'Report' of the Cotton Board's Post-war Reconstruction Committee. The 'Industrial Organization and Development Act', 1947, empowered the Board of Trade to set up 'industrial development councils' modelled on the Cotton Board for various industries. Under the act, a new Cotton Board took over the assets and activities of the existing board, and Streat continued as chairman. 
At the end of the war the cotton industry had lost 40 per cent of its operatives and the reopening mills faced a sellers' market without sufficient labour. The board promoted measures to reorganize the industry and increase productivity, as well as to attract workers and increase exports. Aware of the threat of Japanese competition, Streat worked for a voluntary agreement among textile-exporting countries to share the shrinking world trade in cotton goods. He travelled to the USA twice in 1949 to secure the collaboration of American manufacturers and went to Japan and India in 1950 for talks with government representatives and industrialists. After 1952 large-scale duty-free imports from India, Hong Kong, and eventually Pakistan shook the confidence of the Lancashire industry. Despite protests and deputations, including one to Churchill in 1955, Streat and the Cotton Board were unable to alter government policy, and in 1957, lacking a sympathetic policy from the government, and with continuing sectional conflict, Streat decided to step down as chairman at the age of sixty. 
Although the lucrative directorships Streat hoped for did not materialize he was able to bring his skills and experience to bear during a period of unprecedented growth and change in universities. In 1957 he succeeded Ernest Simon as chairman of the council of Manchester University. He had been associated with the university since his election to the court of governors in 1938. He was elected to the council in 1943 and became treasurer in 1951; he helped work out the financial partnership between the government and university that supported the Jodrell Bank telescope (where a tree was planted in his memory after his death). While his time in the cotton industry had been characterized by an atmosphere of decline, Streat's eight-year tenure as chairman of Manchester University council were years of expansion, ample finance, and ready implementation of new ideas. He guided the university through the Robbins report of 1962, student revolts, and a new charter. His contributions were recognized with an honorary LLD in 1963. Outside Manchester he was visiting fellow of Nuffield College, Oxford, from 1944 and an honorary fellow from 1959. 
While chairman of the Cotton Board, Streat had served a number of related organizations, particularly those concerned with the application of science to industry and technical education. He was a member of the advisory council of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research (1942-7); president of the Association of Technical Institutions (1944-5); a member of the General Advisory Council of the BBC (1947-52); and president of the Textile Institute (1948-51). Later he served on the North Western Electricity Consultative Council (1960-68). Weekend rounds of golf and family summer holidays provided most of his recreation. He was a lively companion and a renowned organizer of games at family parties. People who knew him before the war in particular spoke of his extrovert high spirits and the irresistible attraction of his personality. After 1940 the heavy burden of the jobs he carried out and the anxiety and doubt, both national and personal, dampened his spirits, but he kept his resilience and his broad and generous way of thought. He died at the Churchill Hospital in Oxford on 13 September 1979 and was cremated at Oxford crematorium on 20 September. 


@@@@@


doc= 48332


Talbot, Benjamin (1864-1947), steel company manager and metallurgist, was born on 19 September 1864 at Hadley, near Wellington, Shropshire, the second son of Benjamin Talbot, engine millwright, and his wife, Emma Isabella, 'nee' Todd. He attended Fulneck School, near Leeds, and served his apprenticeship at the Ebbw Vale works in south Wales. He then worked for his father, who owned the Castle ironworks at Wellington. When the family company ceased operating in 1890 Talbot emigrated to the USA, where he became superintendent of the Southern Iron and Steel Company at Chattanooga, Tennessee, and developed a basic lined gas-heated mixer for the preliminary refining of high-silicon pig iron. Three years later he was hired as superintendent by the Pencoyd Steelworks in Pennsylvania. There, in 1899, he applied the tilting furnace concept of Campbell and Wellman to develop a 'continuous' process for making basic open-hearth steel. 
Talbot's process involved the sequential charging and tapping of a tilting vessel at frequent intervals. The furnace contained molten steel into which liquid iron was poured and which quickly decarburized on coming into contact with the highly oxidizing slag floating on top of the steel bath. Refining was completed in just four hours (in contrast to about twelve hours in a fixed furnace using cold metal practice) and 20-25 per cent of the finished steel was then tapped into ingot moulds and allowed to cool before rolling. 
After Talbot returned to the UK in 1900, his new process played an important role in supporting the rapid growth of basic open-hearth steel making (which accounted for 18.2 per cent of output in the UK in 1906 and 36.7 per cent by 1914), primarily because the tilting furnace made it possible to handle the large amount of slag generated during the refining of highly phosphoric iron made from cheap, low-quality ore. However, his system promised other important advantages. The tilting furnace provided a more regular supply of steel to the rolling mills, increased both yield and output, and lowered labour, fuel, and repair costs. The use of a molten steel bath also made furnaces of much larger capacity (250 tons instead of 80-100 tons) economical. In cold metal open-hearth steel making, as furnace size increased, more time was needed to complete the refining process. How Talbot's system affected steel makers' capital costs is unclear: some contemporaries estimated a reduction of 25-30 per cent, while others believed the tilting vessel was more expensive to construct than a fixed furnace. However, his process lowered operating expenses by 20-25 per cent and was quickly adopted by firms with access to low-grade ores. 
To license his process, Talbot formed the Talbot Continuous Steel Process Co. Ltd in association with Sir Christopher Furness. Though the Frodingham Iron and Steel Company was the first to adopt the new system, three of Furness's steel firms -- Cargo Fleet Iron, Palmer's Shipbuilding and Iron, and South Durham Steel and Iron -- soon followed suit. In 1904 Talbot consulted for Cargo Fleet which had embarked on an ambitious reconstruction programme, and in 1907 he became managing director of this troubled firm. During the next seven years he transformed Cargo Fleet into a financially stable enterprise, but he could not overcome all the deficiencies arising from errors made in the initial planning of the new works prior to his arrival. He became a director of South Durham Steel in 1906, managing director in 1919, and chairman from 1940 to 1947. After the First World War South Durham adopted a hydrocarbon-lining process that Talbot invented for pipe making. 
Although primarily a technical specialist, Talbot was a strong, all-round manager who exhibited sound organizational skills, pursued systematic methods, and developed effective sales and marketing plans. His talent for judging character was an asset when he strengthened Cargo Fleet's organization by hiring new staff, including several men who, like himself, had acquired experience abroad. His correspondence reveals a man who possessed strategic vision, yet retained absolute command of operational detail. He was also a very tough negotiator, especially when dealing with various steelmasters' associations. Indeed, from beneath his strong, broad brow, his eyes exuded determination. 
Talbot was an adviser to the Ministry of Munitions during the First World War. As a member of the departmental committee formed to examine the position of the steel industry in 1918, he supported the majority opinion that Britain should impose tariffs to protect the trade from dumping. After 1945 he was an unrelenting critic of plans to nationalize the steel industry. 
Talbot was awarded the Bessemer gold medal of the Iron and Steel Institute, the Elliott Cresson gold medal, and the John Scott medal of the Franklin Institute. In 1928 he was elected president of the Iron and Steel Institute and served as president of the National Federation of Iron and Steel Manufacturers. He was also a JP. His main hobby was hunting. 
Talbot married Frances, daughter of J. P. Chapman of Siddington, Cheshire; they had three children. Benjamin Chetwynd Talbot, his only son, became deputy chairman of South Durham Steel in 1947 and served as chairman from 1950 to 1966. Benjamin Talbot died at his home, Solberge, Newby Wiske, Thirsk, Yorkshire, on 17 December 1947. 


@@@@@


doc= 48333


Tattersall, John Brown (1845-1925), cotton spinner, was born on 30 September 1845 at Sandy Lane, Royton, Oldham, Lancashire, one of the nine children of Stanley Tattersall, a master tailor, and his wife, Nancy, 'nee' Kershaw. Having started work at the age of ten as a half-time little piecer in the Sandy Lane cotton mill, he graduated to become a minder of cotton mules and became actively involved in the spinners' union. He was elected to the executive committee of the Oldham Operative Cotton Spinners' Union in April 1870, participated over the years 1870-73 in the shorter working hours campaign, served on the Oldham Trades Council in 1872, and became a key figure in the Factory Acts Reform Association. On 18 December 1867 he married Mary Ann Cocker ('b'. 1843/4), a weaver, the daughter of Matthew Cocker, a draper, at Prestwich parish church. 
Meanwhile, Tattersall had accumulated funds which he invested in the Royton Spinning Company. In November 1873 he made the transition from manual to white-collar worker when he was appointed secretary of the Royton mill. Thereafter he moved through various jobs -- he was in Manchester for a spell as yarn salesman for Royton -- and into company management. He served successively as general manager (1891-1903), managing director (1903-6), and chairman of the Royton company (1906-23). The survival of the company through the slump in the 1920s is testimony to the firm foundations which he laid. His opposition to mill recapitalization in 1919-20 played an important part in this. Tattersall used the Royton company as a base from which he invested in and promoted other limited liability cotton manufacturing companies in the region. By the 1900s his directorships included twelve mills, and he controlled almost half of the spinning capacity of the Royton area. 
It was perhaps inevitable that Tattersall, as a prominent and gregarious employer, should become embroiled in the politics of the industry. He was an active member of the Limited Liability Association in the 1870s and 1880s (acting as secretary for a while) and in February 1890 was elected to the executive committee of the Oldham Master Cotton Spinners' Association, of which he became president a year later. One of his earliest confrontations with the Oldham Spinners' Union concerned his opposition to proposed new factory legislation (1891), the irony of which was not overlooked by his former trade union colleagues. 
In the early 1890s Tattersall worked to promote more representative and powerful employer combinations in cotton spinning, and he played a key part in the formation of the Federation of Master Cotton Spinners' Associations (FMCSA) in 1892; later he became federation vice-president. He was one of a handful of mill owners (including Macara, Andrew, and Reyner) who led the industry-wide Brooklands lock-out and the negotiations thereafter. During this pivotal confrontation Tattersall gained a reputation as an uncompromising hardliner and champion of managerial prerogatives: 'We cannot allow the operatives', he commented, 'to dictate as to the conditions upon which we shall work our concerns -- it won't do at all!' ('Cotton Factory Times', 13 Jan 1893). 
For almost thirty years Tattersall devoted his energies to industry politics and the advancement of mill owners' interests; he remained president of the Oldham Master Cotton Spinners' Association until 1919, and was vice-president of the FMCSA until 1914 and president from 1914 to 1918. He was an active Liberal in politics, one-time president of the Royton Liberal Association, and a staunch supporter of free trade. He co-ordinated the FMCSA's parliamentary monitoring and pressure group activities (serving on the cotton employers' parliamentary committee, 1893-1910), became involved in cotton trade regulation (through the federation cotton committee and the British Cotton Growing Association), and served as a committee member of the International Cotton Spinners' Association (1903-14). Through active involvement in the organization committee, Tattersall bears some credit for the increasing power of the FMCSA, which grew from representing around 40 per cent (17 million spindles) of the capacity of the spinning industry in 1892 to nearly 75 per cent (46 million spindles) in 1918. 
As far as industrial relations policy making was concerned, Tattersall was involved at the highest levels of the federation, representing the employers in the conciliation board, the emergency committee, the various wage-list committees, and the joint disputes committees which met under the Brooklands procedure. He developed a reputation as a defender of managerial rights, an astute and tough negotiator who promulgated, on a number of occasions, the use of the industry-wide lock-out as a tactic. Over time, however, he came to realize the potential within the formalized disputes procedure for containing and defusing trade union militancy and became adept at exploiting the system to protect employers' interests. In one dispute over a mill owner's alleged use of shoddy raw cotton in 1901, for example, he entered the mill (J. Mayall's, Ashton) as part of a joint inspection team, immediately held up a wet finger, and declared that an east wind was blowing off the Pennines and that the spinning could not be inspected properly until it had stopped! The inspection took place several days later, giving the mill owner time to purchase better cotton and get it through the mules. 
Mainly because of the paucity of extant source material, Tattersall's role has been overshadowed by that of Charles Macara, FMCSA president from 1894 to 1914. What appears evident from the records of the mill owners' associations, however, is that Tattersall's contribution to cotton industry politics was far more significant than Macara's autobiography and biography were willing to concede. 
Tattersall presided over the FMCSA, after Macara resigned in 1914, during the difficult wartime years. He retired from his associational activities in 1918-19 and from his directorships in 1923. He was reported to have been in failing health for some time, and died on 3 September 1925, at his home, Ash Grove, Oriel Road, Didsbury, Manchester, leaving $71,661 gross. 


@@@@@


doc= 48334


Taylor, Theodore Cooke (1850-1952), woollen manufacturer and politician, was born at New Hall, Carlinghow, Batley, West Riding of Yorkshire, on 3 August 1850, the eldest son of Joshua Taylor (1821-1879), cloth manufacturer, and his wife, Alice (died 1860), daughter of Samuel Cooke, carpet manufacturer of Liversedge, West Riding of Yorkshire. He was educated at a preparatory school in Batley and at Batley grammar school. At the age of thirteen he moved to the northern Congregational school at Silcoates near Wakefield, a school for nonconformist ministers and laymen. He left at the age of sixteen and entered the family woollen business, with which he was to be connected until his death eighty-six years later. His grandparents had been clothiers in the Batley district. In 1845 his father had founded a cloth manufacturing firm at Blakeridge, Batley, as the junior partner of two older brothers, John (1816-1884) and Thomas (1818-1891); Joshua Taylor worked at Blakeridge Mill as a cloth finisher. Theodore, on entry to the business, gained experience in all its departments, as was common practice at the time. In 1874 he married Sara Jane, his first cousin and daughter of W. J. P. Ingraham of Philadelphia, USA. She had been born in England and Theodore met and courted her on her visits as a girl to her English relations. They had three children, Evelyn Sarah, Lilian Gertrude, and Laurie. 
The heavy woollen district of Yorkshire, within which the Taylors' firm was situated, was benefiting from its success in spinning yarn and weaving cloth using a mixture of new wool and shoddy, wool reclaimed from rags. Strength to the cloth was often provided by the use of cotton yarn as a warp to make 'union cloths'. The firm used shoddy from an early date and the subsequent success of the business was built on the competitive advantages this fibre allowed. The rise of the ready-made clothes trade, notably in Leeds, provided business. In 1879 Theodore Taylor took over his father's role in the business, acting partly as designer and partly as salesman, as well as buyer and as blender, the most important function for a firm of its nature. He was joined in the business by his younger brother, Arthur, in 1871, a cousin, John Taylor, in 1872, and another cousin, Thomas Frederick, in 1883. On 26 January 1892 he agreed with the other partners that he should take complete control of the business, which at that time employed 600 people. The firm made an increasing variety of union cloths, at a time when that was the most successful, and profitable, section of the British wool textile industry. By 1900 the workforce had increased to 1000 in three large mills. Control allowed Taylor to start putting into practice an idea which he had long considered and of which he was a great advocate -- profit-sharing in industry. He set up a successful scheme whereby workers received payment in shares as a 'bonus', according to their proportion of the pay bill. By 1918, when 1800 were employed, the issue of bonus shares amounted to half the company's capital. By 1952 the proportion was over four-fifths. Taylor maintained control of the business, however, by keeping voting rights firmly in his own hands. It has been estimated that the profit-sharing scheme transferred a total of $3 million to Taylor's employees in shares and bonuses. 
Taylor's wife and first daughter died within two days of one another in the influenza epidemic of 1919. The following year, on 16 March, he married Mary Isabella ('b'. 1873/4), daughter of Colin Alexander McVean, a highland laird of Kilfinichen in the Isle of Mull, Scotland, and Mary Wood, 'nee' Cowan. With her he moved from his home in Batley to Grassington in the Yorkshire dales. He remained a devout Congregationalist, supporting financially the local Congregational Union and Silcoates School. He was a teetotaller and disapproved of smoking and gambling. He was described as a man of resolute will and deep conviction who 'liked neither fools nor knaves', and was reluctant to compromise. He had a reputation of being somewhat humourless, but to celebrate his hundredth birthday he took his employees to Blackpool, where he was pictured doing the palais glide with mill girls. 
In 1889 Taylor started his political career when he was elected, for three years, to the new West Riding county council. In 1900 he was invited by Herbert Gladstone, son of the Liberal leader, to stand for parliament. He successfully fought the constituency of Radcliffe-cum-Farnworth, which he represented for eighteen years. He supported old-age pensions in his maiden speech at the budget debate of April 1901, and worked behind the scenes in the Liberal government supporting the principle of pensions. In spite of the difficulties of his industry, he was a strong advocate of free trade. His major political contribution, however, was in the anti-opium crusade. He opposed the majority report of the opium commission set up in 1893 and successfully moved a private member's ballot opposing the trade. He visited China in 1907 to see its effects at first hand, and continued his campaign to 1917, when the government finally released China from its treaty obligations to admit Indian opium. 
Taylor was an inveterate traveller, for pleasure and for business, visiting many of the markets to which his cloth was sent. He toured Europe at the age of seventeen. In his late nineties he made an extensive tour of North America to sell cloth, the last of his twenty-four crossings of the Atlantic. He died at the age of 102, on 19 October 1952, from the after-effects of a heavy cold, at his home, The Moraine, Grassington; he was buried at Batley. 


@@@@@


doc= 48335


Tennant, Henry (1823-1910), railway administrator, was born at Countersett on the shores of Semmerwater, near Bainbridge in Wensleydale. Little is known about his background, but his family were strong Quakers, and he undertook his education at Ackworth, the well-known Quaker school near Pontefract. At the age of sixteen he started his working life as a bookkeeper with the firm of Messrs Charles Bragg & Co. at Newcastle upon Tyne, and two years later was appointed to the staff of the infant Brandling Junction Railway on Tyneside, where he soon became chief clerk. In 1844, as George Hudson engineered the Newcastle and Darlington Junction Railway, Tennant secured the post of chief clerk to the general manager, but he left in 1846 to become accountant and traffic manager of the Leeds and Thirsk Railway. On 17 February 1847 he married Mary Jane Goundry (died 1900), also a Quaker. There were no children from the marriage. 
Mounting the ladder of success rapidly as the youthful railway industry threw up opportunities for capable, ambitious young men, Tennant became general manager of the line in 1848. Inevitably, he was soon involved in the negotiations which led the Leeds Northern (as it became known) to amalgamate with the York, Newcastle and Berwick, and York and North Midland railways to form the North Eastern Railway (NER) in 1854. Tennant immediately became accountant of the new line and held the post until 1870 when he became general manager. 
From 1854 to 1870 Tennant was active in forging, and implementing, the policies which led the NER to absorb the remaining significant independent railways in the area until in contemporary perception it had the district to itself, and was the most complete railway monopoly in the country. He was particularly noted for helping to define its pricing policies and for masterminding the complex scheme of finance by which the ordinary stocks and shares of the constituent railways of the NER were merged into a new class of North Eastern ordinary shares known as 'consols'. The scheme served as a model for the reorganization of other railway companies' stocks as the course of railway amalgamation proceeded apace. 
On the retirement of William O'Brien as general manager in 1870, Tennant was appointed to succeed him, and he held the job until his retirement from executive management in 1891 at the age of sixty-eight. Over the years of his reign the NER evolved into the most powerful of Britain's provincial railways. Its ordinary stocks paid the high dividend of 10 per cent in the early 1870s, and, while the line was subject thereafter to the diminishing returns which beset the industry as a whole, it had a reputation under Tennant for financial strength and sound administration, though not great flair. He brought to the job a skill in handling figures and a reputation for conducting negotiations with shrewdness and a cool, unemotional, and unhurried style. These qualities recommended him to the York City and County Bank, whose board of directors he chaired for a while. Inevitably, he was, in the early railway age (and later), a frequent witness and contributor to many railway parliamentary contests, select committees, and inquiries of the time. In the 1880s he was also closely involved with the evolution of a progressive labour relations policy for the NER, as the impact of militant general unionism on Tyneside made itself felt, and demanded a response. 
On his retirement in 1891, Tennant was elected a director of the NER and was granted the sum of $10,000 in recognition of his services to the growth of the railways in the north-east over the preceding forty years, as well as in anticipation of a continuing consultative contribution to the management of the line. His service on the board continued to the end of his long life, and he was appointed joint deputy chairman in 1905. While his influence on executive management inevitably waned, he remained prominent in the work of the company, and his reputation earned him appointments on the boards of other railways. He also directed ventures in which the NER had a stake, such as the Forth Bridge Company and shipping lines; these investments protected its share of continental traffic around 1900. At various times he acted as an arbitrator for the Board of Trade and the Irish Office on transport matters. 
For much of his professional life Tennant lived unostentatiously in the city of York. His retirement from executive railway management in 1891 enabled him to expand his involvement in the local community. He made an active contribution to the York Liberal Association and local Liberal politics, and put in a long stint as a city JP. His contribution to education in York was particularly notable. He took an interest in the schooling of working-class children, making his motto 'For every child an equal opportunity'. He was elected to the York school board in 1889 after a stiff political campaign, and served as vice-chairman of the board and later as a co-opted member of the York education committee (from which he retired only in 1906). He was active in the temperance movement, and in 1892 when the North Eastern Temperance Union was forged out of a number of regional bodies, he was elected its president and remained so until his death. For his service to railways, but doubtless also his contribution to Liberal politics and values in York, he was offered, but declined, a knighthood in 1907 from Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman. 
Tennant died at his home, Holgate Hill House, York, on 25 May 1910. He was buried in the Quaker burial-ground at Heslington, York, on the 28th. An obituary in the 'Yorkshire Gazette' mourned the loss of a 'Great Railway Administrator and Educationist'. Tennant was, indeed, both these things and very much a man of the north. 


@@@@@


doc= 48336


Tetley, Henry Greenwood (1851-1921), industrialist, was born in Bradford, Yorkshire, on 20 September 1851, the son of Samuel Tetley, a stuff merchant, and his wife, Catherine. After working for over twenty years at the big textile firm of S. C. Lister & Co. and having risen to be head of the silk department, in 1893 he accepted the offer of a post in Essex with Samuel Courtauld & Co., makers of silk mourning crape. The firm's profits had recently slumped badly, and it had become evident that drastic change was needed in order to modernize production and sales methods as well as to regain profitability. Tetley was brought in to reorganize the manufacturing end of the business. He in turn introduced a new sales manager, Thomas Paul Latham, from Manchester. Both became directors in 1895. These two men, wholly outsiders to a family firm, were to direct its destiny for the next quarter-century, with Tetley as the driving force. 
Tetley set about reforming production methods with much gusto. Old machinery was scrapped; the isolation of the company in Essex was broken down as new managers were imported from the textile areas of northern England and as production was started in Lancashire; new lines of coloured fabrics were developed. Losses were turned into profits. But the level of profitability was still only moderate and by 1904 it had become evident that a plateau had been reached. It was then that Tetley succeeded in the first of two striking business gambles. First, he persuaded his fellow directors that Samuel Courtauld & Co. should buy the patent rights to the new viscose process, a British invention for making what was then called artificial silk and later became known as rayon, the first successful man-made fibre. In July 1904 the patents were bought for approximately $25,000. Tetley made it clear to the board that the aim was to find a new source of profits for the company. To that end a new factory was set up, in Coventry. Sundry teething problems, technical and managerial, were overcome, and the profitability that followed was remarkable: a 6 per cent dividend in 1904 had become 30 per cent in 1911 and 50 per cent in 1912. Some part of this bounteous distribution arose from the second of Tetley's business gambles: the purchase in June 1909 for approximately $31,000 of the American rights to the viscose process and the establishment of an American subsidiary which started rayon production inside the US tariff barrier in 1911. The way in which he acquired the American rights represented so shrewd a piece of opportunism as to be not far from sharp practice. He had earlier made an agreement for technical co-operation with the holders of the French viscose rights, and in 1906 an international consortium came into being. In 1908-9 the holder of the American rights sought technical help and entry into the consortium. Tetley was entrusted with the task of negotiating with him on the consortium's behalf. He proceeded to exploit the fact that Courtauld & Co. were far the most successful members of the consortium by simply buying up the rights for his own company, leaving thereby some very aggrieved Frenchmen to be mollified by Latham. The profits being earned by the parent company and its American subsidiary were so big that in 1913 a new company, Courtaulds Ltd, was floated with an issued capital of $2 million. A series of bonus issues raised it to $12 million by 1920. Courtaulds had become the world's largest rayon producer. Tetley was primarily responsible for that achievement, and in 1917 he appropriately became chairman of the company. 
By all accounts, Tetley was an aggressive man with a furious temper. He had a relentless energy for business, trampling on obstacles and people in the course of putting his ideas into practice. While he was periodically precipitate and sometimes bombastic, his partnership with Latham provides a good example of the co-operation of opposites. His unswerving devotion to matters of business is apparent in numerous letters; always lucid and straightforward, they bombarded colleagues and subordinates with orders, plans, and demands for information. Tetley was a self-made man whose efforts brought him a fortune, but neither his will nor his correspondence suggest any noteworthy outside interests. The date of his marriage, the identity of his wife, Charlotte, and details of his family life remain unknown. He served as president of the Silk Association but took no part in public affairs. He maintained a house in London, at 17 Avenue Road, Regent's Park, and died at his country residence, Alderbrook, Cranleigh, in Surrey, on 21 August 1921. No 'Times' obituary marked his death, but two months later his substantial wealth was noted among the wills recorded in that paper. Apart from some small legacies and bequests to such patriotic or charitable institutions as his trustees might select, the bulk of his fortune went to his wife, Charlotte, and his children. 


@@@@@


doc= 48337


Thomas, Herbert John (1892-1947), aircraft and aero-engine manufacturer, was born at Fulham, London, on 20 February 1892, the son of Samuel Herbert Thomas, a commercial traveller, and his wife, Victoria Morgan. His education began in London, but when he was fourteen he entered Clifton College, Bristol, which he left in 1909. He took up flying immediately, in balloons and aeroplanes, obtained the Royal Aero Club pilot's certificate no. 51 in 1910, and for a while tested and raced the new Bristol Boxkite. 
As the youngest nephew of the millionaire Bristol tramways entrepreneur, Sir George White, Thomas was soon involved in the business of the Bristol and Colonial Aeroplane Company, one of four founded simultaneously by White. At eighteen Thomas was sent to Paris to examine the designs and methods of the Societe Zodiac. He brought back a sample machine from which five copies were made under licence, but as they would not fly the deal was cancelled, with Zodiac paying a penalty of 15,000 French francs. However, all was not lost, as a British empire licence was negotiated for the new 50 hp Gnome engine. Soon French technicians and pilots were crossing the channel to help design Bristol aircraft and to instruct in the company's new school at Larkhill, Salisbury Plain. By 1913, the company's 1910 capital of $50,000 had risen to $250,000 and it would be valued at $553,000 in 1919. By the start of the First World War, Thomas was the works manager at Filton, near Bristol. Like almost all British manufacturers early in the war he had great difficulty in retaining skilled labour, but in August 1916 the company's facilities were declared a 'controlled establishment' concurrently with the introduction of conscription; by 1918 the workforce numbered five thousand. In 1912 Thomas suffered a near-fatal head injury when the propeller flew off one of the company's new aircraft while the engine was being ground-tested. 
By 1916, Thomas was a director of the company. In 1919, when RAF orders for the famous Bristol Fighter (the Brisfit) were cancelled, Thomas used his energy and imagination to keep the works alive with a nucleus of about two hundred workers. On the first day of May, when civil aviation became legal, he flew to Hounslow, near to the modern Heathrow, in a modified Brisfit known as the Tourer to meet with General J. E. B. Seely, the new under-secretary of state for air, to whom he shortly sold the aircraft. Thomas soon had contracts from Armstrong-Siddeley for automobile bodies and from the parent Bristol Tramways for both tram and omnibus bodies. 
In 1920 Thomas married Vera Beatrice, daughter of Stephen Codrington, a veterinary surgeon; they had two sons. Also in 1920, the Treasury's demand for the payment of the wartime excess profits duty led to the dissolution of the Bristol and Colonial Aeroplane Company, among many others, and the transfer of its $553,000 of assets to the new Bristol Aeroplane Company, capitalized at $1 million with the same board and employees, but with the addition of Roy Fedden and his Cosmos Engineering Company. Fedden's engines, enormously successful, were licensed in France and other countries. He personally profited immensely from the agreed royalties, but the Bristol board never accepted him as an equal, and for this Thomas must bear some of the responsibility even though he and Fedden were good friends. 
During the Second World War, Thomas was the assistant managing director, largely connected with the works management in the production of over 11,000 Blenheims and Beaufighters, as well as Beauforts and well over 100,000 engines. He also saved the second Bulldog fighter demonstrator (1930-35) from the scrapheap and donated it to the Science Museum, London. 
A reserved man, like so many British businessmen, Thomas was credited with grace and charm. Not much of a public figure, he was a long-standing member of the Society of British Aircraft Constructors and its chairman in 1933-5. Late in life he became sheriff of Bristol (1946) only to die from cancer on 20 May 1947 following surgery at Frenchay Park Hospital, Bristol. He was survived by his wife. His home was at Old Farm, Sodbury, Gloucestershire. 


@@@@@


doc= 48338


Stevens, Thomas (1809-1888), Church of England clergyman and educationist, was born at Bradfield rectory, Berkshire, on 16 September 1809, the second son of Henry Stevens (1766-1842), rector and squire of Bradfield, and his wife, Maria, daughter of William Tinney of Salisbury. Educated privately at Pyrton in Oxfordshire and Iver in Buckinghamshire, he matriculated at Oriel College, Oxford, in 1827, graduating BA in 1832 and MA in 1836. Here he began a lifelong friendship with Charles Marriott and was acquainted with many of the leaders of the Oxford Movement, becoming a convinced Tractarian. 
From 1836 to 1839 Stevens was an assistant commissioner under the 1834 'Poor Law Amendment Act', responsible for the creation of poor-law unions in Derbyshire and Leicestershire. Later he was for many years chairman of the guardians of the Bradfield Union. On 5 June 1839 he married Caroline Octavia, daughter of George Tollet of Betley Hall, Staffordshire, who died the following year. On 16 May 1843 he married Susanna, daughter of Robert Marriott, rector of Cotesbach in Leicestershire, with whom he had thirteen children. Following her death on 8 July 1866, he married in 1868 Caroline, daughter of Edward Miller, vicar of Bognor, Sussex. She died on 8 July 1881 without issue. 
In 1839 Stevens was one of the first students at the Theological College founded by Charles Marriott in Chichester, and on 12 May was ordained as perpetual curate of Keele, Staffordshire. His elder brother having died in 1830, upon the death of his father in 1842 he became rector and squire of Bradfield, the manor and advowson of which had belonged to the family since 1751. Here he now began to put his Tractarian ideals into practice, employing Gilbert Scott to restore the parish church between 1846 and 1849. In the 1850s Bradfield became an important centre of Tractarian liturgical practice, with a full choral service twice daily attracting a number of new residents to the village and influencing other clergy such as William Butler. He selected his farm tenants and domestic servants largely on the grounds of their churchmanship. 
The foundation of St Andrew's College, Bradfield, in 1850 was a direct result of his liturgical ambitions, the intention being that both masters and boys would sing in the parish choir. By 1860 the school had grown to 120 boys. However, parental objections to the lengthy services forced him to shorten them in 1863, and his growing debts, originating in the church restoration, were compounded by new school buildings. Although the school had been constituted as a trust in 1859, Stevens retained overall control as warden. This led to escalating conflicts of authority with the headmasters, culminating in 1879 with the head and many other staff resigning. In 1881 Stevens was declared bankrupt, and forced to relinquish his wardenship and sell his property in the village. From 1883 he was rector of Newton-with-Toft, Lincolnshire, where he died on 15 May 1888. He was buried in the family vault under Bradfield church. Much of his extensive correspondence has survived in manuscript. 


@@@@@


doc= 48339


Thomas, Richard (1837-1916), tin plate manufacturer, was born at Bridgwater, Somerset, on 5 December 1837, the son of Richard Thomas, shipowner and merchant, of Bridgwater. He was educated at Wesleyan (now Queen's) College, Taunton, until the age of eleven. During his early working life he was employed as a clerk, as an assistant to an uncle who ran a draper's business in Oxford (later becoming a partner in the business), and as a coal exporter and commission agent in Cardiff. 
While in Cardiff Thomas married, on 18 February 1859, Anne Loveluck (1836/7-1914), daughter of John Loveluck, a farmer, of Ffald, Llangynog; they had five sons and a daughter. His subsequent employment as works manager and accountant of a colliery and firebrick business at Briton Ferry, Glamorgan, in which his father was a partner, was to provide a springboard for his future career. In 1863 his appointment as accountant and sub-manager in charge of overseeing the construction of a new iron plate and tin plate works at Melyn, Neath, Glamorgan, brought him into direct contact for the first time with the industry in which he was to become an important figure. During his four years at Melyn he studied the processes, working methods, and ways of financing the tin plate trade, and he made contacts with important ironmasters and coal owners. 
A spell as general manager and secretary at the Ynyspenllwch ironworks was followed by Thomas's most significant development: the formation of Richard Thomas & Co. to acquire and run the idle Lydbrook tin plate works in Gloucestershire in 1871. Expansion through the acquisition of the Lydney works (1875) and the Lydbrook colliery (1877) led, however, to financial difficulties and, in 1883, eventual liquidation, due mainly to problems of flooding at the colliery. Nevertheless, with the backing of the company's major creditor, the Barrow Hematite Steel Company, the business was relaunched in 1884 as Richard Thomas & Co. Ltd, with Thomas as managing director of the new concern and his eldest son, Richard Beaumont Thomas, as general manager. 
Gradually the tin plate interests of Thomas and his sons -- for he was always concerned to provide jobs for members of his family -- were extended. In 1888 he acquired, in conjunction with William Thomas Lewis (later Baron Senghenydd) and others, the Melingriffith tin plate works on the outskirts of Cardiff. This and future expansion was based on Thomas's ability to identify ailing concerns which could be acquired at a low price and turned into profitable businesses. The period following the introduction of the American tariffs on tin plate in the early 1890s provided an impetus for further acquisitions in the late 1890s and enabled the Thomas family to build up control over a significant portion of the British tin plate industry. By 1916 the various companies associated with Richard Thomas & Co. Ltd employed over 11,000 workers and controlled a quarter of the tin plate mills in south Wales. While the problems faced during the inter-war period by the organization he built up may cast some doubts on the strategy he pursued and the organizational structure he established, the growth of the Thomas empire was none the less a considerable feat of entrepreneurship and a testament to his considerable drive and energy. 
It has been suggested that the key to Thomas's success lay 'in his concentration of purpose, epitomised perhaps by his insistence on total attention to business' (Wainwright, 55). Indeed, he spared little time for public life, spending only a brief period on the Monmouth board of guardians. A modest and quiet-living man who shunned publicity, he nevertheless gave generously to many a deserving cause, particularly favouring hospital work. 
Thomas died on 28 September 1916 at 31 Henrietta Street, Bath, and was buried at Lydbrook churchyard, Gloucestershire, on 30 September. His wife had predeceased him, dying in 1914. 


@@@@@


doc= 48340


Thomas, (William) Miles Webster, Baron Thomas (1897-1980), motor company and airline executive, was born on 2 March 1897 at Garfield Villa, Cefn Mawr, near Ruabon, Denbighshire, north Wales, the son of William Henry Thomas, retired furniture dealer and restorer, and his wife, Mary Elizabeth (Polly), 'nee' Webster, of farming stock from Derbyshire. William Thomas died of bronchitis shortly after the birth of his only child, leaving his widow to bring up her son on the slender income from the letting of small houses constructed by her late husband in Ruabon, eked out by help from her two brothers. Thomas was educated at Acrefair village school, Ruabon grammar school, and Bromsgrove public school. In 1913 he combined night classes at Birmingham University with a local engineering apprenticeship at Bellis and Morcom Ltd, engineers, of Birmingham. 
In August 1914 Thomas enlisted as a private, served in the German East African campaign in armoured cars, transferred to the Royal Flying Corps, learned to fly, was commissioned and, in 1916, became an instructor at the Air Fighting School at Heliopolis. In 1917-18 he saw active service as a pilot with 72 squadron in Mesopotamia, Persia, and southern Russia, and was awarded a DFC. In 1919 he resigned from the RAF to join Temple Press Ltd to become technical editor of 'The Motor' and, in 1922, editor of the 'Light Car', at $650 a year. 
In January 1924 W. R. Morris (later Lord Nuffield) invited Thomas to join him at Morris Motors, Cowley, as commercial adviser. Six months later, on 2 June 1924, at Littlemore church, Oxford, he married Hylda Church, who had been Morris's secretary. A daughter, Sheila, was born in March 1925 and a son, Michael, in the autumn of 1926. 
Working closely with 'the Boss', Thomas advanced rapidly through the Morris Motors hierarchy: sales manager and a director in 1927, general manager and a director of Morris Commercial Cars Ltd, Birmingham, in 1934, and of Wolseley Motors Ltd in 1937, vice-chairman and managing director of Morris Motors and its subsidiary companies in 1940 (he held these posts until 1947), chairman of the Cruiser Tank Production Group, a member of the advisory panel on tank production in 1941, and chairman of the British tank engine mission to the USA in 1942, by which time his income had reached $20,000 a year. He was knighted in 1943. 
After the Second World War Sir Miles, while president of the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders, joined the board of the Colonial Development Corporation. That precipitated a growing disharmony with Lord Nuffield and a parting, in 1948, on generous terms. Almost at once he was invited by Lord Nathan, minister of civil aviation, to become deputy chairman of the state-owned British Overseas Airways Corporation (BOAC), and to succeed Sir Harold Hartley as chairman from 1 July 1949 at $7500 a year. So began eight years of hard but enjoyable toil and travel. Under Miles Thomas, BOAC became the world's first operator of jet aircraft -- the DH Comet -- and earned its first profits in 1952, with reduced staff numbers, while doubling its traffic. A natural communicator, Thomas raised staff morale and public pride in BOAC as one of the world's leading airlines. 
In 1954 disasters to two Comets and the grounding of the Comet fleet, together with the loss of a Constellation and a Stratocruiser, brought heavy burdens on chairman and airline alike, further compounded in December 1955 when Sir Miles and the new minister of transport and civil aviation, Harold Watkinson, fell out over management responsibilities. In consequence, Sir Miles resigned from BOAC on 30 April 1956, with an offer of the chairmanship of the UK subsidiary of the large United States Monsanto Chemical Company. 
During eight more comfortable years, and a salary back at more than $20,000 a year, Sir Miles was able to add a number of other board appointments, including Sun Life, the 'Sunday Times', and Carbon Electric Holdings Ltd. In 1957 he purchased Remenham Court, Henley-on-Thames, and returned to the air transport industry as the non-executive chairman of Britannia Airways -- a substantial charter company. President of the National Savings Committee from 1965 to 1972 and its chairman in 1965-70, Miles Thomas was created a life peer in 1971, as Baron Thomas of Remenham. He died at his home, Remenham Court, Henley-on-Thames, on 8 February 1980 at the age of eighty-two. 


@@@@@


doc= 48344


Tiarks, Frank Cyril (1874-1952), merchant banker, was born on 9 July 1874 in Balham, London, the fourth of the eleven children of Henry Frederic Tiarks (1832-1911), merchant banker, and his wife, Agnes Morris. His grandfather, the Revd Johann Gerhard Tiarks (1794-1858), from Jever in the duchy of Oldenburg, was the pastor of the Reformed Lutheran church in east London from 1827 until his death; he was also chaplain to the duchess of Kent and a prominent figure in Anglo-German circles. In 1847 Henry Tiarks joined the merchant bank J. Henry Schroder & Co., sponsored by a parishioner of his father who was a partner in the firm. In 1862 he married Agnes Morris, the adopted daughter of Alexander Schlusser, another partner and a distant relation of the Schroder family; in the same year he was promoted to office manager. In 1871, upon Schlusser's retirement, Henry Tiarks was made a partner. 
The 1870s were prosperous years for Schroders and in 1877 Henry Tiarks and his family moved to Foxbury, a forty-room house with 170 acres at Chislehurst, Kent. Henry Tiarks retired at the end of 1905 and died in 1911. His legacy was not only an estate worth $0.5 million, but the establishment of a dynastic partnership with the Schroder family that continued for two more generations and lasted altogether for more than a century. 
Frank Tiarks's education began at a private school in Greenwich and continued, from 1887, at HMS 'Britannia', the naval training college. Commissioned as a lieutenant he joined HMS 'Warspite', but he left the navy in 1894 following the death of his elder brother, who had been intended for the Schroder partnership. Now it fell to Frank to become the banker. 
Tiarks's career as a merchant banker began in the traditional manner. After becoming acquainted with the procedures of the London office, he worked as an unpaid 'volunteer' in several firms with which Schroders had close connections, in Le Havre, New York, and Hamburg. While in Hamburg he fell in love with Emmy Broedermann (died 1943), the daughter of a Hamburg banker, and they were married in 1899. In 1902, aged twenty-eight, Tiarks was made a partner, joining his father and Baron Sir John Henry Schroder, the senior partner, who were both in their sixties, and the senior partner's nephew, Bruno Schroder, aged thirty-five. Within a few years the two younger partners had taken over the running of the firm. 
Tiarks quickly established a formidable reputation in the City. He was appointed to the court of the Bank of England in 1912, having been obliged to decline an earlier invitation because Baron Sir John Henry Schroder objected to his 'wasting time on outside business' ('DBB'). Ironically, just two years later, in August 1914, it was Tiarks's influence at the Bank of England that saved Schroders from seizure as enemy property, by arranging the hurried naturalization of Baron Bruno Schroder, by then the firm's principal proprietor, three days after the outbreak of war. In recognition of this service, the new partnership agreement drawn up in 1919 gave Tiarks a one-third interest in the firm's profits, which was considerably greater than his contribution to capital. 
In the early part of the war Tiarks actively assisted the governor of the Bank of England in handling the disruptions to the City caused by the conflict, particularly the non-repayment of credits by German clients to British banks. In May 1917 he rejoined the navy, working in naval intelligence. In 1919 he served as financial adviser to the British army of occupation in Germany. 
In the 1920s Tiarks played a leading role in the development of Schroders' business, along with Baron Bruno Schroder and Major Albert Pam. Tiarks was particularly active in the development of the corporate finance side of the business. Notable among his achievements in these years were the establishment of the Pressed Steel Company of Great Britain Ltd at Cowley, Oxford, which pioneered the cold steel pressing process for car bodies in Britain, and the formation of Schroders' New York investment banking business, the J. Henry Schroder Banking Corporation. In 1926 his son Henry ['see below'], the eldest of his five children, joined him in the partnership. 
Schroders' business in the finance of international trade expanded greatly in the 1920s, by serving the desperate credit needs of banks and businesses in Germany and central Europe. By the early 1930s approximately four-fifths of Schroders' acceptance business was with such clients. Thus the German suspension of international payments in July 1931 was potentially disastrous. Tiarks's knowledge and experience made him ideally qualified to act as chairman of the body established to make terms for the recovery of British credits. These negotiations produced the first 'standstill agreement' of September 1931, and Tiarks played a leading part in the discussions which led to its annual renewals over the decade. From 1934 he was also chairman of the International Committee of Creditors. 
Like many prominent British nationals with strong German ties, Tiarks hoped for a reconciliation between Britain and Germany. Thus in 1935 he participated in the foundation of the Anglo-German Fellowship to promote mutual trust and understanding. A visit to Cologne in March 1939 to address the fellowship was attacked by critics of appeasement, though his words were unobjectionable. 
Aged sixty-five in 1939, Tiarks's retirement from active involvement in Schroders' affairs coincided with the lull in business brought about by the Second World War. Tiarks stepped down from the court of the Bank of England in 1945 and from the Schroders partnership in 1948. The latter year also saw his retirement from the board of the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company, upon which he had served from 1917 and on whose behalf he paid two visits to Iran in the 1940s. His distinguished career and his public services were recognized by appointment as OBE, as a lieutenant of the City of London from 1911, and as high sheriff of Kent in 1927. 
Energy, common sense, decisiveness, and humour were the qualities commonly ascribed to Frank Tiarks. Henry Andrews, a manager at Schroders in the 1920s, recalled: '[Tiarks] had a strong personality and no doubt those who did not regularly come into contact with him may have thought he was rather frightening because he was also very quick. The strongest impression was one of vitality and gaiety. He laughed for sheer enjoyment and his laugh had a gay ring and you could watch the images and ideas forming themselves on his face and those thoughts always led to a conclusion. ('DBB')' Prentiss Gray, an American colleague, esteemed him the best 'closer' of a deal he had ever met. 'Toughness tempered by human graces', wrote his obituarist in 'The Times', 'made him a first-rate banker, a resourceful negotiator, and at all times the best of company.' 
Tiarks spent most of the last decade of his life in Somerset, having sold Foxbury in 1936. He enjoyed country pursuits and with his brother founded the Mendip foxhounds, of which he was joint master for forty years. In his youth he was a keen polo player, and he was responsible for the introduction of the game to Germany in 1898; he had maintained two polo grounds and a riding school at Foxbury. In later life he took an enthusiastic interest in the Webbington cricket club. His wife predeceased him, dying in 1943. Tiarks died on 7 April 1952, at his home, North Lodge, Loxton, Somerset. 
Tiarks's eldest son, 


@@@@@


doc= 48345


Tilley, Sir John (1813-1898), Post Office administrator, was born on 20 January 1813 in Peckham, Surrey, the son of John Tilley, merchant, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas Fraser. After being educated at a private school in Bromley, Kent, Tilley in 1829 was appointed a clerk in the General Post Office in London, partly on the basis of family connections with Sir Francis Freeling, its secretary. For the next five decades the bureaucracy which Tilley had entered was to provide the central focus of his life, both personal and professional. There he became a confidant of Anthony Trollope, who joined the Post Office in 1834. The relationship was further strengthened by Tilley's marriage to Trollope's sister Cecilia in 1839; she died of consumption in 1849. Tilley's subsequent marriages also ended sadly. Both Mary Anne Partington, a first cousin of Trollope's, whom Tilley married in 1850, and Susan Montgomerie (died 1880), whom he married in 1861, predeceased him. These marriages produced two sons and one daughter. 
Tilley's professional life was to lead to happier outcomes. Indeed, he was the fastest rising man of his generation at St Martin's-le-Grand. In 1838 he was appointed surveyor for a district in northern England, thus gaining the field experience regarded by many as a prerequisite for promotion. In 1848 he returned to London as assistant secretary. In 1864, on the retirement of Sir Rowland Hill, he became secretary and, in effect, director of the largest business in the United Kingdom. 
When Tilley joined the Post Office in 1829, it had the reputation of being a somewhat sleepy organization, its City headquarters removed from other government departments and its management often more interested in its revenue-collecting function than in public service. Yet Tilley was to see and to oversee major transformations in how the department conceived its purpose and how it conducted its business. From the 1830s on railways and steamships quickly emerged as the chief means of mail conveyance, raising difficult contractual questions. In 1840 the agitation of Hill and Robert Wallace bore fruit in the penny post. The mid-century decades were to experience the first waves of labour agitation inside the department, civil service reform, and the coming of new services: Post Office Savings Banks in 1861, the sale of life insurance in 1864, and postcards and a nationalized telegraph system under departmental control in 1870. Another way of gauging this growth is to note that between 1864 and 1880 -- Tilley's years as secretary -- the number of letters conveyed increased from 650 million to 1000 million, gross revenue from $3.8 million to $7.8 million, and net revenue (profit) from $0.9 million to $2.6 million. 
Tilley should by no means be given all the credit for this record of expansion and change: in part it was the natural outcome of a growing economy. It also was the result of policies of reformers such as Hill, whom Tilley disliked; and he was often opposed to such progressive schemes. A traditionalist, Tilley consistently held that civil service examinations would allow candidates with academic training -- but without the necessary personal qualities -- to enter government service. Further, he initially objected to the idea of a state-managed telegraph system, and, when the department assumed control, he allowed Frank Ives Scudamore, the second secretary, who had led the campaign for take-over, a free hand in its management. 
Displaying a tough-minded pragmatism, Tilley brought a real concern for the needs of the nation to his direction of departmental affairs. Whether negotiating with shipping companies or dealing with staff unrest, his goal remained to ensure the best possible outcome for the public and the Post Office. The two were virtually identical in his mind, and it was not simply a question of winning ideological battles. Without question, his approach contributed to a broad, if temporary, consensus that the Post Office was the best-administered government department. 
In 1880 Tilley became KCB and retired on full pay. He remained active in public and charitable activities, including service as a JP and as chairman of the Eastern Hospital, London. He died from old age on 18 March 1898 at his home, 73 St George's Square, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 48346


Tisdall, Edmund Charles (1824-1892), milk retailer, was born on 19 December 1824 in Kensington, the son of Edmund Tisdall, dyer, of Church Street, Kensington, and his wife, Martha. Although born into a nonconformist family, he was baptized on 18 December 1825 at his parish church of St Mary Abbott. He attended the City of London School, and on 3 July 1847 married Emma ('b'. 1822), the daughter of George Tunks, cowkeeper, and his wife, Mary Ann. He went into partnership with Emma's elder sister Elizabeth, and as Tunks and Tisdall they took a lease on 63 acres of pasture in Holland Park. In 1851 the company employed eight men, and at its peak Tunks and Tisdall supplied milk to 1200 families. 
With a herd of Jerseys, Alderneys, and dairy shorthorns, the quality of Tunks and Tisdall's milk was renowned in the middle-class residential neighbourhood of Kensington, not just for its richness of butterfat but also because Tisdall abhorred the common practice of adulterating milk with added water. He also maintained what were then advanced standards of cleanliness in the dairy. The improvements in milk production and retailing which were later enforced by legislation and inspection were partly the result of his influence and energy. 
Tisdall was an enthusiast for dairy science. He regularly monitored the daily yield of all his animals and attempted to convince other farmers that this was the route to herd improvement by organizing milking competitions at dairy shows and by publishing papers on breeding and milk-recording in the 'Journal of the British Dairy Farmers' Association'. He was also ahead of his time in his vision of the production of sterile milk for consumption on the long voyages of the Royal Navy. Unfortunately the experimental sterilization process was imperfect and his sample bottles are reported to have burst at the naval board of inquiry. 
The idea of producing milk in a built-up area has become increasingly alien in the highly regulated modern world but it was common in the mid-nineteenth century. Inevitably there were additional costs in maintaining a herd in the heart of London, but Tunks and Tisdall was able to survive both these and the competition from country milk imported by rail. Gradually, however, their pastures were eroded by building land and eventually they became merely agents for the receipt and distribution of country milk. 
Tisdall selflessly devoted much of his time to trade organizations. He was a founder member of the Metropolitan Dairymen's Society (1873), the Metropolitan Dairymen's Benevolent Institution (1875) (of which he was in turn president and treasurer), and the British Dairy Farmers' Association (1877). An elected member for thirty-five years, he became father of the Kensington vestry and was an active member of its works and sanitary committee. He chaired the special purposes committee and for many years was on the commission of baths and workhouses. He was a clear and emphatic debater, a cool-headed man of business, and thoroughly respected. In politics he was a Liberal but, like many others, was unhappy with Gladstone's Irish policy. 
Tisdall's father had been a founder member of the London Temperance League, and Edmund himself before the age of twenty was president of the Kensington and Hammersmith Youths' Temperance Society. Later he was a manager of the London Temperance Hospital and a founder member (1853), director (1854-78), chairman (1874-8), vice-president (1878-90), and president (1890-92) of the Temperance Building Society. 
About 1890, while out shooting, Tisdall was accidentally wounded in the eye and partially blinded, which considerably handicapped him in both business and private life. He underwent an operation for a stomach tumour but died three months later at his residence, Holland Park Farm, 3 Holland Park Road, Kensington, on 14 July 1892. Family and trade friends joined representatives of temperance organizations and Kensington gentry at his funeral on 16 July at Brompton cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 48347


Tomkinson, Michael (1841-1921), carpet manufacturer, was born on 29 May 1841 at his father's house in the High Street, Kidderminster, the elder son of Michael Tomkinson (1810-1886), draper, and his wife, Sarah, daughter of James Grigg of Blakebrook, Kidderminster. 
Tomkinson was educated at Bridgens Hall School, Bridgnorth, and King Charles I's Grammar School, Kidderminster. He commenced work at the age of fourteen as a clerk in a local hand-loom carpet factory. He was later employed in Schoolbred's drapery and soft furnishing shop in Tottenham Court Road, London, and on returning to Kidderminster by a carpet, rug, and yarn merchant. 
In 1869 Tomkinson went into partnership with William Adam (1828-1898) in Kidderminster, founding the business which was to transform the manufacture of Axminster carpeting and make it a familiar object in middle-class homes. Tomkinson and Adam produced a variety of handmade carpets and rugs but their speciality was chenille Axminsters, woven by a process which had been patented by Adam's former employer, James Templeton of Glasgow. The firm established an international reputation by displaying its products at exhibitions in Europe and the USA, and by 1876 some 800 people were employed. 
On 13 September 1871 Tomkinson married Ann Porritt (1850-1920), daughter of Matthew Porritt Stonehouse of Wakefield, worsted spinner. They lived in Kidderminster, for the last forty years of their married life at Franche Hall. There were twelve surviving children, the two eldest sons, Herbert and Gerald, becoming partners in the firm. 
Tomkinson took a major new initiative in 1878 when he visited the USA and purchased the United Kingdom rights to Halcyon Skinner's spool Axminster power-loom, which wove a pile fabric imitating the luxurious hand-tufted Axminster carpets. Five other British firms were granted licences by Tomkinson and Adam and together they formed the Royal Axminster Manufacturers' Association which successfully maintained prices, permitting comfortable profit margins, until 1893. Tomkinson became its chairman, retaining the position for over forty years. 
In the production of chenille Axminster carpeting a leading position was achieved by means of Adam's power-loom patented in 1880-82. Licences were given to three other firms and prices and profit levels protected by the formation of the Axminster Manufacturers' Association. The expiry of Skinner's patent and the perfection of alternative power-looms during the 1890s led to increased competition and a marked reduction in chenille and spool Axminster prices. Demand soared and the manufacture of Axminster carpeting became the largest sector of the carpet industry, and Tomkinson and Adam continued to expand. The firm employed 1300 people by 1907 and it ranked as the fourth largest firm in the industry. The firm's success owed much to Tomkinson's leadership and commercial acumen, while Adam seems to have confined himself to technical and production matters. 
Tomkinson was prominent in local government. He sat on Worcestershire county council from its formation, became an alderman in 1892, and was a long-standing chairman of the finance committee. A member of Kidderminster borough council for thirty-five years, he also held office as mayor seven times between 1887 and 1913. As chairman of the library committee, he was mainly responsible for raising funds to build the borough library. He was a JP, and also served as a deputy lieutenant and high sheriff for Worcestershire. 
A number of other good causes in Kidderminster attracted Tomkinson's time and energy. He was for many years chairman of the Kidderminster board of guardians, as well as treasurer of the Workmen's Club, a governor of the grammar school, and a trustee of Kidderminster Infirmary and Children's Hospital. In 1916 he was made an honorary freeman of the borough. An Anglican and a churchwarden, Tomkinson collected rare books and manuscripts, and he acquired a national reputation as a collector of Japanese ivories and lacquer work. This interest was reflected in 'A Japanese Collection', published in 1898; he was also an active member of the Japan Society. He enjoyed fishing and shooting on his country estate at Chilton, Cleobury Mortimer, and was a keen gardener, creating a notable rose garden at Franche Hall. 
Tomkinson died at Franche Hall on 28 June 1921 after a brief illness. The funeral was held at Wolverley church, Worcestershire, where he was buried on 2 July 1921. 


@@@@@


doc= 48349


Turner, Edward (1901-1973), motorcycle designer and manufacturer, was born on 24 January 1901 at 32 Bronti Place, Walworth, Surrey, one of seven surviving children of William Turner, mechanical engineer, and his wife, Fanny, 'nee' Hillman. Edward Turner gained an early familiarity with metal working and tool making in his father's light engineering works. After some time at the Marconi School and a spell as wireless operator in the merchant navy during the First World War, he opened his own motorcycle shop in Peckham Road, Dulwich. In 1927 he designed and made his own 350 cc motorcycle, the Turner Special. While trying to find someone to manufacture this model, he met John Young (Jack) Sangster, the managing director of the Ariel Cycle Company, and was persuaded to become chief development engineer at the Ariel works in Birmingham in 1927. Turner spent the rest of his working life with Ariel, Triumph, and BSA, and, in collaboration with Val Page and Herbert (Bert) Hopwood, his senior and junior colleagues respectively, was responsible for the creation of many of the principal motorcycle models produced in Britain up to the 1960s. 
Turner became chief designer at Ariel in 1932. He designed the four-cylinder Square Four power unit, which sold well from 1932 to 1959 and was scaled up to 500 and 1000 cc. In 1936 he moved to Triumph in Coventry after it was purchased by Sangster. There, in 1937, he designed the Speed Twin that 'changed the whole concept of motor cycle design... A determined and ambitious man who had no time for fools, he was to bring a kind of engineering dictatorship to Triumph... Above all, Edward Turner had a flair for styling' (Louis and Currie, 114). He rationalized the eighteen existing models and generated new ideas that earned good profits. He was also an enthusiastic rider. 
These were Turner's best years. He became a substantial shareholder in Triumph. Then, in July 1939, his first wife, Edith Marion, was killed in a car accident. He took the loss hard. A therapeutic visit to the United States was the first of many. He was also badly affected by the bombing of Coventry, which destroyed the Triumph factory in 1940, and he may also have begun to suffer from the diabetes that later affected him. It is said that, thereafter, he became a different man, less dynamic, more cantankerous. He was managing director of Triumph from 1944 to 1956 and of the motorcycle division at BSA from September 1956, under Sangster's chairmanship, until January 1964; he remained on the board until 1967. Although in charge at Small Heath, Birmingham, he preferred Triumph's Meriden factory, but did nothing to eliminate tension between the two works and their staff and styles. Triumph with its annual output of 5000 machines was much smaller than Small Heath, where 50,000 motorcycles and other products were made in 1951. 
Turner's responsibilities in the late 1950s covered Ariel, Triumph, BSA, and Sunbeam, and the Redditch works where scooter engines and small motorcycles were made. He had a brief design interest in luxury cars before Daimler was sold to Jaguar in 1960. In 1955, a Triumph reached 193 m.p.h on the Bonneville track in the USA. Outstanding successes were the BSA Rocket and Triumph Trident Three in the 1960s. At this time, Triumphs in particular were selling well in the USA and the group commanded the British market, though rivalled by Norton in both markets. But there were also failures -- no successful scooters, no sharing of components and tools across marques, and no drive for a full-size range to meet Japanese competition arriving in the early 1960s and dominant in all except the largest machines by the end of the 1960s. Suggested plans to combat the threat in these ways were called 'potty' or 'irrelevant' by Turner (Hopwood, 193, 197, 201). The bad management that finally broke the group and the British motorcycle industry in 1969 and in the 1970s began under Turner and Sangster. One element was Turner's bad temper and jealous attitude to his designers and engineers. Another was his regular absence from the group in California, where he spent several months each year. Writing in 1981, Bert Hopwood, a senior designer in the group, was sharply critical of Turner, giving evidence of his waywardness. Davies (86) described his temper as 'ferocious', one designer actually being kicked. Others, including Ryerson, offered a more favourable picture. 
Turner became a rich man, living in some style near Kenilworth until moving on his retirement to Rutland Gate in London and later to Capel, a few miles from Dorking in Surrey. He was a member of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers and of the Institute of Directors and a liveryman of the Worshipful Company of Coachmakers. He married for a second time on 19 July 1952. His second wife, Shirley Joan, 'nee' Watts, from Sydney, was a teenage Australian for whom he seems to have felt an 'uncharacteristic tenderness' ('DBB', 5.569). They had three children before divorcing about 1968. Turner died on 15 August 1973, aged seventy-two, at his home, Newlands, Weare Street, Capel. 


@@@@@


doc= 48350


Turner, Eric (1918-1980), motorcycle manufacturer, was born on 18 July 1918 at Burton upon Trent, Staffordshire, the son of William Edmund Turner, headmaster, and his wife, Elsie Emma, 'nee' Hartwell. He was educated at Chesterfield School, 5 miles from Staveley. Nothing else is known about the years prior to 1940, when he qualified as an accountant just after the outbreak of war. He was an associate and later a fellow of the Institute of Chartered Accountants. Turner left accounting to join the Royal Army Service Corps as a driver. He served in France, and was briefly a staff sergeant, just before Dunkirk. By the age of twenty-six he was a lieutenant-colonel in command of 100 Dakotas and 3000 men airlifting troops into Burma to fight the Japanese in 1943-4. In 1943 he married Zena Doreen Schellenberg, who died about 1973; they had a son and a daughter. 
On demobilization, Turner reverted to accountancy, joining the Blackburn aircraft company at Brough in Yorkshire as chief accountant despite his total lack of relevant experience. He became company secretary two years later and a director in 1950. He was made managing director at thirty-two, the youngest head of an aircraft company in the country. Although lacking in executive experience, he tried to get to know his staff and to weld them into a team. 'I am expert in nothing', he said (Rae, 74-7). 
In 1959 Turner agreed to join the board of Birmingham Small Arms (BSA) and he became chief executive and deputy chairman on 1 January 1960. He absorbed the chairmanship in June 1961 when Jack Sangster retired. Shortly afterwards he served as president of the British Cycle and Motor Cycle Association, for the year 1962-3. This was the time when a trade treaty was signed with Japan giving Japanese-made goods, including motorcycles, most favoured nation treatment in Britain without corresponding entry to the Japanese market. The industry protested fruitlessly but BSA, despite the managing director Edward Turner's visit to Japan in 1960, failed to act to meet the new threat. 
Turner was the first chief executive of the BSA group following the reorganization associated with the dismissal of Sir Bernard Docker as chairman in 1956. He was picked specifically for his accountancy expertise, but as a man with no experience of the industry he was a remarkable choice, and he may have been headhunted at the suggestion of consultants Lazards and Deloitte, Plender; his appointment turned out to be a disastrous misjudgement. The group, with its head office in Small Heath, Birmingham, and 20,000 employees in factories around Britain, had 34 per cent of its sales in motorcycles, 15 per cent in Daimler cars and buses, 13 per cent in steel and titanium, and 21 per cent in small arms and engineering; Turner switched products, appointed new directors and executives, and introduced new functions such as research and personnel, but the changes upset rather than developed the organization's strengths. 
Turner may have sought teamwork, 'a long broad view' (Ryerson, 171), and a 'consistent profitability' (Hopwood, 240, 243) but he was hardly successful. New men were brought in, many from the aircraft industry then in recession, rather than existing ones promoted, notably on the motorcycle side; one such was Lionel Jofeh. These newcomers were 'ignorant and unsympathetic to the problems of motorcycle design and production' (Smith, 'DBB') and the outcome was a series of unsuccessful models that reached the market too late in the season and were unacceptable. 'The decision that change was needed was right; the method of introducing it questionable; the outcome disastrous' (ibid.). Over $1 million was lost in orders and returned motorcycles in 1967-8, $8 million in 1970-71, and $3 million in the following two years. Turner, after sacking Jofeh, resigned himself and BSA was forced to its knees, never to rise fully again. 
To a degree the tension lay between the accountant and the engineer, the new thinking on value engineering, computerization, and research versus traditional, well-tried methods used by men who knew and loved motorcycles. For example, 300 newcomers were taken on in the research unit established at Umberslade Hall, with virtually no communication with the experienced staff at Small Heath 20 miles away. Ryerson described 'the management at BSA (as) very highly skilled, and... very bad' (Ryerson, 137-40), concerned with making money but not with the means to do so. Ryerson saw BSA's collapse as the result of a 'quiet, steady merciless erosion of the company due to lack of true, deepseated commitment and sense of purpose in the manufacture of motorcycles' (ibid., 167). 
Turner left BSA in 1971 aged fifty-two. He was already a director of English and Scottish Investors, and had been, until 1967, of Associated Electrical Industries. He was on the advisory council attached to the export credits guarantee department (1965-70), on the Malta Industrial Development Board (1959-65), and chairman of the finance committee of the University of Aston in Birmingham (1968-76); Aston awarded him an honorary DSc when he left office. He was also chairman of the right-wing Economic League (1967-72) and president of the Birmingham chamber of commerce (1971-2), being concerned with the integration of midlands industry into the Common Market. He moved into the insurance brokerage business and became an underwriting member of Lloyds. 
In 1974, shortly after the death of his first wife, Turner married Eileen Laura Svrljuga. Prior to leaving BSA, he had become a founder director of what is now the National Exhibition Centre, which opened just outside Birmingham in 1976. He served for ten years to 1979. In that year, Turner moved from Dale Cross Grange, Barnt Green, near Birmingham, where he had lived for many years, to live with his daughter at Windlesham in Surrey. Ill health may have caused the move, for he died of lung cancer at the age of sixty-two on 21 September 1980, at his daughter's house, at Lennoxwood, Westwood Road, Windlesham. The business career that had started so well when he was young terminated early and blighted. 


@@@@@


doc= 48352


Tyrer, Henry (1858-1936), shipping agent, was born at Green Lane Farm, Ormskirk, Lancashire, on 2 March 1858, the third son among thirteen children of John Tyrer (died 1894), a farmer, and his wife, Jane (died 1889), 'nee' Travis. Tyrer was educated at the free grammar school in Ormskirk and left school in 1872. Deciding against agriculture as a career, he obtained a position with Alfred Murdoch & Co. in Liverpool. The firm had been active in the west African trade since 1847, and its trading in palm oil had led to the purchase of a cooperage. Tyrer learned all aspects of the business, and in 1879 he became a partner, only to leave soon after to set up his own business. 
Henry Tyrer & Co. had an initial capital of only $100, but Tyrer's activities as a commission agent in the west African trade required little more as cash was usually received with each order. By taking personal care of each transaction Tyrer soon acquired a good reputation. He restored relations with Murdoch, and eventually took over his business. Tyrer then took a partner to fund further expansion, but this link ended in 1885. 
Tyrer was now a general merchant, trading in goods on his own account, as well as being a commission agent. His success enabled him to marry Jane Elizabeth (1855-1936), daughter of John Porter, an estate manager, on 17 June 1885 at Rufford church near Ormskirk. Sadly both their children died at an early age. Then in 1890 Tyrer found himself in financial difficulties, and only narrowly escaped bankruptcy. 
During the 1890s Tyrer made various attempts to take a more direct part in the west African shipping trade. He successively encouraged the Prince Line, the General Steam Navigation Company, and Furness Withy & Co. Ltd to provide services to west Africa for which he would act as agent. Alfred Jones dominated the west African trade, and defeated Tyrer's efforts, as he did again in 1903-4 when Tyrer organized voyages to west Africa by a ship of his own. 
To compensate for these rebuffs, Tyrer diversified his business into other activities. These included agencies for short sea routes from Liverpool and the development of a small coastal trade with western Scotland. Tyrer also took advantage of the opening of the port of Preston in 1892. He was soon the leading shipping agent there, dealing with grain from Ireland, general cargo from London, and, most important of all, the woodpulp trade from Scandinavia. His own service from Preston to Brussels via London was short-lived, but was sold at a profit. 
Tyrer converted his business into a limited liability company in 1914. He became governing director and six of his most long-standing employees were appointed directors. The First World War disrupted some of Tyrer's activities, but it also gave him yet another chance to take a bigger part in the west African trade. In 1916 Sir William Lever set up the Bromport Steamship Company in defiance of the west African shipping conference, and Tyrer became the agent for Bromport. 
The coming of peace dealt several blows to Tyrer's business. He lost the agency for the woodpulp trade, and in 1924 the Bromport Steamship Company was wound up. However, Tyrer retained the agency for Lever's Southern Whaling and Sealing Company. In the late 1920s Tyrer was again active in the west African trade, acting for the African and Eastern Trade Corporation, and then the United African Company. 
By 1930 Henry Tyrer was in his seventies, and playing a much smaller role in the running of his company. His health gradually failed and he died on 20 June 1936 at his home, Bewcastle, Latham, near Ormskirk, Lancashire. He was buried at Rufford church. Tyrer's wife survived him, but died two months later, on 25 August 1936. 


@@@@@


doc= 48355


Vestey, William, first Baron Vestey (1859-1940), industrialist and food importer, and his business partner, Sir Edmund Hoyle Vestey, first baronet (1866-1953), were both born in Liverpool. William was the eldest ('b'. 21 January 1859), and Edmund was the fifth child ('b'. 3 February 1866), of Samuel Vestey (1832-1902), a Yorkshireman and provision merchant, and Hannah, 'nee' Utley (died 1884). Samuel ran a business in Liverpool, buying and selling mainly provisions imported from North America. Both William and Edmund, after an education at the Liverpool Institute, gained experience in the family business. 
At the age of seventeen William was sent to the USA to buy and ship home goods for his father. He established a canning factory in Chicago, and purchased the cheaper cuts of meat to make corned beef, which he shipped to Liverpool. This venture was successful, and the management of the cannery was given to Edmund, who had joined the firm in 1883. In 1890 William travelled to Argentina, and decided to exploit the uses of refrigeration to preserve foodstuffs. He began by shipping frozen partridges, and later mutton and beef, from Argentina to Britain. William was joined in this enterprise by Edmund, and in 1890 they established the first cold store in Liverpool, which as the Union Cold Storage Company was to become one of the world's largest cold storage operations. They soon diversified into other products, using their extensive network of cold stores to accommodate all types of perishable foodstuffs, and developed their supplies on a worldwide basis. In 1906 they began to ship eggs, chickens, and other produce from China. The China trade led them into another avenue of business, when they purchased two tramp steamers in 1909, and converted them into refrigerated ships. This was the beginning of the Blue Star Line, which they registered, in 1911, with a capital of $100,000. In the next five years they acquired five more ships, as well as a butchery business, a chain of retail shops in Britain, and small freezing works in Australia and New Zealand. This set the pattern for the later growth of the Vestey empire -- a totally integrated business, with control of every link in the chain of processing and distribution of food from producer to consumer. 
A prominent part of the Vesteys' worldwide holdings was the cattle-raising farms and ranches, which enabled them to control supplies to their meat-packing and cold storage plants. After 1915 Argentina became an important base for their operations, especially when Britain's 1914 'Finance Act' with its high taxes made them tax exiles there. While their business made large profits in the First World War supplying the British army with meat, the Vesteys applied themselves energetically to their Argentinian packing houses. They returned to Britain in 1919, when William appeared before the royal commission on income tax to argue the need for a return to the pre-1915 tax levels. Unable to convince the government of the validity of their case, in 1921 the Vesteys and their advisers devised a complex and highly successful scheme which not only satisfied their desire to live in Britain and avoid paying any personal tax but also showed them to be as innovative and pioneering in the field of tax avoidance as in the food business. The greater part of the Vesteys' overseas empire was leased to their British company, Union Cold Storage Ltd, for a yearly rent of $960,000, which was used to set up a Paris trust fund. From the trust the money flowed into the Western United Investment Company in Britain, a Vestey holding company in which the family held the management shares and controlling interest, and thence, tax free, into the pockets of the Vestey brothers. Once domiciled again in England, Edmund was created a baronet in 1921, and the following year William purchased a peerage from the Lloyd George government, apparently for $25,000 (he had been made a baronet in 1913 for his role in making cheap food more widely available). The peerage evoked a letter of protest from George V, who felt it wrong that a man who declined to pay national taxes should be ennobled. 
Edmund's first marriage in 1887 to Sarah Barker produced six children before they divorced in 1926. His second marriage was on 10 March 1926, to Ellen Soward (died 1953). 
The Vesteys' ownership of refrigerated ships increased so that by 1925 they had, in Blue Star, the largest refrigerated fleet in the world. In Britain they owned cold stores in several cities as well as 2365 retail butcher shops. The advantage of such an all-embracing organization for perishable commodities was that they could be held until prices were right, and once the chain of processing had started the arrival of further supplies could be controlled to avoid losses from overstocked markets. Their operations in Britain were managed from the Union Cold Storage Company Ltd, which by 1925 had a capital of $9,628,575. By 1933 the Union had an issued capital of $12 million. Despite the depression the Vesteys' business continued to expand, especially in Australia where in 1934 they took over the Anglis meat interests for $1.5 million. 
William Vestey was married twice: first in 1882 to Sarah (died 1923), daughter of George Ellis of Birkenhead; second on 9 August 1924 in New York to Evelene Brodstone (1875-1941), daughter of Norwegian emigrants to Superior, Nebraska. His second wife had joined the Vesteys' Chicago organization in 1895 as a secretary, and became a powerful figure in the enterprise as its international troubleshooter. Her help proved indispensable to the Vesteys in retaining their direct control over a multinational corporation which by William's death was conservatively valued at over $90 million. William's son and heir from his first marriage, Samuel (1882-1954), later joined Edmund in running the family business during the eventful post-war years. William died on 10 December 1940 at his home, Cleeve Cottage, Bulstrode Way, Gerrards Cross. His remains were buried at the parish church of St Peter Foley, Lancaster; his ashes were later reinterred in the Anglican cathedral in Liverpool. Edmund died, still chairman, on 18 November 1953, at St Bartholomew's Hospital, London, and his son, Ronald ('b'. 1898) assumed control of the business. 


@@@@@


doc= 48356


Vickers, Thomas Edward (1833-1915), steel maker and armaments manufacturer, was born on 9 July 1833 in Sheffield, the son of Edward Vickers (1804-1897) and his wife, Anne, 'nee' Naylor. His brother, 
Tom (usually known as Colonel Tom because of his association with the local militia) had joined the business by the age of twenty-one. By then the family firm, known as Naylor Vickers, was one of the leading crucible steel makers in Sheffield, and Edward had firmly established the Vickers' name in the town's commercial and political life: he had served as the town's alderman and mayor, and was the first president of the Sheffield chamber of commerce. His sons did not maintain this involvement, but they were to take the family firm to new heights. 
In 1860 Tom Vickers married Frances Mary Douglas (1841-1904), the only child of Joseph Douglas, a London surgeon; they had two sons and four daughters. For many years the family resided at Bolsover Hill, a large house on high ground to the north of Sheffield, where they lived a life of unostentatious luxury surrounded by eight servants. Later they moved to London, where Tom indulged his taste for ceramic art and frequented the leading chess clubs. In 1861 Albert Vickers married Helen Horton George (died 1873) of Boston, Massachusetts; they had three children. After her death he married, in 1875, Edith Foster (died 1909), daughter of John Foster of Maltby, near Sheffield; they had a son and two daughters. 
Tom Vickers's arrival at Naylor Vickers coincided with a period of frenzied activity, as the firm shared in the heyday of the crucible steel trade. It rapidly outgrew its old site in Millsands and, beginning in 1863, under Vickers's direction, steelmaking activity was transferred to the River Don works in the Brightside district of Sheffield. Utilizing German technology, he pioneered the manufacture of steel castings, still using the crucible process to produce cast-steel bells and railway wheels. The success of the business owed much to his leadership in the foundry, where he acquired a reputation as a tough individual who never knew when he was beaten. He was known to sleep at the works, when the occasion demanded. A series of patents dealing with the production of steel castings, particularly cast-steel tyres, and a paper read before the Institution of Mechanical Engineers in 1861, 'On the strength of steel containing different proportions of carbon', testified to his technical prowess. His innovations placed Naylor Vickers at the forefront of world steel making, and only German firms such as Krupp could compete in size or technology. 
In 1867 the firm was incorporated as Vickers, Sons & Co. Ltd, with a capital of $155,000 split equally between the Vickers brothers and Ernst Benzon, their American agent, who became chairman until Tom Vickers succeeded him in 1873. The business then employed about a thousand men, ranking the firm third in Sheffield behind Charles Cammells and John Browns. By then Albert Vickers was also playing a significant part in the business. He had joined the firm in 1854, gaining experience in the American market, which he was to visit thirty-four times. The brothers complemented each other: Tom was the technologist, and Albert the salesman and strategist. Although equally autocratic by nature, Albert did not have Tom's technical knowledge, but was more daring and speculative, with the courage to back his business convictions. Handsome, commanding, having an easy way with customers, and familiar with other countries and their languages, 'Don Alberto', as he was sometimes known, was the perfect foil for his taciturn brother. 
Vickers was rather slower to commit itself fully to the arms business than its rivals Browns, Cammells, and Firths. But by the late 1880s a fall in profits led to a marked shift towards the arms sector, which gathered pace towards 1900. In 1897 the Maxim Gun Company was acquired for $1.3 million, and in the same year the Naval Construction and Armaments Company was bought at the bargain price of $425,000. Four years later Vickers absorbed Wolseley cars, partly with an eye to manufacturing military vehicles. In 1902 Vickers again extended its empire to include a half-share in William Beardmore & Co., the Glasgow-based armour-plate and warship makers, and in 1906 a similar-sized holding in Whitehead & Co., the torpedo makers of Weymouth and Fiume, Croatia. After 1900 Vickers also developed an interest in submarine and aircraft manufacture and began creating foreign subsidiaries or holding companies in Spain, Italy, Japan, Russia, and Turkey. Vickers, Sons and Maxim, as it became known, was then in the unique position of being able not only to build a battleship but also to equip her with engines, fit her with armour, provide the necessary guns and shells, and, in fact, launch her from Barrow in Furness ready for immediate service. 'All this we can do without outside help', stated Tom Vickers ('Sheffield Daily Telegraph', 20 Oct 1915). Significantly, by then the firm's head office had shifted to London. The brothers had turned the company into an integrated, though diverse, arms conglomerate, which vied with W. G. Armstrong as Britain's leading arsenal. 
In 1909 Tom Vickers resigned as chairman, handing over to Albert, who held the post until 1918. By 1914 Vickers' issued share capital was almost $6 million, its workforce in the UK was 22,000, and its average annual profits since 1897 had been $589,391. Its growth continued unchecked during the First World War, when its products -- battleships, naval guns, machine-guns, torpedoes, aircraft, and submarines -- could be found in every theatre of war. By 1919 the company's $20 million issued capital meant that only Coats, Lever Brothers, and Imperial Tobacco surpassed it in capital size as a British industrial firm -- though this was not entirely welcome to the old family members, who recognized that the company could no longer be under such close personal control. By the customary measures of business success, Tom and Albert Vickers had presided over a period of continuous growth; on the other hand, they might be criticized for becoming over-committed to armaments, which left Vickers with a legacy of problems which were to come home to roost when arms orders evaporated in the 1920s. 
In his later years Tom Vickers was an aloof and patriarchal, though greatly respected, figure, who was used to deferential treatment from his shareholders, who 'soon came to realise that curiosity was a folly which could not be indulged in pleasantly while this man of iron occupied the chair. In time the enquiring shareholder became as extinct as the Dodo, and the annual meeting of Messrs Vickers was concentrated into a kind of lightning episode... [of] four or five minutes. ('Sheffield Daily Telegraph', 20 Oct 1915)' The River Don works was his absorbing passion and he continued to visit it until only a few months before his death, when he was wheeled around it in a bath chair. His technical achievements were recognized by the Howard Quinquennial prize from the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1907. Outside business, both Tom and Albert Vickers shunned publicity and disliked being photographed. Apart from chess, and a little shooting and fishing, Tom's only passion was drilling the Hallamshire volunteers, of which he was commanding officer from 1871 to 1899. A staunch Conservative, he also served as a magistrate, and as master cutler in 1872, and was created CB, civil division, in 1898. Albert's influence as armourer-statesman is evidenced by the award of several foreign decorations, such as the order of the Rising Sun in Japan. 
Tom Vickers died at his home, 12 Stanhope Place, Hyde Park, London, on 19 October 1915 and was cremated at Golders Green, Middlesex. Albert Vickers died at Compton Place, Eastbourne, Sussex, on 12 July 1919 and was buried at Hascombe church, Surrey. 


@@@@@


doc= 48357


Albert Vickers (1838-1919), was born on 16 September 1838, also in Sheffield. Their father was a miller who had launched the Vickers' steelmaking dynasty in Sheffield in the 1820s; their mother was the daughter of a local steel maker. Tom attended Sheffield collegiate school and then received technical training in Germany, at Neuwied am Rhein; Albert was educated privately in Sheffield and then studied at Hameln an der Weser, Germany. 


@@@@@


doc= 48364


Warner, Sir Frank (1862-1930), silk manufacturer, was born at 5 Punderson's Place, Bethnal Green, London, on 13 September 1862, the son of Benjamin Warner (1828-1908), a silk designer, and his wife, Emma, 'nee' Branscomb. When he left school in 1878, Frank and his elder brother Alfred went to Lyons to study silk manufacture and political economy. The family had been connected with the silk industry for several generations, and in 1870 his father had established the silk weaving firm of Warner, Sillett, and Ramm, which produced high quality fabrics. The firm was renamed Warner and Ramm in 1874. Frank joined the firm in 1881, serving his apprenticeship at its Hollybush Gardens factory; when in 1891 he and Alfred were made partners, the firm became known as Warner & Sons. Under Benjamin Warner the business had developed through a series of take-overs of old-established weaving firms: Burnier in 1857, Norris & Co. in 1885, and Daniel Walters of Braintree in 1894. Many of the Hollybush Gardens staff moved to Braintree, and eventually all the weaving took place at New Mills, where it was directed by Frank Warner. These take-overs led to the acquisition of a magnificent collection of silk designs which was one of the main strengths of the firm, which aimed to maintain the quality of the richly woven silk fabrics made in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. Unfortunately the market for such goods was not large owing to their cost, but the firm was fortunate in receiving royal patronage and was commissioned to weave the coronation robes of both King Edward and Queen Alexandra and King George and Queen Mary. At the same time Warners also began to produce modern designs provided by freelance designers, who included Crane, Butterfield, and Silver. 
Following the death of Benjamin Warner in 1908, Frank Warner and his brother Alfred continued in partnership, and in 1922 Frank's son, Cloudesley Warner, who had supervised the installation of power-looms in 1919, also became a partner. On Cloudesley Warner's advice a Paris showroom was opened in the rue Edward VII, but this had to close in 1926. Further expansion took place in 1926, when the firm acquired the silk printing works of Newman, Smith, and Newman, of Dartford, Kent. The original staff remained, and until 1932 all printing was carried out by hand using the traditional woodblocks. Three months after the early death of Cloudesley Warner in September 1928, Warner & Sons became a private limited company, with the board consisting of Frank Warner, W. Bayford Stone, W. Vizard, and Warner's son-in-law Ernest Goodale. 
Warner greatly contributed to the development of the English silk industry. In 1905, as a witness for the royal commission on tariff reform, he advocated a return to import duties on woven silks (which had been removed in 1860) in order to halt the decline of the industry. However, he realized that French designs were often superior and believed that designers should also receive a technical training in weaving. He gave lectures to the Society of Arts and numerous art and technical colleges, emphasizing the importance of the relationship between art and industry, and served as an examiner for the City and Guilds of London Institute from 1898 to 1905. He also played a part in organizing textile exhibitions both at home and abroad, notably those at Brussels in 1910, Turin in 1911, and Paris in 1925, when he served as chairman of the textile committee of the British section, for which he was made an officer of the Legion d'honneur. At home he organized the silk exhibition of 1912 and assisted with the Empire Exhibition at Wembley in 1924. 
Warner served as president of the Silk Association of Great Britain and Ireland from 1910 to 1917 and of the Textile Institute from 1918 to 1920. He was chairman of the British Silk Research Association, the silk section of the London chamber of commerce, the silk advisory committee of the Imperial Institute (1917-21), and the Board of Trade committee for the British Industries Fair (1920). In addition he had been adviser on textiles to the Board of Trade during the First World War. He became a member of the council of the Royal Society of Arts and of the Victoria and Albert Museum. In 1918 he was created KBE for services to the textile industry. 
Warner's invention of a velvet fabric with three different heights of pile, which was patented in the UK in 1914, demonstrated his technical ability. His literary ability and very extensive knowledge of silk manufacturing is revealed in his book 'The Silk Industry of the United Kingdom: its Origin and Development' (1921). 
Warner married Kate Dennis, the daughter of Edmund Strange Parsons of Shernbourne Hall, near Kings Lynn, Norfolk, on 3 September 1890 at the parish church of Ingoldisthorpe. They had three children, Frank Cloudesley Folliott, who married Louise Gouet of Paris; Evelyn Sandford, who married Leonard Tibbitts; and Gwendolen Branscombe, who married Ernest Goodale, a solicitor. The death of his wife in March 1928, followed by that of Cloudesley in France the following September, was a severe blow to Warner. He retired in the summer of 1929, and died of pneumonia on 23 January 1930, aged sixty-seven, at his home, Woodcroft, Mottingham, Kent. He was buried on 27 January in Chislehurst cemetery, where his tombstone bears the inscription 'He wove truth with trust'. 


@@@@@


doc= 48365


Wates, Norman Edward (1905-1969), builder and contractor, was born on 12 January 1905 in Streatham, London, the eldest of the three sons of Edward Wates, house furnisher and builder, and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Holmes. His younger brother was Sir Ronald Wallace Wates. He was educated at Emmanuel School, Wandsworth, leaving in 1922 to spend a year with a firm of chartered accountants before joining the building firm started by his father and three uncles. The firm had expanded rapidly after the First World War, building housing estates in south London, and in 1926 it embarked on an estate of 1000 houses in Streatham Vale, which took five years to complete. On 25 April 1929 Wates married Margot Irene ('b'. 1906/7), daughter of James Sidwell; they had three sons, the eldest of whom was the builder and environmentalist Neil Edward Wates, and three daughters. 
By 1930 Wates had been joined by his two younger brothers. This younger generation soon took charge of the firm and, in 1935, began to look beyond the building of houses to public works, including libraries, fire stations, and drill halls. Wates made several trips to the United States in the 1930s to study American building methods and business and management techniques, and he was one of the first builders to reduce the amount of casual labour, leading to the Wates staff-man scheme for qualified site workers, which provided security of employment. 
As war approached Wates took on a number of government contracts, and by 1939 had over 100 contracts with the War Office, the Admiralty, and the London boroughs, including contracts for air raid shelters, lining units for trenches, and the construction of army camps and airfields. Wates advised the Admiralty on specialist concrete structures; during the war the firm made pre-cast concrete barges and the first pre-cast concrete floating dock. It was also involved in the construction of units for the Mulberry harbours used for the Normandy landings in 1944. 
With the post-war housing shortage and the shortage of traditional building materials, including bricks, timber, and steel, as well as that of skilled site labour, the government subsidized the building of houses using non-traditional materials. The Wates firm was one of the leading builders of temporary, prefabricated bungalows for local authorities all over England, as part of the temporary housing programme from 1945 to 1948. Wates built on experience acquired during the war and, using the precasting works built for production of war materials, he developed a system of making large load-bearing concrete slabs, one storey high, for bungalows. This was especially useful in areas where there was a shortage of site labour. When the subsidies ended, and the prohibition on building for private ownership was lifted, Wates built permanent pre-cast concrete houses; between 1945 and 1955 the firm built nearly 20,000 of these, 9.6% of the total output in the country. 
In the 1950s Wates set up a separate division in the midlands. The company built various styles of house, including over a thousand of the detached Dormy houses. In 1953 they were the first to import the tower crane from France, for use in high construction work. They were also one of the first contractors to move into urban redevelopment in the 1950s, working with the charitable foundation of Alleyn's College to redevelop Dulwich; with the Church Commissioners they embarked on the Parkhill development in Croydon, and the Hyde Park estate in Bayswater, where the firm built 763 flats and 112 houses. In the early 1960s the pre-cast concrete division made and put up many of the buildings at the new universities of Sussex and Essex. The Wates Group remained a private company, one of the largest family businesses in the construction industry, with Norman Wates as chairman. 
Throughout his career Wates sat on many committees concerned with housing standards. He was a founder member of the National Housebuilders Registration Committee in 1935. After the war he was one of a team sent to Germany by the government to study methods of pre-fabrication. He served for twelve years on the Central Housing Advisory Committee, set up by the minister of housing and local government in 1957; he was also on the Parker Morris committee, set up to establish minimum specifications for local authority housing, whose report, 'Homes for Today and Tomorrow', appeared in 1961. 
Always interested in education Wates started an indentured student scheme in the company in 1947. He was a foundation governor of the United Westminster Schools foundation, a member of the council of King's College Hospital medical school, and on the court of governors of the London School of Economics. With his brothers he set up the Wates Foundation to encourage the arts and sciences. His main recreation was ocean racing. He died at King's College Hospital, Denmark Hill, Lambeth, London, on 21 July 1969. 


@@@@@


doc= 48369


Casella, Louis Pascal (1812-1897), maker of scientific instruments, was born Luigi Pasquale Casella on 29 February 1812 in Edinburgh, the son of Pasquale Casella, teacher of painting, and his wife, who was a daughter of General Ramsay of Edinburgh. He was brought up and educated in Edinburgh, although nothing further seems to be known about his early life. About 1835 he moved to London, where he was employed by the instrument maker Caesar Tagliabue who, like Casella's father, had emigrated to Britain from near Como. On 5 November 1838 Casella married Caesar's daughter, Maria Louisa Tagliabue, who worked for the family firm in the office. In the same year Tagliabue took his son-in-law into partnership, changing the company's name to Tagliabue and Casella. In 1844, following Tagliabue's death, Casella took over the running of the firm, buying out the interests of his sister-in-law, Antonia Marina Tagliabue, in 1845. 
At the time of Tagliabue's death, the firm was at Hatton Garden in the heart of London's scientific instrument making community. It was making and selling a variety of philosophical or scientific instruments, including thermometers, which became one of the main concerns of the firm under Casella's guidance. Its activities expanded considerably, and in 1848 Tagliabue was dropped from the company name. By the 1860s Casella & Co. sold thermometers, hydrometers, and drawing and surveying instruments, as well as meteorological instruments and accessories for photography. Many of the devices were made in the Casella workshop, but some were made -- and engraved with Casella's name -- under contract by others, including the light engineers R. W. Munro of London and Thomas Cooke of York. Among the company's customers were the British and overseas governments, universities, and other scientific institutions. In 1872 Casella moved the firm, which had been in Hatton Garden for forty-four years, to Holborn Bars, where it stayed until after his death. By the time of the move, his two sons, Louis Marino and Charles Frederick, were working for the company. 
As well as, or possibly as part of, pursuing his business interests, Casella maintained his contact with the scientific community through membership of learned societies. He was elected a member of the Meteorological Society of London in 1841 and became a fellow of the Royal Meteorological Society in 1862, by which time he had also joined the Royal Astronomical Society. One of his principal scientific interests was in meteorology and he received wide acclaim for his development and production of first-class meteorological instruments. He was also a fellow of the Royal Geographical Society. The instruments for which Casella was most renowned were thermometers, and his name is associated with several designs, including a clinical thermometer based on the principle of the maximum thermometer, and the adaptation of a pressure gauge for the verification of thermometers to be used for determining deep-sea temperatures. 
For most of his life Casella's company was profitable, and his family lived comfortably. In the mid-1870s a new family home, The Lawns, was built in Highgate, Middlesex, and in 1879 Casella bought a house for his daughter in neighbouring Finchley. However, during the 1890s the company went through some lean years, perhaps partly because of Casella's reluctance to loosen the reigns of control, despite his advancing years. On 29 February 1896 he celebrated his official twenty-first birthday, and a year later, on 23 April, he died from bronchitis at his home in Highgate. The firm, with its continuing problems, was left in the hands of his son, Charles Frederick. 


On his father's death in 1897 Charles Frederick was left in charge of the family business. Unfortunately, despite an interest in the instruments themselves, he lacked business acumen; he had inherited a company which was struggling and he was, for some years, unable to improve its situation. For a time there was confusion over the company name: formally it was changed to C. F. Casella, but leaflets, catalogues, and finished instruments continued to be issued under the name of L. P. Casella. By 1905, when the lease on the company's Holborn premises expired, affairs were in a poor state. The firm moved to cheaper but less convenient rooms in Westminster. 
Having presided over the company's decline, Casella also oversaw its recovery, through two important appointments: Rowland Miall, an accomplished business manager, and Robert Abraham, who brought skills in engineering and some much needed capital. The three brought about a transformation; they formed a limited liability company in 1910, moved to new premises in south London in 1912, and launched a successful range of instruments. By the time of Charles's death from tuberculosis at his home, Kirkdale, 15 Spencer Road, Bournemouth, on 24 February 1916, Casellas was once more an instrument making company of renown. 


By the middle of the First World War, Louis Marino was chairman of D. Gilson & Co., a firm making screws and turned parts. During the war the firms of Gilson and C. F. Casella crossed paths as the latter set up a new factory alongside Gilson in Walthamstow. In 1918, the Casella company fared better than its neighbour in reverting to peacetime production, and absorbed some of the production capacity abandoned by Louis Marino's organization. This led to a partial amalgamation of the two companies, a situation which prevailed when Louis Marino died, at his home, 47 Fitzjohn's Avenue, Hampstead, on 28 July 1923, the last Casella to have direct involvement in the company. 


@@@@@


doc= 48370


Louis Marino Casella (1842-1923), manufacturer of scientific instruments, was born in London in 1842, the first son of Louis Pascal Casella and Maria Louisa Tagliabue. As a young man, Louis Marino joined his father's firm where he worked on the design of instruments, registering his first patent, for a mercurial minimum thermometer, in 1861. Louis maintained an interest in the firm throughout his father's lifetime and beyond but, following his father's death, his involvement was at arm's length. He kept his position as company director, but his own business interests took him in a different direction in manufacturing. 


@@@@@


doc= 48371


Charles Frederick Casella (1852-1916), manufacturer of scientific instruments, was the younger son of Louis Pascal Casella and Maria Louisa Tagliabue. He was born in London on 25 February 1852. He was educated at Ushaw College, Durham, after which he spent time in Paris and at the university in Bonn. He was a fellow of the Royal Meteorological Society and a member of the Society of Engineers and of the Physical Society. 


@@@@@


doc= 48372


Reeve, Richard (d. 1666), maker of optical instruments, was of obscure origin, but in the records of a London court case of 1664 he was described as a gentleman (rather than an artisan or a freeman of a City guild company) with landed relatives in Burghfield, Berkshire. His skill in the polite art of turning on the lathe and a facility for working optical glass led to him playing a central role in a concerted programme to improve the image quality in refracting telescopes and microscopes. 
The first mention of Reeve's optical work is in 1639, in a letter from a correspondent of Samuel Hartlib. Between 1641 and 1643 Reeve was associated with the circle of Charles Cavendish, working with the mathematician John Pell in the ambitious (and ultimately fruitless) task of grinding lenses with the idealized hyperbolic sections recommended by Rene Descartes. The reported achievements of the German optician Johann Wiesel prompted further work, notably under the patronage of the courtier Sir Paul Neile. Reeve constructed telescopes of increasing focal length and magnification for Neile, including several for the observatory established in 1650 by Seth Ward at Wadham College, Oxford. This was the focus for a group of royalist astronomers and natural philosophers during the interregnum, centred on Ward, Dr John Wilkins, Robert Boyle, and his assistant and protege Robert Hooke, and including Neile's son William and the young Christopher Wren. By 1652 Reeve was well established as a telescope maker in London and was described by the diarist John Evelyn as 'that admirable Artiste Reeves famous for Perspectives, & turning curiosities in Ivorie' (Evelyn, 64). In the same year Reeve developed an improved form of compound microscope which was marketed commercially. Reeve microscopes were used by Wren for his pioneering illustrations of microscopic objects, some of which were presented to Charles II in 1661. Hooke was closely involved with this project which came to published fruition as his 'Micrographia' of 1664 and formed a valuable advertisement for Reeve's instruments. 
By 1656 Reeve had produced the first of a series of successful 36 feet long telescopes, for Neile's house at White Waltham, Berkshire. There it was used by Wren for his important work on the structure of Saturn's rings before being transferred to Gresham College, London, for Wren's use after his appointment as Gresham professor of astronomy in 1657. The telescope attracted the interest of Charles II, to whom it was demonstrated in 1660, and for a time it was relocated at Whitehall Palace before being remounted in 1664 by Hooke at Gresham, where he became professor of geometry. A further Reeve telescope of this size was presented by Charles as a diplomatic gift to his brother-in-law Philippe, duke of Orleans, brother of Louis XIV. With the encouragement of Hooke, Reeve developed telescopes of 60 feet in length during the period 1662-5, and one was purchased by Boyle for Hooke's use at Gresham. More typical of Reeve's fashionable trade was the construction of smaller terrestrial telescopes such as the 4 foot instrument purchased by William, first duke of Bedford, in 1661, probably in anticipation of the transit of Mercury that year. A list of Reeve's prices for instruments is included in correspondence of 1660 with the microscopist Henry Power in the British Library. 
Reeve's first marriage is tentatively identified with that recorded at St Martin-in-the-Fields on 5 October 1624 between Richard Reeve and Margeria Alexander. The baptisms of two children are known: in 1626 or 1627 that of a daughter, Elizabeth, and in 1630 that of a son, Richard, who equates with the Richard who succeeded Reeve in business at his death. Reeve subsequently married Alice Groves in St Paul's, Covent Garden, in 1659. She died from accidental domestic injuries received in 1664 and Reeve was indicted for manslaughter. He was able to secure a royal pardon in 1665 but at considerable expense. 
Reeve may be identified with the Richard Reeve who died in January 1666 in Hampstead, and was buried at St Paul's, Covent Garden, leaving the remaining lease of his house in Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, to his then wife, Dorothy, in a will contested by his cousin. The lease was originally taken out by Reeve in 1633 and Dorothy Reeve is recorded as the occupant for 1667 and 1668. The Reeve business was at the west end of Longacre, trading at the Blue Blanket 1656-73 (and perhaps earlier at Cross Lane, Longacre, 1643-51). The younger Reeve, who was recorded in Samuel Pepys's diary, was not as successful as his father and soon lost the approbation of Hooke and the Royal Society. They came to favour Christopher Cock, an optical instrument maker who may earlier have worked under the elder Reeve and is associated with a commission undertaken by Reeve for the mathematician James Gregory in 1663. In 1675 a Richard Reeve, gentleman, who may be identical with the younger Reeve, obtained a patent for a type of reflector lamp for street lighting, but his later circumstances are unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 48373


Hicks, James Joseph (1837-1916), manufacturer of scientific instruments, was born on 4 November 1837 at Ross Carbery, co. Cork, one of three children of George Hicks and Gillian Coakley. His father worked in the Coakleys' flax mill and may have held a little land, but the family was poor and James was sent to London to live with another branch of the Coakley family. In 1852 he was apprenticed to L. P. Casella of Hatton Garden, London, a philosophical glass-blower, where by 1860 he had risen to the status of foreman. This date marks also the first of many patents filed by Hicks, principally relating to meteorological and clinical thermometers, but covering other items such as barometers, hydrometers and radiometers, aneroid barometers, and various medical appliances utilizing aneroid pressure capsules. In 1862 he established his own wholesale business at 8 Hatton Garden and on 19 June married Emma Sarah Robertson, a milliner, with whom he had a son and two daughters. 
It seems likely that in 1861, in Casella's shop, Hicks had made the first clinical thermometer. In 1878, as an independent manufacturer, he acquired partial rights in Luigi Peroni's lens-front tube patent, after which his workforce swelled from about a dozen men to fifty-four employed on clinical thermometers alone, and annual sales rose to about 500 gross, of which a quarter went to the United States. In 1882, to stop infringement of his patent, Hicks went to New York to prosecute what turned out to be the biggest patent lawsuit yet contested between British and American parties. Hicks won this case, and, subsequently, others of a similar nature. By the end of his working life, he claimed to have manufactured 13 million clinical thermometers, which he supplied throughout the empire. 
Hicks also became well known for his aneroid barometers, aimed at the large market which opened to British manufacturers when Vidi's original patent expired in 1861. He produced these in all sorts and sizes, from the popular pocket aneroids to accurate instruments which could register over a wide pressure range, for use as surveying barometers. The mountaineer Edward Whymper and Henry Watkin of the Royal Artillery collaborated with him on the improvement of high-altitude aneroids, while his reputation for precision led to his being approached by various medical men, who saw the aneroid as a means of measuring blood pressure. Under their guidance various sphygmomanometers were patented and sold on the specialist market. The firm catered to the developing science of meteorology, the growing use of industrial control instruments, and to military needs, by the provision of scientific, industrial, and domestic thermometers, barometers, and pressure gauges, and many other types of apparatus. Some, like the Crookes radiometers, were the joint product of scientific knowledge and the glass-blowing skills available in Hicks's workshops; others were aimed at new markets, for which he sometimes lacked understanding; his forays into the manufacture of aeronautical instruments, for example, were unsuccessful. 
In 1892 Hicks expanded his manufacturing capacity by building a large factory a short distance from Hatton Garden, eventually employing some 350 men. A benevolent paternalism ruled; his men fielded cricket and football teams, and enjoyed winter social events and summer outings, joined by Hicks and his son, George, who served as his manager. To market his huge and varied output, which was always aimed at wholesale and government buyers, Hicks travelled the world, visiting the United States, South Africa, China, and Australia. He was represented at many of the international and domestic trade fairs, for example, at the annual brewery trades fairs, at Meteorological Society and Royal Geographical Society exhibitions, and at Royal Society conversaziones. He wrote, or had written on his behalf, articles in the popular and scientific press describing his new products. He was admitted a member of the Spectaclemakers' Company in 1898 and sat on its trades council, which was endeavouring to regulate the practice of ophthalmic opticians. 
Hicks was a staunch Roman Catholic, a prominent and generous member of the church of St John the Evangelist at Islington, which served the local Irish community. In 1898 he joined other London Catholics on a pilgrimage to Rome, where he presented Pope Leo XIII with medical instruments and a gilt aneroid. In December that year the pope created him a knight of St Gregory. In 1901 he travelled again to Rome to install meteorological apparatus at the Vatican observatory, and in 1906 he presented and fitted up a similar set of apparatus at the patriarchal seminary in Venice. He gave more than $1000 towards the building of Westminster Cathedral and built and endowed a church and presbytery in north London. 
In 1911 Hicks sold his business to W. and F. Stanley of Great Turnstile, Holborn, and although he remained nominally a director until his death, his son severed all connections with the trade. Hicks's wife died in 1899; he himself died at Margate, Kent, on 24 October 1916 and was buried at St Augustine's Abbey in Ramsgate. 


@@@@@


doc= 48374


Elliott, William (1780/81-1853), maker of scientific instruments, was born in 1780 or 1781 in the parish of St Andrew, High Holborn, London, the son of William Elliott, yeoman, of Tash Court, Gray's Inn Lane in the county of Middlesex. On 14 April 1795 he was bound apprentice for seven years to William Backwell, compass and drawing instrument maker, of Tash Street, Gray's Inn Lane. He was re-bound in May 1795 in the Coach and Coach Harness Makers' Company; in 1804 he became a freeman and bound his own first apprentice. This was probably the year when he commenced his own business. 
Between 1804 and 1814 Elliott took five apprentices and between 1832 and 1839 another four, thus usually having two or three apprentices at a time. All these were bound in the Coach and Coach Harness Makers' Company; there may have been others between those years. He was, very probably, the William Elliott living at 26 Wilderness Row, Goswell Street, from 1808 to 1816 and his addresses are known with certainty thereafter. From 1817 to 1827 his business was at 21 Great Newport Street, and from then until 1833 at 227 High Holborn. His home and business were at 268 High Holborn from 1835 to 1849 and at 56 Strand from 1850 until his death. 
In 1804 Elliott married Elizabeth Thrale, or Thrah, at St Martin-in-the-Fields. Their son, William ('b'. 1804), studied at Queens' College, Cambridge, and entered the Church of England. As the Revd William Elliott he wrote 'A Treatise on the Slide Rule' which was advertised in the catalogues of the family's company. From Elliott's second marriage, to Anne Berner, there was a daughter, Anne. His third wife was Emma Paget, the widow of a Captain Kelly. Their children were Frederick Henry ('b'. 1819) ['see below'], George Augustus ('b'. 1821), Charles Alfred ('b'. 1822) ['see below'], Eliza ('b'. 1829), and possibly others. In Elliott's will there was provision for a married daughter Mary, whose birth record is untraced. 
The absence of advertisements and catalogues prior to 1850 suggests that Elliott supplied his products mostly to the trade and was well known within it. No record has been found of his gaining prizes or awards for his products. He was not active in guild matters. He did not seek membership of learned societies or the protection of patents, again suggesting that he worked within the trade and its requirements, as he did with J. W. Woolgar on his new plotting scale. Elliott was one of the first to use German silver, a new alloy with good resistance to corrosion, in his drawing instruments. Many examples of these, and of scales, survive from his early places of work. Later he described himself as a mathematical, optical, and philosophical instrument maker and other products from these years include a theodolite and a vacuum pump. In 1850, under a deed of partnership, his sons Frederick Henry and Charles Alfred were taken into their father's business which then carried on as William Elliott & Sons at 56 Strand, London. 
Elliott died in 1853; in his will he left his share in the partnership to provide his wife with an annuity. His passing went largely unrecorded but years later he was referred to in his son Frederick's obituary as 'the well-known mathematical instrument-maker, Mr. W. Elliott in Holborn'. 


Frederick Elliott became a fellow of the Royal Society of Arts in 1850 and in 1859 a fellow of the Royal Astronomical Society. Jointly, Frederick and Charles obtained patents for improvements in drawing boards, barometers, and telescopes. The company worked willingly with academics and others to realize their inventions; instruments for the new applications of electricity were produced and became an important part of the firm's activity. Customers included J. C. Maxwell, Charles Wheatstone, J. W. Strutt, and other leading scientists. The company prospered, its success attributed to Frederick's business ability. Details of his marriage, to Susan Pearse, are unknown. He died of a stroke in his office at 449 Strand, London on 18 January 1873. 


When William Elliott's career began London's thriving scientific instrument trade was the province of individual craftsmen. By widening his activities he remained a significant and respected supplier through its transition to large-scale manufacture and application. The creation of a partnership with his sons ensured the continuity and expansion of a business which became one of the largest producers of scientific instruments, remaining so until 1967 when it was taken over by English Electric, which itself became part of GEC soon afterwards. 


@@@@@


doc= 48375


(Edward) Wilfred Taylor (1891-1980), was born at Bootham Terrace, York, on 29 April 1891, and went from Oundle School into an apprenticeship at Thomas Cooke & Sons, rising to optical manager, technical director, and joint managing director along with James Simms Wilson, a post which he held from 1937 until their retirement in 1956. He played a key role in the development of the Tavistock theodolite, the first double-reading optical theodolite manufactured in Great Britain, and in the Second World War presided over a huge expansion of Cooke, Troughton, and Simms in York to meet demand for rangefinders and optical measuring tools, for which he was made CBE in 1946. In the post-war period, his key papers in phase-contrast microscopy earned him fellowship of the Royal Society in 1952. He died at Cookridge Hospital, Leeds, on 1 November 1980, and was survived by a son, Julian, and two grandchildren; his wife Winifred Mary ('nee' Hunter) died in 1964. 


@@@@@


doc= 48376


Taylor, Harold Dennis (1862-1943), designer of optical instruments, was born at Lockwood House, Lockwood, Yorkshire, on 10 July 1862, the son of Joseph Walter Taylor, a wool manufacturer, and Annie Victoria Taylor, ('nee' Bainbridge), and was educated at St Peter's School in York. He started to train as an architect, but his strong scientific interest led him to take up a post with Thomas Cooke & Sons of Bishophill, York, a highly respected manufacturer of astronomical and optical instruments. Despite his lack of formal training, Taylor rapidly made his mark, rising to the position of optical manager: whereas Thomas Cooke had blended good mechanical practice with artistic intuition, Taylor was to put lens making onto a firm quantitative basis while at the same time retaining an aesthetic simplicity in his approach. On 24 July 1888 he married Charlotte Fernandez ('b'. 1856/7), daughter of William Barff, wool merchant, of Liverpool. They raised a daughter, Nina Dennis Taylor, and two sons, one of whom, Wilfred ['see below'], followed in his father's professional footsteps. 
Taylor's design of the Cooke triplet lens, originally in 1893, removed all aberrations; that is, all effects which caused parallel light not to be focused to a point were consistently corrected. With three lenses, each with two distinct curvatures, and two lens spacings, there were just enough degrees of freedom to achieve his purpose via what was for the late nineteenth century an algebraic extravaganza. In addition, by combining lenses of low and high refractive index, he achieved an impressive flatness of field. This revived an analytic approach to lens design in the British optical industry, which had failed to build on earlier work of Airy, Hamilton, and in particular Coddington. 
As well as contrasting sharply with the empiricism of his industry, Taylor's work was distinct from the more complex theoretical approaches of German opticians of the period -- his was a kind of minimalist approach to the aberration problem. The manufacture of Cooke triplet lenses for photography was licensed to Taylor, Taylor, and Hobson of Leicester (they were not related): the patents were drawn up in such a detailed way that it was relatively easy for others to copy the principle, but nevertheless the Cooke triplet philosophy dominated lens design for inexpensive cameras until computers began to be used for the task. 
Taylor's approach to optics was enshrined in his classic 'A System of Applied Optics' (1906), while his short guide, 'The Adjustment and Testing of Telescopic Objectives' (1901), described novel autocollimation techniques for the alignment of telescopes. The latter proved an invaluable manual for amateur and professional alike, and was still being reprinted in the 1980s. In addition Taylor made important advances in lenses for refracting telescopes, first with the achromatic triplet using an innovative glass developed at the Schott glassworks at Jena, and in the Franklin-Adams telescope which was responsible for producing star maps of outstanding quality for both the northern and southern hemispheres early in the twentieth century. He also discovered that light was transmitted through a lens when there was a thin corrosion layer on it, and patented a coating technique which was the forerunner of later 'blooming' technology. In all close to fifty patents carry his name. 
Taylor was a modest man, fiercely loyal to his employers, and it was not until after his premature retirement in 1915 that the impact of his lens research was fully appreciated and recognized in the awards of the Royal Photographic Society medal (1933) and the Duddell medal of the Physical Society (1934). He continued to act as consultant to Taylor, Taylor, and Hobson, and moved to Coxwold in the foothills of the North York Moors, where he pursued his hobbies of gardening, astronomy, photography, and natural history. In 1924 he received the Traill-Taylor medal for services to photography, and gave the memorial lecture to the Royal Photographic Society, at the end of which he caused some astonishment by declaring that he had been a member of the Society for Psychic Research for more than eighteen years, and was inclined to believe that photography could reveal supernatural beings invisible to the unaided human eye. Although he acknowledged that some such photographs were fakes, he nevertheless found others convincing. Taylor died at The Hall, Stillington, on 26 February 1943, survived by his wife and children. 
Taylor is perhaps best summed up by his son Wilfred, who followed his father into Thomas Cooke & Sons: 'My father was a man of encyclopaedic knowledge, who seemed always to be working out some new optical invention or formula. He could, none-the-less, put all this to one side and derive great pleasure from a country walk, cycle ride or climb. His tastes were simple and he was very self-sufficient. My mother understood him well and knew how to order the household so as to give his genius full scope. (Payne, 563-4)' 



@@@@@


doc= 48377


Reid, Thomas (1746-1831), horologist, was born in Dysart, Fife, in January 1746. He was apprenticed in 1762 to a cousin, James Cowan, an able watchmaker in Lawnmarket, Edinburgh. After discharge from his indentures, Reid spent eleven years in London, where, in his own words, 'after having received the instruction of the first masters in that profession [he] did carry on business and was employed in the execution of the first-rate work there' (Smith, 311). When Cowan died in 1781 Reid returned to Edinburgh and succeeded to the business. He married Alexandria, 'nee' Ogilvie, the widow of William Auld, printer, who had died in 1777. 
Reid's rise to fame was rapid. Before very long he moved to 8 Parliament Close in Edinburgh. In 1788 a tower clock of his making was put up in St Andrew's parish church. In 1797 he rebuilt that of St Giles's Kirk. His business, however, embraced all aspects of horology. His insistence upon excellence was reflected in his clientele. His enthusiasm, practical ability, and contacts in London and Lancashire ensured success. He corresponded with B. L. Vulliamy (1780-1854) between 1805 and 1826. Reid's best apprentice was his stepson, William Auld (died 1846), who became his partner in 1806 and who remained his lifelong friend. They moved shop to 33 Princes Street in 1809, and later to no. 66. Reid managed to indulge an all-consuming, if unprofitable, interest in improving regulator clocks, experimenting endlessly with different escapements and compensation pendulums. He was particularly proud of his delicate, 'detatched' spring-pallet escapement. This he at first placed outside his movements, where it was vulnerable to damage; however this proved to be an excellent arrangement in a regulator dated 1811 made for Lord Gray's observatory at Kinfauns, Perthshire, and in another dated 1813 for the Royal Observatory, Edinburgh. Both survived, but without Reid's escapements. His later regulators, dated 1816 and 1818, have their spring-pallets within their movements and remain unaltered. 
Reid and Auld both retired in 1823. The former had assembled a remarkable horological library and always studied unremittingly. As early as 1793 he was invited by the scientist John Robison (1739-1804) to co-operate in the writing of 'a magnificent work on the History, Theory and Practice of Horology'. Reid was too busy to comply, but he later addressed long technical letters to the scientific journals and contributed fifteen important horological chapters to Brewster's 'Edinburgh Encyclopaedia'. His letter to Vulliamy dated 20 November 1819 reveals, however, that much had been kept back. In 1825 he was elected an honorary member of the Clockmakers' Company. In March 1826 Reid's monumental work 'A Treatise on Clock and Watch Making, Theoretical and Practical' appeared. It was dedicated to Auld and was to run to seven editions over more than thirty years; it remained authoritative for much longer. A pirated version appeared in Philadelphia in 1832, the year after the author's death. Reid died in Edinburgh on 20 September 1831 and his former partner caused him to be buried in the Auld family tomb in the Calton cemetery, Edinburgh. He is regarded as Scotland's most celebrated maker of clocks, watches, and chronometers. 


@@@@@


doc= 48378


Adie, Alexander James (1775-1858), maker of scientific instruments, was born on 7 January 1775, and baptized at Greyfriars parish church, Edinburgh, the posthumous second son of John Adie and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Miller. His father was a printer, one of the proprietors of the 'Edinburgh Evening Courant', and was said to have contributed articles to the 'Scots Magazine'. He died about three months before Alexander was born, and although his widow remarried she too died shortly thereafter, and the boy was adopted by his maternal uncle, John Miller (1746-1815), with whom he lived until Miller's death. 
At the age of twelve Adie was apprenticed to a stocking maker, but on the death a short time later of his elder brother, John, he was apprenticed as his replacement to their uncle, an optician. In later life, he regretted the curtailed education of his youth, and attended lectures and sought out private tuition. He became a partner with his uncle from 1803, and continued to trade under the name Miller and Adie until 1822, when the firm became Alexander Adie. On 22 October 1804 he married Marion Ritchie, with whom he had four sons and seven daughters. Three of his sons became successful scientific instrument makers: the eldest, John Adie (1805-1857), subsequently went into partnership with his father; the third, Richard (1810-1881), started a business in Liverpool; and the youngest, Patrick (1821-1886), began one in London. 
Although the firm's products were aimed at satisfying the expanding demand for surveying instruments, both the University of St Andrews and Anderson's Institution of Glasgow are known to have purchased Adie's demonstration apparatus for their natural philosophy classrooms. His mechanical skills soon attracted the attention of a number of inventive patrons, among whom was the Edinburgh-based natural philosopher, David Brewster (1781-1868), who commissioned a number of newly designed instruments from Adie for his research work in optics. As a scientific journalist and editor, Brewster publicized Adie's skills by promoting his own work, particularly in connection with his experiments with jewel lenses for microscope optics during the 1820s. Another early patron was Sir James Hall (1761-1832) of Dunglass, who undertook a series of experiments between 1798 and 1805 which ultimately confirmed James Hutton's (1726-1797) argument for the igneous origin of basalt and other types of rock. Adie also manufactured a series of differential thermometers used in the pioneering work on the nature of heat by Sir John Leslie (1766-1832), professor of mathematics at the University of Edinburgh; these were advertised in Leslie's publications between 1808 and 1820. A further patron was the civil engineer Robert Stevenson (1772-1850), whose improvements in lighthouse optics called upon Adie's practical mechanical skills. The construction of an improved form of the pantograph, called the eidograph, was produced by Adie in 1821 for its designer, William Wallace, professor of mathematics at the University of Edinburgh. 
Adie was interested in the science of meteorology from an early date, and began a register with barometer, thermometer, and wind and rain gauges, all constructed by himself. His records ran from 1795 to 1805, and again between 1821 and 1850, and were later used in discussion by James David Forbes (1809-1868), professor of natural philosophy at the University of Edinburgh, and also a patron of Adie during the 1830s. Adie's interest in weather led him to design, and subsequently patent, in December 1818, his sympiesometer or 'new air barometer'. This instrument used oil as its hydrostatic fluid, together with a column of gas. It was particularly useful as a marine barometer, as its sensitivity provided early warning of weather changes at sea, and its construction meant that it was less likely to break in storms. Until the invention of the aneroid barometer in 1861 the sympiesometer appears to have sold in reasonable numbers. 
An active member of the Wernerian Natural History Society, Adie was elected to the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1819 and was a founder member of Brewster's Society for the Encouragement of the Useful Arts in Scotland (later the Royal Scottish Society of Arts), instituted in 1821. In the same year, Brewster introduced Adie to the young J. D. Forbes, whose interests in geology and the nature of heat led to a project funded by the British Association for the Advancement of Science to investigate heat flow in soil and bedrock. Three sites around Edinburgh were chosen, for which Adie constructed four remarkable thermometers, of 3, 6, 12, and 24 ft in length, during 1836-7. This appears to have been his final special commission. 
Alexander's eldest son, John, joined him in the workshop about 1826. The business traded as Adie & Son from 1835 until 1881, long after both had died. It is not known when Alexander ceased work altogether, but from about 1840 he suffered poor health. He spent much of his retirement experimenting with horticulture. John committed suicide in early 1857, and by that time Adie was becoming senile. After a severe illness followed by a bad cold, he died at his home, Canaan Cottage, Newington, Edinburgh, on 4 December 1858, aged eighty-three. He was buried at Greyfriars churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 48414


Mary Anne Ewart (1830-1911), was an early patron of higher education for women. Born in London, where she was baptized at St George's, Hanover Square, on 30 December 1830, she was a benefactor and governor of Newnham College, Cambridge, Somerville College, Oxford, and Bedford College, London. She also started and administrated a teachers' education loan fund for aspiring women teachers of limited means. She died at her home, 68 Albert Hall Mansions, London, on 19 February 1911. 


@@@@@


doc= 48418


Julia Elizabeth Kennedy (1839-1916), supporter of education for women, was born at Shrewsbury on 23 December 1839. She and her sister Marion remained single, and they lived with their parents, moving to Cambridge on their father's election to the regius chair of Greek in 1867. After their mother's death in 1874 they kept house for their father at The Elms, a large house in Bateman Street. The sisters became well-known members of Cambridge society, which from the early 1880s was transformed by the relaxation of celibacy rules for college fellowships. Several young fellows who taught at the new women's colleges (Girton, founded in 1869, and Newnham, founded in 1871) subsequently married their pupils. Marion and Julia were staunch members of the liberal reforming circle in this society; they were probably the two elderly spinsters whom A. N. Whitehead tried to embarrass by announcing advanced Liberal views -- only to be told how pleased they were that he shared their own opinions (B. Russell, 'Autobiography of Bertrand Russell', 1975, 130). 


@@@@@


doc= 48543


Efa ferch Maredudd (fl. 1300), daughter of Maredudd ab Owain, a task he undertook out of love for her and in her honour. She was one of the first Welsh women whose ability to read is documented, and her descendants were patrons of devotional treatises in Welsh in the fourteenth century. Brother Gruffudd and Madog ap Selyf may have been members of the convent at Strata Florida where, late in the century, a major corpus of court poetry of the period of the princes, the Hendregadredd manuscript, was written. No surviving manuscript of 'Brut y tywysogyon' can be shown to have been written in the abbey scriptorium, but both the lost Latin text on which the surviving Welsh versions were based, and one of the Welsh texts, may well have been composed there. 


@@@@@


doc= 48554


Robert Amadeus Heath (1818-1882), merchant and financier, was born in London on 12 December 1818. He was educated at Harrow School and shared a number of his father's interests: in 1879 he was elected a member of the Roxburghe Club. In 1847 he married Harriet ('b'. 1826), the daughter of Thomas Keen of Croydon and Coulsdon, Surrey; they had one son and two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 48794


Samuel George Stuckey (1740-1812). Born in April 1740 at Langport, Somerset, he was the youngest of the five children of George Stuckey (1697-1774), merchant, and his wife, Elizabeth (1699-1752), daughter of Lawrence Tuttiett of Stoke St Gregory, Somerset. Stuckey had an elder brother and three sisters. 
Samuel's father, who was three times portreeve, or mayor, of Langport, was responsible for developing a flourishing mercantile firm that traded in a wide range of commodities including corn, timber, and salt. Samuel, together with his elder brother, George, greatly developed the family firm and established beyond doubt the name of Stuckey in the business and commercial life of the county of Somerset. On 20 August 1764 he married Sarah (1741-1812), daughter of Robert Jennings of Cerne Abbas, Dorset. Together they had one son and five daughters. 
About 1770, Samuel Stuckey began to provide a banking function in parallel with his trading activities; and the origin of Stuckey's Bank, which was to grow into one of the country's premier provincial banking companies, is traced to this date. The banking activities of the firm grew quickly, and agents were soon appointed in London and Bristol. In 1800 Samuel took his brother, George, into the bank, and the latter's son Vincent joined in 1801. By 1806 banking business had so increased that Samuel chose to separate the bank from the rest of the family business, and officially founded the Langport Bank in that year. By bringing in three additional partners, together with his brother George, Samuel Stuckey was able to increase the bank's capital, enabling the establishment of branches at Bridgwater and Bristol. From 1807, however, Samuel Stuckey's health was failing and he relinquished many of his direct interests in the bank. He died on 13 February 1812 at Langport and was buried there shortly after, at All Saints' Church. 
The key figure in the subsequent development of the bank was Samuel's nephew 


@@@@@


doc= 48795


Vincent Stuckey (1771-1845). Born on 24 March 1771 at Langport, Somerset, he was the youngest of the eight children of George Stuckey (1731-1807), banker and merchant, and his wife, Edith (1742-1793), daughter of Thomas Beedal, of Langport, Somerset. He had four brothers and three sisters, though he was the only surviving son. His father, George, Samuel Stuckey's elder brother, was widely known in Langport and its environs, not only as a prominent member of the bank and merchant house, but as mayor of the town on no fewer than four occasions. 
At an early age Vincent Stuckey showed himself to be of enterprising spirit when, probably about 1790, he presented himself to Lady Chatham, a neighbour and family friend, and asked if she would give him an introduction to her son the prime minister. Armed with a letter from Lady Chatham, Stuckey obtained from William Pitt (1759-1806) a clerkship in the Treasury. He was soon appointed to the department of bills of exchange and owing to rapid growth in its business was in almost daily contact with Pitt himself. He was also private secretary to William Huskisson, then secretary to the Treasury. Despite such promising beginnings to a public career, Stuckey resigned from the Treasury in 1801 and returned to the family business at Langport, a decision connected with his marriage on 16 April 1801 to his first cousin Julia (1781-1861), the youngest daughter of his uncle Samuel. By 1807 he was made a partner in the bank, though with the death of his father, George, and his uncle Samuel in increasingly poor health, Vincent Stuckey became 'de facto' head of the firm; with Samuel's death in 1812 he became senior partner. 
The Bank of England's monopoly of joint-stock banking meant country banks in England and Wales were limited until 1826 to private partnerships of no more than six persons, which clearly limited their capitalization and branch development. Stuckey was fortunate that in 1810 he came into a considerable fortune through a bequest from an old friend, which provided him with capital for the establishment of additional branches at Taunton and Wells, together with an agency at Illminster. In 1825 Thomas Watson Bagehot, Vincent's brother-in-law became a partner, and this further cemented links between the two patriarchal Langport families. In the following year Stuckey's nephew, the great Victorian banker, economist, and writer Walter Bagehot was born at the Bank House, Langport, and he was later to become closely involved in the management of its affairs. 
Following the financial crisis of 1825-6, when eighty private banks failed in London and the country, the government rescinded the Bank of England's monopoly of joint-stock organization, which had stood since 1708. Stuckey was the first private banker to take advantage of the new legislation, by converting the Langport Bank to Stuckey's Banking Company in 1826. By reacting so quickly to the new opportunities, Stuckey displayed his genius as a banker. None the less, even after conversion Stuckey's Bank remained essentially a partnership, with Stuckey himself exercising the shrewd judgement and personal authority characteristic of his private banking days. The bank retained its distinctive regional focus, with further branches being confined to the Somerset and Bristol region. Such caution was perhaps best captured in his oft-quoted phrase 'bankers are mortal, but banks should never die' (Stuckey). 
Stuckey was widely regarded as the leading country banker of his generation, an opinion confirmed by the quality of his testimonies to the frequent parliamentary inquiries on banking and currency questions in the early nineteenth century. Thus, despite leaving the Treasury in 1801, he remained influential in government circles and was particularly close to Sir Robert Peel: he acted as Peel's adviser and confidant during the long debates on currency reform which culminated in the 'Bank Charter Act' of 1844. 
Though heavily involved in the management of the bank, Stuckey continued to expand the family's mercantile and shipping business, in close partnership with the Bagehots. He inherited the salt interests of his late father and uncle, including an estate with salt pans at Droitwich, Worcestershire. Much involved in the social and political life of Langport and the county, he was mayor of the town on three occasions -- in 1810, 1823, and 1833 -- and served as a magistrate, churchwarden, and trustee of the local grammar school. He was also made a deputy lieutenant and, in 1822, high sheriff of Somerset. A robust and hearty figure, a memoir recalls how 'Vincent Stuckey kept a pack of hounds in Whatley, and dwelt in patriarchal style among his people -- hospitable, free-handed, and popular. He might be seen at times seated under the great elm on the Hill fronting the west door of the church and chatting with his neighbours. He used to tell how in his Treasury days he had shot snipe in the muddy fields between St. James's Park and Sloane Street (his home), now called Belgravia. (Ross, 355)' Stuckey's great longing for a son was unfulfilled and indeed his family life was marred by tragedy; of ten children born to the couple only two daughters survived to adulthood. Hereditary defects intensified by the marriage of first cousins were possibly to blame. Vincent Stuckey died at Langport on 8 May 1845 and was buried there shortly afterwards in All Saints' Church. After his death, his wife, Julia, maintained a close interest in the affairs of the bank until she died, on 15 February 1861. Their considerable fortune was passed to Vincent Stuckey Wood, second son of their daughter Julia Wood, who had died in 1832. The younger Vincent took the name and arms of Stuckey in 1861 and subsequently became the third chairman of Stuckey's Banking Company between 1876 and 1900. 


@@@@@


doc= 48805


William Beckett (1826-1890), banker and politician, and his wife, Helen, 'nee' Duncombe, third daughter of the second Baron Feversham. Rupert was the grandson of Sir Edmund Beckett, fourth baronet (1787-1874). When, in 1814, Edmund married the great-great-niece and heir of Sir Thomas Denison (1699-1765), a judge in the king's bench, he added Denison to his surname, but he resumed his patronymic when he succeeded to the baronetcy in 1872. His third son, William Beckett Denison, followed his example only in 1886 (when he chose to be called William Beckett). 


@@@@@


doc= 48891


Hugh Tennent Tennent (1863-1890), known as Hugh T. Tennent, who was born at Mount Vernon, Old Monkland, Lanarkshire, on 21 October 1863, were infants when their father died and so the business was managed on their behalf for twenty years by the trustees. Tennents continued to prosper under the trustees and the firm's famous red T trademark, registered in 1876, became one of the most famous in the British brewing industry. By 1886 the brewery covered 11 acres and produced 3 million gallons of ale and 1.5 million gallons of stout per annum. Two-thirds of the output was sent for export and it was claimed that Tennents was the largest exporter of bottled beer in the world. 
In 1869 Charles Tennent's widowed mother, Arabella Tennent, married Richard Frederick Fothringham Campbell (1831-1888) of Craigie, who was Liberal (later Liberal Unionist) MP for Ayr from 1880 until his death. Hugh T. Tennent, his brother Archibald, and sister Annie were raised at Craigie House in Ayrshire, where Arabella had five children with her second husband. The brothers suffered from poor health but Hugh was able to start work at the brewery in the late 1870s and was trained in management. He became sole owner of J. and R. Tennent on his twenty-first birthday in 1884, having purchased his brother Archibald's share in the firm. 
During the early 1880s Hugh T. Tennent travelled to Europe with the family physician and friend, J. F. Wyllie Clarke (died 1905), and was impressed by the qualities of German lager beer. Lager was being imported in increasing quantities to the United Kingdom and was popular in many of Tennents' export markets. Hugh decided to begin brewing lager in Glasgow and employed a German and a Danish brewer to set up operations there. The firm began brewing lager in the late 1880s and in 1889 Tennent engaged the German firm L. A. Riedinger to build a specialist lager brewery at Wellpark. The new brewery was completed in 1891, after Hugh's death. Tennents lager was the first to be brewed and marketed successfully by a British company and it became one of the country's most famous beer brands. 
Hugh T. Tennent died, aged only twenty-six, of 'acute fever' and 'fatty heart' (d. cert.), at 40 Westbourne Gardens, Kelvinside, Lanarkshire, on 3 February 1890. Unmarried, he was a wealthy man, and his estate, which included the extensive Dunalistair estate in Perthshire, was divided among his relatives and friends. The management of J. and R. Tennent passed again to trustees and in 1901 to a limited company, J. and R. Tennent Ltd, which was controlled by members of the Campbell family. 


@@@@@


doc= 48901


Patrick Og MacCrimmon (fl. 1650), 


@@@@@


doc= 48917


Thomas Sitch (1852-1923), chain maker and trade unionist, and his wife, Elizabeth ('nee' Young). Thomas Sitch was born at Cradley Heath, Staffordshire, on 23 July 1852, the son of a chain maker. He started work in Cradley Heath at the age of eight and subsequently moved first to Newcastle upon Tyne, where he met and married his wife, and then to Saltney, Chester. 


@@@@@


doc= 48918


Laura Theresa Alma-Tadema (1852-1909) who was born in London on 16 April 1852, became a painter in her own right. She concentrated on domestic and genre scenes, often in Dutch seventeenth-century settings. Following her death, at Hindhead, Surrey, on 15 August 1909, a memorial exhibition of her work was held at the Fine Art Society in 1910. 


@@@@@


doc= 48938


Edith Bulwer-Lytton, countess of Lytton (1841-1936), the second daughter of the Hon. Edward Villiers and the niece of George Villiers, fourth earl of Clarendon. They had married on 4 October 1864 after a courtship complicated by his penury. She brought him $6000 a year and bore him four sons and three daughters, including Elizabeth Balfour, later countess of Balfour (1867-1942), Lady Constance Georgina Bulwer-Lytton, who was later to earn notoriety as a suffragette, Victor Alexander George Robert Bulwer-Lytton, who succeeded to the earldom and served as governor of Bengal and acting viceroy of India, and Neville Stephen Lytton. Lady Lytton was devoted to her husband and strongly supported his diplomatic career as companion and hostess. However, it was as vicereine of India that she came into her own. Finding the viceregal court 'very dull and coarse' compared to the glittering palaces of Europe, she set out to transform its style. She and her daughters became particularly distinguished for their displays of high fashion, sustained by regular supplies from the couturiers and milliners of Paris. She also became a noted benefactress of the cause of female education, especially with regard to the zenanas of the Indian princes. 


@@@@@


doc= 48942


Sir John Muir, first baronet (1828-1903), who was born on 8 December 1828 at Hutchesontown, Glasgow, Lanarkshire, the son of James Muir ('c'.1795-1864), a cotton trader, and his wife, Elizabeth Brown ('c'.1809-1874), a descendant of James Finlay (1727-1790), who about 1765 had founded a textile exporting business. John Muir was educated at Glasgow high school, then briefly at Glasgow University, and joined James Finlay & Co. in 1849, at the same time as his first cousin, Hugh Brown Muir (1828- 'c'.1908), son of John Muir of Kilmarnock. 
The company which James Finlay had founded was expanded by his son Kirkman Finlay (1773-1842), then passed to his grandsons who left its management in other hands. The numerous family partners were uninterested in change and exports were stagnant. John Muir was brought in to revitalize the business. Finlays absorbed Wilson, Kay & Co., another piece-goods exporter, and in 1854 purchased offices in West Nile Street, Glasgow. In 1861 John and Hugh Muir became junior partners, each holding two of the total of forty-five shares, the rest being held by another junior and five senior partners. John Muir married in 1860 Margaret Morrison, eldest daughter of Alexander Kay, one of those seniors, and they raised four sons and six daughters. After his marriage John systematically eliminated the other partners, inducing them to retire or deliberately disagreeing with them, earning himself in Glasgow business circles the covert nickname of the Cuckoo. By 1870 John and Hugh dominated those remaining, namely Alexander Kay and two elderly Finlay relatives, and by 1883 John had become sole proprietor, with two junior non-voting partners. In that year Archibald Buchan, the last of the old Finlay family, tried but failed to obtain a legal injunction to prevent Muir trading under the name of James Finlay & Co. 
The outbreak of the American Civil War in 1861 had obliged Finlays to seek alternative sources of cotton. Their two large Scottish mills, at Deanston in Perthshire and Catrine in Ayrshire, each with nearly 1000 hands, came to a standstill. In 1861 Hugh Muir made the first of two visits to India in search of the high-quality raw cotton that had eluded Kirkman Finlay's agents in 1816. At the same time he investigated piece-goods sales in Singapore and Batavia, but finding that Chinese traders operated on extremely small margins, he advised against expanding into those already overstocked markets. In 1865 he re-established a Bombay office and was enthusiastic about the prospects of Indian trade; in 1870 a Calcutta office was reopened, and in 1871 Hugh opened a small London office. There were close links with Samuel Smith MP (1836-1906), a leading cotton broker in Liverpool and also related to the Finlay family. 
Existing friction between the cousins came to a head when John, a member of the Free Church of Scotland, dismissed a senior employee for playing chess on the sabbath day, which Hugh, a member of the Kirk of Scotland, considered unjust. In December 1873 Hugh left the partnership and set up Hugh Brown Muir & Co., East India merchants, an independent business in the City of London. He died, probably in London, about 1908. 
John Muir made the first of seven visits to Calcutta in 1871, setting up Finlay, Muir & Co. as a private business to act as agent for his own ventures, while the Glasgow firm continued to act as home agent and to export piece-goods, grey-cloth, and yarns to Bombay and Calcutta. The first of these 'rupee companies' registered in India was a jute press, followed in 1873 by a jute mill. Their foundation marked Muir's move into new products. Also in 1873 he moved into the infant tea industry, starting with the Calcutta agency for two small tea estates in northern India, then buying up other estates as they came on to the market. He was one of the first to realize that tea plantations would pay best when consolidated into large centrally administered groups under tight financial control, a management pattern later adopted throughout the industry. Muir floated the private North and South Sylhet Tea companies in 1883, both of which yielded large dividends. In 1896, now endowed with estates throughout the subcontinent, they were amalgamated under Muir as the Glasgow-registered Consolidated Tea and Lands Ltd. In 1894 Muir bought a large tract of high-altitude virgin jungle in the southern Indian state of Travancore and floated the very successful Kanan Devan Hills Produce Company Ltd, which included Darjeeling properties. A branch in Ceylon followed, with tea and rubber estates. Muir exercised a close supervision of the Calcutta office which managed these estates, with weekly reports and instructions passing between Glasgow and Calcutta. 
Two other tea companies were registered in Glasgow, their purpose being to bypass the traditional London tea sales and reach directly to new outlets in America, Canada, and Russia -- another bold innovation on Muir's part. He set up London warehouses at Orient Dock, established his own tea-brokers and tea-tasters, and owned controlling interests in a tea-packeting and confectionery concern. By the 1890s Muir was the world's major stakeholder in the growing and marketing of tea. 
Muir invested heavily in capital developments, especially in southern India and Ceylon, building roads and railways, putting in hydro-electric schemes and telephone systems. He was a harsh employer, both to his Indian labour force and to the young British -- mainly Scottish -- planters and 'jute-wallahs' whom he recruited, and then had to replace when they fell victim to malaria. Salaries were small and leave infrequent; no wife's passage was paid until 1924, and a planter received a larger allowance for his essential horse than he did for a wife. But 'a berth in Finlays' was sought after, and Finlays always commanded a deep if inexplicable loyalty from employees. At his death Muir had some 90,000 employees on payrolls in Britain and the Indian subcontinent. 
Muir's venture into indigo trading in the 1890s, when aniline dyes were already replacing vegetable dyes, was disastrous. Possibly he hoped thereby to acquire valuable land in upper India, but he reaped heavy losses. Another hard-fought battle was more successful. About the time Muir's tea plantations were becoming profitable, Charles Cayzer was attempting to set up a shipping line in Glasgow. Cayzer was introduced to Alexander Stephen of Linthouse, a shipbuilder, and to John Muir as financier. The three men, though they never learned to trust each other, did remarkably successful business together. In 1878 they entered an agreement to build two ships, which became the nucleus of the Clan Line, cargo carriers with some passenger accommodation. Muir stipulated that James Finlay & Co. should hold all the Clan Line agencies east of Suez, and that his tea should be freighted at a favourable rate. By this time a second jute mill was producing a great quantity of gunny (burlap) for export. As the port of Calcutta became overcrowded, Muir advocated the primitive port of Chittagong in East Bengal as an alternative, taking the agency for the Bengal Coal Company, and he forced the Clan Line to serve this port from 1901 by offering huge cargoes of tea and jute. A series of boardroom struggles and deep disagreements marred what was, in fact, a successful partnership. Cayzer resented Muir's bullying tactics and he managed to beat off Muir's attempted take-over, gaining complete control of the Clan Line in 1898. The two men remained, however, mutually necessary to their individual concerns, and they expanded this co-operation into new ventures in South Africa and in the Far East. 
All John Muir's children were born at their parents' town house, 6 Park Gardens, Glasgow. The two eldest sons, (Alexander) Kay Muir and James Finlay Muir, attended Glasgow high school and Glasgow University before being sent to Calcutta, where their parents wintered each year. The Muirs took a leading part in Calcutta society, were on friendly terms with the viceroy, and subscribed to local charities. The younger sons, John Buchanan Finlay Muir ('b'. 1876) and Matthew William Muir (1878-1922), were also educated at Glasgow high school and sent out to India. John then went ranching in Wyoming and died young. Matthew, a keen rider, was killed on the hunting field. 
With his Indian empire secured, John Muir turned his attention to civic affairs. He was elected a baillie of Glasgow town council in 1886 and three years later became lord provost (1889-92), receiving a baronetcy in 1893. He was largely responsible for the Glasgow International Exhibition of 1888. Its $55,000 surplus was the basis of the Kelvingrove Art Galleries Fund, to which Muir donated $15,000. In 1891 he presided over the passing of the 'City of Glasgow Act', which by enlarging the municipal boundaries added nearly 10,000 citizens. Gas supplies were extended, and electricity -- for which Muir was an early enthusiast -- lit the streets. Several notable public buildings were erected during his tenure, and Muir and his wife held glittering public functions in the city chambers. In a popular farewell gesture Lady Muir entertained all the nurses from Glasgow's hospitals. In national politics Muir was a liberal, becoming an active Liberal Unionist after 1886. He was a JP and deputy lieutenant for both Lanarkshire and Ayrshire, and an honorary colonel of the 4th (volunteer battalion) Cameronian Scottish rifles. 
When John Finlay, last of Kirkman's sons and a sleeping partner, died in 1873 Muir took over and rebuilt Deanston House, near one of his cotton mills in Perthshire. Lady Muir took a great interest in the welfare of the mill hands at Deanston and was a popular local figure. Muir was an elder of St George's United Presbyterian Church in Glasgow and of the Bridge of Teith Free Presbyterian Church at Deanston. He was a stern parent, trusting his grown-up sons only a little more than his former partners; he wrote to them on 18 October 1898, 'My advice to you both is to fall in 'cordially' with 'my' views and policy, even when you do not quite understand them' (Finlay archive). His daughters made good marriages into the gentry or the upper mercantile families of Glasgow. Muir undoubtedly sailed close to the wind in some of his financial dealings. He considered shareholders a necessary evil, and the boards of all his public companies were composed of his sons-in-law and other compliant relatives. 
Sir John Muir suffered two strokes and died at Deanston House on 6 August 1903. Alexander and James Muir returned from Calcutta on receiving news of their father's first stroke in 1901 and took over direction as trustees, later successive chairmen. 



@@@@@


doc= 48943


Sir (Alexander) Kay Muir, second baronet (1868-1951), left his mother in possession of Deanston House and bought the large adjoining estate of Blair Drummond. A less domineering man than his father, he nevertheless exercised tight control of James Finlay & Co., modernizing it and converting his father's haphazard collection of companies into a private company, owned by members of the extended Muir family, with the tea and jute companies as wholly owned subsidiaries. In 1919 capital was increased to $2 million and in 1923 it became a public limited liability company. The First World War brought reasonable profits from sales of those staples of warfare -- gunny for sandbags, khaki cotton cloth, and tea, though the British staff were depleted by military service and Blair Drummond House became a convalescent hospital. Sir Kay made shrewd private investments. Just before he retired from the chair in 1926, foreseeing possible political instability in the Indian empire, he instigated a new venture, sending planters from southern India and Ceylon to open the first large-scale tea plantations in Kenya, which under his brother's chairmanship quickly began to produce good teas. Sir Kay took a conventional interest in politics as a Liberal Unionist. His main interests were shooting and fishing. 
Sir Kay had married in 1910 Grace Frances, daughter of John Adam Richard Newman of Newberry Manor, co. Cork, and widow of Major Henry Charles Windsor Villiers-Stuart of Dromana, co. Waterford; she died in 1920. His second marriage was on 17 March 1924 at Brompton Oratory, Knightsbridge, to the Catholic twenty-year-old Nadejda Constanza Irenea Garilla Euphrosyne, eldest daughter of Dmitry Stancioff, former premier of Bulgaria, then Bulgarian minister in London. The marriage was a very happy one; Lady Nadejda's cosmopolitan background, united to Sir Kay's hospitality and sporting interests, made Blair Drummond the scene of notable house parties at which King Boris of Bulgaria was frequently present. Sir Kay died childless at Blair Drummond House on 4 June 1951; his wife died in 1957. The baronetcy and Blair Drummond estate devolved on his nephew John Harling Muir, the son of his late brother James Finlay Muir. 



@@@@@


doc= 48944


James Finlay Muir (1870-1948), a man in his father's mould, was an autocrat rather than an innovator. He was ruthless, efficient, and, though much respected, more feared than loved. He married in 1909 Charlotte Escudier (died 1956), daughter of John Harling Turner of Cessnock, Ayrshire. They resided at Braco Castle, Braco, Perthshire, where they raised two sons and a daughter. Charlotte's warmth, hospitality, and practical concern for the enormous Finlay workforce were much appreciated, though labour conditions improved as a result of legislation and the provision of better housing and health services, in which Finlays was slightly ahead of its competitors. Muir took a particular interest in developing the Kenya tea estates. When the slump of 1929-30 severely affected tea and other plantation crops he supported the formation of the international tea quota. 
In 1936 James Finlay Muir retired from the chair, which passed in turn to three unrelated chairmen and one grandson of the original Muir, Alexander McGrigor Muir. James Muir was a notable sportsman and enjoyed fine shooting at Braco. He and his wife played their part in local unionist politics and more widely in charitable and social affairs. He died at Braco Castle on 7 September 1948 and was buried privately on his estate. His widow lived on at Braco until her death in 1956. 



@@@@@


doc= 48946


David Sassoon (1792-1864), a Jewish merchant. Born in Baghdad in October 1792, the son of Sason ben Saleh (1750-1830) and Amam Gabbai, David belonged to a Sephardic family that, though originating in Spain, had prospered in Mesopotamia, and was active in both financial and religious affairs. David's father held the position of state treasurer to the governor of Baghdad for nearly forty years. The office carried with it automatic leadership of the Jewish community as well as tremendous commercial power. 
David joined his father's business in Baghdad at an early age, after receiving a traditional Hebrew education and a counting-house apprenticeship. In 1818 he married Hannah (died 1826), daughter of Abdullah Joseph of Baghdad, and they had two sons and two daughters. The eldest son, 


@@@@@


doc= 48951


Alexander Falconer Wallace (1836-1925), was the guiding hand in Bombay behind this innovative and immensely successful transaction which removed many of the risks faced by the London and Bombay firms while ensuring for them a lucrative commission income. Born on 30 June 1836, he first went out to Bombay in 1856. He became the corporation's first chairman and emerged as a major business figure at Bombay and a worthy successor there to William and Lewis. William was to play no part in the new company's affairs, but retired from business, aged forty-six, on his return to London in 1864; for most of the rest of his life he lived at the Union Club. Little is known about him in retirement. He never married but in Burma had an illegitimate child whom he supported through remittances to Rangoon. He died on 28 January 1888 at 29 Hyde Park Place, London, leaving his estate to Lewis and Alexander. 
Alexander himself left for England in 1867, and from then on the day-to-day management was in the hands of local partners; none of the brothers were to return to India. Shortly after his return, on 25 February 1868 Alexander married Katharine Louisa, daughter of William Harter of Hope Hall, Eccles; they had a son and a daughter. Alexander then moved to Manchester to supervise, along with his brother Robert, the family's interests there, as an important part of its business was the export of Lancashire textiles to India. After a decade running Wallace & Co. (formed in 1864), Alexander moved back to London, to assist in the management of the London house. 
Under the direction of Lewis and Alexander (as joint senior partners), the London business went from strength to strength. Lewis, in his sixties, was concerned with financial and investment matters and Alexander, fifteen years younger, with expansion into new ventures; they enjoyed 'a complete and perfect confidence' in one another (Pointon, 'Wallace Brothers', 50). From the 1880s Alexander -- energetic, alert, shrewd, and the most entrepreneurial of all the brothers -- led the family and Bombay Burmah businesses in new directions, ranging from the importation of kerosene into India to the extension of the teak business to Siam, and from oil prospecting in Sumatra to the ownership of rubber plantations. Very often these new interests were carried on through the establishment of new companies controlled by the Wallaces. However, the core of the family firm's business continued to be in timber, and the trade of textiles and other exports and imports. 
Alexander's growing reputation in the City was confirmed in 1887 through his appointment to the Bank of England's court; he served as a director for thirty-one years and was governor between 1905 and 1907. By the end of the 1880s the size of their business meant that both brothers had withdrawn from managing day-to-day transactions and were focusing instead upon policy and strategy. A sign of this withdrawal was their acquisition in the 1890s of estates at Strathdon, Aberdeenshire, Lewis through the lease of Castle Newe and Alexander through the purchase of Candacraig, though both had possessed country houses in England prior to this. 
Lewis died on 9 September 1906, aged eighty-five, at Castle Newe. Throughout his life he had devoted himself single-mindedly to Wallace's affairs and had purposefully avoided charitable and committee work. He never married. Although still a partner at his death, a few years earlier he had handed his duties as senior to his brother. It was Alexander who in 1911 oversaw the London firm's conversion to a limited company and who was its first chairman and major shareholder. Alexander died on 24 January 1925 at 20 Hyde Park Gardens, London. By this time the family's influence had waned, if only because of a shortage of male heirs produced by the six founding brothers. The firm was finally acquired by Standard Chartered Bank. 


@@@@@


doc= 48964


Hannah Marshman (1767-1847), born on 13 May 1767 at Bristol, was the granddaughter of John Clark, pastor of the Baptist church at Crockerton, Wiltshire, and the only daughter of John Shepherd, a farmer, and his wife, Rachel. She was outstanding among the missionaries' wives in India at the time in playing an active part in the work of the mission, particularly in the field of education. In 1800 she opened a fee-paying boarding-school for girls, which flourished and soon became a vital source of funds for the mission; and from 1822 she was one of the pioneers of elementary schools for Bengali girls, in which teaching was in the vernacular. She became a matriarchal figure in the domestic life and organization of the Serampore community, and died there on 5 March 1847, a few weeks before her eightieth birthday. The Marshmans had twelve children, six of whom died in infancy. 


@@@@@


doc= 48965


William [i] Dixon (1753-1824), iron and coal master, whose origins are obscure but who is reputed to have come to Scotland from Northumberland in 1770 or 1771; during the 1770s he was engaged as manager of the Govan colliery, indicating that he had probably trained as a mining engineer in the north-east of England. This appointment commenced an association of the names Dixon and Govan that was to last almost 200 years until the Govan ironworks, or 'Dixon's blazes', so named for its furnaces' lighting up the night sky, was dismantled in 1958. 
The first William Dixon was ambitious and hardworking, and while manager at Govan set up the Calder ironworks in Lanarkshire in 1795 in partnership with David Mushet, the discoverer of the local blackband iron ore which was intermixed with the coal-seams, and James Creelman, a local pottery manufacturer. The partnership lasted until 1802, when Dixon bought out the concern for $19,000; he followed this in 1803 with the purchase of the estate of Palacecraig, lying centrally in the rich coal and ore seams of north Lanarkshire. All of this was undertaken while Dixon still managed the Govan collieries, and when these were put up for sale in 1813 at a price of $30,000 he acquired four-ninths of the stock. He worked with the other members of the purchasing combine for six years, and finally acquired sole control of the Govan colliery in 1819. To this he added further mineral estates at Govanhill and Faskine, also in 1819, and the mineral lands and ironworks at Wilsontown in 1824, the year of his death. In a long working life he had created an extensive coal and iron empire with collieries at Govan, Faskine, Palacecraig, Wilsontown, and Legbrannock, together with ironworks at Calder and Wilsontown. 
On William Dixon's death in 1824 his considerable empire passed to his two sons John and William. There was property but little liquid capital, and the elder son John, unwilling to take on the business, sold out to the younger 


@@@@@


doc= 48967


William [ii] Dixon (1788-1859), iron and coal master. To buy out his brother, William like his father before him had to resort to a partnership with three other investors. This arrangement lasted eleven years until 1835, when Dixon regained control of the family business. He married Elizabeth Strang, and they had at least one son, who was born at Gallowknow, Gorbals, in Lanarkshire. 
The second William Dixon shared his father's drive and ambition. Some time between 1835 and 1840 he sold the lands of Palacecraig to the Bairds of Gartsherrie, purchased another estate at Carfin, near Wishaw, and began smelting and puddling at his newly established Govan Bar Iron Works. He was active in experimenting with the substitution of raw coal for coke in the furnace, and also with J. B. Neilson's idea of heating the blast. He managed to reach a temperature of 600 degree F in tests and was reported to have made three times as much iron with the same quantity of coal as before. Satisfied with this he blew in the first blast furnace at Govan in 1837. He then closed the Wilsontown ironworks in 1842, and concentrated his iron interests at Govan and Calder. 
By the late 1840s Dixon was among the leading coal and iron masters in Scotland, his collieries then providing around 150,000 tons of coal per year. He was a man of great energy and drive, and one who exercised close and detailed control over all his business operations. He was also a citizen of some standing, a trustee of the savings bank of Glasgow and a town councillor. Unfortunately, he was a man of inflexible opinion. He constantly engaged in litigation, notably over Neilson's hot blast patent and with the trustees of the Clyde Navigation, and the Monkland Canal Authority. In the early 1850s this brought him close to bankruptcy, and he was rescued only by loans from friends to meet his debts; these were not repaid until after his death in 1859. 
Control of the Dixon empire passed over to his son 


@@@@@


doc= 48968


William Smith Dixon (1824-1880), iron and coal master, who had been assistant to his father for some years. Unlike his father and grandfather, William S. Dixon was a cautious manager rather than a risk taker. Under his control the colliery side expanded in the 1860s with new mines at Cockerhill, Titwood, and Ibrox. In the early 1870s, when the new deeper coalfield around Blantyre, 10 miles south-east of Glasgow, was being developed, Dixon chose to convert his company to limited liability status. In 1872 Dixon issued 465 shares of $1000 each, and with the capital extended mining into the Blantyre district. After this it seems that William S. Dixon withdrew from active management and spent much of his time in London or at his estate at Belleisle, Ayr. He served as deputy lieutenant for Lanarkshire and Ayrshire, and was also a major in the 2nd Lanarkshire militia. The community where his works were situated benefited from his generosity, including his funding of the town halls of the joint burghs of Crosshill and Govanhill. Dixon married Catherine Ann, daughter of David Napier, a Singapore merchant, on 21 August 1851. 
William S. Dixon died on 16 June 1880 at his home, 14 Grosvenor Place, London, at the early age of fifty-six. He and his wife (who survived him) did not have any children, and thereafter the company was carried on by trustees, becoming a publicly limited company in 1906. The Govan colliery finally closed in 1926. 


@@@@@


doc= 48972


Philip [ii] Foley (bap. 1648, d. 1716), three took part in the iron business, and all but Philip [ii] had a university education. In 1651 Thomas [i] bought the manor of Compton Hollows in Kinver, and in 1661 the manor of Harborne. He was managing the Stour works from about 1640 and in 1665 his house at Compton Hollows was assessed at 15 hearths. The civil war brought problems in the transport of iron, but it also provided opportunities for sale. Although the partnership supplied the king's armies it was able to remain neutral and after the war secured valuable naval ordnance contracts for Cromwell's government. 
In the aftermath of the war, between 1648 and 1675, Thomas [i] acquired ninety-seven leases and partnerships, expanding in particular into the Forest of Dean where the furnaces produced exceptionally high grade iron from local ores. In the 1650s and 1660s Thomas and his Browne brother-in-law had a gunfounding furnace in Kent. By 1670 the Foley family had under its control mines, woodlands, furnaces, forges, slitting mills, a wire works, and warehouses, located in Worcestershire, south and north Staffordshire, Shropshire, and the Forest of Dean. Furnaces, chafery and finery forges, and slitting mills were grouped to form production units of furnaces and forges, but some work was put out to other ironmasters. The Foley mills produced bar iron, rod iron, wire, cast pots, and anvils. The River Severn was an important line of communication and transport connecting the Stour valley, Shropshire, and Forest of Dean mills with each other as well as with the seaport of Bristol and the river port of Bewdley. Thomas [i] was also a governor of the Society of Mines Royal and of the Society of Mineral and Battery Works. 
Thomas's house in Austin Friars, London, was an important assertion of his role on the national market, but Worcestershire remained his main centre. In 1667 he founded Oldswinford Hospital, which provided food, clothes, education, and apprenticeships for sixty poor boys. His contracts with Cromwell's government led to his being drawn into public affairs and in 1656 he was high sheriff for Worcestershire. In the previous year he had bought the manors of Great and Little Witley in Worcestershire and other properties for $2600. In 1669 Thomas [i] reorganized control of the ironworks, grouping the mills on a broadly geographical basis. He handed them over to be managed by his sons, though he continued to supervise and arbitrate between them: Paul became responsible for the Forest works and Philip [ii] for the Stour works. His half-brother Richard [iii] and his nephew Richard [iv] meanwhile ran their north Staffordshire works. Thomas [i] Foley died on 1 October 1677 and was buried at Witley. 
The ironworks partnerships were becoming even more widely dispersed as more ironworks were leased, and new partners were brought in. Raw materials, pig iron, and wrought iron were moved greater distances in the course of production, and the numerous customers expected extended credit and paid mainly by means of bills of exchange. This presented problems of management, logistics, and accounting, which required sophisticated solutions. 
Richard [iv] was trained by his father and inherited the north Staffordshire works on his father's death in 1678. Philip [ii] and other interested parties made an agreement to resolve the outstanding debts and enabled Richard [iv] to establish his ownership. However Richard died in 1684 and his heir was his uncle, John Foley (1631-1684), the youngest son of Richard [ii] Foley. When John Foley died in November of the same year the ironworks were inherited by Henry Glover senior, his brother-in-law, who had long been manager of the Stour works. For a short period the Cheshire works were transferred to the Yorkshire ironmasters, but they had returned to Foley hands by 1696. John Wheeler of Wollaston, Stourbridge, took over the Moorland works, with Obadiah Lane as manager, the partners being Wheeler, Lane, and Philip [ii] Foley. These works were in a favourable location between the expanding industrial areas of north and south Staffordshire where most of the bar and rod iron was sold. 
Thomas [ii] ('c'.1641-1701), the eldest son of Thomas [i], was educated at Pembroke College, Cambridge, where he was admitted in 1657 aged sixteen; he entered the Inner Temple, London, in the same year. He married Elizabeth (died 1686), daughter of Edward Ashe, a draper of Heytesbury, Wiltshire, and London. Thomas [ii] held the Longhope and Tintern furnaces and Whitbrook and Wilden forge mills in the Forest of Dean. He too was a governor of the Society of Mines Royal and of the Society of Mineral and Battery Works. As eldest son, Thomas [ii] was increasingly preoccupied with building up a landed estate and a political career in the House of Commons. In 1683 he bought the Jacobean manor house of Great Witley from the Russell family, and added long wings to it. He was very active in the House of Commons, a member of all three Exclusion parliaments, supported the revolution, and sat in all the parliaments of William III. He was appointed to 177 committees of the house. In 1685 Thomas's daughter, Elizabeth (died 1691), married Robert Harley, first earl of Oxford and Mortimer. His eldest son, Thomas Foley, first Baron Foley (1673-1733), was one of the twelve new peers created by Robert Harley in January 1712. 
Meanwhile the younger sons of Thomas [i], Paul Foley and Philip [ii], had become the principal managers of the family works, bringing the partnerships to their widest extension in 1692. Paul was educated at Magdalen Hall, Oxford, from 1662, and possibly at the Inner Temple in London from September of that year. Between 1668 and 1670 he married Mary, daughter of John Lane, a clothworker, of St Lawrence, Poultney Lane, London, and bought the estate of Stoke Edith in Herefordshire. Not long before his death he completely rebuilt the house. He was a dissenter, and employed an ejected minister as tutor for his children. Like his elder brother Thomas [ii] he was a governor of the Society of Mines Royal from 1666 to 1678 and the Society of Mineral and Battery Works from 1666 to 1687. 
In 1669 the numerous but interlocking partnerships and semi-dependent enterprises of the ironworks had been divided into three segments. Paul purchased the king's works in the Forest of Dean in 1674 and probably demolished them; but the Forest of Dean remained the main base of his power and responsibilities within the ironworks partnership. The Forest of Dean works were mainly furnaces producing high-quality iron from local ores. Eventually Paul held seven blast furnaces including Redbrook furnace and two forges at Lydbrook, Gloucestershire. He also had a half-interest in St Weonard's furnace, and the Pontrilas, Peterchurch, and Llansillo forges in Herefordshire. 
The Stour works were controlled by the youngest of the brothers, Philip [ii] Foley, baptized on 12 May 1648 in the parish of St Peter le Poer in London. He married Penelope, daughter of William Paget, in 1670, bringing the Cannock group of forges into the family, and his father settled Prestwood estate in Kingswinford parish on them. They had two sons and five daughters. At the age of nineteen Philip took over the Stour valley and south Staffordshire works, then comprising four furnaces, thirteen forges, and the Bewdley warehouse, the stock and debts of which were estimated as $68,830. Philip entered into a bond to pay $60,000 to his father. There was a thorough assessment in 1667-8 of each and every mill in respect of its productivity and profitability, and the workmen were appraised in detail in respect of their skills, diligence, and reliability. 
In 1674 there was a rift between Paul and Philip [ii]. Philip was both Paul's chief customer and his main competitor. Paul had expanded his output of pig iron in the Forest works and needed to expand his market in the midlands, but he also raised the price of the best quality Forest iron. Their father, Thomas [i], had to intervene in what threatened to become a bitter quarrel between the brothers. An agreement was drawn up which gave Philip one third of the Forest works but ensured Paul access to the midland market for iron. The partnership was, however, always strained and Paul was never satisfied that he was receiving support from his brother nor a full return from his mills. There were constant shifts and changes in the arrangements and although Paul received a steady profit from the Forest works he was by 1685 anxious to persuade Philip and other ironmasters to buy him out. This may have been a negotiating ploy, for Paul continued to operate the Forest works in close association with Philip. 
At the same time Philip [ii] was establishing links with other partners in the Stour valley and in Shropshire, strengthening his own position and making himself less dependent upon Paul for pig iron. His agent and partner John Wheeler of Wollaston became important both in the practical management of the Stour valley and of the north Staffordshire works, and in his personal support for Philip. By 1691 Wheeler was also active in the Forest works. The partnerships included other ironmasters who held shares of one-sixth, or one-quarter, contributing to the large capital required, and they also created an active link with partnerships in other parts of the country. 
As the leases of the ironworks were usually for short periods, and without right of survivorship, there was a continual need for adjustment and change of personnel. In 1692 Paul and Philip [ii] Foley together with John and Richard Wheeler and Richard Avenant drew up a new agreement for seven years which created a supervisory group of six partners. This brought together once more the Forest, Stour, and Staffordshire works. Paul and Philip paid in cash; the others were deemed to have put in the stock and debts from the mills which they had been operating for some years. The Stour ironworks were similarly reorganized with five partners. John Wheeler was the chief agent and salaried cash-holder for both partnerships. 
Although this episode marked the climax of the process of expansion it did not halt the process of continuous renewal and reorganization of capital. It was a flexible arrangement and new mills continued to be brought within the network while others passed into other hands. Philip [ii] briefly made agreements which brought mills in Derbyshire (only between 1695 and 1698) and Nottinghamshire (from 1696) into the partnership. The organization was called in the accounts 'The Ironworks in Partnership'. Although other ironmasters held shares in the partnerships, Paul and Philip retained control of capital and the leadership in decision making. The day-to-day running of the units of production was in the hands of salaried clerks. These were educated men of modest background, who organized the sales and purchases along with the movement of raw materials and iron, and who hired and fired the workmen. The highly skilled men commanded high wages; their competence was monitored by the management, and they moved from mill to mill. In addition the ironworks required local unskilled labourers and large numbers of carriers by land and water. The enterprise was documented and controlled by a single set of annual accounts which were derived from detailed and regular records of daily transactions, wages, stock, debts, buildings repairs, and customers. 
Such attention to financial detail was remarkable for the period, but the Foleys had long been concerned with county and national finance as well as business accounting; in the House of Commons Paul was respected as a good financier and lawyer, and he was one of the main organizers of the Land Bank proposed by Robert Harley. Philip [ii] was less involved in politics than his brother but was elected MP for Bewdley in 1679, for Stafford in 1689, 1695, and 1698, and for Droitwich in 1690 and 1701. There were five Foley cousins in the House of Commons, including the speaker in 1698, and all of them were notable members. In politics as in business the Foley brothers both supported and competed with each other. 
The skills of public administration and private business in the Foley concern combined to make possible the effective co-ordination of more than fifty mills located in England and Wales. The enterprise was a landmark in the development of management techniques, but, perhaps as important, it also developed the selection, training, and control of local agents and managers at the sites. Many of the family members who had built up the business to its greatest extent died between 1699 and 1716. Paul Foley died of gangrene on 13 November 1699, and was buried at Stoke Edith, leaving an estate reputed to be worth $4000 a year. Thomas Foley [ii] died in 1701 and Philip [ii] in 1716. Their sons made aristocratic marriages and entered the peerage. From 1710 the Foleys gradually disposed of many of the works, retaining mainly those at the Forest of Dean and the Bewdley warehouse, and domination of the industry thus passed to other families. 
Throughout the seventeenth century the Foley family were outstanding in the business of the production and sale of cast and wrought iron. They developed systems of management which enabled them to co-ordinate a multiplicity of units of production spread over a wide geographical area. Their achievement lay in the development of a business which was at once based on a multiplicity of units of production and local salaried management, a sophisticated system of central controls, and an elaborate unified accounting system. At the level of middle management the clerks of two or three related units worked to a uniform pattern throughout the enterprise. At the centre Henry Glover of Stourbridge and John Wheeler were of great importance both as managers and partners, but the Foleys were directly and personally creating policies and enforcing the routines which held together the whole enterprise, and demanding accountability from all those involved. They were also active in local and county government and in the second half of the century in the House of Commons. The two spheres of action were closely linked, not least in providing access to large government contracts and the experience of the management of money. There were other partnerships of ironmasters with whom they both competed and associated, but for six generations they were the leaders of a dynamic sector of industrialization. With the profits they founded three landed estates, namely Great Witley in Worcestershire, Stoke Edith in Herefordshire, and Prestwood in Staffordshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 48976


John [i] Spencer (c.1600-1658), who was involved in the Shrewsbury drapery trade. John mentioned his Yorkshire forges and furnaces in his will and his contact with the iron industry may have arisen from the marriage of his sister Elizabeth to the ironmaster William Fownes in 1625. In turn, it seems possible that the interests of William Fownes in the Yorkshire ironworks arose through his brother-in-law Walter Spencer, especially as one of the partnership's blast furnaces was established at Barnby, on land belonging to Walter's brother-in-law, Sir Charles Barnby. 
William Fownes and his brother Gilbert were involved in the Yorkshire ironworks by the 1640s; these comprised Wortley forges, Colne Bridge forge, and Barnby and Bank furnaces, with the lease of Kirkstall forge being agreed in the late 1650s. John [i] Spencer possessed a three-fifths share in these works for about ten or twelve years before his death, so his involvement dated perhaps from the death of William Fownes, whose will was proved in 1647. 
John [i] Spencer died in August 1658 and was buried at Wortley. He and his wife, Elizabeth, had one son and two daughters. Himself a younger son, Spencer wished to assure genteel standing for his own children and in his will he charged the Yorkshire works with raising $1500 to fulfil the marriage settlement of his son, Edward, and $1000 as a marriage portion for his daughter Mary. He also directed his brother, another Edward Spencer, and his son-in-law, Russell Alsopp, to administer the works on behalf of his son and heir, who retired to an estate purchased by his father at Huntington in Cheshire and never played an active role in the iron industry. John [i] Spencer was survived by his wife, who by his will was to receive $150 out of the drapery trade and possession of some land. Elizabeth Fownes died before her brother; in her own will (1655) she described herself as of Wortley forge, and it was at Wortley that she too was buried in February 1658. Monuments in the church commemorated both her and her brother. 
The third member of this family to establish Yorkshire connections was 


@@@@@


doc= 48977


John [iii] Spencer (c.1655-1729), that the family was able to re-establish its dominance in south Yorkshire. Thomas Dickin died in 1692 and in 1695 it was to his son of the same name that the new lease of Wortley forges was granted. However, Spencer now acquired a half share at Wortley for $2000. He also extended his influence to the south of Sheffield by acquiring a share in the former Sitwell works (Foxbrooke and Staveley furnaces, Staveley and Carburton forges, and Renishaw slitting mill) which Denis Hayford and partners took over about 1700. 
Spencer was provided with a great opportunity by fatalities among his partners. The second Thomas Dickin died childless in 1701, only nine years after his father's death and in 1703 Spencer's main rival, William Cotton of Haigh Hall, died, leaving as heir a minor, William Westby Cotton. Dickin's heirs were his five sisters, so Spencer's half share left him the dominant partner at Wortley. Matthew Woodhead, who was not only the adopted son of Thomas Dickin and manager of Wortley forges and Barnby furnace, but also the husband of one of the Dickin sisters, was persuaded to let Spencer buy half the Dickin share in Colne Bridge. Spencer also induced Robert Wilmott, the husband of another sister, Mary Dickin, to sell him half their share in the Kirkstall partnership, thus gaining a quarter share at Colne Bridge and Bank furnace and increasing his influence at Kirkstall forge and Barnby furnace. 
In 1680 John [iii] Spencer married Anne (1659-1699), daughter of John Wilson of Wortley; they had two sons. When Matthew Woodhead died in 1704, Spencer had his brother-in-law Matthew Wilson installed as managing partner at Wortley. In 1713, through the Wilmott connection, Spencer obtained a share in Holme Chapel furnace, near Burnley in Lancashire, which Wilmott had established in 1693. He also extended the Spencer iron-bearing estates by purchasing from the Allott family of Bentley half the former estates of Sir Charles Barnby. Spencer's position as the most influential figure in the iron trade of south Yorkshire was consolidated in 1727 by the acquisition of five shares out of thirty-two in the duke of Norfolk's works (Chapel furnace, Attercliffe and Wadsley forges, and Masborough slitting mill), the only remaining major iron interest in the area. John [iii] Spencer died on 13 April 1729. 
The markets of the south Yorkshire ironworks had included York itself, Hull, and the east coast as far south as Norfolk, with large sales in London. Rod iron from Colne Bridge slitting mill went chiefly to the Lancashire nail trade, through warehouses in Burnley and Rochdale. The slitting mills at Kirkstall and Wortley supplied the local nail trade, for which some of the ironmasters, including John [iii] Spencer's elder son, 


@@@@@


doc= 48979


William Spencer (c.1690-1756), acted as factors. London was the main market for the bulk nail trade, but these distant markets became steadily more difficult to retain. Even in Lancashire, rod iron had to be delivered at Chowbent, in the centre of the nail-making area, in the effort to maintain that market. 
Meanwhile, William Westby Cotton ('bap'. 1689, died 1749) had laid claim to the Cotton interest in Colne Bridge in 1717. During the 1720s he organized a rival partnership, based on a new furnace at Bretton, Kilnhurst forge on the Don, and a lease of Rockley furnace obtained in 1726. This was unwelcome to the Spencers, because the scarcity of cordwood in south Yorkshire made it difficult to apportion charcoal between the works. Though William Spencer acquired the remainder of the Barnby inheritance, his own estates were insignificant in comparison with those of the duke of Norfolk, the marquess of Rockingham, and the Wortley Montagu family, all of which needed to be laid under contribution to satisfy the charcoal needs of the ironworks. Wood agreements with Cotton, whom William Spencer characterized as an 'unreasonable wasp' and contemptuously called 'the little gentleman', rarely lasted more than a few months (Butler, 14). Writing to John Watts, the managing partner at Kirkstall forge, Spencer described Cotton as his 'greatest enemy but yourself' (ibid., 18), and it was with Watts that he was involved in an exasperating feud concerning the price to be paid by Kirkstall forge for pig iron, a dispute which continued until just before Watts died in 1751. 
William Spencer was a scholar of Christ's College, Cambridge (1706-7), and about 1715 he married Christiana (died 1737), daughter and heir of Benjamin Ashton of Hathersage, Derbyshire. They had one son and one daughter. His father, perhaps knowing the uncertain temper of his eldest son, left the Spencer share in the partnership (which included Wortley slitting mill) divided between William and his younger brother, Edward. Edward died in 1729 and he left his share in this partnership not to his brother William, with whom he had been on bad terms, but to their uncle Matthew Wilson. William Spencer challenged the validity of the will, and seized the forges on Wilson's death in 1739. In 1743 the matter went before arbitrators, one of them the hated Westby Cotton. However, by March 1746 Spencer was persuaded to accept the unfavourable arbitration and to relinquish control at Wortley slitting mill to John Cockshutt, Wilson's nephew and heir. 
William Spencer was not the only ironmaster in south Yorkshire interested in the nail trade, but he was perhaps the largest, with two-thirds of his Wortley iron going into rod iron for nails. Between 1742 and 1747 he employed 120 nailers and sent some 4465 bags of nails worth $10,000 via Hull to London. However, there were constant difficulties in maintaining quality control, some nails being without points, others without heads, and some having neither, as his clerk complained. Towards the end of the period slitting had to be done for him by John Fell at Masborough and John Cockshutt at Wortley, both of them competitors in the nail trade, so he finally withdrew from it in 1748. 
William Spencer's frustrations were small inducement to his son, 


@@@@@


doc= 49020


Irby, (Adeline) Paulina (1831-1911), traveller and Balkan sympathizer, was the youngest daughter of Rear-Admiral the Hon. Frederick Paul Irby (1779-1844) of Long Stratton, Norfolk, and his second wife, Frances Wright (died 1852), daughter of Ichabod Wright of Mapperley Hall, Nottinghamshire; she was the granddaughter of the second Baron Boston. Her long life, as traveller, relief worker, educationist, and Serbian patriot, was shaped by two events, one personal -- she was arrested as a spy in 1859 -- the other of public concern -- the 'Bulgarian atrocities' of 1876. In the first incident, she and her companion, Georgina Muir Mackenzie, while travelling in the Austrian Carpathians, were accused of showing 'pan-Slavistic tendencies'. Neither understood the term, knowing little of the Slav nationalities in Europe. In the next four years they remedied that ignorance through extensive journeys across Turkey in Europe, examining the conditions of the south Slavs, talking to Turkish authorities, and discussing the position and education of Christian women and girls. The evidence they obtained convinced them of Turkish misrule and made them advocates of Serbia and the south Slavs. They reported on their travels in some articles and speeches, and finally in 1867 in 'The Turks, the Greeks and the Slavons: Travels in the Slavonic Provinces of Turkey-in-Europe', a substantial and authoritative publication. 
In 1865 Paulina Irby and Georgina Muir Mackenzie established an association to promote education among the Slavonic Christians, appealing for funds to set up a training school for Bosnian girls. The school was opened in Sarajevo, and in 1871 Paulina Irby, with a new companion, Priscilla Johnston (the granddaughter of the first Sir Thomas Fowell Buxton, the anti-slavery leader, of Northrepps, Norfolk), took over its management. The pattern of her life, nine months in Sarajevo followed by a summer of recuperation and fund-raising in England, was broken in 1875 by the uprising of the Christian population. She closed the school and set up a relief fund for Bosnian refugees fleeing into Austrian Slavonia, undertaking food distribution and the establishment of schools for refugee children. By June 1876 seven schools were operating, and 3000 women and children had been fed, clothed, and vaccinated. She was in England in July 1876 when the 'Bulgarian atrocities' agitation swept the country: Turkish misrule and the condition of its subject Christian nationalities became the focus of public debate and practical action. Her relief fund was one among many that benefited from the generosity of the British public; she was recognized as an expert on Turkish matters, and relatives and influential friends, including Florence Nightingale, became active on behalf of the fund. References were made to her in parliament, and W. E. Gladstone wrote the introduction to the second edition of 'Travels' (published in 1877). 
During 1877 and 1878 in Dalmatia and Slavonia, Paulina Irby continued to administer relief, establishing twenty-one schools for 2000 pupils and distributing food, clothes, and pickaxes (for road building). Vivid descriptions of her work, written by Arthur Evans, appeared in the 'Manchester Guardian'. Under the Berlin Congress of June 1878 Austria was given the mandate of Bosnia and Herzegovina, but the Austrian authorities were reluctant, because of her Serbian sympathies, to grant permission for her return to Sarajevo. Finally, in June 1879, the school was reopened. After Priscilla Johnston returned to England in 1885, Paulina Irby continued to maintain the school, which remained small, for Orthodox Christian girls only, an increasing number of whom were Slav and Serbian. Edith Durham, visiting in 1906, believed the school was the centre of the pro-Serb party. On 15 September 1911 Paulina Irby died, and her death was an occasion for public mourning in Belgrade as well as Sarajevo. As she had requested, her letters and papers were destroyed, but her work for the south Slav people became a legend. On the occasion of the centenary of her birth (postponed to 1934) there were celebrations throughout Yugoslavia in her honour. For some years there was an annual commemoration at her gravestone in Sarajevo of the day in June 1914 when the shot was fired that started the First World War. 


@@@@@


doc= 49022


Bryce, (John) Annan (1843-1923), merchant and politician, was born in Belfast on 12 August 1843, the son of the mathematician and geologist James Bryce the younger (1806-1877) and his wife, Margaret, 'nee' Young (1813-1903). His elder brother was James Bryce, Viscount Bryce (1838-1922). Educated at Glasgow high school, he studied from 1858 at the University of Glasgow, graduating MA in 1866, and at the University of Edinburgh. He went on to Balliol College as Brackenbury history scholar, graduating BA in 1872, after serving as first the secretary, then treasurer, and in 1871 the president of the Oxford Union Society. He married Violet (died 1939), daughter of Captain Champagne L'Estrange RA. They had two daughters and a son. 
In 1875 Bryce joined Wallace Brothers, East India merchants, and was sent to work as an assistant for the Bombay-based arm of the company, Wallace & Co. The firm held leases of extensive teak forests in British and Upper Burma through its subsidiary, the Bombay Burma Trading Corporation, and in 1878 Bryce moved to Rangoon to assist in extending its activities. In 1880 he and a colleague, H. Maxwell, visited King Thibaw in Mandalay, and after prolonged negotiations they were able to confirm existing leases, and obtain new ones, to teak forests in Upper Burma. The following year Bryce travelled extensively in the Chindwin forests, identifying areas suitable for further expansion. In 1884 he visited upper Siam to explore opportunities for working the teak forests of that country, and his report was instrumental in Wallace Brothers' decision to open an office in Bangkok in 1886. 
Bryce took an active part in the business life of Rangoon, serving as a chairman of the Rangoon chamber of commerce, and on the legislative council of Burma. In 1881 he was made a resident partner in the head office of Wallace & Co. in Bombay, and in August 1884 he returned to London, on becoming a partner in the parent company, Wallace Brothers. Bryce's knowledge of Burmese and Siamese affairs proved invaluable to the London partners, and his analysis of the political situations at the royal courts in Mandalay and Bangkok was sent to British government officials in 1884, when the company lobbied for action to counter French moves to extend their commercial interests in the region. 
It seems that Bryce was sent abroad only rarely after 1888, when he visited the Caucasus to investigate the state of the oil industry there, prior to Wallace Brothers' negotiation of contracts for the supply of refined kerosene. Maintaining his interest in travel and exploration, however, Bryce was a member of the council of the Royal Geographical Society, 1886-9, and frequently contributed to discussions at their meetings in the 1880s and 1890s. He also served as a member of the council of the London chamber of commerce, 1891-1902. 
Bryce retired from Wallace Brothers in 1906, on his election as the Liberal MP for the Inverness burghs. He represented the constituency until 1918, when he declined to seek re-election. Although his political career effectively ended, he remained active in business, and was a director of London, County, and Westminster Bank; the Bombay, Baroda, and Burma railway companies; the English, Scottish, and Australian Bank; and the Atlas Assurance Company. He was also chairman of British Westinghouse Company. 
Possessing a strong interest in Irish affairs, Bryce served on the royal commission on congestion in Ireland, 1906-8, and he spoke frequently in favour of home rule. In October 1920 he wrote to 'The Times' from Glengariff, co. Cork, complaining of reprisals carried out against the local population by soldiers seeking revenge for republican attacks on troops and loyalists. Later that month, his wife, Violet, was arrested at Holyhead, 'en route' for Tonypandy, where she had been invited to speak about reprisals. Violet Bryce was detained under the 'Restoration of Order in Ireland Act', on the grounds that she was in possession of documents (the notes for her speech and a copy of a cartoon from an English newspaper) which libelled the Royal Irish Constabulary. She was deported to Dublin and held in the bridewell for several hours, before being released without charge -- a situation Bryce deplored in a series of letters to 'The Times'. The issues raised by his wife's arrest, and Bryce's denunciations of the increasing authoritarianism of British rule in some areas of Ireland, fuelled controversy in the press and in the House of Commons over the government's policy in Ireland. 
Bryce died at his home, 35 Bryanston Square, London, on 25 June 1923, and was cremated at Golders Green, Middlesex. He had been an enthusiastic collector of art throughout his adult life, and his collection of oriental 'objets d'art' was so highly regarded as to merit exhibition at the Imperial Institute in 1892. In November 1923 the contents of his home, consisting of 2200 lots, which included Italian masters, English furniture, and Persian rugs, were sold at auction. 
To his contemporaries in the world of business, Bryce was probably best known for his services in opening up and protecting British interests in the teak forests of Burma and Siam. However, his support for Irish home rule and his outspoken criticism of British policy in Ireland after the First World War brought him a degree of wider fame, or notoriety, late in life. 


@@@@@


doc= 49023


Dalgety, Frederick Gonnerman (1817-1894), wool merchant and sheep farmer, was born on 3 December 1817 in Canada, where his father was a lieutenant in the Irish fusiliers; he had at least two younger half-brothers. Nothing is known of his education or early career before his arrival in Australia at Sydney on 2 June 1834. 
Dalgety became a clerk in the merchant house of T. C. Breillat & Co., before moving to Melbourne in December 1842 as manager of the new office of Griffiths, Borrodaile & Co., a firm hitherto based in both Sydney and Launceston and which specialized in importing goods for 'squatters' and purchasing their goods for export. In 1845 Griffiths withdrew and set up a separate concern in Sydney; Dalgety became a partner in Dalgety, Borrodaile, and Gore, of Melbourne and Geelong. Problems arose when Borrodaile then withdrew and demanded repayment of his capital at a time of falling wool prices, when growers were in debt to the firm. John Gore, the London merchant on whom the firm relied, had second thoughts about providing capital for his son Harry's partnership, and he was restricting Dalgety's credit in London. 
The firm narrowly escaped failure in 1848 as a result of the strict line that Dalgety took with his debtors, but he had suffered 'the greatest anxiety which I would not again undergo to secure a fortune' (Dalgety to John Gore, 7 Feb 1849, Dalgety archives, N8/19). It was clear that he needed better access to the financial resources of London, and a solution appeared in 1849 when John Gore proposed that they should form a partnership. Dalgety set out for London to complete the agreement, but Gore unfortunately died. Dalgety traded in London in association with Gore's sons, but by 1852 he was back in Melbourne with his finance still unresolved. He returned, however, to a very different situation: Victoria was experiencing a gold rush, and Melbourne was in a phase of explosive development. Dalgety's fortunes were to be transformed. 
Initially Dalgety continued in his partnership with Harry Gore, whose brothers provided the crucial connection with London. Dalgety made perhaps $150,000 by 1855 from the firm, as well as a considerable profit from property he had purchased at Melbourne in 1846 -- he sold it in 1853, for building, at a profit of 4000 per cent. But his new wealth was little compensation for the discomforts of Melbourne. Life was 'infernally dull' in the absence of a 'smiling female face', and he could 'only hope my moral resolve will be sufficiently strong, to enable me to resist the temptation of taking one... on the doubtful capacity of housekeeper'; his will would, he felt, hold out 'for I have paid the penalty too frequently to incur the risk again' (Dalgety to Tobias, 25 June 1852, Dalgety archives, N8/20). His initial thoughts were to retire to England and give up business, for he was 'naturally of an excitable and anxious temperament' (Dalgety to F. and E. Gore, 1 Aug 1853, Dalgety archives, N8/20); however, a further bout of self-analysis led him to conclude that 'I am not cut out for a life of idleness or a life of gaiety' (Dalgety to J. Gore, 7 June 1853, Dalgety archives, N8/20). Moreover, as so often in his career, family responsibilities played their role, for he had two younger brothers 'to push forward in the world' (Dalgety to his doctor, 13 July 1852, Dalgety archives, N8/20). The impression is of a man who had acquired wealth through fortunate timing, but who lacked confidence and flexibility, preferring to keep to what he knew -- commodity trade with settlers. 
Continuation in business required a base in London, and Dalgety decided that the best resolution of his difficulties was to sever all ties with the Gores, to settle in London where he would run the business in person, and to find others to operate the business in the colonies. He formed a partnership with Frederick Du Croz (1821-1897), a merchant in Van Diemen's Land, to create Dalgety & Co., and they settled in London in 1854. The Geelong business was run by Charles Ibbotson, and in 1857 Dalgety returned to Australia to make James Blackwood the managing partner in Melbourne. The basic structure of the firm was set for the next twenty years, and Dalgety firmly held to the view that merchant firms should be based on close personal ties and family involvement, in order to create trust for the transaction of business over long distances. 
In 1855, soon after Dalgety moved to London, he married Blanche Trosse Allen (1836-1883), the niece of his uncle's wife. Their first child was born in 1860, after his return from Australia in 1859, and Dalgety became impressed by the need to provide for a large and young family: Blanche died in 1883 in childbirth, and five sons and five daughters survived to adulthood. The firm prospered in the 1860s, opening further branches in Australia and New Zealand, and it moved away from its earlier role as a general merchant to specialize in selling wool on consignment and in lending to pastoralists. Dalgety was the largest importer of wool in London in the 1860s, at a time when about 80 per cent of the Australian wool clip was consigned for sale in London. The firm's capital grew from $75,000 in 1852 to $348,000 in 1861, of which Dalgety held $200,000; by 1879 the capital was $934,000, of which Dalgety held $300,000. 
By the late 1870s Dalgety & Co. was starting to falter as its original partners became older, and Dalgety failed to adapt to the new circumstances of the wool trade. The capital of the firm had grown through retaining profits, which was no longer adequate by the mid-1870s to provide settlers with funds for fencing their properties and acquiring freeholds. Dalgety was facing increasing competition in London from colonial banks such as the Bank of New South Wales and from finance houses such as the Australian Mercantile Land and Finance Company. They had access to larger sums of money from their depositors and from the sale of debentures to 'rentiers' in England and Scotland; and they were able to offer mortgages to settlers, and to move (in the contrary direction to Dalgety) from pastoral finance to handling consignments of wool. The next stage, towards the end of the nineteenth century, was to sell wool at auctions within Australia rather than in London. These changes posed a threat to Dalgety's continued prosperity. 
Dalgety proved incapable of adapting to the new realities, being essentially a simple-minded colonial merchant who was not able to move from the world of visible trade in wool to more abstruse dealings in finance. In the early 1870s he came under attack from growers in the colonies, who suspected that they were being exploited by London merchants; above all he came into bitter conflict with Sir Daniel Cooper of the Bank of New South Wales, who could pose as the protector of the growers. Dalgety's loathing of this 'little Sydney blaguard ['sic']' and his 'ignorant and vulgar aspersions' knew no bounds (Dalgety to C. Nichols, 10 Aug 1871, Dalgety archives, N39/42), and by 1873 he was 'really tired of occupying the position of a muzzled Badger placed under a Trough, for every Cur to snap at' (Dalgety to J. Blackwood, 17 April 1873, Dalgety archives, N39/42). The serious point behind Dalgety's bluster was that he was failing to adapt, for the increasing need for finance was making the firm more and more dependent on bankers for loans. 
Although Dalgety admitted that 'we must be strong in capital' (Dalgety to Blackwood, 22 Dec 1875, Dalgety archives, N39/42), the problem was that the firm was -- like all partnerships -- susceptible to reduction of capital when partners opted to take their undistributed profits from the firm, or to retire. Dalgety was putting large sums into the acquisition of a landed estate and the construction of Lockerley Hall, at East Lytherly, Hampshire, from 1868, and he also made large purchases of sheep stations in New Zealand. His aim was not to achieve 'immediate and high returns' (Dalgety to C. Ibbotson, 26 Nov 1875, Dalgety archives, N39/42). Although he complained constantly at the low return and the difficulties of control, his strategy was clear from his will made in 1893: the New Zealand properties were to be held by his trustees 'with a view to their being ultimately taken over by my sons rather than to be sold' (will, proved 11 April 1894, London). His response to the attacks of Cooper, and to the changing world of the City, was to retreat into the world he knew best: sheep, which increasingly dominated his letters as he advised his station managers on minute details of breeding and washing wool. In the early 1870s Dalgety had about 100,000 sheep in New Zealand, and the stations offered a solution to his mounting concern over his young family. 
'I have five young sons growing up', he remarked in 1879, 'and I should like in these difficult times for providing for sons, to form a future house for some of them in New Zealand' (Dalgety to W. Burnett, 22 May 1879, Dalgety archives, N8/21). None of his sons, he ruefully admitted, was capable of holding a job in the City; they were constantly failing their examinations at Cambridge and in the navy and army. The eldest son, Freddy, was kind and considerate, 'not quick or clever with books but fond of outdoor sports, a capital rider, good shot, plays cricket and lawn tennis well, and fond of animals' (Dalgety to A. Blackwood, 10 July 1884, Dalgety archives, N39/45). Charles, the only one who entered the firm, soon left and begged to be sent to New Zealand. 'He is gentlemanly and has no vices', commented his father, 'so I hope he will make a good colonist' (Dalgety to W. Burnett, 3 Sept 1891, Dalgety archives, N39/46). He was also plagued by his drunken half-brother, his incompetent brother-in-law, and his feckless cousin: New Zealand was the solution for all. 'Verily one's relatives are a source of humiliation and anxiety', he concluded (Dalgety to A. Blackwood, 20 Jan 1876, Dalgety archives, N39/43). 
Perhaps it was this need to provide for his children which made Dalgety reluctant to change the basis of the firm into a merchant bank. However, it also reflected his own inadequate grasp of financial issues. He dealt with a single commodity on the frontier of the world economy, without connections in European financial centres. During the 1870s he retreated into his estate activities and left the active management of the firm to others. In 1878 Du Croz announced his wish to retire from the London house; Blackwood and Ibbotson's health was failing; and in 1879 Blackwood's son Arthur was taken into partnership in Melbourne, despite Dalgety's justified doubts about his abilities. Dalgety's response was to seek the injection of more capital by the traditional means of recruiting an additional partner. His choice was inspired, for it fell on E. T. Doxat, a partner in the wool brokers Edenborough and Doxat, valued at about $250,000. Edenborough, it was reported, was a 'half imbecile'; Doxat was 'very clever but not scrupulous, one must exercise utmost caution in dealing with him' ('Kleinwort Information Book 1', fol. 88). Doxat was to rescue the firm from the increasingly inept Dalgety. 
Doxat took over the running of the business with great dynamism and soon obtained ascendancy over the elderly partners. He was energetic, capable, indispensable, perceptive, and unscrupulous: Dalgety stood no chance. Doxat soon discovered that the firm was less secure than he had assumed and was furious that he had been misled into taking a drop in income. He was concerned from the start at the reliance on bankers and brokers for credit, which would be fatal if wool prices fell. Clearly the firm was not able to compete in the business of consigning wool when banks and finance houses were able to offer loans and mortgages to pastoralists. Access to cheap funds was crucial. A bitter battle started for control of the firm. Dalgety preferred to continue in the old way, simply replacing retiring partners. 'I cannot see why', he wrote to Arthur Blackwood, 'we could not work on as we are comfortably and independently, if we are only content to work within our capital, and our legitimate credit' (Dalgety to A. Blackwood, 23 Aug 1883, Dalgety archives, N39/45). 
Accordingly, Dalgety made a further trip to Australia and New Zealand in 1881 in a search for new blood. He was repeating the strategy of the 1850s, which Doxat felt was no solution. No sooner had he arrived in the colonies than Doxat and the London partners put forward a plan they had vainly proposed before his departure: conversion to a joint-stock company. Dalgety was horrified and continued with his negotiations to bring in new partners; to his disgust, the London partners refused to agree. Dalgety returned home to do battle, urging that the firm was making an adequate profit, and that conversion would simply alienate its 'staunch and valuable connection' (Dalgety to A. Blackwood, 6 April 1882, Dalgety archives, N39/44). 
Doxat, however, was perfectly correct to see that the capital of the firm was inadequate to compete with banks and finance houses. 'I cannot understand myself', Doxat informed Arthur Blackwood, 'how Dalgety who is so chary of bills and financing thinks the business is to be worked' (Doxat to A. Blackwood, 9 June 1881, Dalgety archives, N8/23). The matter was eventually resolved after the death of Dalgety's wife in 1883, which gave him 'sole anxious care' of a large and young family, and made him disinclined to face 'constant worrying and bullying' (Dalgety to C. Ibbotson, 6 Sept 1883, Dalgety archives, N39/45), and the conversion of the company by Arthur Blackwood. The partnership became a limited company in 1884. The business was now able to secure cheap funds through the issue of debentures, which amounted to $2m by 1888. The firm was also able to shift from consignments to London, which remained stable, to local sales in Australia, where Dalgety's was one of the three dominant firms before the First World War. 
Dalgety himself retreated from the business and became increasingly involved in his activities as a major landowner in Hampshire and New Zealand; he also became deputy lieutenant for Hampshire. The net value of his estate in 1893 was $779,993; he also had $66,852 in investments other than land and the firm. These investments were misjudged, however, for the New Zealand estates were not a success and he had bought land in England shortly before the long-term fall in property prices. Dalgety died from cancer, at Lockerley Hall on 20 March 1894, and was buried at the church of St John the Evangelist, Lockerley, which he had rebuilt. His memorial window, appropriately enough, portrayed Christ the good shepherd, with a sheep across his shoulders. 


@@@@@


doc= 49024


Hirsch, Maurice de, Baron de Hirsch in the Bavarian nobility (1831-1896), businessman and philanthropist, was born on 9 December 1831 in Munich, the third child and oldest son of Joseph von Hirsch (1805-1885) and his wife, Karoline Wertheimer. His grandfather Jacob had established the family as one of the first Jewish families to acquire great wealth and social acceptability in Bavaria, and had become a court banker and substantial landowner. He received patents of hereditary nobility in 1818. Moritz's father Joseph carried on these business activities which became centred in Munich. His mother came from an Orthodox Frankfurt family and ensured that the children were properly instructed in Jewish matters. 
After attending school in Munich, at the age of thirteen Moritz was sent to Brussels for schooling, receiving, according to his obituary in the 'Jewish Chronicle', a 'plain but sound education'. Though bright he was disinclined to undertake prolonged formal education. At seventeen he joined the banking house of Bischoffsheim and Goldschmidt in Brussels. He was soon regarded as a financial genius with a special interest in railway promotion. Speculation in sugar and cotton shares also brought him rapidly accumulated wealth and promotion. In 1855 he married Clara Bischoffsheim (1833-1899) ['see 'Hirsch, Clara de], daughter of the senior partner, Senator Jonathan Bischoffsheim. After his marriage he moved to Paris to join the board of the branch of Bischoffsheim and Goldschmidt there. The heads of the firm followed his speculations with a certain amount of trepidation, and refrained from making him a partner, though they allowed him to use the firm's facilities for making transactions. The main foundation of his vast fortune came when he purchased the bankrupt firm of Langrand Demonceau. This possessed valuable assets including the rights to construct railways in Turkey and the land upon which to do so. Hirsch then focused his energies upon constructing railways through the Balkans and Turkey, and in particular that linking Vienna and Constantinople -- the Orient Express line, as it came to be known -- which he eventually completed despite much opposition in Austria. 
Hirsch's methods of raising finance were often daring and imaginative and gave rise to accusations of dubious practice, though this was never proved. For example, a section of the Orient Express line was financed by floating a popular loan of 792 million francs in the form of 3 per cent Turkish lottery bonds, for which 1,980,000 tickets at 400 francs each were issued in 1870. There was to be a draw every two months enabling small investors to make quick gains. They were popular in France and Germany. The bankruptcy of the Turkish state, following the international financial crisis of 1873, led to suspension of payment in 1875 and many of the gamblers lost their stakes. Hirsch was rumoured to have made a fortune from the transaction, though he denied it. 
Despite occasional setbacks, by 1890, besides his huge railway interests, banking houses, and a number of industrial firms, Hirsch owned vast estates in Austria-Hungary and France, and was one of the wealthiest men of his day with assets whose worth was estimated at between $16 million and $30 million. That estimates were so much at variance indicates the scale and complexity of his operations, which probably no one but himself could fully comprehend. He worked sometimes in association with other financiers, including, in Britain, Sir Ernest Cassel, whose early career he appears to have nurtured, but the details of such associations remain mysterious. His personal financial activities in Britain appear to have been few and no information is known about them. He attributed his success to mastery of detail, economy in small things, and close personal watch over his transactions, which he combined with undeniable financial flair, and inexhaustible energy and industry. His working day typically began at 5 a.m. and lasted far into the night. 
Hirsch was a good-looking man, slim in his younger days, later described by Wolf as 'portly and robust' (Wolf). He was a well-known and ubiquitous member of the smart set in Paris, the south of France, and London. Although a lavish host, he and his wife were frugal in their domestic life. His London address was Bath House, Piccadilly. In France he owned what his obituary in the 'Jewish Chronicle' described as a 'princely house' in the rue de l'Elysee palace in Paris and the Chateau de Beauregard near Chesnay; in Moravia he owned a picturesque castle near Brunn (Brno) and 'enormous property' ('Jewish Chronicle', 24 April 1896) in Hungary. He supervised the most minute household details of each residence, directing them personally as he did his businesses. 
His 'Times' obituary commented that 'he carried the same coolness and system [of his business dealings] into his amusements'. Every year he went to London for the season. He belonged to the circle of the prince of Wales (later Edward VII) and shared his interest in horse-racing. His racing-stables, Grafton House at Newmarket, were famous, and his colours were often successful. He just missed winning the Grand Prix with Matchbox in 1894 but with La Fleche won the One Thousand Guineas, the Oaks, and the St Leger, all in 1892, and the Ascot Cup in 1894. It was a source of great disappointment and surprise to him that La Fleche did not win the Derby. He was elected as a foreign member of the Turf Club. This followed his rejection by the Jockey Club in Paris, and he thereafter lived more in London than in Paris. It was not well known that his winnings on the English turf were always donated to London hospitals, but his 'Jewish Chronicle' obituary retailed that he liked to tell friends that his horses 'raced for charity'. Substantial sums were involved, amounting to $7000 in 1891, and $35,000 in 1892. When in 1893 his horses won only $7500 he doubled the amount before giving to the hospitals, saying that they should not suffer for the poor performance of his stable. Over the years he gave some $100,000 in total. He loved hunting and was a good shot, and he frequently entertained the prince of Wales, the duke of Devonshire, Lord Curzon, Earl Grey, and other members of the English nobility in Hungary during the hunting season. 
Hirsch's wife, Clara de Hirsch, took little pleasure in the social scene, though she often travelled with him. She had more interest in philanthropic activity, especially after the death of their only son Lucien ('b'. 1856) in 1887, of pneumonia. They had previously lost their only other child, a daughter, in infancy. Lucien had been studious and little interested in finance though he appears to have been popular in London society. The parents were inconsolable. Shortly thereafter Hirsch retired from business and both he and his wife devoted themselves to humanitarian causes. He later wrote in response to a letter of condolence: 'My son I have lost, but not my heir, humanity is my heir' (Adler-Rudel, 39). 
Hirsch had become active in humane causes even before his son's death, however, probably because of his wife's influence and also as a result of observing the poverty of the Jews of Turkey and the Balkans as he travelled in connection with his railway transactions. He primarily exerted himself to relieve the poverty and persecution suffered by Jews in Turkey and the Balkans, and later in Russia and Galicia. Clara had been secretary to her father when he was a member of the general committee of the Alliance Israelite Universelle, which was the major channel for assistance from rich Jews of prosperous parts of the world to the poor and persecuted. Hirsch also became a committee member, in 1876. In December 1873 he donated a million francs to the Alliance for the furtherance of education in Turkey. From 1879 he contributed an annual 50,000 francs to the training scheme of the Alliance for artisans. From 1882 he underwrote its large annual deficit, keeping it in independent existence. In 1882 he contributed a million francs to an emergency fund for refugees from the Russian pogroms. By the time of his death he had donated at least 12 million francs to the Alliance. An equivalent amount went primarily for the education and training of Jews in Austria against resistance from the government of Austria. In 1889 he opened welfare agencies in towns in central and eastern Europe dispensing aid to those in need, and he supervised these agencies closely. His policy was to give relief only in such a way as positively to assist people to become self-supporting, for example through acquiring training or the tools of a trade. He refused also to give to communities which had other substantial sources of relief, such as the poor of London and Paris. 
Hirsch sought to introduce similar schemes in Russia, but faced with the resolute opposition of the government sought instead to assist mass emigration of Jews. He gave large sums to poor Jews arriving in America through the Baron de Hirsch Fund, established in 1891. His agent in Russia from 1890, enquiring about the condition of the Jews and the most effective ways to assist, was the British campaigner against Jewish immigration Arnold White. White believed that immigration of poor Jews was exacerbating poverty in Britain and that Russian Jews should be supported in their native country or in colonies elsewhere, where they could be self-sufficient. Hirsch did not find this objectionable. Above all he wished to establish and endow a safe Jewish colony. He initially expected this to be located somewhere in the Americas, through the instrument of the Jewish Colonization Society which he established in 1891 with headquarters in London to raise money for this enterprise and make it a reality. It was floated with a capital of $2 million issued in shares of $100 each. He held 19,993 of these, the others being taken up by prominent London Jews. He distributed his shares around prominent European Jewish organizations, and invested at least $38 million in this enterprise before his death. He had high hopes of establishing a colony in Argentina, where a large amount of land was purchased and where Jews settled. Smaller colonies were funded elsewhere including, after Hirsch's death, Palestine. 
Jewish colonization had become the centre of Hirsch's life and of his incessant work (though his financial dealings never ceased) by the time of his sudden death on 21 April 1896, on the estate of his friend Anton Ehrenfeld in the small village of Ogyalla near Komorn in Hungary. He was having a hunting lodge built nearby. According to his 'Jewish Chronicle' obituary an autopsy led to the pronouncement that the cause of death was apoplexy; according to 'The Times' he died of heart disease. He was interred in the family vault at the Montmartre cemetery, amid, according to the 'Jewish Chronicle', 'demonstrations of sympathy from all classes of society, from the Head of State and the bearers of the proudest names in the old French aristocracy, down to the meanest Christian ouvrier and the poorest Polish Jewish immigrant'. His wife was his main heir and she carried on the philanthropic and colonizing work on which they had previously worked jointly until her death in 1899. He also left a million francs for various charities, and a million to his adopted daughter (probably the illegitimate daughter of his son) Luciena Premelie. The Hirsches had adopted two boys who were still under age at his death. In his later years he signed himself Maurice de Hirsch, baron, by which time his father, a baron in the Bavarian nobility, had died. He was a citizen of Austria-Hungary at his death. 
Arnold White wrote in the 'English Illustrated Magazine' (reprinted in the 'Jewish Chronicle', 29 May 1896) after Hirsch's death: 'the roses and raptures with which his wealth and hospitality surrounded him always seemed to me to cover a deep and sterling character of which the gay world knew very little. If he was a little too fond of playing the young man it was only in the hours of relaxation. How many of his censors and traducers, who sneer at what they do not understand, have devoted several hours a day, all the year round over a series of years to remedy the wrongs and lightening the burdens of men, women and children whom they have never seen.' With regard to the allegations then current as to Hirsch's being an 'upstart', White noted that he was born rich: 'Except that he became richer as his life developed and expanded, there was no sudden leap from poverty to riches which could turn his head. In his youth there was a theological tutor who presented to the future millionaire so vivid a contrast between precept and practice that for ever after the dogmas of creed ceased to exercise any effect on his mind. He told me that he had never entered a synagogue for worship.' Like his contemporaries historians have barely grasped the many-sidedness of Hirsch's character and career. 


@@@@@


doc= 49025


Hawker, Sir Frank Cyril (1900-1991), banker, was born on 21 July 1900 at Walthamstow, Essex, to Frank Charles Hawker, civil servant, and his wife, Bertha Mary Bastow. Educated at the City of London School, Hawker was briefly at the stock exchange and at a firm of solicitors before joining the Bank of England in 1920. He remained there for forty-two years and left only to become chairman of Standard Bank. In 1931 he married Marjorie Anne, daughter of Thomas Henry Pearce and his wife, Amelia Harriet; they had three daughters. 
Hawker rose rapidly through the Bank of England's ranks. He served as deputy to George Bolton, when the latter was made head of the bank's new foreign department in 1934. Then he became, successively, deputy chief cashier (1944), chief accountant (1948), adviser to the governor (1953), and executive director (1954). 
In 1953 the then governor of the bank asked Hawker to contact various industrialists as part of a crusade to make the bank less isolated. Hawker did so, first in the UK and then in the Commonwealth. For this he was knighted in 1958. He also acquired an extensive knowledge of the banking industry of the Commonwealth and especially of South Africa, which was going through the difficult period that culminated in its withdrawal from the Commonwealth. 
In 1962 Hawker was appointed chairman of Standard Bank, whose core business had traditionally been in South Africa. He was one of the few strategic thinkers of his day in the banking profession, and in his new position he tried to restructure and reorganize British overseas banking to meet the needs and pressures of the modern world. 
By the 1960s the future of British overseas banking looked bleak. The end of the British empire meant that London was no longer automatically the centre of trade finance. Banks faced a future in which business would have to be fought for, against strong foreign, especially American, competition. Moreover, the advent of new independent governments meant that banks had to confront tough political constraints in areas where traditionally they had had a free hand. Logic therefore dictated that there should be fewer and larger banks, based in London, rather than many localized overseas banks. 
Within Standard this idea was known as the 'grand design', and Hawker was its chief proponent. Given the particular political circumstances of South Africa and of emergent Africa, he looked to amalgamation for geographical diversification. While the negotiations were necessarily complex, there were three main strands to this design: a link with a British domestic bank, a link with an American bank, and mergers with other overseas banks. None of these strands was altogether successful, but each set of negotiations resulted in moves which changed the face of British overseas banking. Standard succeeded in consolidating its trans-African persona and in 1969 it amalgamated with the Chartered Bank, which traditionally banked in the East. The merger, creating the Standard Chartered Bank Ltd, was a triumph, though Hawker's considerable management skills were required to combine two very different banking cultures. 
As well as being the first chairman of the Standard and Chartered group, Hawker was chairman of the Bank of West Africa (taken over by Standard in 1965) from 1965 to 1973, and of the Union Zairoise de Banques from 1969 to 1974. He was also deputy chairman of Midland and International Banks, and of two industrial companies: Head Wrightson and the Davy Corporation. 
Despite his highly successful career Hawker's first love, arguably, was cricket; he was a talented batsman and captained several club sides. He was also a keen footballer and sportsman generally. In later life he became chairman of the Amateur Football Alliance and the Minor Counties Cricket Association; he was the finance committee chairman for the National Playing Fields Association, and then the association's honorary vice-president; and he was vice-chairman of the Football Association. The summit of his sporting career came in 1970-71, when he was made president of the MCC, though his South African connection led to adverse press exposure in a year when the South African touring team visited England. 
Hawker died on 22 February 1991 at his home Hadlow Lodge, Burgh Hill, Etchingham, Sussex, aged ninety, and was survived by his wife and daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 49026


Hoskier, Herman (1832-1904), merchant banker, was one of at least two sons and daughters of Herman Christian Hoskier, merchant, then based in Christiania, Norway. In 1840 Hoskier's family moved to Copenhagen and by 1846 he and his brother, Emile, were at school in Berlin. About 1848 he went to study in Florence. From an early age his outlook was cosmopolitan and he enjoyed fluency in at least French and English. On 8 February 1860, when working at Mobile in the USA, he married Elizabeth Catherine Byrne of New Orleans. 
Hoskier's career began in 1850 with a short stint as a clerk in the Algiers branch of his father's house, H. C. Hoskier & Son of Paris. Later that year he travelled to New York to join the merchants Dutilh & Co. and in 1851 and 1853 spent time in London, latterly with C. Hambro & Co., which at this time rescued his father's firm from ruin. Everard Hambro, later head of Hambros, became a close friend, and later Hoskier's executor. In 1854 Hoskier established Dutilh's Liverpool office, remaining as manager until 1857 and becoming friendly with Stewart Henry Brown. 
Brown was a junior partner in Brown Shipley & Co., the British end of the Brown family's leading north Atlantic merchant banking business, and in 1859 Hoskier was appointed Browns' agent at Mobile, dealing largely in cotton. Despite the outbreak of the civil war and the imposition of a blockade, Hoskier managed to secure the passage to Browns in Liverpool of some 30,000 bales of cotton, 'nearly the whole... balance of the year's cotton crop' (Crosby Brown, 275) thereby ensuring large profits on their sale in Britain. In June 1861 Hoskier, with his wife and child, undertook a hazardous journey to New York, from where he sailed to join Browns in Liverpool. Early in 1864 Hoskier and his colleague Mark Collet established Brown Shipley's London house, and Hoskier was a partner from 1866. The business flourished in those years, but Hoskier 'carries a heavy workload' and was 'disposed to stand for what he considers his rights & to go if he does not get them' (Kouwenhoven, 143). It was not surprising, therefore, that Hoskier in 1880 retired early from Brown Shipley, owing to a combination of ill health 'and other circumstances' (ibid.) and having 'sufficient for his wants' (Guildhall MS 20111-20112). 
By then Hoskier's transformation from merchant to merchant banker was complete and in the last two decades of the nineteenth century he established a well-founded reputation as a financier. The Union Bank of London, one of London's largest banks, appointed him a director in 1881, and he served until his death, but he declined its governorship in 1893. In 1886 he was appointed London director, largely concerned with finance, of Arthur Guinness Son & Co. Ltd, one of the largest brewing businesses, on the eve of its flotation and on the recommendation of his friend Lord Revelstoke of Barings. Revelstoke reckoned him a 'first class man, clever, a gentleman and good at accounts' (History of Guinness). He served for a time as London agent for the Banque de Paris et des Pays Bas and he was closely connected with his brother's Parisian bank, Emile Hoskier & Cie. 
Hoskier was at his most influential in the 1880s and 1890s, when he brought together underwriting syndicates for bond issues and other transactions in securities. His intimate connections with Brown Shipley, Hambros, Barings, and the Banque de Paris meant that he was able to act as an informal intermediary, in return for a one to two per cent commission. During the Baring crisis of 1890, the Bank of England, perhaps unaware of his friendship with Revelstoke, wanted him to investigate Barings' books, but his co-investigator, Bertram Currie, rejected him on account of an obvious conflict of interest. 
After 1864 Hoskier lived at Queenswood, Blackheath, Roehampton, and finally at Coney Hill, Hayes Common, Kent. He had two sons, and at least one daughter. He died on 7 May 1904 at the Royal Pavilion Hotel, Folkestone, having been taken there the previous December after falling ill while travelling to Biarritz. Hoskier was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 49027


Kissin, Harry Aaron, Baron Kissin (1912-1997), businessman and financier, was born on 23 August 1912 in Danzig, Germany, the son of Russian Jewish parents, Israel Kissin, grain merchant, and his wife, Reusi, 'nee' Model. He was brought up in Danzig and studied law at Basel University, Switzerland, where he afterwards practised as a lawyer until 1933 when he moved to London. His parents subsequently lived in Paris; after his father's death, his mother moved to London. On 1 June 1935 Kissin married Ruth Deborah Samuel ('b'. 1911), daughter of Siegmund Samuel. They had a son and a daughter. 
In London Kissin initially worked for P. Winn's Produce Company Ltd, drug merchants and shellac and general importers and exporters, which had recently been established by Paul Winn & Co. Ltd, general merchants. At this time he was especially friendly with Siegmund Warburg, Henry Grunfeld, and Eric Korner, then developing their financing and commodity broking business, New Trading Co., which in the post-war years emerged as the merchant bank of S. G. Warburg & Co. During the Second World War Kissin was especially concerned with Barking Brassware Co., manufacturers of sanitary fittings and a connection of Winns, whose output he converted to shell production. 
About 1947 Kissin established his own firm of G. H. Kay (Overseas), general import and export merchants, of Drapers Gardens, London, although he sustained his link with Winns as it shared the same address. His new firm quickly developed an important trading business with eastern Europe (especially Poland and Yugoslavia) and Latin America; it specialized in rubber. He was managing director and the largest single shareholder. Clement Davies, leader of the Liberal Party, and T. L. (Tom) Horabin, a Labour MP and business consultant, sat with him on the board. 
At this time G. H. Kay developed business links with the well known and long established yet somewhat moribund commodity brokers, Lewis and Peat, of Mincing Lane. Soon Kissin acquired a controlling interest in this public company through another of his companies, Kay Finance Co. Boardroom conflict arose and in 1955 Kay orchestrated the resignation of several Lewis and Peat directors and obtained executive control. As major shareholder and as non-executive deputy chairman from 1954, managing director from 1958, and chairman from 1961, Kissin revived and expanded Lewis and Peat by diversifying it from broking into dealing and broadening the range of commodities and goods in which it dealt, often through the timely acquisition of ailing businesses. He was recognized as particularly adept at this and employed as his adviser S. G. Warburg & Co. He also diversified Lewis and Peat into service provision to the commodity industry -- for example through insurance and ship broking -- and into processing commodities such as rubber and cocoa through the establishment of plant overseas. Profits grew from $231,000 in 1961 to $2.15 million a decade later. Under Kissin, Lewis and Peat emerged as a dynamic force amid the decaying commodity firms of Mincing Lane and Mark Lane which in the 1950s and 1960s for the most part failed to adapt to rapid structural change in their industry. 
Kissin's management style was certainly energetic, hands-on, and at times ruthless. As with firms such as Warburgs, it marked him out as an outsider not above suspicion in the closed world of the City at that time. This did not, however, stand in his way in 1972 when he diversified Peats into financial services through its takeover of the privately owned and patrician merchant bank Guinness Mahon, although at the time the transaction was referred to as a merger. The acquisition of this business, with its membership of the prestigious Accepting Houses Committee, brought the Guinness Peat Group, as Kissin's firm was now known, into the mainstream of City business life. 
In 1974 Kissin was created a life peer as Baron Kissin of Camden by Harold Wilson. He had known Wilson since the late 1940s when Wilson was president of the Board of Trade and when Kissin acted as the board's consultant on trade with China and the Far East. They became close friends. In the early 1950s Lewis and Peat appears to have employed Wilson as a consultant, although Kissin was always quite clear that he made no payments of any kind to him. Kissin supported the Labour Party -- for example, arranging the funding for vital private opinion polls during the 1974 election campaigns -- and joined the group of eastern European emigre supporters and friends who gathered around Wilson. His elevation to a peerage coincided with the high point of his business career. In the 1970s Guinness Peat continued to prosper and when Kissin retired in 1979 his company was reckoned to be the 112th largest UK public company; he owned about 9 per cent of its equity. 
After 1979 Kissin continued as life president of Guinness Peat and as a major shareholder, a combination which enabled him to exercise considerable influence and he did not flinch from doing so; the 'Daily Telegraph' labelled him 'the ghost in the Guinness Peat boardroom' ('Daily Telegraph'). His autocratic style had frequently brought him into conflict with colleagues and this was vividly underlined in 1982 in a power struggle with Edmund Dell, a former Labour secretary of state for trade and Kissin's successor as chairman and chief executive. Without Kissin's hands-on management, Guinness Peat soon lost its way, and in 1981-2 chalked up losses of over $30 million; a dispute between the two over a recovery programme led to a bitter and highly public power struggle which resulted in Dell being ousted. With the encouragement of the Bank of England, anxious to protect Guinness Mahon from the problems of the wider group, Alastair Morton was brought in as Dell's successor. His ruthless restructuring of the group became a cause of further public strife for Kissin, who sought to preserve the value of his still-considerable shareholding. The surviving parts, in which Kissin maintained shareholdings, were soon subject to hostile takeover or ran into difficulties in the recession of the early 1990s. As part of this restructuring, Kissin and his son led a management buy-out of the commodities division which subsequently traded as Lewis and Peat Holdings Ltd; Kissin was its chairman until 1987. 
Away from business Kissin's charitable work reflected his informed interest in music. This led him to a directorship of the Royal Opera House from 1973 to 1984; he established and was first chairman, until 1980, of the Royal Opera House Trust, which raised funds for the first major extension to the house, completed in 1982. He was an amateur painter and chaired the council of the Institute of Contemporary Art from 1968 to 1975. He collected seventeenth-century Dutch and Flemish pictures. He supported Jewish causes and Israel, where he was a governor of the Bezalel Academy of Arts and Design from 1975 to 1987, and of the Hebrew University of Jerusalem in 1980. He was active in the House of Lords from the mid-1980s, sitting as a cross-bencher. He died of heart failure at 38 Hereford House, 66 North Row, Westminster, on 22 November 1997 and was buried at Bushey cemetery, Hertfordshire five days later. His wife survived him. A concert to celebrate his life was held at the Wigmore Hall, London, at which his relative, the leading Russian pianist Yevgeny Kissin, played. 


@@@@@


doc= 49028


McMullen, John Franklin (1820-1897), banker, was born on 19 May 1820 in Ireland, one of at least three children. His father probably died about 1859. At sixteen McMullen joined the National Bank of Ireland, a newly formed British-owned joint stock bank with a head office in London, as a clerk at its Cork branch. He served as teller and accountant at various branches before being appointed assistant inspector of branches in 1842. Promotion to management of the Waterford branch in 1851 was followed by appointment as an 'inspector of the bank' in January 1853 and manager at Cork in October the same year. He resigned on 19 August 1856, having accepted an appointment with the Union Bank of Australia, a leading Anglo-Australian bank which, like the National, was controlled by a London board. McMullen married Beatrice Carnegie at Tipperary, Ireland in 1884 and their nine children were born in Ireland and Australia. 
McMullen arrived in Sydney on the 'Simla' on 10 January 1857 and took up his appointment ten days later. Undoubtedly he was appointed to introduce to the Union Bank the skills he had learned in Irish branch banking. As inspector (northern division) of the Union Bank of Australia he was responsible for all branches in New South Wales, Queensland, and New Zealand, and worked jointly with the inspector (southern division), each being separately responsible to the London board. The problems that this system generated were obviated by his appointment in 1859 as inspector and general manager solely responsible for the Australian and New Zealand operations of the bank. At the beginning of his career with the Union Bank he was 'feared and even hated, though his ruthless efficiency was respected' (Butlin, 151). Scathingly critical of the staff when he assumed office, McMullen instituted a clean-up, dismissing and downgrading managers for incompetence and lack of drive. He was to suffer from this same failing towards the end of his twenty-eight years as chief executive. 
During McMullen's administration the Union Bank grew substantially, but he was slow to open new branches, resulting in a loss of market share. Important initiatives were the establishment of the Melbourne Clearing House in 1867 and the introduction of a staff pension and guarantee fund. McMullen also unwittingly set the scene for the banking disasters of the 1890s when in 1863 he urged the board to approve the taking of London deposits. The Union Bank was prudent in handling these deposits, but other banks copied the idea with dire results. McMullen was aware of the difficulties the boom years of the 1880s would bring to the Australian economy and this, together with age and illness, made him more conservative and cautious in expanding the Union's business. However, his successors inherited a business well able to withstand the shock of the 1890s. His strict control over the bank's colonial policy and his failure to delegate caused alarm to the board, particularly when he resisted calls for reorganization of the colonial administration. He grew suspicious of the skills of his own managerial appointees and fell out with a number of his executives. Summoned to London for discussions with the directors (his fourth trip) he tendered his resignation on the grounds of ill health before he could be taken to task. He retired on 24 May 1887. In 1889 he was nevertheless offered, and accepted, a seat on the bank's London board; but he resigned in 1891, again because of ill health. 
McMullen was a tall, solid man, with a receding hairline coiffeured in the Regency manner, and he gave the appearance of the authority which was to be expected of an Irish squire. A member of the influential Melbourne Club from 1868 and domineering chairman of the Associated Banks, Victoria, from 1882 until his retirement, his influence on the Australian banking world nevertheless faded fast and his death went unnoticed in Australian newspapers and banking journals. After retirement McMullen lived in England and Ireland, probably as a widower, with no fixed address, and visited Australia. He died at Brewster's Hotel, Lower Baggot Street, Dublin, on 23 June 1897, aged seventy-seven. 


@@@@@


doc= 49029


Nugent, Christopher Robert (1852?-1926), banker, was probably born at Bruges, Belgium, one of six children and the eldest son of Robert Nugent and Emma, daughter of John Hunter. The family was of Irish descent and included among its forebears the statesman and political philosopher Edmund Burke, who in 1757 had married Jane Nugent, the daughter of his physician. When Christopher was six the children were orphaned and taken to England to be educated. 
Nugent's City career began in 1870 when, at the age of eighteen, he joined the discount firm of Grigg & Co. Here he learned the business of dealing in bills of exchange that was to be his life's work. His exceptional ability quickly brought him to prominence and in 1879 he accepted an invitation to become deputy manager of the United Discount Corporation. In the following year he was made manager and thus at the age of twenty-seven took control of a major joint-stock discount company. 
United Discount was a 'reconstruction' of a discount company that had suffered in the crisis of 1866. In 1885 it merged with another 'reconstruction', the General Credit and Discount Company, to form the Union Discount Company of London Ltd, with Nugent as the first manager. Here he found full scope for his financial genius and during the thirty-seven years in which he guided the company's fortunes he established Union Discount as the leading house in the market. Such was his personal standing that in the early years the company was more usually referred to as 'Nugent's' (King, 261 n. 4). 
Success in the discount business depended on the dealer's ability to assess correctly the quality of bills offered for discount and in this Nugent was an acknowledged master. It was said that he was able to 'sense good paper' (Cleaver and Cleaver, 58), though in reality his judgement was informed by a minute knowledge, tirelessly accumulated, of the names on bills. He corresponded regularly with bankers worldwide and supplemented the knowledge thus gained of local conditions by means of annual trips abroad. For all the seriousness of his approach to business and the strict code of conduct he required of his clerks, Nugent was nevertheless a popular figure in the market, noted for the 'geniality and infectious gaiety of disposition' that endeared him to a very wide circle of friends ('Banker's Magazine', June 1926, 912). 
It was inevitable that Nugent's views would be sought on important issues of the day. In 1910 he gave evidence to the national monetary commission in the USA (the Aldrich commission), and in 1918 he represented the market before the Treasury committee on bank amalgamations (the Colwyn committee) and the committee on currency and foreign exchanges after the war (the Cunliffe committee). More immediately, he played a prominent part in the affairs of the discount market. He was chairman of the London Discount Houses Committee, which from before the First World War met to discuss the setting of interest rates, and of the sub-committee established in 1914 to liaise with the Bank of England. He was also the first chairman of the London Discount Market Association, which replaced the committee in 1919. 
Nugent, who was married and had a family, retired in 1922, on reaching the age of seventy. In retirement he maintained contact with the company through retention of his seat on the board, to which he had been elected in 1909. The rest of his time he divided between his houses in Pinner, where a road -- Nugent's Park -- was named after him, and at Totland Bay, Isle of Wight. He also continued to travel extensively abroad. 
Nugent was taken ill while returning from a stay in Ceylon, and he developed pneumonia soon after reaching home. He died at 14 Berkeley Square, Mayfair, London, on 27 April 1926 and was widely mourned, not least by the older members of the market who remembered him as 'the last of the Victorians' ('The Times', 28 April 1926). 


@@@@@


doc= 49030


Ralli, Stephen Augustus (1829-1902), merchant, was born in Marseilles, France, on 30 January 1829, the only son (there were two daughters) of Avgoustis (1792-1878) and Sozonga Ralli (died 1878). His father was a Greek merchant. Stephen was educated in Marseilles. At the age of twenty-two, in 1851, he was summoned to London to assist his uncle Pantia Stephen Ralli (1793-1865), the senior partner in Ralli Brothers, the foremost Anglo-Greek merchant house in London. Pantia Ralli's own sons had died in early life, so the nephew was evidently groomed for the succession. At Parkfield House, Clapham, he married on 27 October 1855 his cousin Marrietta (1838-1922), daughter of Antonio Theodore Ralli, merchant, and his wife, Catherine, 'nee' Mavrogordato, of Trieste. They had three sons and four daughters. 
Before S. A. Ralli took entire control of Ralli Brothers he was responsible for a major new initiative in the firm, that of trade with the United States. A new interlinking partnership was created in 1860 based on London, Liverpool, and New York, with connections to New Orleans for the supply of raw cotton. The strategy and disposition of the new development was set in the mould of the parent house. S. A. Ralli explained that the: 'business is strictly commercial and legitimate; they [the partners] neither speculate in goods, nor on the stock exchanges, but confine themselves to the import and export trade with the U. States, and receive also consignments from Alexandria, Smyrna, and Syria. They have a good commission business besides the business for their own account. (Guildhall Library, MS 23826)' Ralli Brothers also imported cotton from Egypt, installing the first steam-powered cotton gins in a factory there in 1860. 
At the same time, Ralli Brothers' trade in India was being energetically pushed forward. New branches were opened in Bombay and Karachi about 1860 and connections 'up country' (with Indian traders in the interior) built up. Imports from India were mainly jute, cotton, indigo, rice, saltpetre, gunnies (sacking), and shellac; exports were 'Manchester goods', metals, and, later, petroleum. Perhaps this new development was partly to compensate for severe competition in the Russian grain trade, where Jewish houses (notably Dreyfus and Fribourg) were using their co-religionists to penetrate the interior. Rallis' Persian branch at Tabriz, a pioneer venture launched in 1837 to import silk, and for some years a prospering concern, had to be closed in 1871 after pebrine (silkworm disease) ruined the Persian silk trade. This closure was followed by that of the branches at Constantinople and Trebizond which had been sustained by it. 
Notwithstanding the set-backs, S. A. Ralli drove his firm forward with single-minded commitment. According to a contemporary: 'the prestige and interest of the firm absorbed the very soul of the young Stephen Ralli, and filled it with a sort of religious cult. His devotion to work became a veritable passion.... He was austere... undisturbed by the accumulation of wealth... counting ostentation as a thing derogatory to the dignity of man.' He 'entirely abstained' from 'active politics', his only relaxation being the comfort of his home and his wife, herself a Ralli (Gennadius). He was utterly loyal to the system of strict discipline instituted by his uncle in the firm, and more financially successful with it. The partnership capital of Ralli Brothers rose from $500,000 in 1850 to $1.2 million in 1878, $2 million in 1880, and $3 million in 1901, according to the Bank of England records, keeping the firm at the top of the premier league of merchant houses in Britain. In India Ralli Brothers 'occupies commercially the first place: neither English nor German firms can compare with its ascendency there', Stephen Ralli's biographer fairly observed in 1902 (ibid.). 
Ralli devoted his whole time and entire career to expanding the business, but, as his biographer insists, 'he did not labour for money, that he considered as an object quite secondary to the prestige of the firm' (Gennadius). The standing of the firm was not however the ultimate aim: that was unquestionably to raise the moral status of the Greek trading community in Britain. The large numbers of Greek small traders settling in London and Manchester in the 1840s and 1850s gave rise to widespread suspicions, which went as high as the Bank of England, of their probity. Publication of 'The Bubbles of Finance' in 1865 featuring Mr Velardi, a Greek trader 'like the lowest Houndsditch Jew' (M. R. Laing-Meason, 'The Bubbles of Finance', 1865, 158), appeared to confirm the prejudices of many in the indigenous community. Stephen Ralli's achievement was to succeed his uncle, not only as head of Ralli Brothers, but more particularly as the doyen and mentor of the Anglo-Greek trading community. 
Stephen Ralli died at Monte Carlo on 2 April 1902. His widow died at Brighton in 1922. Two of his sons having died young, he was succeeded as the head of the firm by a nephew, Sir Lucas Ralli (1846-1931). This third-generation head was born in Manchester and educated at Harrow School and Trinity College, Cambridge, which guaranteed his place, and that of his firm, in the English establishment. 


@@@@@


doc= 49031


Elias David Sassoon (1820-1880), was born in Baghdad in 1820. Hannah died in 1826 and two years later David Sassoon married Farha Hyeem (1812-1886), aged sixteen, the daughter of a Baghdad merchant; they had six sons and three daughters. At some point in the late 1820s, persecution of the Jewish community in Baghdad forced the family to flee. David was the first to leave, moving initially to Bushehr on the Persian Gulf before settling in Bombay. By 1832 he had been joined by his family and had begun trading from a small office at 9 Tamarind Street. He transferred later, as the firm grew, to larger premises in Forbes Street. He traded mainly with the Gulf ports, exchanging British cotton goods for commodities such as hides, silks, spices, and pearls. 
As trade grew David embarked on an expansionist policy. At home the firm bought up wharfages in Bombay, aware that the new steamship service between Britain and India would drive up the value of such property. Overseas the opening up of five Chinese ports to foreign traders after the treaty of Nanking (Nanjing) in 1842 had a profound effect on the firm's fortunes. Located midway between Europe and China it was ideally placed to take immediate benefit, trading Lancashire textiles and Indian yarn and opium for Chinese goods. Cotton and opium were the two commodities on which the firm rose to prominence. 
Although the firm's interests were spread across the world, it was David Sassoon's policy to keep the control of the business in his own hands and in those of his sons. In 1844 Elias, his second son, was sent to the Far East to supervise the firm's operations there. Branches were established in Shanghai (which after Bombay became the second centre of Sassoon activities), Canton (Guangzhou), Hong Kong, and Yokohama and Nagasaki in Japan. 
In 1858 David sent his eldest son from his second marriage, Sassoon David Sassoon (1832-1867), to establish the London office of David Sassoon & Co. in Leadenhall Street in the City of London. This office played a central role in the boost to the Sassoon fortunes resulting from the outbreak of the American Civil War in 1861. The war disrupted the supply of American cotton to Lancashire's mills, which turned to India as a replacement source. London became a main centre of the firm's operations and, as a consequence, branches were established in Liverpool and Manchester. From this time both the business and the family began to gravitate to England. 
David Sassoon poured vast amounts of the fortune he acquired as a merchant into public benefactions; on his death he was one of Bombay's most energetic, wealthy, public-spirited, and benevolent citizens. He funded some of the most important cultural and civic institutions in Bombay: hospitals, libraries, museums, orphanages, and schools. He became a British subject in 1853, signing his naturalization certificate in Hebrew as he neither spoke nor wrote English. When he died in Poona on 7 November 1864 he was buried in the mausoleum in the courtyard of the synagogue which he had funded. 
On joining David Sassoon & Sons, Albert Sassoon was sent to Baghdad to re-establish the firm's trading links and to recruit staff for the various offices in China. In 1838, aged twenty, he married Hannah (died 1895), daughter of Meyer Moses, a Baghdad merchant. They had three daughters and two sons. From Baghdad, Albert moved to China and then back to Bombay to assist his father in his last years. He became a partner in David Sassoon & Sons in 1852 and took over the leadership on his father's death. 
Under Albert's direction David Sassoon & Sons rose to the peak of its prosperity, as one of India's most important businesses. Albert significantly extended the business from trade to industry by opening one of the first great textile mills in Bombay. Through his activities India became a manufacturing centre for cotton and woollen goods rather than an exporter of raw cotton to England for manufacture. Wool was imported from Australia to stimulate the woollen industry and the firm also established the Sassoon Spinning and Weaving Company and the Sassoon and Alliance Silk Manufactory Company. 
Further diversification of the firm's interests took place when between 1872 and 1875 it constructed a wet dock at Bombay, the first on the west coast of India. Enormously successful in stimulating the commercial development of the port, it was bought four years later by the Bombay government. Trade also diversified overseas as the firm involved itself in the cultivation and export of Indian tea and the importation of sugar from Java, and the network of branches was extended into Singapore. Although Albert was later to become involved in the founding of the Hongkong and Shanghai Bank (in 1865) and was a member of the board of the Imperial Bank of Persia (in 1889), the focus of the firm's activities remained overwhelmingly mercantile. 
Albert's interests began to develop away from business. He became a leading member of the Bombay chamber of commerce, and served on the Bombay legislative council from 1867 to 1871. He became one of the governor's inner circle of advisers on educational and building projects. His commitment to civic affairs was recognized in 1867, when he was awarded the Order of the Star of India, and in 1872 on his retirement from the legislative council when he was awarded a knighthood. In 1873 Sir Albert visited England and was the first Indian and first Jew to receive the freedom of the City of London in recognition of his philanthropic work in both India and Britain. He became a member of the Worshipful Company of Fishmongers. 
In 1876 Sir Albert decided to move to London, which immediately became the focus of the firm's activities, with all major policy decisions and directives emanating from Leadenhall Street. Albert was a great success socially, becoming part of the aristocratic social circle that revolved around the prince of Wales, later Edward VII, whom he had entertained during the latter's state visit to India beginning in 1875. The triumph of his social career was his reception in London in 1889 for the shah of Persia, from whom he had already received the order of the Lion and the Sun. He settled at 25 Kensington Gore and bought a second mansion at 1 Eastern Terrace, Kemp Town, near Brighton. Links with the eminent banking family of Rothschild followed when in 1887 Edward Albert Sassoon (1856-1912), Albert's only surviving son and heir, married Aline, the second daughter of Baron Gustave de Rothschild. On 22 March 1890 Albert was created baronet in recognition of his role in the industrialization of India. On 24 October 1896 Albert died at his home, 1 Eastern Terrace, Kemp Town, of a heart attack; he was buried in a private mausoleum next to his property. His son, Edward, succeeded to the chairmanship of the firm and to the baronetcy. 
Sir Albert's younger brother, Elias David Sassoon, married Leah Gubbay (died 1878) in 1840 and they had five sons and two daughters, one of whom, Hannah, married the financier Sir Sassoon Jacob David, first baronet. Their son, Sir Percival Victor David Ezekiel David, achieved prominence as a collector of Chinese art. In 1844 Elias was sent to China to develop the firm's interests and within five years his firm enjoyed a secure footing along the entire China coast. Its trade was primarily in textiles and opium, but it also diversified into small-scale broking and banking activities. Elias joined Albert as a partner in the firm shortly after 1852. 
On the death of their father in 1864 Elias saw himself as his brother's permanent deputy, but three years later he resigned from David Sassoon & Sons. Taking his eldest son, Jacob (1844-1916), into partnership, he established a rival firm, E. D. Sassoon & Co., based in Bombay with offices in Shanghai, which carried on identical activities trading with the same centres as David Sassoon & Sons. It was soon competing significantly in opium and Indian yarn and opened offices in Europe, Africa, and America, outstripping the original firm. The two houses remained separate and rivals. Elias died in 1880, aged fifty-nine, in Colombo, Ceylon, while visiting tea plantations, and the business passed into the hands of his sons Jacob, Edward (1853-1924), Meyer (1855-1924), and David (1866-1938). 
At the end of the nineteenth century the Sassoon family, pre-eminent in trading and aristocratic social circles, moved into politics when in 1899 Sir Edward, Albert's son, was elected Conservative MP for the Hythe constituency in Kent. Sir Philip Sassoon, Sir Edward's son, succeeded to the baronetcy, the chairmanship of David Sassoon & Co., and the Hythe seat on his father's death in 1912. (Sir Philip's sister, Sybil, married in 1913 the earl of Rocksavage, heir of the marquess of Cholmondeley.) Sir Philip died in 1939 without an heir and his second cousin, Sir Victor Sassoon (1881-1961), grandson of Elias David Sassoon, took over as head of the Sassoon family. Sir Victor was the nephew of Jacob and had become chairman of E. D. Sassoon & Co. in 1924. He also became the third holder of the baronetcy to which Jacob had been elevated in 1909 for his civic and philanthropic activities. Sir Victor's death in 1961 ended both the second baronetcy and the last family connection with his companies in the direct male line. A later prominent member of the family was the poet and writer Siegfried Sassoon (1886-1967), a grandson of Sassoon David Sassoon. 


@@@@@


doc= 49032


Shipley, Joseph (1795-1867), merchant and banker, was born on 12 April 1795 in Shipley House, on the corner of 16th and French streets, Wilmington, Delaware, USA. He was the eleventh of twelve children of a Quaker, Joseph Shipley (1752-1832), whose grandfather William Shipley had left his native Leicestershire to settle at Wilmington, and of Mary Levis (died 1843) of Springfield, Delaware county, Pennsylvania. Although there is no definite information, it is evident from his correspondence that he received a good general and an excellent business education. It is likely he worked as a clerk for Samuel Canby, jun., of Philadelphia, whose letters reveal a fatherly interest in him. 
Shipley's first definite employment was with John Welsh, a leading Philadelphia merchant, who sent him to Virginia to buy depreciated southern banknotes during the panic of 1819. Welsh then sent him to Liverpool, first as his agent in Joseph Shipley Jr & Co., Welsh being represented by '& Co.', then from January 1822 as his Liverpool partner, in Shipley, Welsh & Co. By 1825 Shipley had conducted affairs so well that he was invited by William Brown, of William and James Brown & Co. of Liverpool, to become from January 1826 a junior partner in that firm. 
Shipley thus joined the leading firm in Atlantic commerce, with branches in Baltimore, Philadelphia, and New York, as well as in Liverpool, and with agents in the southern United States cotton ports. The firm consigned British manufactured goods to the USA, received huge volumes of American staples, especially cotton, ran packet lines, offered advances and credits to smaller merchants, and negotiated foreign exchange. Shipley at first was a partner only in the Liverpool house, but in 1837 he joined all the houses and in June 1839 the Liverpool firm's name was changed to Brown Shipley in recognition of his services during the financial panic of 1837. 
This crisis was caused by the collapse of an unsustainable boom in the USA, but Browns and the other large Anglo-American houses bore the main pressure. In late 1836 the Bank of England, afraid of gold outflows, put increasing pressure on the Liverpool houses to restrict American credits. The consequence in America in early 1837 was widespread financial collapse. By May 1837 the Browns were in severe difficulties: remittances due from America for previous credits were unpaid and cotton prices had collapsed. Shipley wrote to his cousin in Philadelphia on 14 May, 'Such a revolution in commerce in the short space of three months surely never was (hitherto) witnessed... the mind can scarcely realise it. It has been only in the last week to ten days that I have begun seriously to apprehend the possible loss of nearly all the earnings of eleven laborious, anxious years. (Shipley to Newlin, 14 May 1837, Hargraves collection)' In these circumstances Shipley, William Brown being ill, visited London several times in late May and early June, and with the help of the Browns' bankers, Joseph Denison & Co., persuaded the Bank of England to offer Browns a loan of $2 million, a quite unprecedented sum. Shipley argued that 'two thirds of all our engagements arise out of the export of British manufacturers', and that 'disastrous consequences would follow our stoppage' which 'would be more felt than that of any other house in England' (Brown, 83-4). He was thus able to exploit fear of a systemic collapse, while the accounts showed that Browns was fundamentally sound. 
Shipley gradually became the active partner in Brown Shipley as William Brown developed political interests. However, although in 1846 Brown became the free-trade member of parliament for South Lancashire, he still remained the senior partner, and he and James Brown still owned four-fifths of the capital. Fortunately Shipley agreed with William Brown on most important matters. Under this joint management Browns became the largest negotiator of sterling-dollar exchange and the leading financier of Anglo-American trade. This was inevitably at the expense of its traditional wider interests. Hence when James Brown involved the firm in financing the Collins Line steam-packet ships in the late 1840s, both William Brown and Shipley opposed him. Shipley's importance to the firm is indicated by William Brown's reaction to this deal. He wrote to James Brown: 'Mr Shipley says little, but he seems so vexed at this transaction, I think it not at all improbable he will give us notice of retiring. If so I must do the same, for I cannot at my time of life (even if I resign my seat in Parliament) undertake the management of the business here without the assistance of a partner who I have so long known, and in whom I have every confidence as the first man of business in the Kingdom.' He later revised this letter before transmission, but repeated his comments on Shipley, only replacing the last phrase with: 'as a man of strict integrity and probably the best man of business in the Kingdom' (Brown, letter-book, 23 and 29 Jan 1848). 
Despite his doubts about the steamers Shipley remained with the firm until 1850, when he retired because of worsening gout. He returned to his family home in Wilmington, Delaware, and built a house, Rockwood, in Brandywine hundred, in the English style, and lived there with his two maiden sisters. He remained unmarried. His Liverpool house ultimately became part of Liverpool University. However, he retained a strong interest in the firms and regularly wrote them useful letters at critical times, such as in the panic of 1857 and during the civil war. He died on 8 May 1867 at Rockwood, Wilmington, and was buried at the Quaker burial-ground there. 


@@@@@


doc= 49037


Beaton, John (1831-1930), banker, was born at Hampstead, Middlesex, the second son of John Beaton, a Bank of England clerk, and his wife, Margaret. On 23 July 1863 Beaton married Jane Ann, daughter of Samuel Chard of the stock exchange; they had two daughters. 
Beaton entered the City and trained as a banker. In 1862 he became secretary of the Anglo-Portuguese Bank at its foundation. In the following year this bank was absorbed by the London and Brazilian Bank, also set up in 1862. Beaton was appointed manager of the Porto branch but did not take up the post. Instead, he stayed in London as acting secretary, becoming secretary in 1870 and secretary and manager in 1872. 
During these years the bank was critically tested, both by the Overend, Gurney collapse and by the mismanagement of its own staff in Brazil. For some five years, from August 1866, Beaton plied between London and Rio de Janeiro to assess the damage and reorganize activities on a more professional basis. The eventual solution was to reconstruct the company totally, writing off considerable capital, to the noisy dismay of certain shareholders. 
The New London and Brazilian Bank, created in 1872, was firmly under Beaton's control. He beavered away to rescue something from the illiquid securities of the old company, and in the branches he instilled good banking practice, backed up by firm guidance and control from London. Above all, he strove to improve staff morale. Bonus payments, votes of thanks, a pensions and benevolent fund, and a career path for the ablest men leading from South America to London, instituted loyalty. In 1893, when the Rio branch was made so dangerous from shelling that staff attendance was declared voluntary, not a man stayed away. 
Beaton steered the bank into Montevideo, and then into Buenos Aires by 1890. It was not, however, until 1902 that an agency was established at Manaos on the Amazon. By then a net profit of $12,000 in 1872 had risen nearly eightfold. Beaton had become managing director in 1885, the year before the bank reverted to its old title by the omission of 'New'. When the chairman, the Hon. Pascoe Charles Glyn, was ill in 1904, Beaton presided at the annual general meeting; the following year, after Glyn's death, Beaton took the chair in his own right at the age of seventy-four. He was now publicly accountable for the bank he had been effectively running for forty years. 
Beaton increased the capital base in 1907 and 1912 and the bank became strong. Return on equity was relatively high (although a little weaker after 1913), while paid-up capital was matched or outpaced by published reserves. In 1912, the bank's jubilee year, Beaton was voted $10,000 from shareholders and praised for his 'highest and best traditions of commercial morality' (AGM report, 1912). For the next nine years, until his ninetieth year, Beaton ran the bank by the same principles of paternalism and sound practice which had won such general respect. He became, as one shareholder put it, their 'grand old man' (AGM report, 1921), a patriarch whose knowledge and experience of South America were matchless and authoritative. He was of sufficient stature to be able to disagree publicly with Sir Edward Holden, eminent head of the Midland Bank, as to the diminishing world role of specialist overseas banks. He criticized over-banking in cities like Rio and Buenos Aires, where branches could 'be played off on each other by astute gentlemen of very small means' (AGM report, 1914). He maintained his conservative values. He saw strikes, particularly in Brazil, as organized by 'anarchic visitors' (AGM report, 1920) and thought the labour movement in Argentina had 'dictatorial pretensions' (AGM report, 1921). When Beaton resigned as chairman in 1921, in a crescendo of adulation, he was voted another $10,000. He was impossible to replace and his bank merged with the London and River Plate Bank in 1923, to form the Bank of London and South America. 
Beaton retired to Tunbridge Wells, and later to Folkestone, where he died at his home, The Lawn, 7 Godwyn Road, on 23 October 1930, in his one hundredth year. He was buried in Brompton cemetery, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 49038


Hardy, William (d. 1832), horologist, was apparently Scottish, but nothing is known of his place and date of birth nor of his early life and training. Yet by 1805 he was sufficiently renowned to be one of the fifteen eminent watchmakers recruited by the board of longitude to assess the merits of the rival chronometric claims of John Arnold (died 1799) and Thomas Earnshaw (1749-1829), and in the following years he regularly received awards from the Society of Arts for ingenious inventions in horology. None ever saw general adoption, due largely to trade conservatism, but the best must be recorded here. 
Hardy was the first practical horologist in England, and probably anywhere, to make comparatively accurate cycloidal cutters for wheels and pinions. His patterns were supplied to the famous Thomas Leyland (1790-1861) of Prescot, Lancashire, who, according to D. S. Torrens, produced without doubt the finest horological gearings that have ever been known. At the time of the 1862 International Exhibition in London the great Victorian horologist Charles Frodsham wrote: 'the train of wheel-work in Hardy's regulators is among the best in England, and the shape of the wheels and pinions makes the most perfect gearing I have ever witnessed' (Frodsham, 10). Hardy's career reached its apogee in 1811 thanks to the truly remarkable performance of an astronomical regulator clock with a very delicate detached spring-pallet escapement made for the Royal Observatory, Greenwich. The astronomer royal, Nevil Maskelyne, had in 1807 tested its prototype at Greenwich with most promising results. Unfortunately, he died before the new regulator and a new mural circle by Edward Troughton could be used together. His successor, John Pond, was at first satisfied with Hardy's clock even though its escapement needed frequent cleaning by its maker. 
Good reports reached the ears of astronomers and scientists everywhere. Among the first was Ferdinand Hassler, a distinguished Swiss geodesist who had emigrated to America in 1805 and who in 1812 was in London seeking equipment for a survey of the east coast of the United States. He ordered from Hardy two regulators of the Greenwich type, together with box chronometers and special timers. Hardy's reputation was established. He received orders for regulators and chronometers from both observatories and amateur astronomers. In 1820 outstandingly good clock rates were recorded at Greenwich, Sandhurst, and Vilna. The celebrated astronomer William Pearson acquired a Hardy regulator in 1816 and published an illustrated description of the type in 1829. Hassler had done the same in 1824. 
In 1823 Pond moved Hardy's regulator to the transit room, thus making it the most important clock in the world. In 1830, however, his records show that it had 'accelerated on its mean by nearly 4s per day'. Hardy, perhaps ill, ignored two notices to attend. Had he then simply cleaned the escapement, events would almost certainly have turned out differently. In his absence his detached escapement was removed by the envious E. J. Dent and replaced by a conventional deadbeat one. Hardy's regulator at the Cape observatory soon suffered the same indignity. Pearson's clock and those at Vilna, Cambridge, and Fyvie continued to perform well although, one by one (and in one case as late as 'c'.1990), their fragile escapements were broken by inexpert handling. Hardy died at his home, 5 Wood Street, Cold Bath Square, Clerkenwell, London, on 12 November 1832. 


@@@@@


doc= 49039


Streatfeild, Lucy Anne Evelyn Deane (1865-1950), factory inspector and social worker, was born at Madras, India, on 31 July 1865, and was baptized there on the following day, the daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel Bonar Millett Deane (1834-1881) and his wife, the Hon. Lucy Boscawen, a sister of the sixth Viscount Falmouth. Her father served in India and South Africa, and was killed at Laing's Neck on 28 January 1881 during the Anglo-Transvaal War. Her mother died in March 1886. 
In the 1890s Lucy Deane trained as a health worker and lecturer for the National Health Society, a charitable body established to provide some professional training for those working in a largely amateur, altruistic service. In 1893 she and Rose Squire (1861-1938) were appointed by the vestry of St Mary Abbots in Kensington as sanitary inspectors of workshops and factories that employed women. Both were subsequently appointed as factory inspectors by the Home Office, Deane in 1894 and Squire in 1895. The work of the early women's inspectorate, headed by May Abraham (later Tennant), was arduous: they faced antagonism from employers and in many cases from workers, as well as from their male colleagues. The women travelled long distances throughout Britain and Ireland, on public transport or by bicycle, often without revealing the nature of their work to protect the women whose working conditions they were investigating. In Ireland, where Deane undertook several periods of duty, she was particularly angered by the truck system, noting that even the priests would not support the workers and that there was 'utter disregard for law and justice, terrible tales of the corruption of the magistrates' (Deane Streatfeild MSS, business diaries, 9 Nov 1897). In 1900 there were only seven women factory inspectors, and Lucy Deane was in charge of 4000 workshops (including the court dressmakers') in west London alone ('Manchester Guardian', 13 July 1900, 5). 
In 1901 Deane was one of the six women appointed by the British government to report on conditions in the South African concentration camps (the committee of inquiry into the South African War concentration camps, chaired by Millicent Fawcett), approaching the work in much the same way as she did that of factory inspection. In letters to her sister, Hyacinthe Mary (died 1903), an inspector of domestic science and one of the first women inspectors in the education department, she gave a detailed account of the committee's travels in South Africa, and sometimes complained about the unprofessional methods of her colleagues. Although she usually got on well with her companions, she described herself as 'one against five' because she disagreed with them on so many points (Deane Streatfeild MSS, letter to Hyacinthe Deane, 23 Dec 1901). It was largely at her insistence that the committee's report included criticisms of the operation of the camps system. 
In 1906 Deane resigned from the factory inspectorate because of ill health, and moved from London to Westerham in Kent, where she lived until her death. On 16 March 1911 she married Granville Edward Stewart Streatfeild (1868/9-1947), an architect; they had no children. She remained an active voluntary worker. She was the first woman organizing officer for the National Health Insurance Commission, and organized infant welfare centres in London; she was also a member of various trade boards. In 1912, she was one of the two women (the other was E. S. Haldane) appointed to the royal commission on the civil service. She supported female suffrage, and lectured for the National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies. In 1913 she was one of the organizers of the women's suffrage pilgrimage from Westerham and district, which joined the union's rally of about 50,000 people held in Hyde Park on 26 July 1913. 
During the First World War, Lucy Deane Streatfeild was a member of the executive committee of the Women's Land Army in Kent. She was a member of the War Office appeals committee, which adjudicated on separation allowances for soldiers' and sailors' dependants, and of a special arbitration tribunal to settle disputes over wages and conditions in munitions works. In 1918 she was appointed chairman of a committee of inquiry into the conduct of members of the Women's Army Auxiliary Corps in France, and was appointed CBE. 
After the war Deane Streatfeild was one of the first women JPs (appointed in 1920), and a member of Kent county council. She was a leading member of the Women's Institute and was one of the founders of the Westerham branch, of which she became the president. She was an enthusiastic producer of amateur theatre and mounted village productions of several Shakespeare plays. She was a member of the University Women's Club and of the National Union of Working Women. She published a number of articles on aspects of factory work and industrial legislation. She died on 3 July 1950 at her home, Cottage on the Hill, Westerham, Kent, and was buried at Westerham on 7 July. She was remembered by her contemporaries as a lively and inspiring colleague with a strong social conscience -- an impression confirmed by the account of her work left in her business diaries. 


@@@@@


doc= 49040


Thomas Hall (1657-1715), who was born at Tenbury, Worcestershire, on 26 March 1657, operated the furnace at Madeley, Staffordshire, from 1683, probably in conjunction with Norton and Winnington forges. By 1687 he was a partner in the Cheshire ironworks with his cousin William Cotton (1648/9-1703) ['see under 'Cotton family]. During the 1690s he managed this partnership (Lawton furnace, Warmingham and Cranage forges, Cranage slitting mill, and Street plating forge), which from 1696 onwards was closely linked with the Staffordshire works (Mear Heath furnace, Consall, Tib Green, Oakamoor, Chartley, Abbots Bromley, and Cannock forges, with Consall and Rugeley slitting mills), a Foley and Wheeler concern. Hall further cemented his family's industrial links by his marriage in 1697 to Cotton's sister, Joanna (died 1721), though this union left no surviving children. 
Hall built a new Cheshire furnace in 1696 at Vale Royal. It smelted haematite ores brought by sea from Furness, so most of its product was tough pig iron. Some of this went to a forge which Hall built in 1699 at Bodfari to supply north Wales. Vale Royal, Lawton, and Mear Heath were three of the largest furnaces of the period, and because the Cheshire partnership now had two large furnaces, it was able to make good the Staffordshire deficit of pig iron with either tough pig from Vale Royal or cold-short pig smelted from local ores at Lawton. This made the amalgamation of the two partnerships in 1707 a logical step. In the Staffordshire works Hall owned a seventh share, and after the death of John Wheeler he also acted as managing director for a short time. But his responsibilities covered a wide area; in Yorkshire after the death of William [ii] Cotton he witnessed a wood agreement of 1704 and the new lease of Colne Bridge forge in 1706, on behalf of Anna Cotton (died 1721), his sister-in-law. Thomas Hall died at The Hermitage, Cranage, on 25 March 1715. 
Thomas's younger brother 


@@@@@


doc= 49041


Edward Hall (1664-1750) of Cranage was born at Ruabon, Denbighshire, on 14 April 1664. He was briefly a scholar at Brasenose College, Oxford, in 1684, and he is known to have delivered iron for the use of Sir Thomas Myddelton in 1685. In 1701 he married Anne Frances Maurice (died 1758) in Chester; they had three sons and three daughters. By 1700 his investment of $10,251 made him the largest shareholder in the Cheshire works. Hall's responsibility was Warmingham forge, though in 1706 he transferred to Vale Royal furnace and Bodfari forge. After the amalgamation of the partnerships he had a sixth share in the Cheshire works and a seventh in those of Staffordshire, and he gradually succeeded to the dominating role played by his brother. Already in 1711, along with his cousin Daniel Cotton (c.1660-1723) ['see under 'Cotton family], he had established a furnace at Cunsey in Furness, though the company continued to smelt haematite ores in Cheshire, until 1718 at Vale Royal and then at a new furnace built at Oulton in 1719. In 1720 Hall acquired a share in the new Bretton furnace-Kilnhurst forge partnership of his Yorkshire nephew, William Westby Cotton (bap. 1689, d. 1749) ['see under 'Cotton family]. The same year he built a furnace at Carr Mill, near St Helens, on a thirty-year lease from a Roman Catholic co-religionist, Sir William Gerard of Garswood. This furnace presumably worked in conjunction with Aintree forge, which Hall held in 1727. In Furness he had the Cheshire company's second furnace built at Duddon Bridge in 1736. 
Edward Hall cannot have been a Roman Catholic when at Brasenose College, but was described as such when his estates were duly registered in 1723. The ironmasters Thomas Hall and William Hall, who presented silver communion patens to Bodfari and Lawton churches respectively in 1699, were presumably his elder brothers Thomas and William (1659-1700). William resided at Ruthin from 1679 to 1685 and died at Mostyn. In 1708 Thomas presented a double-tiered brass candelabrum to the church at Holmes Chapel, and there he also endowed schools. 'The present Ironmasters of Lawton Furnace' donated a peal of bells to the church at Lawton in 1713. There is, however, no record of similar gifts by Edward Hall himself, who died on 23 September 1750. 
Edward's eldest son was 


@@@@@


doc= 49042


Squire, Rose Elizabeth (1861-1938), factory inspector, was born at 6 Orchard Street, Marylebone, London, on 19 May 1861, the youngest daughter of William Squire (1825-1899), surgeon, and his wife, Martha Wilkinson. Her father had, as a medical student, administered ether at Robert Liston's first major operation under anaesthetic (1846); he later practised as a Harley Street physician and was known for his work on epidemiology and preventive medicine. Her elder brother, John Edward Squire (1855-1917), also became a physician, and made the prevention and treatment of pulmonary tuberculosis 'his life's work' (Munk, 'Roll', 4.506). As was common for the period, she was educated at home by a governess, 'came out' into fashionable London society, and took up voluntary social work. By the age of thirty-two, however, she was unmarried and in need of an income. 
Despite the campaigns of middle-class women to open up educational and professional employment opportunities, there were few respectable openings, and competition for them was fierce. At various stages in her career Squire expressed frustration at the unequal treatment of women in employment and politics. Her own predicament in the early 1890s was worsened by the fact that many middle-class girls had by then received a schooling and were potentially more employable than she was. It was her own choice to become a sanitary inspector and then a factory inspector. Neither occupation was widely regarded as suitable work for a woman, and her family and friends expressed disapproval and dismay. 
In 1893 Squire began training with Lucy Deane under the auspices of the National Health Society to qualify as a lecturer on hygiene, nursing, and first aid. She also studied and undertook practical nursing, and took examinations for the society's diploma in anatomy, physiology, hygiene, nursing, and first aid. In November 1893 she began inspecting workshops and laundries in Kensington and then, in 1894, became the first woman to sit for the sanitary inspectors' certificate. At first the Local Government Board had been loath to recognize women as sanitary inspectors, but in the end it had to give way. 
Squire had stood up to family and Local Government Board prejudice, but then found the work of sanitary inspector too limited and therefore frustrating. Problems were brought to her attention about which she could do nothing as they fell under the remit of the factory inspectors. She, moreover, became aware of the greater scope of factory inspectors. As the 1895 'Factory and Workshop Bill' passed through parliament she worked closely with the three women factory inspectors behind the scenes, feeding information to back-benchers. The contents of the bill related to her everyday work, and she found it irksome playing an indirect role in policy making when men ignorant of the facts played a direct role. 
In December 1895 Squire was appointed a lady inspector of factories. All the women were at this time peripatetic inspectors, and Squire therefore gained experience of women's working conditions throughout the country. In 1903 she was promoted to senior lady inspector and in 1908 she moved with her sister to Manchester, where she was based for four and a half years. In 1912 she returned to London as deputy principal inspector. 
From 1906 to 1907 Squire served as a special investigator to the royal commission on the poor laws, which brought her into contact with male workers for the first time. With Arthur Steel-Maitland, her fellow special investigator, she examined the relationship between industrial and sanitary conditions and pauperism. She discussed with Beatrice Webb, the member of the royal commission for whom she was working, not just the details of her own subject but the principles and problems of poor relief in general. 
Factory inspection, although far closer to the heart of the policy-making process than sanitary inspection, also held frustrations for Squire, many of them to do with gender. She found it difficult working in a separate branch from the men inspectors when a hierarchy of men with vested interests in their positions and duties existed. Even after women ceased to be peripatetic, she still found it difficult; she commented on the galling sense of the limitations and isolation of the women's branch from the main current of Home Office practice and policy. She did, however, remark on the friendship and harmony with male colleagues in Manchester, which suggests that she did not encounter these experiences elsewhere. 
During the war Squire, like other women inspectors, expanded the scope of her work. From 1915 she worked closely with the Ministry of Munitions, now responsible for the production of munitions and for maximizing munition workers' productivity, which included promoting health and safety at the workplace, low absenteeism rates, and low staff turnover. The recognition within the ministry, albeit slowly and partially, of the link between productivity and good working conditions led to her involvement in conferences at the ministry and a place on its Health of Munition Workers Committee. Early in 1918 she transferred from the Home Office to the ministry as director of the women's welfare department, which involved her developing new policies as well as supporting and instructing welfare officers. The war heightened interdepartmental rivalries, and her transfer helped to improve communications between an old and conservative department and a new ministry under less orthodox leadership. She was not keen on the temporary transfer, and although she did not subsequently regret it she did feel that it had militated against her promotion. In 1918 she was appointed OBE. 
In 1919 Squire became director of women's training at the Ministry of Labour, which involved training former service personnel and munitions workers for peacetime work. In 1920 she returned to the Home Office as a principal, the first woman to hold an administrative post in the Home Office. At the Home Office she worked directly on the drafting of a new factory bill, but short-lived governments, employers' hostility, and Conservative home secretaries' sympathy for the employers' case in the 1920s meant that a new 'Factory Act' was not passed until 1937, eleven years after her retirement. 
On her retirement Squire immediately wrote her memoirs, 'Thirty Years in the Public Service: an Industrial Retrospect' (1927) which reveal little of her motivations and personal thoughts, and even less of her private life. She died on 15 April 1938 at the home of her sister and brother-in-law at Wellmead, Fryerning, Ingatestone, Essex. Her funeral took place on 20 April 1938 at Ealing cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 49043


Thomas Hall (1702-1748) of The Hermitage, Cranage, who was born on 3 June 1702 at Warmingham forge. He possibly attended Peterhouse, Cambridge. He married Elizabeth Bayley (died 1745) of Nantwich in 1738, and they had a son and a daughter. Thomas's will mentions his interest in Bodfari forge; from there he had supplied iron to Ruthin church in 1720. Receipts of iron at the Stour valley forges during the 1730s demonstrate Thomas Hall's involvement at Sowley furnace in Hampshire, and in 1729 in connection with this he, along with Myles Troughton of Beaulieu, took a sixteen-year lease of Viscount Montagu's mines at Lindal and Dalton in Furness. Thomas Hall served as mayor of Chester during the Jacobite rising of 1745, and was apparently of the established church. He died at The Hermitage, Cranage, on 27 June 1748. Edward Hall's youngest son, Maurice (1715-1741), was involved in wood-procurement in south Lancashire in 1741, but also predeceased his father. The second son and executor, Richard Edward Hall (1703-1793), was a Manchester surgeon, so managerial interest in the iron industry passed out of the family. 
After the building of the Vale Royal furnace by Thomas Hall in 1696, the Hall family was of major importance for the development of the iron industry in north-west England. The decision of the Cheshire partnership to establish its own mines, furnace, and forge in Furness provoked local ironmasters into forming the Backbarrow company, and suddenly opened up the whole area to the blast furnace. The effective failure of the male line in the Hall family, however, coincided with the major technological and organizational changes within the iron industry which attended the transition from charcoal to coke smelting. Like their cousins and sometime partners, the Cottons, the Halls withdrew from the iron trade after a century of involvement. Their forge at Cranage and the furnaces at Cunsey, Carr Mill, and Lawton are all thought to have been discontinued about 1750. 
The Hall family together with the associated kindred families of Cotton and Kendall, played a pioneering role in the growth of the iron industry in Britain between the mid-seventeenth and the mid-eighteenth centuries. Members of the family were active in wide-ranging business partnerships which were the leading producers of iron in Staffordshire, Cheshire, and the north-west of England. 


@@@@@


doc= 49044


Hall family (per. c.1650-c.1750), ironmasters, became involved in the iron trade with the marriage, late in the 1640s, of 


@@@@@


doc= 49045


Cotton family (per. c.1650-1802), ironmasters, together with the kindred families of Hall and Kendall, played a leading role in the development of the iron industry in Britain between the mid-seventeenth century and the second half of the eighteenth century. Members of the family were at the centre of extended partnerships which dominated iron production in Yorkshire, Staffordshire, Cheshire, and the north-west of England. These partnerships were consolidated by marriage between members of the families involved, occasionally accompanied by formal marriage agreements safeguarding the interests of forthcoming children. 
Like the Spencer-Fownes partners in the south Yorkshire ironworks, the Cotton family originated in Shropshire, possibly from near Hodnet. Three children of Thomas [i] Cotton (died 1671) and his wife, Ann, became involved in the iron industry in various ways. 


@@@@@


doc= 49046


William [i] Cotton (d. 1675) married Eleanor, daughter of William Fownes (died 'c'.1647) of Kenley, and they had eleven children. Cotton became general manager for the partnership. An elder brother, Edward Cotton (1624-1669), also moved to Yorkshire and was involved at the partnership's Wortley forges. A sister, Elizabeth Hall, nee Cotton (d. 1679), married Michael Hall (1623/4-c.1670) ['see under 'Hall family], and after her husband's death became personally involved in the iron industry in Denbighshire. 
When his mother-in-law, Elizabeth Fownes ('nee' Spencer) ['see 'Spencer family] of Wortley forges, died in 1658, William [i] Cotton inherited her mines in Denbighshire, and a property at Haigh, in the parish of Darton in Yorkshire, bought in 1656 out of the profits of the Shropshire ironworks. William [i] and Eleanor Cotton also inherited a fifth share in Elizabeth Fownes's personal estate and her stock in the ironworks in Shropshire and Yorkshire. 
However, having entered the iron industry on his own account, Cotton ceased to act for the Spencer family partnership in 1667. He had already leased Colne Bridge forge near Huddersfield and he built a slitting mill there; in this he was partnered by a cousin, Thomas Dickin. In Wales he became partner of the Myddeltons of Chirk Castle from about 1662. They had a forge at Mathrafal in Montgomeryshire and the Denbighshire works (Ruabon furnace and Pont-y-blew forge), where Cotton's brother-in-law Michael Hall acted as clerk at Ruabon. Following her husband's death, Cotton's sister Elizabeth Hall had the oversight of Ruabon furnace during the 1670s, for which she was paid $30 a year, together with a 'riding allowance' for her involvement in sales of iron and in charcoal procurement. 
William [i] Cotton was a staunch nonconformist and was a friend of the Revd Oliver Heywood. Cotton died on 13 March 1675, probably at Nether Denby, and was buried at Penistone, eight dissenting ministers in attendance, amid 'great lamentation'. His will made provision for an annuity to the ministers of the West Riding and for a bequest to his brother-in-law, the dissenting minister George Fownes. He wished his three younger sons, including Daniel, to be educated for the ministry. An older son, Thomas [ii] Cotton (1653-1730), who was already a pupil at Richard Frankland's academy, married the daughter of Leonard Hoare and was ordained by Oliver Heywood in 1696. Cotton's widow, Eleanor, survived until 1699. She died in Cheshire, where two of her children were established -- Daniel Cotton ['see below'], now an ironmaster, and Joanna, who married her ironmaster cousin Thomas Hall (1657-1715) ['see under 'Hall family] in 1697. However, Eleanor Cotton was buried alongside her husband at Penistone. 
Cotton's eldest son, 


@@@@@


doc= 49047


William [ii] Cotton (1648/9-1703), was paid for drawing up the accounts of the Myddelton works in January 1674 and he continued the Denbighshire partnership until 1690. He disregarded the instructions in his father's will to sell the stock in Colne Bridge forge and the Haigh estate. On the contrary, he and Dickin took over Kirkstall forge and Barnby furnace in 1675, when the first Spencer partnership at length collapsed, and built a slitting mill there. Though the forges supplied bar iron for general purposes, the building of slitting mills shows that the production of rod iron, for which cold-short iron made from coal measure ironstone was suitable, was one of Cotton's main products. In the 1660s, while his father was manager of the Spencer-Fownes partnership, a slitting mill was set up near Wigan to supply the south Lancashire nail trade. Judging from its function during the period of the Spencer accounts it is clear that Colne Bridge mill was set up to supply this Lancashire market, while most of the Kirkstall output went to the nail trade of south Yorkshire. After 1684, with a new partner, Denis Hayford of Wortley, Cotton was also able to supply bar and rod iron in the Birmingham area from Lord Paget's works (Abbots Bromley and Cannock forges and Rugeley slitting mill), the lease of which they took over in that year. Rugeley was one of the largest slitting mills in the country. 
After the death of Richard Foley of Longton, Cotton and Heyford acquired the Cheshire works (Lawton furnace, Warmingham and Cranage forges, and Cranage slitting mill). In addition to smelting local north Staffordshire ores, Lawton furnace used haematite ores from Furness, which had to be carried right across the Cheshire plain for smelting. The production of the valuable tough iron which these ores yielded was greatly eased by the building of a more accessible furnace at Vale Royal in 1696. Cotton's personal links with the north-west went back considerably beyond this, because on 2 October 1677 he married Barbara, daughter of Thomas Curwen of Sellapark, Cumberland. Their only child died in infancy. With tough and 'mixed' as well as cold-short pig iron available, much of the Cheshire product was sold as bar iron. However, a plating mill at Street (just north of Lawton furnace) enabled some of the Warmingham product to be sold locally as salt pan plates. Much of the Cranage product, especially the rod iron, went to Lancashire, but in addition to local markets the Cheshire works also supplied customers in Wrexham and in north Staffordshire. 
Together with Hayford and William Simpson, Cotton also ran Knottingley forge and Bank furnace, so by the end of the century he had control of most of the Yorkshire works, and it seems to have been he who finally settled the elder branch of the family in Yorkshire at Haigh Hall. William [ii] Cotton was also involved with Hayford and other partners in the 'Company in the North', a shear-steel producing project in Durham, based on Blackhall mill on the Derwent. In 1748, together with Joshua Copley, Cotton's younger son, Joshua (1694-1753), a Newcastle ironmaster, was involved in selling the lease of the steel furnace at Derwentcote, so Cotton involvement in this steelmaking enterprise perhaps continued up to then. 
Cotton's first marriage was celebrated at the Anglican church of St Crux in York, but his second wife, 


@@@@@


doc= 49049


William Westby Cotton (bap. 1689, d. 1749) married, on 1 September 1715, Mary Cotton of Church Hulme, Daniel Cotton's daughter. Anna Cotton died at Stourbridge on 8 July 1721, presumably at the home of her daughter and Edward Kendall. She was buried on 13 July at Darton. The death of his 'dear and worthy friend' was formally recorded by Oliver Heywood's successor, the Revd Thomas Dickinson, in their Northowram register. 
William Westby Cotton's first entry into the iron trade was not in Yorkshire. In 1714, together with Edward Kendall, he took a lease of Kemberton furnace in Shropshire. Probably with her retirement in view, his mother had informed John Spencer in 1716 of her assignment of her share in Colne Bridge forge to her son, in partnership with her sons-in-law Edward Kendall and William Vernon. Spencer remained unco-operative, but in 1720 William Westby Cotton re-established himself in Yorkshire with a new furnace at Bretton, adjacent to Haigh Hall, run in conjunction with Kilnhurst forge on the Don, in a twenty-one-year partnership with his brother-in-law 


@@@@@


doc= 49050


Thomas [ii] Cotton (bap. 1701, d. 1749) of Doddlespool (who was Daniel Cotton's son), Edward Hall of Cranage, and Samuel Shore of Sheffield. Rockley furnace was added to this partnership through a sixteen-year lease obtained in 1726. 
William Westby Cotton obtained a corresponding share in the Staffordshire works, where, in addition to Doddington and Madeley furnaces, Cannock furnace was put in blast again during the 1720s. However, the depression of the 1730s hit the Staffordshire works severely and the 1732 lease of Cannock forge mentioned the furnace site as 'late used', which suggests it was again derelict. About this time Thomas [ii] Cotton moved from Doddlespool to Eardley End, nearer to Lawton furnace. In 1737 four of the forges were out of action; though Lea forge in Cheshire was in production in 1737, Thomas Coape, its clerk, left for the Spencer forges at Wortley in 1738, Thomas [ii] Cotton having no work for him. Small quantities of tin plate shipped down the Weaver Navigation by Thomas Cotton in the 1740s suggest that the tin-plate works had by now replaced the forge at Oakamoor. By 1750 Bromley forge was also out of action, but Cannock forge had by then resumed and Consall and Warmingham forges had even increased their production, each to 300 tons a year. 
Thomas [ii] Cotton married Elizabeth Langley in 1724, and they had at least one son. Cotton's will of 1746 (Lichfield Joint RO, B/C/11) shows that he had disregarded the provision of his marriage agreement to lay out $2000 in the purchase of land for the settlement of sums on his sons, but that it still remained in his partnership with Edward Hall and others. If possible his executors were to increase his stock and maintain his leases for ten years, at least in the Staffordshire works, if not in those more remote, in the hope that his family would continue in the trade. In a desperate codicil he revoked most of the executorships (even that of his own son, Robert), confirming only that of his fellow ironmaster, Samuel Hopkins of Cradley. His worst fears were realized, however, and after 1750 the names Kendall and Hopkins replaced that of Cotton in transactions relating to the ironworks of Cheshire and north Staffordshire. Thomas [ii] Cotton was buried at Audley, Staffordshire, on 9 March 1749. 
When a committee of the House of Commons reported to parliament in March 1738 on the damage likely to the English iron industry from the proposed lifting of the embargo on the import of bar iron from the North American colonies, William Westby Cotton was among the ironmasters whose evidence succeeded in prolonging the embargo. He died in August 1749. 



@@@@@


doc= 49051


Edward [i] Kendall (1684-1746), the fourth son, but ultimate heir, of Jonathan Kendall (1648-1716) of Austrey, Warwickshire, and of his wife, Jane, daughter of Edward Dyson of Inkberrow, Worcestershire. By 1702 he was an agent under John Wheeler in the Foley partnership for the Stour valley and forest of Dean ironworks. In 1710 he became, with William Rea of Monmouth, joint manager of the Staffordshire ironworks, and the far-flung nature of his family's later interests was foreshadowed in 1712. In that year he married Anna Cotton (1685-1763), daughter of the former Yorkshire ironmaster William Cotton (1648/9-1703), of Haigh Hall ['see under 'Cotton family]; they had two sons and two daughters. In common with the Cotton family, Kendall was staunchly nonconformist, and he led those who petitioned quarter sessions to license a new meeting-house in Stourbridge in 1715, after the original one was destroyed by a mob. In 1743 the congregation built a house for the new minister at Stourbridge on land conveyed to them by Kendall and his wife. 
In Shropshire, together with his brother-in-law William Westby Cotton (bap. 1689, d. 1749) ['see under 'Cotton family], Kendall acquired Kemberton furnace in 1714. In 1724 he leased Cradley ironworks on the Stour and from there he supplied pig iron to the Stour valley forges, especially during the 1740s. In Staffordshire in the 1720s he was probably involved in Rushall furnace. Anna Cotton (d. 1721) ['see under 'Cotton family], widow of William Cotton, assigned Colnbridge forge in Yorkshire to her son William Westby Cotton in 1716, and further assignees were Kendall and another son-in-law, William Vernon, a move which probably marked Anna Cotton's retirement from active participation in management. By 1718 Kendall was involved as partner of Edward Hall and Daniel Cotton at Cunsey furnace in Furness. This had been built in 1711 so that some of the haematite ores of the area could be smelted on the spot, rather than after shipping to furnaces on the Cheshire plain. The building of a second northern furnace on the River Duddon in 1736 endorsed this move. 
Kendall died in February 1746. He willed his ironworks to be continued for six years by his widow, who survived her husband until 1763, and his son 


@@@@@


doc= 49052


Jonathan Kendall (1714-1791), with his servant Samuel Hopkins as manager. Meanwhile the Cheshire-Staffordshire works were deprived by death of all managing partners: Thomas Hall of the Hermitage, son of the senior partner Edward Hall of Cranage ['see under 'Hall family], died in 1748; Thomas Cotton of Eardley End ['see under 'Cotton family] followed in 1749; and then Edward Hall himself died in 1750. Because their heirs were not interested in iron, Jonathan Kendall was left as senior partner, assisted by Samuel Hopkins, now also one of Cotton's executors. In 1741 Kendall married Elizabeth Smith of Birmingham, but the marriage did not produce any children. 
Major difficulties impended. In Furness seven furnaces were now in competition, forcing up the price of the most expensive raw material, charcoal, and in the nail trade, cheap coke-smelted rod iron was soon to replace rod made from cold-short charcoal-smelted iron. It made sense to concentrate on tough pig iron, convertible into best merchant bar at the forge, and also suitable for making tin plate. The manufacture of tin plate spread rapidly about 1740, especially within south Wales; but its shipping in small quantities down the Weaver Navigation during the 1740s by Thomas Cotton suggests that the company's forge at Oakamoor was then already producing tin plate. 
To escape rising charcoal prices a Welsh furnace, situated on the Conwy, ideally placed to smelt haematite ore shipped from Furness, had already been erected in 1748. It could ship its product to the company's own forges in Cheshire, to south Wales, or to the Severn valley. In 1755 another Welsh furnace was built at Dyfi, where Kendall's partner was his cousin Ralph Vernon, while at the still more remote Scottish furnace, built the same year at Goatfield on Loch Fyne, Jonathan's younger brother 


@@@@@


doc= 49053


Henry Kendall (1718-1787) was involved. Henry matriculated at Glasgow University in 1740 and married Ellen Jacques; they had four sons and one daughter. He was established at Ulverston by 1750 and in the north he was partnered by the manager at Duddon, William Latham, another Austrey man. Jonathan's partner in Staffordshire was Samuel Hopkins; banking was provided by Jonathan's brother-in-law Samuel Notton, a London grocer, husband of Elizabeth Kendall. 
Meanwhile, the furnaces at Cunsey, at Carr mill in south Lancashire, and at Lawton in Cheshire were closed about 1750. Mear Heath in Staffordshire closed before 1763. Cranage forge had also closed, so smelting was concentrated at Doddington and Madeley furnaces, with Cumbrian haematite ores being used at Doddington after carriage across the Cheshire plain. The two furnaces were close to the company's small forges at Lea, Norton, and Winnington, and not far from the forges at Warmingham and Consall, which with annual outputs of 300 tons of bar iron were among the largest in Britain. Tin-plating at Oakamoor was joined by an iron and tin plate works in Aston, where the Kendalls were partnered by Thomas Hopkins, lessee of Cannock forge from 1775. 
William Latham's Duddon furnace account books show that, to coordinate the affairs of such widely scattered works, company meetings were held regularly in Cheshire, the places mentioned including Warrington (1775), Middlewich (1760), Hilcot (in Staffordshire, 1762), and Holmes Chapel (1763). Managing personnel were compelled to move too: Henry Kendall's son Edward replaced Ralph Vernon as manager at Warmingham forge before 1773; by 1762 Jonathan Kendall had established himself at Hilcot, but by 1779 he had moved on to Market Drayton; by 1790, when he made his will, he had moved back to Stourbridge, where he died on 7 March 1791. 
In 1779, in a complete break with the past, members of the Kendall family showed their usual flexibility by building the coke-fuelled Beaufort furnace above Ebbw Vale in south Wales, on land leased from the duke of Beaufort. The Cheshire forges were not maintained beyond 1784. Conwy furnace had closed by 1774, Dyfi continued in 1794 but was abandoned during the next ten years, Goatfield was blown out in 1813, and though William Latham's sons, Joseph and Richard, continued to operate Duddon, it too was sold to Harrison, Ainslie & Co. in 1828. 
Beaufort furnace produced 1500 tons of pig iron per year; the addition of a second furnace in 1798 and of steam-powered blast enabled production to soar to 7000 tons in 1825. 


@@@@@


doc= 49054


Edward [ii] Kendall (1750-1807), who had formerly been at Warmingham, was the driving force at Beaufort. His first wife was Elizabeth, daughter of Samuel Irton, of Irton Hall, Cumberland; they had one son. His second wife, whom he married in 1801, Elizabeth Bevan of Crickhowell, was a widow who had two sons by her former marriage. Kendall was chairman of the Monmouthshire Canal, which afforded transport for his iron to Newport. He also interested himself closely in local affairs, perhaps more so than any other ironmaster of Brecknockshire, was a justice of the peace, and ultimately became high sheriff of the county. 'Nothing like iron', he thought, and he fenced the river front land of the estate which he acquired in 1804 at Dan y Parc, on the Usk near Crickhowell, with a massive iron deer fence, which still stood unimpaired in 1906. 
Edward Kendall died suddenly on 7 March 1807. Since his own son, Edward [iii] Kendall ('b'. 1789), showed little interest in the works, he wished his stepson William Hibbs Bevan to succeed him. During Bevan's minority Joseph Latham carried on as manager until retirement in 1816, when Bevan, now Latham's son-in-law, succeeded him. 
In 1833 the concern was taken over by its near neighbours, Joseph and Crawshay Bailey of Nant-y-glo ironworks, and Edward [iii] Kendall disposed of his remaining share in the works, so ending an involvement of well over a century, during which, rather unusually, his family had successfully negotiated all the technical, commercial, and logistical problems entailed in the changeover from charcoal smelting of iron to smelting with coke. 


@@@@@


doc= 49056


William [ii] Cadell (bap. 1708, d. 1777), who was baptized at Haddington on 10 May 1708. William [i] Cadell died at Haddington on 20 May 1728. 
Initially a merchant like his father, by the late 1740s William [ii] Cadell was also managing collieries near Tranent in East Lothian for the York Buildings Company (responsible for running forfeited Jacobite estates). It was probably as a mine manager that he was approached by John Roebuck and Samuel Garbett when they came to establish a sulphuric acid works at Prestonpans in 1749. Roebuck and Cadell both knew Alexander 'Jupiter' Carlyle (1722-1805), and may have met through him. On 20 July 1734 Cadell married Christeen ('b'. 1703), daughter of John Hog, a shipmaster at Prestonpans. They had three sons and three daughters. Their eldest son, 


@@@@@


doc= 49057


William [iii] Cadell (bap. 1737, d. 1819), was born at Cockenzie, East Lothian, and baptized on 16 August 1737. 
The works were a success; so when, nearly ten years later, the two Englishmen resolved to establish a modern ironworks in Scotland, they approached Cadell again. He and his eldest son, William [iii], joined Roebuck and Garbett, and each putting in $1500, provided a quarter of the founding capital of what was to become Carron Company. 
Like his father, William [iii] Cadell was trained to the commerce of east-coast Scotland. His grand tour in 1755 took him to Goteborg, Copenhagen, and Stettin, and in 1759, when the Carron partnership was formed, he was considered able enough to be its first managing partner. The first of Carron's great furnaces went into blast on Boxing day 1760, the date which marks the start of the industrial revolution in Scotland. At the age of twenty-three, therefore, William [iii] Cadell found himself running a factory where advanced technology was allied to managerial problems of a complexity never before encountered in Scotland. By 1762 the firm employed 615 men and was thus many times the size of any other industrial undertaking in the country. 
The Cadells were involved with the firm through the first ten exciting and precarious years of its existence, and were the only founding partners never to go bankrupt. William [iii] Cadell ceased to be manager in 1769, and went on to make a name for himself as a coal and ironmaster first at Cramond just outside Edinburgh, and then at Grange near Bo'ness. His father, William [ii] Cadell, died at Cockenzie on 31 March 1777. 
Cramond was a group of small traditional mills on the River Almond, acquired by Carron Company, and it passed to the Cadells as part of the financial arrangements by which they extricated themselves from Carron. Until the end of the century it was a reasonably successful business. It exported a variety of goods, notably bar iron and barrel hoops to Europe and the West Indies. It was unusual as early as 1782 in having much of the mill-train and even the haft of the forge hammer made of iron, and it had the distinction of being the first ironworks in Scotland to produce steel commercially. It remained in the Cadell family until 1860. Grange was a small estate on the edge of the Forth over a good coal seam. The coal was mined profitably by the Cadells until nationalization in 1947, and the estate continued to be owned by the family. 
William [iii] Cadell's other interests included the manufacture of high-quality paper at Auchendinny. This was a mill which had come to him through his marriage in 1773 to Katherine (died 1797), daughter of Archibald Inglis of Auchendinny, with whom he had five sons and one daughter. In addition, Cadell became a founder partner in the Muirkirk and Clyde ironworks, both of which, like Carron, were still functioning in the twentieth century. By the end of his life Cadell had limited his interests to Cramond and Grange, but was characteristic of those simple hard-working merchants who wanted only to turn an honest penny, and on whose enterprise the early industrial development of Scotland was founded. William [iii] Cadell died on 17 September 1819. 
William's younger brother 


@@@@@


doc= 49058


John Cadell (bap. 1740, d. 1814) was a mine owner at Tranent. Baptized at Cockenzie on 2 May 1740, in 1772 he married Marie (1753-1841), daughter of John Buchan of Letham, East Lothian; they had eight sons and four daughters. John Cadell had the melancholy distinction of being the magistrate responsible for giving the orders to the militia that led to the 'massacre of Tranent' in 1797, at which eleven men were killed during a riot in protest against the 'Militia Act'. He died at Cockenzie on 20 January 1814. Among John's sons, William [iv] Cadell (1773-1840) was briefly employed at Cramond before becoming treasurer of the Bank of Scotland, and Robert Cadell (1788-1849) was Sir Walter Scott's publisher. 
William [iii] Cadell's sons included William Archibald Cadell (1775-1855), traveller, mathematician, and friend of Sir Joseph Banks. Later significant members of the family included William's grandson 


@@@@@


doc= 49063


Nehemiah [iii] Champion (1678-1747) is known to have been married three times. His first wife was Susanna, daughter of John Trueman, a Bristol Quaker. Their five children included John [i] (1705-1794) ['see below'], Nehemiah [iv] (1709-1782), William (1710-1789) ['see below'], and also Rachel (1712-1766), who, in 1731, married Quaker iron smelter Sampson [ii] Lloyd (1699-1779), it being his second marriage. Nehemiah [iii] made a second marriage, to Hannah Ball, and a third, in 1742, to Martha Vandewall, daughter of Quaker merchant William Goldney. Richard, younger brother of Nehemiah [iii], a merchant of Bisley, Gloucestershire, briefly partnered Abraham Darby in 1711, providing capital for expansion at the Coalbrookdale ironworks, later becoming a leading partner of the Bristol brassworks after the death of Nehemiah [iii]. 
From 1706 Nehemiah [iii] Champion was purchasing Cornish copper ores on behalf of brassworks established in 1702 by Abraham Darby and his Quaker partners at Bristol. This company was to achieve success in establishing brass production in England as a thriving industry, whereas those before had failed under domination from exports from traditional European centres of manufacture. After Darby left Bristol for Coalbrookdale, some time between 1708 and 1710, Champion replaced him as manager, later becoming a partner, with responsibility for developing new technical expertise, particularly in adopting coal instead of charcoal as the main source of fuel. 
Champion's new techniques in brass production and manufacture, patented in 1723 (no. 454), increased the output of alloy from its raw materials, copper and the zinc ore calamine. Included also were new methods of annealing -- or heating -- brass goods during manufacture to prevent cracking. A further patent, no. 567 in 1739, concerned overshot water-wheels, possibly for use in conjunction with the Newcomen pumping engine. Champion's methods brought the Bristol brass company to predominance throughout Britain and, later in the century, throughout Europe. He died on 9 June 1747. 
Of Nehemiah's sons, 


@@@@@


doc= 49064


John [i] Champion (1705-1794), who was born on 22 June 1705, developed separate interests in metals. His patent (no. 569) of 1739 involved antimony and arsenic to toughen metals; and no. 726, of 1758, registered brass production and the smelting of zinc from its sulphide ore, known as blende, instead of from calamine, the zinc carbonate used previously. Although receiving his father's share in the Bristol brass company and being agent for the Warmley company, he took no major part in either, but established his own brassworks at Holywell, north Wales, near local resources of blende and calamine. His production there appears to have been of a quality more suited to cast products, in contrast to the greater degree of purity required for the rolled-sheet goods, beaten hollowware, and drawn wire typical of the traditional Bristol processes. He relinquished the Holywell works in 1765 when under financial pressure. 
His son John [iii] Champion (1754-1779), at the age of sixteen, was responsible for patent no. 950 (1770) for hatching eggs and rearing young domestic birds by artificial heat. He later worked on the extraction of sulphur during the roasting of copper sulphide ores, which his partner, William Roe of Macclesfield, patented in 1779, after John's early death at the age of twenty-five. During that same year his father was patenting another process for brass production in large sealed crucibles. Ten years later, aged eighty-four, John [i] Champion was writing to Matthew Boulton on coal gas, the 'inflammable matter for lighting' (Day, 'Bristol Brass', 120) he had produced, and which he thought suitable for lighthouse illumination. John [i] Champion died in Warwick Row, Pimlico, on 4 April 1794, aged eighty-eight. 
Another member of the family, Richard Champion (1743-1791), grandson of Richard Champion (1680-1764), became noted for collaboration with the Quaker William Cookworthy (1705-1780), pioneer of hard-paste porcelain in England. Richard had shown interest in attempting to make porcelain before meeting Cookworthy in 1764, after Cookworthy's difficulty in establishing works in Cornwall. Successful manufacture was introduced to Bristol by the partners, with sole rights from Cookworthy's patent of 1768 being transferred to Champion by 1774. However, his petition to parliament, challenged by Josiah Wedgwood (1730-1795) and others, failed to obtain an extension of patent rights, and Champion's Bristol works proved unable to withstand the ensuing competition from other manufacturers. 
The widespread contribution of members of the Society of Friends to eighteenth-century metal industries is well recognized, and the Champions, centred in Bristol, were deeply involved in the Quaker life of the city. Nevertheless, some members of the family were at times disciplined for un-Quakerly activities: their bankruptcies were not approved; Nehemiah [iii] Champion was proscribed for privateering; and Richard Champion (1743-1791) was admonished for irresponsible financial dealings. By marriage they were interrelated to many of the most prominent members of Quaker families, in the city and elsewhere, and in old age John [i] Champion particularly received support from the society. 
The death of John [i] Champion in 1794 brought an end to the significant contributions of the Champion family to the technology of the eighteenth century. Their interests were widespread and of national significance, ranging from Cornish copper mining to manufacturing in Coalbrookdale, Swansea, Macclesfield, and Liverpool, but mainly concentrated on important developments in non-ferrous metal production. 


@@@@@


doc= 49065


William Champion (1710-1789), born on 26 April 1710, achieved greatest distinction, although he was often confused with his elder brother John [i]. William married Ann, daughter of George Bridges, on 18 June 1741. Travelling Europe as a young man, he became interested in producing zinc, which was only beginning to be understood and accepted as a metal rather than as a stone or earth which converted copper to brass. At that time its production was not possible on a large industrial scale in Europe. He returned home in 1730 and experimented for eight years until in 1738 he registered his patent (no. 564), which was obscurely worded for secrecy. The sound technical process he developed displayed a true understanding of problems previously encountered by others. To avoid the oxidization of zinc vapour at the high temperatures required for metal production, he built a large-scale distillation furnace, based on the Bristol glass cones and heated by coal. When the city fathers complained of the harmful 'smoke' from his Bristol furnaces, he moved in 1746 to Warmley, 5 miles away. An 80-acre site had been purchased by his father, Nehemiah [iii], who, shortly before he died, joined his son and other Quaker merchants in a new Warmley partnership. 
William Champion established a large integrated works at Warmley, where, in addition to exploiting his new zinc smelting process, he incorporated the smelting of copper, together with brass production and manufacture. The output consisted mainly of hollowware -- pots, pans, and vats -- and wire, similar to the output of the Bristol company. Under such direct competition, antagonism soon developed between the two companies, which increased as the Warmley site was developed to capacity. 
The principle of completely integrated production on one site was new to the industry, contrasting strongly with the Bristol company, which operated several separate manufacturing watermills in addition to two copper smelting sites. The water-wheels powering the Warmley hammers, rolling mills, wire mills, and other manufacturing equipment were kept working by recycling water with a large Newcomen pumping engine. This was the first time such an engine had been used in manufacturing processes. Zinc production proved less profitable than had been anticipated, however, especially after the refusal of an extension of patent rights; nevertheless, William Champion continually expanded his premises, plant, and processes, adding brass pin manufacture. By 1765 his business was still expanding, although he was forced to borrow heavily, and personal losses occurred after the failure of his dock improvements in the port of Bristol. He registered patent no. 867 for manufacturing brass and brass wire in 1767, but was bankrupt by 1769, his Warmley company premises eventually being purchased by the Bristol brass company. William Champion died on 22 May 1789 at Somerset Street, Bristol. 
William and Ann Champion's five children included John [ii] Champion, born in Bristol in 1746, who was manufacturing metals at Cheese Lane, Bristol, at the end of the century. He corresponded in the 1790s with Matthew Boulton (1728-1809), through his Birmingham cousin Charles Lloyd, on the more efficient use of his rotative steam engine, with which he intended to operate a rolling mill for copper and lead in addition to producing iron and brass wire. He patented new methods of wire manufacture in 1798, but in the following year his premises were advertised for sale. He is known to have approached Lord Ribblesdale in 1806, in connection with purchasing calamine mined at Malham Moor for new zinc production in Yorkshire; but by 1810 at the age of sixty-four John [ii] Champion was declared a bankrupt. 
William's elder brother 


@@@@@


doc= 49067


William Cookson (bap. 1668, d. 1744), and second with Joseph Button, a Gateshead stationer in whose house Daniel Defoe stayed during his 'Tour through the Whole Island'. The brothers' partnership was for the building of an iron furnace at Little Clifton, near Workington, on land leased from Lord Lonsdale. The furnace was supplied with water power from the River Marrow, ironstone from Branthwaite, and coal from Cookson's mines at Clifton and Greysouthen. The ironworks appears to have been a success. The lease was renegotiated in 1735 for $240 for a further twenty-one years and, in 1750, the lessors considered the works to be 'carrying on to very great proffit for the casting and making of Pots and other Uttensals of cast iron' (Hedley and Hudleston, 13-14). 
Isaac Cookson's original partnership with Joseph Button concerned the leasing, in March 1721, of a founding house for casting iron and brass wares at the east end of old Trunk Staith, Gateshead, from William Cotesworth. The partnership was later extended for thirty-one years from 1 September 1729, the partners agreeing to share the 'art, trade and mystery of carrying on iron foundries at Clifton [Cumberland], Gateshead and Newcastle' (Hedley and Hudleston, 25). The capital employed was $4800, of which Cookson's share was $3900. 
The first evidence of Isaac Cookson's interests in glass manufacturing is in 1728, when he entered into partnership with Joseph Airey, a Newcastle mercer and fellow member of the Hanover Square congregation. Airey, Cookson & Co. took over the Dagnia flint glasshouse in the Closegate, Newcastle, after the death of Onesiphorus Dagnia. This glasshouse was still operating as Airey, Cookson & Co. in 1801. In the late 1730s Isaac Cookson was part of a separate partnership to develop a crown glasshouse at Bill Quay, South Shields, on land he had originally leased in 1722, and appears to have acted as a sleeping partner in this enterprise by leasing the land for building. The main partners were his eldest son, John Cookson ['see below'], Thomas Jeffreys and James Dixon, merchants of Snow Hill, London, and Francis Hawkes the elder, a glassmaker of Vane Hall, Surrey. This partnership appears to have been reinforced by marriage: James Dixon married Isaac Cookson's daughter Hannah in 1738. By 1740 the partnership was advertising the best crown glass to be sold at its London warehouse, the Old Swan, London Bridge. 
Isaac Cookson died in Newcastle upon Tyne in 1743 and his brother William a year later, in 1744. It is not known how the Little Clifton ironworks partnership was continued after their deaths. In his will, drawn up on 13 November 1740, Isaac Cookson left 'all and every my goods and chattels, rights and credits' to his son John Cookson, who was his sole executor, with the 'special condition, trust and confidence' (Hedley and Hudleston, 20) that annual payments of $80 be made to his widow during her lifetime. Hannah was also to have the family's silver plate, linen, beds, and other furniture, although she was required to release her dower money to her son within three months of her husband's death. Isaac Cookson's other sons, Isaac and Joseph, were to receive $2000 and a one-eighth part of the crown glasshouse at South Shields plus its stock, money, debts, glass bottles, pots, clay work, and tools. His daughters, Sarah Cookson and Hannah Dixon, were to receive $1200 and $300 respectively. 
William Cookson, who was baptized in Penrith on 25 November 1668, had two sons and four daughters with his first wife, Esther Wren, whom he married on 30 December 1691 and who died soon after the birth of their youngest child in 1705. No children were born of his second marriage, on 5 August 1708, to Susanna (died 1736), widow of John Stenhouse. William Cookson was buried in Penrith on 25 December 1744. Of the five elder children nothing is known. However, the youngest child, 


@@@@@


doc= 49068


Isaac Cookson (bap. 1679, d. 1743), glass and iron manufacturer, who was baptized in Penrith on 3 March 1679, the third of seven children of William Cookson ('c'.1635-1712), a brazier, and his wife, Alice. William was occasionally cautioned for religious dissent and non-attendance at church. By 1704 Isaac had moved to Newcastle upon Tyne, where he became a merchant adventurer; however, nothing is known of the details of his early business interests. He married Hannah Buston (1681/2-1760) on 6 April 1709, but no details of her family, or of when their five children were born, are extant. The Cookson family worshipped at the Hanover Square congregation of dissenters, founded by Richard Gilpin before 1700. 
By 1721 Isaac Cookson was established in the iron trade. In that year he entered into partnerships, first with his eldest brother, 


